Torture Torture is the practice or act of deliberately inflicting severe
physical pain and possibly injury on a person, though psychological and animal
torture also exist. Torture has been carried out or sanctioned by individuals,
groups and states throughout history from ancient times to modern day, and
forms of torture can vary greatly in duration from only a few minutes to
several days or even longer. Reasons for torture can include punishment,
revenge, political re-education, deterrence, interrogation or coercion of the
victim or a third party, or simply the sadistic gratification of those carrying
out or observing the torture. The torturer may or may not intend to kill or
injure the victim, but sometimes torture is deliberately fatal and can
accompany forms of murder or capital punishment. The aim may also be to inflict
pain but without causing fatal injury, or sometimes any injury at all. In other
cases, the torturer may be indifferent to the condition of the victim. There is
also torture that can be fatal eventually, but where attempts are made not to
kill the victim quickly to prolong the length of time of the suffering.
Although historically torture was sanctioned by some states, torture in the
21st century is prohibited under international law and the domestic laws of
most countries. It is considered to be a violation of human rights, and is
declared to be unacceptable by Article 5 of the UN Universal Declaration of
Human Rights. Signatories of the Third Geneva Convention and Fourth Geneva
Convention officially agree not to torture prisoners in armed conflicts.
Torture is also prohibited by the United Nations Convention Against Torture,
which has been ratified by 147 countries. National and international legal
prohibitions on torture derive from a consensus that torture and similar ill-
treatment are immoral, as well as impractical. Despite these international
conventions, organizations that monitor abuses of human rights (e.g. Amnesty
International, the International Rehabilitation Council for Torture Victims)
report widespread use condoned by states in many regions of the world. Amnesty
International estimates that at least 81 world governments currently practice
torture, some of them openly. History. For most of recorded history, capital
punishments were often deliberately painful. Severe historical penalties
include the breaking wheel, boiling to death, flaying, disembowelment,
crucifixion, impalement, crushing, stoning, execution by burning,
dismemberment, sawing, scaphism, or necklacing. An example from Archaic Greece
is the story of the brazen bull proposed to Phalaris in the mid 6th century BC.
The Five Pains are an example from Ancient China. Deliberately painful methods
of execution for severe crimes were taken for granted as part of justice until
the development of Humanism in 17th century philosophy, and "cruel and unusual
punishment" came to be denounced in the English Bill of Rights of 1689. The Age
of Enlightenment in the western world further developed the idea of universal
human rights. The adoption of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights in 1948
marks the recognition at least nominally of a general ban of torture by all UN
member states. Its effect in practice is limited, however, as the Declaration
is not ratified officially and does not have legally binding character in
international law, but is rather considered part of customary international
law. Antiquity. The ancient Greeks and Romans used torture for interrogation.
Until the 2nd century AD, torture was used only on slaves (with a few
exceptions). After this point it began to be extended to all members of the
lower classes. A slave's testimony was admissible "only" if extracted by
torture, on the assumption that slaves could not be trusted to reveal the truth
voluntarily. One of the oldest methods of torture was crucifixion. Its
antiquity is indicated in its wide use by the Phoenicians. It was employed also
by the Scythians, the Greeks, the Romans, the Persians and the Carthaginians.
Notorious mass crucifixions followed the slave rebellion under Spartacus and
the Destruction of Jerusalem in 70 AD. To frighten other slaves from revolting,
Crassus crucified 6,000 of Spartacus' men along the Appian Way from Capua to
Rome. Prior to crucifixion, victims were often savagely whipped with barbed
metal lashes, to induce exsanguination (bleeding to death). This had the effect
of weakening the condemned and thus speed up what could be an inconveniently
long execution process. Over time the conceptual definition of torture has been
expanded and remains a major question for ethics, philosophy, and law, but
clearly includes the practices of many subsequent cultures. Modern scholars
find the concept of torture to be compatible with society's concept of Justice
during the time of Jesus Christ. Romans, Jews, Egyptians and many others
cultures during that time included torture as part of their justice system.
Romans had crucifixion, Jews had stoning and Egyptians had desert sun death.
All these acts of torture were considered necessary (as to deter others) or
good (as to punish the immoral). Middle Ages. Medieval and early modern
European courts used torture, depending on the crime of the accused and his or
her social status. Torture was deemed a legitimate means to extract confessions
or to obtain the names of accomplices or other information about a crime. It
was permitted by law only if there was already half-proof against the accused.
Often, defendants already sentenced to death would be tortured to force them to
disclose the names of accomplices. Torture in the Medieval Inquisition began in
1252 with a papal bull Ad Extirpanda and ended in 1816 when another papal bull
forbade its use. While secular courts often treated suspects ferociously, Will
and Ariel Durant argued in "The Age of Faith" that many of the most vicious
procedures were inflicted upon pious heretics by even more pious friars. The
Dominicans gained a reputation as some of the most fearsomely innovative
torturers in medieval Spain. Torture was usually conducted in secret, in
underground dungeons. By contrast, torturous executions were typically public,
and woodcuts of English prisoners being hanged, drawn and quartered show large
crowds of spectators, as do paintings of Spanish auto-da-fé executions, in
which heretics were burned at the stake. Early modern period. During the early
modern period, the torture of witches took place. In 1613, Anton Praetorius
described the situation of the prisoners in the dungeons in his book
"Gründlicher Bericht Von Zauberey und Zauberern" ("Thorough Report about
Sorcery and Sorcerers"). He was one of the first to protest against all means
of torture. In England the trial by jury developed considerable freedom in
evaluating evidence and condemning on circumstantial evidence, making torture
to extort confessions unnecessary. For this reason in England a regularized
system of judicial torture never existed and its use was limited to political
cases. Torture was in theory not permitted under English law, but in Tudor and
early Stuart times, under certain conditions, torture was used in England. For
example the confession of Marc Smeaton at the trial of Anne Boleyn was
presented in written form only, either to hide from the court that Smeaton had
been tortured on the rack for four hours, or because Thomas Cromwell was
worried that he would recant his confession if cross-examined. When Guy Fawkes
was arrested for his role in the Gunpowder Plot of 1605 he was tortured until
he revealed all he knew about the plot. This was not so much to extract a
confession, which was not needed to prove his guilt, but to extract from him
the names of his fellow conspirators. By this time torture was not routine in
England and a special warrant from King James I was needed before he could be
tortured. The wording of the warrant shows some concerns for humanitarian
considerations, the severity of the methods of interrogation were to be
increased gradually until the interrogators were sure that Fawkes had told all
he knew. In the end this did not help Fawkes much as he was broken on the only
rack in England, which was in the Tower of London. Torture was abolished in
England around 1640 (except "peine forte et dure", which was abolished in
1772). In Colonial America, women were sentenced to the stocks with wooden
clips on their tongues or subjected to the "dunking stool" for the gender-
specific crime of talking too much. Certain Native American peoples, especially
in the area that later became the eastern half of the United States, engaged in
the sacrificial torture of war captives. In the 17th century the number of
incidents of judicial torture decreased in many European regions. Johann Graefe
in 1624 published "Tribunal Reformation", a case against torture. Cesare
Beccaria, an Italian lawyer, published in 1764 "An Essay on Crimes and
Punishments", in which he argued that torture unjustly punished the innocent
and should be unnecessary in proving guilt. Voltaire (1694–1778) also
fiercely condemned torture in some of his essays. While in Egypt in 1798,
Napoleon Bonaparte wrote to Major-General Berthier that the Napoleon Bonaparte,
"Letters and Documents of Napoleon, Volume I: The Rise to Power", selected and
translated by John Eldred Howard (London: The Cresset Press, 1961), 274.
European states abolished torture from their statutory law in the late 18th and
early 19th centuries. Sweden and Prussia were the first to do so in 1722 and
1754 respectively; Denmark abolished torture in 1770, Russia in 1774, Austria
in 1776, France in 1780, and the Netherlands in 1798. Bavaria abolished torture
in 1806 and Württemberg in 1809. In Spain the Napoleonic conquest put an end
to torture in 1808. Norway abolished it in 1819 and Portugal in 1826. The Swiss
cantons abolished torture in the first half of the 19th century. Tortures
included the chevalet, in which an accused witch sat on a pointed metal horse
with weights strung from her feet. Sexual humiliation torture included forced
sitting on red-hot stools. Gresillons, also called pennywinkis in Scotland,
crushed the tips of fingers and toes in a vice-like device. The Spanish Boot,
or "leg-screw", used mostly in Germany and Scotland, was a steel boot that was
placed over the leg of the accused and was tightened. The pressure from the
squeezing of the boot would break the shin bone in pieces. An anonymous
Scotsman called it "The most severe and cruel pain in the world". The echelle
more commonly known as the "ladder" or "rack" was a long table that the accused
would lie upon and be stretched violently. The torture was used so intensely
that on many occasions the victim's limbs would be pulled out of the socket
and, at times, the limbs would even be torn from the body entirely. On some
special occasions a tortillon was used in conjunction with the ladder which
would severely squeeze and mutilate the genitals at the same time as the
stretching was occurring. Similar to the ladder was the "lift". It too
stretched the limbs of the accused, this time however the victim's feet were
strapped to the ground and their arms were tied behind their back before a rope
was tied to their hands and lifted upwards. This caused the arms to break
before the horrific portion of the stretching began. Recent times. Modern
sensibilities have been shaped by a profound reaction to the war crimes and
crimes against humanity committed by the Axis Powers in the Second World War,
which have led to a sweeping international rejection of most if not all aspects
of the practice. Even as many states engage in torture, few wish to be
described as doing so, either to their own citizens or to the international
community. A variety of devices bridge this gap, including state denial,
"secret police", "need to know", a denial that given treatments are torturous
in nature, appeal to various laws (national or international), the use of
jurisdictional argument and the claim of "overriding need". Throughout history
and today, many states have engaged in torture, albeit unofficially. According
to scholar Ervand Abrahamian, although there were several decades of
prohibition of torture that spread from Europe to most parts of the world, by
the 1980s, the taboo against torture was broken and torture "returned with a
vengeance," propelled in part by television and an opportunity to break
political prisoners and broadcast the resulting public recantations of their
political beliefs for "ideological warfare, political mobilization, and the
need to win 'hearts and minds.'" According to professor Darius Rejali, although
dictatorships may have used tortured "more, and more indiscriminately", it was
modern democracies, "the United States, Britain, and France" who "pioneered and
exported techniques that have become the lingua franca of modern torture:
methods that leave no marks." Torture still occurs in liberal democracies
despite several international treaties such as the International Covenant on
Civil and Political Rights and the UN Convention Against Torture making torture
illegal. Despite such international conventions, torture cases continue to
arise such as the 2004 Abu Ghraib torture and prisoner abuse scandal committed
by military police personnel of the United States Army. The US Constitution and
US federal law prohibits the use of torture, yet such human rights violations
occurred. Soldiers involved in the violations have been tried and sentenced to
prison, and additional court cases are pending on other persons who engaged in
such violations. At least one alleged person who engaged in a violation, an
alleged homicide, was granted qualified immunity. According to the findings of
Dr. Christian Davenport of the University of Notre Dame, Professor William
Moore of Florida State University, and David Armstrong of Oxford University
during their torture research, evidence suggests that non-governmental
organizations have played the most determinant factor for stopping torture once
it gets started. Preliminary research suggests that it is civil society, not
government institutions, that can stop torture once it has begun. Organizations
such as Amnesty International serve to expose widespread human rights
violations and hold the individuals accountable to the international community.
Historical methods of execution and capital punishment. For most of recorded
history, capital punishments were often cruel and inhumane. Severe historical
penalties include breaking wheel, boiling to death, flaying, slow slicing,
disembowelment, crucifixion, impalement, crushing, stoning, execution by
burning, dismemberment, sawing, decapitation, scaphism, or necklacing. "Slow
slicing", or "death by/of a thousand cuts", was a form of execution used in
China from roughly 900 AD to its abolition in 1905. According to apocryphal
lore, "língchí" began when the torturer, wielding an extremely sharp knife,
began by putting out the eyes, rendering the condemned incapable of seeing the
remainder of the torture and, presumably, adding considerably to the
psychological terror of the procedure. Successive rather minor cuts chopped off
ears, nose, tongue, fingers, toes, and such before proceeding to grosser cuts
that removed large collops of flesh from more sizable parts, e.g., thighs and
shoulders. The entire process was said to last three days, and to total 3,600
cuts. The heavily carved bodies of the deceased were then put on a parade for a
show in the public. "Impalement" was a method of torture and execution whereby
a person is pierced with a long stake. The penetration can be through the
sides, from the rectum, or through the mouth. This method would lead to slow,
painful, death. Often, the victim was hoisted into the air after partial
impalement. Gravity and the victim's own struggles would cause him to slide
down the pole. Death could take many days. Impalement was frequently practiced
in Asia and Europe throughout the Middle Ages. Vlad III Dracula and Ivan the
Terrible have passed into legend as major users of the method. The "breaking
wheel" was a torturous capital punishment device used in the Middle Ages and
early modern times for public execution by cudgeling to death, especially in
France and Germany. In France the condemned were placed on a cart-wheel with
their limbs stretched out along the spokes over two sturdy wooden beams. The
wheel was made to slowly revolve. Through the openings between the spokes, the
executioner hit the victim with an iron hammer that could easily break the
victim's bones. This process was repeated several times per limb. Once his
bones were broken, he was left on the wheel to die. It could take hours, even
days, before shock and dehydration caused death. The punishment was abolished
in Germany as late as 1827. Etymology. The word 'torture' comes from the French
"torture", originating in the Late Latin "tortura" and ultimately deriving the
past participle of "torquere" meaning 'to twist'. The word is also used loosely
to describe more ordinary discomforts that would be accurately described as
tedious rather than painful; for example, "making this spreadsheet was
torture!" Laws against torture. On 10 December 1948 the United Nations General
Assembly adopted the Universal Declaration of Human Rights (UDHR). Article 5
states, "No one shall be subjected to torture or to cruel, inhuman or degrading
treatment or punishment." Since that time, a number of other international
treaties have been adopted to prevent the use of torture. Two of these are the
United Nations Convention Against Torture and for international conflicts the
Geneva Conventions III and IV. United Nations Convention Against Torture. The
United Nations Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading
Treatment or Punishment came into force in June 1987. The most relevant
articles are Articles 1, 2, 3, and the first paragraph of Article 16. As of
June 2008, 145 states are parties to the Convention against Torture, and
another nine states have signed but not ratified the treaty. Optional Protocol
to the UN Convention Against Torture. The Optional Protocol to the Convention
Against Torture (OPCAT) entered into force on 22 June 2006 as an important
addition to the UNCAT. As stated in Article 1, the purpose of the protocol is
to "establish a system of regular visits undertaken by independent
international and national bodies to places where people are deprived of their
liberty, in order to prevent torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading
treatment or punishment." Each state ratifying the OPCAT, according to Article
17, is responsible for creating or maintaining at least one independent
national preventive mechanism for torture prevention at the domestic level.
Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court. The Rome Statute, which
established the International Criminal Court (ICC), provides for criminal
prosecution of individuals responsible for genocide, war crimes, and crimes
against humanity. The statute defines torture as "intentional infliction of
severe pain or suffering, whether physical or mental, upon a person in the
custody or under the control of the accused; except that torture shall not
include pain or suffering arising only from, inherent in or incidental to,
lawful sanctions". Under Article 7 of the statute, torture may be considered a
crime against humanity "when committed as part of a widespread or systematic
attack directed against any civilian population, with knowledge of the attack".
Article 8 of the statute provides that torture may also, under certain
circumstances, be prosecuted as a war crime. The ICC came into existence on 1
July 2002 and can only prosecute crimes committed on or after that date. The
court can generally exercise jurisdiction only in cases where the accused is a
national of a state party to the Rome Statute, the alleged crime took place on
the territory of a state party, or a situation is referred to the court by the
United Nations Security Council. The court is designed to complement existing
national judicial systems: it can exercise its jurisdiction only when national
courts are unwilling or unable to investigate or prosecute such crimes. Primary
responsibility to investigate and punish crimes is therefore reserved to
individual states. Geneva Conventions. The four Geneva Conventions provide
protection for people who fall into enemy hands. The third (GCIII) and fourth
(GCIV) Geneva Conventions are the two most relevant for the treatment of the
victims of conflicts. Both treaties state in Article 3, in similar wording,
that in a non-international armed conflict, "Persons taking no active part in
the hostilities, including members of armed forces who have laid down their
arms... shall in all circumstances be treated humanely." The treaty also states
that there must not be any "violence to life and person, in particular murder
of all kinds, mutilation, cruel treatment and torture" or "outrages upon
personal dignity, in particular humiliating and degrading treatment". GCIV
covers most civilians in an international armed conflict, and says they are
usually "Protected Persons" (see exemptions section immediately after this for
those who are not). Under Article 32, protected persons have the right to
protection from "murder, torture, corporal punishments, mutilation and medical
or scientific experiments...but also to any other measures of brutality whether
applied by non-combatant or military agents". GCIII covers the treatment of
prisoners of war (POWs) in an international armed conflict. In particular,
Article 17 says that "No physical or mental torture, nor any other form of
coercion, may be inflicted on prisoners of war to secure from them information
of any kind whatever. Prisoners of war who refuse to answer may not be
threatened, insulted or exposed to unpleasant or disadvantageous treatment of
any kind." POW status under GCIII has far fewer exemptions than "Protected
Person" status under GCIV. Captured enemy combatants in an international armed
conflict automatically have the protection of GCIII and are POWs under GCIII
unless they are determined by a competent tribunal to not be a POW (GCIII
Article 5). Also, nationals of a State not bound by the Convention are not
protected by it, and nationals of a neutral State in the territory of a
combatant State, and nationals of a co-belligerent State, cannot claim the
protection of GCIV if their home state has normal diplomatic representation in
the State that holds them (Article 4), as their diplomatic representatives can
take steps to protect them. The requirement to treat persons with "humanity"
implies that it is still prohibited to torture individuals not protected by the
Convention. The George W. Bush administration afforded fewer protections, under
GCIII, to detainees in the "War on Terror" by codifying the legal status of an
"unlawful combatant". If there is a question of whether a person is a lawful
combatant, he (or she) must be treated as a POW "until their status has been
determined by a competent tribunal" (GCIII Article 5). If the tribunal decides
that he is an unlawful combatant, he is not considered a protected person under
GCIII. However, if he is a protected person under GCIV he still has some
protection under GCIV, and must be "treated with humanity and, in case of
trial, shall not be deprived of the rights of fair and regular trial prescribed
by the present Convention" (GCIV Article 5). There are two additional protocols
to the Geneva Convention: Protocol I (1977), relating to the protection of
victims of international armed conflicts and Protocol II (1977), relating to
the protection of victims of non-international armed conflicts. These clarify
and extend the definitions in some areas, but to date many countries, including
the United States, have either not signed them or have not ratified them.
Protocol I does not mention torture but it does affect the treatment of POWs
and Protected Persons. In Article 5, the protocol explicitly involves "the
appointment of Protecting Powers and of their substitute" to monitor that the
Parties to the conflict are enforcing the Conventions. The protocol also
broadens the definition of a lawful combatant in wars against "alien
occupation, colonial domination and racist regimes" to include those who carry
arms openly but are not wearing uniforms, so that they are now lawful
combatants and protected by the Geneva Conventions—although only if the
Occupying Power has ratified Protocol I. Under the original conventions
combatants without a recognisable insignia could be treated as criminals, and
potentially be executed. It also mentions spies, and defines who is a
mercenary. Mercenaries and spies are considered an unlawful combatant, and not
protected by the same conventions. Protocol II "develops and supplements
Article 3 to the protection of victims of non-international armed conflicts
common to the Geneva Conventions of 12 August 1949 without modifying its
existing conditions of application" (Article 1). Any person who does not take
part in or ceased to take part in hostilities is entitled to humane treatment.
Among the acts prohibited against these persons are, "Violence to the life,
health and physical or mental well-being of persons, in particular murder as
well as cruel treatment such as torture, mutilation or any form of corporal
punishment" (Article 4.a), "Outrages upon personal dignity, in particular
humiliating and degrading treatment, rape, enforced prostitution and any form
of indecent assault" (Article 4.e), and "Threats to commit any of the foregoing
acts" (Article 4.h). Clauses in other articles implore humane treatment of
enemy personnel in an internal conflict. These have a bearing on torture, but
no other clauses explicitly mention torture. Other conventions. In accordance
with the optional UN Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners
(1955), ""corporal punishment, punishment by placing in a dark cell, and all
cruel, inhuman or degrading punishments shall be completely prohibited as
punishments for disciplinary offences."" The International Covenant on Civil
and Political Rights, (16 December 1966), explicitly prohibits torture and
""cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment"" by signatories. In 1950
during the Cold War, the participating member states of the Council of Europe
signed the European Convention on Human Rights. The treaty was based on the
UDHR. It included the provision for a court to interpret the treaty, and
Article 3 "Prohibition of torture" stated; ""No one shall be subjected to
torture or to inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment."" In 1978, the
European Court of Human Rights ruled that the five techniques of "sensory
deprivation" were not torture as laid out in Article 3 of the European
Convention on Human Rights, but were ""inhuman or degrading treatment"" (see
Accusations of use of torture by United Kingdom for details). This case
occurred nine years before the United Nations Convention Against Torture came
into force and had an influence on thinking about what constitutes torture ever
since. On 26 November 1987 the member states of the Council of Europe, meeting
at Strasbourg, adopted the European Convention for the Prevention of Torture
and Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment (ECPT). Two additional
Protocols amended the Convention, which entered into force on 1 March 2002. The
Convention set up the Committee for the Prevention of Torture to oversee
compliance with its provisions. The Inter-American Convention to Prevent and
Punish Torture, currently ratified by 17 nations of the Americas and in force
since 28 February 1987, defines torture more expansively than the United
Nations Convention Against Torture. Supervision of anti-torture treaties. The
Istanbul Protocol, an official UN document, is the first set of international
guidelines for documentation of torture and its consequences. It became a
United Nations official document in 1999. Under the provisions of OPCAT that
entered into force on 22 June 2006 independent international and national
bodies regularly visit places where people are deprived of their liberty, to
prevent torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment.
Each state that ratified the OPCAT, according to Article 17, is responsible for
creating or maintaining at least one independent national preventative
mechanism for torture prevention at the domestic level. The European Committee
for the Prevention of Torture, citing Article 1 of the European Convention for
the Prevention of Torture, states that it will, "by means of visits, examine
the treatment of persons deprived of their liberty with a view to
strengthening, if necessary, the protection of such persons from torture and
from inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment". In times of armed conflict
between a signatory of the Geneva conventions and another party, delegates of
the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) monitor the compliance of
signatories to the Geneva Conventions, which includes monitoring the use of
torture. Human rights organizations, such as Amnesty International, the World
Organization Against Torture, and Association for the Prevention of Torture
work actively to stop the use of torture throughout the world and publish
reports on any activities they consider to be torture. Municipal law. States
that ratified the United Nations Convention Against Torture have a treaty
obligation to include the provisions into municipal law. The laws of many
states therefore formally prohibit torture. However, such "de jure" legal
provisions are by no means a proof that, "de facto", the signatory country does
not use torture. To prevent torture, many legal systems have a right against
self-incrimination or explicitly prohibit undue force when dealing with
suspects. England abolished torture in about 1640 (except peine forte et dure,
which England only abolished in 1772), Scotland in 1708, Prussia in 1740,
Denmark around 1770, Russia in 1774, Austria and Polish-Lithuanian Commonwealth
in 1776, Italy in 1786, France in 1789, Baden in 1831, Japan in 1873. The last
European jurisdictions to abolish legal torture were Portugal (1828) and the
canton of Glarus in Switzerland (1851). The French 1789 Declaration of the
Rights of Man and of the Citizen, of constitutional value, prohibits submitting
suspects to any hardship not necessary to secure his or her person. Statute law
explicitly makes torture a crime. In addition, statute law prohibits the police
or justice from interrogating suspects under oath. As the United States
Constitution recognizes customary international law, or the law of nations, the
U.S. Alien Tort Claims Act also provides legal remedies for victims of torture
in the United States. Specifically, the status of torturers under the law of
the United States, as determined by a famous legal decision in 1980, Filártiga
v. Peña-Irala, 630 F.2d 876 (1980), is that, "the torturer has become, like
the pirate and the slave trader before him, hostis humani generis, an enemy of
all mankind." Exclusion of Evidence Obtained Under Torture. Recently the
question of the use of evidence obtained under torture has arisen in connection
with prosecutions in the so-called War on Terror in the United Kingdom and the
United States. United Kingdom. In September 2011, UK involvement in torture
overseas was brought to light yet again with the unearthing of top secret
documents by Human Rights Watch in Libya. Chief Executive of Freedom from
Torture Keith Best stated: 'If verified, they show the head of counter-
terrorism at MI6 engaged in fawning dialogue with Gaddafi’s former
intelligence chief, Musa Kusa, about how "glad" Britain was to help deliver
into his hands the Libyan dissident Abdel Hakim Belhadj' on Freedom from
Torture website. During a House of Commons debate on 7 July 2009, MP David
Davis accused the UK government of outsourcing torture, by allowing Rangzieb
Ahmed to leave the country (even though they had evidence against him upon
which he was later convicted for terrorism) to Pakistan, where it is said the
Inter-Services Intelligence was given the go ahead by the British intelligence
agencies to torture Ahmed. Davis further accused the government of trying to
gag Ahmed, stopping him coming forward with his accusations, after he had been
imprisoned back in the UK. He said, there was "an alleged request to drop his
allegations of torture: if he did that, they could get his sentence cut and
possibly give him some money. If this request to drop the torture case is true,
it is frankly monstrous. It would at the very least be a criminal misuse of the
powers and funds under the Government's Contest strategy, and at worst a
conspiracy to pervert the course of justice." In 2003, the United Kingdom's
Ambassador to Uzbekistan, Craig Murray, suggested that it was "wrong to use
information gleaned from torture". The unanimous Law Lords judgment on 8
December 2005 confirmed this position. They ruled that, under English law
tradition, "torture and its fruits" could not be used in court. But the
information thus obtained could be used by the British police and security
services as "it would be ludicrous for them to disregard information about a
ticking bomb if it had been procured by torture." The Law Lords thus dismissed
concerns about the validity of information obtained under torture, which have
been expressed by various security agents and human rights activists. Murray's
accusations did not lead to any investigation by his employer, the FCO, and he
resigned after disciplinary action was taken against him in 2004. The Foreign
and Commonwealth Office itself is being investigated by the National Audit
Office because of accusations that it has victimized, bullied and intimidated
its own staff. Murray later stated that he felt that he had unwittingly
stumbled upon what has been called "torture by proxy". He thought that Western
countries moved people to regimes and nations where it was known that
information would be extracted by torture, and made available to them. Murray
states that he was aware from August 2002 "that the CIA were bringing in
detainees to Tashkent from Bagram airport Afghanistan, who were handed over to
the Uzbek security services (SNB). I presumed at the time that these were all
Uzbek nationals — that may have been a false presumption. I knew that the CIA
were obtaining intelligence from their subsequent interrogation by the SNB." He
goes on to say that he did not know at the time that any non-Uzbek nationals
were flown to Uzbekistan and although he has studied the reports by several
journalists and finds their reports credible he is not a firsthand authority on
this issue. United States. As in the United Kingdom, US law prohibits using
evidence obtained illegally or under duress in US courts. The United States
includes protection against self-incrimination in the fifth amendment to its
federal constitution, which in turn serves as the basis of the Miranda warning,
which law enforcement officers issue to individuals upon their arrest.
Additionally, the US Constitution's eighth amendment forbids the use of "cruel
and unusual punishments," which is widely interpreted as prohibiting torture.
Finally, 18 U.S.C. § 2340 "et seq." define and forbid torture outside the
United States. In May 2008 Susan Crawford, the official overseeing prosecutions
before Military Tribunals at Guantanamo, declined to refer for trial the case
of Mohammed al-Qahtani because she said, "we tortured name = "Qahtani
Tortured">[http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/5134328.stm Q&A: Guantanamo detentions
BBC News, 22 January 2009. Crawford said that a combination of techniques with
clear medical consequences amounted to the legal definition of torture, and
that torture "tainted everything going forward." In the 2010 New York trial of
Ahmed Khalfan Ghailani who was accused of complicity in the bombing of US
embassies in Tanzania and Kenya, Judge Lewis Kaplan ruled evidence obtained
under coercion inadmissible. The ruling excluded an important witness, whose
name had been extracted from the defendant under duress. The jury acquitted him
of 280 charges and convicted on only one charge of conspiracy. Use of torture.
"Recent times" in the context of this article is from 10 December 1948, when
the United Nations General Assembly adopted the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights. Torture by proxy. In 2003, Britain's Ambassador to Uzbekistan, Craig
Murray, made accusations that information was being extracted under extreme
torture from dissidents in that country, and that the information was
subsequently being used by Western, democratic countries that officially
disapproved of torture. The accusations did not lead to any investigation by
his employer, the Foreign and Commonwealth Office, and he resigned after
disciplinary action was taken against him in 2004. No misconduct by him was
proven. The National Audit Office is investigating the Foreign and Commonwealth
Office because of accusations of victimisation, bullying, and intimidating its
own staff. Murray later stated that he felt that he had unwittingly stumbled
upon what others called "torture by proxy" and with the euphemism of
"extraordinary rendition". He thought that Western countries moved people to
regimes and nations knowing that torturers would extract and disclose
information. Murray alleged that this practice circumvented and violated
international treaties against torture. If a country participated in torture by
proxy and had signed the UN Convention Against Torture, that country would be
in specific breach of Article 3 of that convention. Aspects of torture. Ethical
arguments regarding torture. Torture has been criticized on humanitarian and
moral grounds, on the grounds that evidence extracted by torture is unreliable,
and because torture corrupts institutions that tolerate it. Organizations like
Amnesty International argue that the universal legal prohibition is based on a
universal philosophical consensus that torture and ill-treatment are repugnant,
abhorrent, and immoral. But since shortly after the September 11, 2001 attacks
there has been a debate in the United States about whether torture is justified
in some circumstances. Some people, such as Alan M. Dershowitz and Mirko
Bagaric, have argued the need for information outweighs the moral and ethical
arguments against torture. However, after coercive practices were banned,
interrogators in Iraq saw an increase of 50 percent more high-value
intelligence. Maj. Gen. Geoffrey D. Miller, the American commander in charge of
detentions and interrogations, stated ""a rapport-based interrogation that
recognizes respect and dignity, and having very well-trained interrogators, is
the basis by which you develop intelligence rapidly and increase the validity
of that intelligence."" Others including Robert Mueller, FBI Director since 5
July 2001, have pointed out that despite former Bush Administration claims that
waterboarding has "disrupted a number of attacks, maybe dozens of attacks",
they do not believe that evidence gained by the U.S. government through what
supporters of the techniques call "enhanced interrogation" has disrupted a
single attack and no one has come up with a documented example of lives saved
thanks to these techniques. On 19 June 2009, the US government announced that
it was delaying the scheduled release of declassified portions of a report by
the CIA Inspector General that reportedly cast doubt on the effectiveness of
the "enhanced interrogation" techniques employed by CIA interrogators,
according to references to the report contained in several Bush-era Justice
Department memos declassified in the Spring of 2009 by the US Justice
Department. An average of 59% of people worldwide rejected torture. However
there was a clear divide between those countries with strong rejection of
torture (such as Italy, where only 14% supported torture) and nations where
rejection was less strong. Often this lessened rejection is found in countries
severely and frequently threatened by terrorist attacks. E.g., Israel, despite
its Supreme Court outlawing torture in 1999, showed 43% supporting torture, but
48% opposing, India showed 37% supporting torture and only 23% opposing. Within
nations there is a clear divide between the positions of members of different
ethnic groups, religions, and political affiliations, sometimes reflecting
distinctions between groups considering themselves threatened or victimized by
terror acts and those from the alleged perpetrator groups. For example, the
study found that among Jews in Israel 53% favored some degree of torture and
only 39% wanted strong rules against torture while Muslims in Israel were
overwhelmingly against any use of torture, unlike Muslims polled elsewhere.
Differences in general political views also can matter. In one 2006 survey by
the Scripps Center at Ohio University, 66% of Americans who identified
themselves as strongly Republican supported torture, whereas 24% of those who
identified themselves as strongly Democratic. In a 2005 U.S. survey 72% of
American Catholics supported the use of torture in some circumstances compared
to 51% of American secularists. A Pew survey in 2009 similarly found that the
religiously unaffiliated are the least likely (40 percent) to support torture,
and that the more a person "claims" to attend church, the more likely he or she
is to condone torture; among racial/religious groups, white evangelical
Protestants were far and away the most likely (62 percent) to support
inflicting pain as a tool of interrogation. A CNN/USA Today/Gallup poll "found
that sizable majorities of Americans disagree with tactics ranging from leaving
prisoners naked and chained in uncomfortable positions for hours, to trying to
make a prisoner think he was being drowned". There are also different attitudes
as to what constitutes torture, as revealed in an ABC News/Washington Post
poll, where more than half of the Americans polled thought that techniques such
as sleep deprivation were not torture. In practice, so-called "enhanced
interrogation" techniques were employed by the CIA in situations that did not
involve the "ticking time bomb" scenario that has been the subject of opinion
polls and public debate. In April 2009 a former senior U.S. intelligence
official and a former Army psychiatrist stated that the Bush administration
applied pressure on interrogators to use the "enhanced interrogation"
techniques on detainees to find evidence of cooperation between al Qaida and
the late Iraqi dictator Saddam Hussein's regime. The purported link between al
Qaida and Hussein's regime, which has been disproven, was a key political
justification for the Iraq War. On 13 May 2009, former NBC News investigative
producer Robert Windrem reported, as confirmed by former Iraq Survey Group
leader Charles Duelfer, that the Vice President's Office suggested that an
interrogation team led by Duelfer waterboard an Iraqi prisoner suspected of
knowing about a relationship between al Qaeda and Saddam. On 14 February 2010,
in an appearance on ABC's This Week, Vice-President Dick Cheney reiterated his
support of waterboarding and "enhanced interrogation" techniques for captured
terrorist suspects, saying, "I was and remain a strong proponent of our
enhanced interrogation program." Pressed by the BBC in 2010 on his personal
view of waterboarding, Presidential Advisor Karl Rove said: "I'm proud that we
kept the world safer than it was, by the use of these techniques. They’re
appropriate, they're in conformity with our international requirements and with
US law." Utilitarian arguments against torture. There is a strong utilitarian
argument against torture; namely, that there is simply no scientific evidence
supporting its effectiveness. The lack of scientific basis for the
effectiveness of torture as an interrogation techniques is summarized in a 2006
Intelligence Science Board report titled "EDUCING INFORMATION, Interrogation:
Science and Art, Foundations for the Future". Those favoring torture have
however pointed to some specific cases where torture has elicited true
information. Rejection of torture. A famous example of rejection of the use of
torture was cited by the Argentine National Commission on the Disappearance of
Persons in whose report, Italian general Carlo Alberto Dalla Chiesa was reputed
to have said in connection with the investigation of the disappearance of prime
minister Aldo Moro, "Italy can survive the loss of Aldo Moro. It would not
survive the introduction of torture." Incrimination of innocent people. One
well documented effect of torture is that its victims will say or do anything
to escape the situation, including untrue "confessions" and implication of
others without genuine knowledge, who may well then be tortured in turn. That
information may have been extracted from the Birmingham Six through the use of
police beatings was counterproductive because it made the convictions unsound
as the confessions were worthless. There are rare exceptions, such as Admiral
James Stockdale, Medal of Honor recipient, who refused to provide information
under torture. Secrecy. Before the emergence of modern policing, torture was an
important aspect of policing and the use of it was openly sanctioned and
acknowledged by the authority. The Economist magazine proposed that one of the
reasons torture endures is that torture does indeed work in some instances to
extract information/confession, if those who are being tortured are indeed
guilty. Depending on the culture, torture has at times been carried on in
silence (official denial), semi-silence (known but not spoken about), or openly
acknowledged in public (to instill fear and obedience). In the 21st century,
even when states sanction their interrogation methods, torturers often work
outside the law. For this reason, some prefer methods that, while unpleasant,
leave victims alive and unmarked. A victim with no visible damage may lack
credibility when telling tales of torture, whereas a person missing fingernails
or eyes can easily prove claims of torture. Mental torture, however can leave
scars just as deep and long-lasting as physical torture. Professional torturers
in some countries have used techniques such as electrical shock, asphyxiation,
heat, cold, noise, and sleep deprivation, which leave little evidence, although
in other contexts torture frequently results in horrific mutilation or death.
However the most common and prevalent form of torture worldwide in both
developed and under-developed countries is beating. Torture methods and
devices. Physical torture methods have been used throughout recorded history
and can range from a beating with nothing more than fist and boot, through to
the use of sophisticated custom designed devices such as the rack. Remarkable
ingenuity has been shown in the invention of instruments and techniques of
physical torture, exploiting medical knowledge of the vulnerabilities of the
human body ("e.g.", the sensitivity of the nail beds to pressure, or of the
soles of the feet to heat). Other types of torture can include sensory or sleep
deprivation, restraint or being held in awkward or damaging positions,
uncomfortable extremes of heat and cold, loud noises or any other means that
inflicts severe physical or mental pain. The boundary between torture and
legitimate interrogation techniques is not universally agreed. In a separate
opinion, at the end of the 1978 in the European Court of Human Rights (ECHR)
trial "Ireland v. the United Kingdom" (Case No. 5310/71), Judge Zekia stated
that "It seems to me permissible, in ascertaining whether torture or inhuman
treatment has been committed or not, to apply not only the objective test but
also the subjective test. As an example I can refer to the case of an elderly
sick man who is exposed to a harsh treatment—after being given several blows
and beaten to the floor, he is dragged and kicked on the floor for several
hours. I would say without hesitation that the poor man has been tortured. If
such treatment is applied on a wrestler or even a young athlete, I would
hesitate a lot to describe it as an inhuman treatment and I might regard it as
a mere rough handling". Psychological torture uses non-physical methods that
cause psychological suffering. Its effects are not immediately apparent unless
they alter the behavior of the tortured person. Since there is no international
political consensus on what constitutes psychological torture, it is often
overlooked, denied, and referred to by different names. Psychological torture
is less well known than physical torture and tends to be subtle and much easier
to conceal. In practice the distinctions between physical and psychological
torture are often blurred. Physical torture is the inflicting of severe pain or
suffering on a person. In contrast, psychological torture is directed at the
psyche with calculated violations of psychological needs, along with deep
damage to psychological structures and the breakage of beliefs underpinning
normal sanity. Torturers often inflict both types of torture in combination to
compound the associated effects. Psychological torture also includes deliberate
use of extreme stressors and situations such as mock execution, shunning,
violation of deep-seated social or sexual norms and taboos, or extended
solitary confinement. Because psychological torture needs no physical violence
to be effective, it is possible to induce severe psychological pain, suffering,
and trauma with no externally visible effects. Rape and other forms of sexual
abuse are often used as methods of torture for interrogative or punitive
purposes. In medical torture, medical practitioners use torture to judge what
victims can endure, to apply treatments that enhance torture, or act as
torturers in their own right. Josef Mengele and Shirō Ishii were infamous
during and after World War II for their involvement in medical torture and
murder. Pharmacological torture is the use of drugs to produce psychological or
physical pain or discomfort. Tickle torture is an unusual form of torture which
nevertheless has been documented, and can be both physically and
psychologically painful. Torture murder. Torture murder involves torture to the
point of murder as for punishment in law enforcement agencies of countries that
allow torture. Murderers might also torture their victims to death for sadistic
reasons. Terrorist groups such as al Qaeda enjoy subjecting captured enemy
soldiers to a variety of tortures—typically commencing with the forcible
extraction of all ten fingernails, all ten toenails, and all thirty-two
teeth—before executing them by such barbaric techniques as slow decapitation
via butcher knife. Ancient conceptual forerunners of torture murder include
drawing and quartering and flaying. Effects of torture. The consequences of
torture reach far beyond immediate pain. Many victims suffer from post-
traumatic stress disorder (PTSD), which includes symptoms such as flashbacks
(or intrusive thoughts), severe anxiety, insomnia, nightmares, depression and
memory lapses. Torture victims often feel guilt and shame, triggered by the
humiliation they have endured. Many feel that they have betrayed themselves or
their friends and family. All such symptoms are normal human responses to
abnormal and inhuman treatment. Organizations like Freedom from Torture and the
Center for Victims of Torture try to help survivors of torture obtain medical
treatment and to gain forensic medical evidence to obtain political asylum in a
safe country and/or to prosecute the perpetrators. Torture is often difficult
to prove, particularly when some time has passed between the event and a
medical examination, or when the torturers are immune from prosecution. Many
torturers around the world use methods designed to have a maximum psychological
impact while leaving only minimal physical traces. Medical and Human Rights
Organizations worldwide have collaborated to produce the Istanbul Protocol, a
document designed to outline common torture methods, consequences of torture,
and medico-legal examination techniques. Typically deaths due to torture are
shown in an autopsy as being due to "natural causes" like heart attack,
inflammation, or embolism due to extreme stress. For survivors, torture often
leads to lasting mental and physical health problems. Physical problems can be
wide-ranging, e.g. sexually transmitted diseases, musculo-skeletal problems,
brain injury, post-traumatic epilepsy and dementia or chronic pain syndromes.
Mental health problems are equally wide-ranging; common are post-traumatic
stress disorder, depression and anxiety disorder. Psychic deadness, erasure of
intersubjectivity, refusal of meaning-making, perversion of agency, and an
inability to bear desire constitute the core features of the post-traumatic
psychic landscape of torture. On 19 August 2007, the American Psychology
Association (APA) voted to bar participation, to intervene to stop, and to
report involvement in a wide variety of interrogation techniques as torture,
including "using mock executions, simulated drowning, sexual and religious
humiliation, stress positions or sleep deprivation", as well as "the
exploitation of prisoners' phobias, the use of mind-altering drugs, hooding,
forced nakedness, the use of dogs to frighten detainees, exposing prisoners to
extreme heat and cold, physical assault and threatening the use of such
techniques against a prisoner or a prisoner's family." However, the APA
rejected a stronger resolution that sought to prohibit “all psychologist
involvement, either direct or indirect, in any interrogations at U.S. detention
centers for foreign detainees or citizens detained outside normal legal
channels.” That resolution would have placed the APA alongside the American
Medical Association and the American Psychiatric Association in limiting
professional involvement in such settings to direct patient care. The APA
echoed the Bush administration by condemning isolation, sleep deprivation, and
sensory deprivation or over-stimulation only when they are likely to cause
lasting harm. Psychiatric treatment of torture-related medical problems might
require a wide range of expertise and often specialized experience. Common
treatments are psychotropic medication, e.g. SSRI antidepressants, counseling,
Cognitive Behavioural Therapy, family systems therapy and physiotherapy.
Rehabilitation. The aim of rehabilitation is to empower the torture victim to
resume as full a life as possible. Rebuilding the life of someone whose dignity
has been destroyed takes time and as a result long-term material, medical,
psychological and social support is needed. Treatment must be a coordinated
effort that covers both physical and psychological aspects. It is important to
take into consideration the patients' needs, problems, expectations, views and
cultural references. The consequences of torture are likely to be influenced by
many internal and external factors. Therefore, rehabilitation needs to employ
different treatment approaches, taking into account the victims' individual
needs, as well as the cultural, social and political environment. In the case
of asylum seekers and refugees, the services also may include assisting in
documentation of torture for the asylum decision, language classes and help in
finding somewhere to live and work. Rehabilitation of secondary survivors. In
the worst case, torture can affect several generations. The physical and mental
after-effects of torture often place great strain on the entire family and
society. Children are particularly vulnerable. They often suffer from feelings
of guilt or personal responsibility for what has happened. Therefore, other
members of the survivor’s family – in particular the spouse and children
– are also offered treatment and counselling. Broken societies. In some
instances, whole societies can be more or less traumatized where torture has
been used in a systematic and widespread manner. In general, after years of
repression, and war, regular support networks and structures have often been
broken or destroyed. Providing psychosocial support and redress to survivors of
torture and trauma can help reconstruct broken societies. "Rehabilitation
centres therefore play a key role in promoting democracy, co-existence and
respect for human rights. They provide support and hope, and act as a symbol of
triumph over the manmade terror of torture which can hold back the development
of democracy of entire societies."
