Vector Marketing Vector Marketing is the domestic sales arm of Cutco
Corporation, an Olean, New York based cutlery manufacturer. History. Vector
Marketing Corporation and Cutco Cutlery Corporation are wholly owned
subsidiaries of Cutco Corporation. Formerly known as Alcas Corporation, the
company was created as a joint venture between Alcoa and Case Cutlery. The
factory in Olean, New York was completed in 1949, and the first set of Cutco
Cutlery was shipped to New Kensington, Pennsylvania that same year. Alcoa
purchased Case's share of the company in 1972. In 1982 members of management
purchased the company from Alcoa in a management buyout. The company remains
privately held, and is a major employer in Cattaraugus County, New York. Vector
began as an independent distributor of Cutco Cutlery in 1981. Then Vector was
purchased by Alcas Corporation in 1985 (in 2009 Alcas changed its name to Cutco
Corporation). Vector Marketing then expanded into Canada in 1990. As of 2011,
Vector has more than 200 offices throughout the U.S. and contracts about 60,000
student workers each year to perform entry-level sales work. Business model.
Vector Marketing is both a multi-level marketing and a direct sales group that
builds its work force through advertising via newspapers, direct marketing,
word-of-mouth, posted advertisements, letters and various media on the
internet. Their fliers advertising "student work" are distributed in many high
schools and college campuses across the United States and Canada. Students are
hired to sell Cutco products (mainly kitchen knives) to customers, typically
their friends and family members via one-on-one demonstrations. Business
memberships. Vector Marketing has belonged to the Better Business Bureau since
December 19, 1990, as well as the Direct Selling Association. Controversy. Some
of Vector Marketing former independent contractors have accused Vector
Marketing of unsavory business practices. Vector frequently advertises in
newspapers and on fliers posted on bulletin boards at college campuses, but
seldom do those advertisements explain the nature of the job. Vector Marketing
previously required sales representatives to make a refundable security deposit
to procure a set of knives for demonstrations, however no deposit is now
required. Students who work for Vector Marketing are considered independent
contractors and are not reimbursed by the company for money they spend on
transportation expenses and other common business expenses while working or for
the time they spend at training sessions. In the 2008 case "Vector Marketing
Corporation v. New Hampshire Department of Revenue Administration", the Supreme
Court of New Hampshire ruled that Vector employees are independent contractors
and Vector is thus exempt from the state business profit tax. Vector was sued
in 1990 by the Arizona Attorney General and in 1999 by the Australian
Competition and Consumer Commission. In 1994, Wisconsin ordered Vector to stop
providing dishonest information to recruits. Arizona and Vector agreed to a
settlement that punctuated a series of state actions against Vector's Tucson
manager that spanned seven years. Vector agreed not to misrepresent its
compensation system as part of the settlement. In 1996, "The Washington Post"
reported that of "940 Vector recruits surveyed, nearly half either earned no
money or actually lost money through working with the company". A recruit who
was successful in a lawsuit against Vector for failing to adhere to labor laws
in New York co-founded a group, Students Against Vector Exploitation (SAVE). In
2008, Alicia Harris filed a federal class action lawsuit against Vector. Harris
alleged that Vector violated California and federal labor law by failing to pay
adequate wages and illegally coercing employees into patronizing the company.
The case, "Harris v. Vector Marketing Corporation", is pending a final
settlement approval for US$13Â million before Judge Edward M. Chen.
