Western culture Western culture, sometimes equated with Western civilization,
Western lifestyle or European civilization, is a term used very broadly to
refer to a heritage of social norms, ethical values, traditional customs,
belief systems, political systems, and specific artifacts and technologies. The
term has come to apply to countries whose history is strongly marked by
European immigration, such as the countries of The Americas, and the countries
of Australasia, and is not restricted to the continent of Europe. Western
culture is characterised by a host of artistic, philosophic, literary, and
legal themes and traditions; the heritage of Celtic, Germanic, Hellenic,
Jewish, and Latin ethnic and linguistic groups, and Christianity, which played
an important part in the shaping of Western civilization since at least the 4th
century. Also contributing to Western thought, in ancient times and then in the
Middle Ages and the Renaissance onwards, a tradition of rationalism in various
spheres of life, developed by Hellenistic philosophy, Scholasticism, humanism,
the Scientific Revolution and the Enlightenment. Values of Western culture
have, throughout history, been derived from: political thought, widespread
employment of rational argument favouring freethought; assimilation of human
rights; the need for equality; and democracy. Historical records of Western
culture in Europe begin with Ancient Greece and Ancient Rome. Western culture
continued to develop with Christianization during the Middle Ages, with the
reform and modernization triggered by the Renaissance, and with globalization
by successive European empires, that spread European ways of life and European
educational methods around the world between the 16th and 20th centuries.
European culture developed with a complex range of philosophy, medieval
scholasticism and mysticism, and Christian and secular humanism. Rational
thinking developed through a long age of change and formation, with the
experiments of the Enlightenment, and breakthroughs in the sciences. With its
global connection, European culture grew with an all-inclusive urge to adopt,
adapt, and ultimately influence other cultural trends around the world.
Tendencies that have come to define modern Western societies include the
existence of political pluralism, prominent subcultures or countercultures
(such as New Age movements), and increasing cultural syncretism - resulting
from globalization and human migration. Terminology. The Greeks contrasted
themselves to their Eastern neighbors, such as the Trojans in "Iliad", setting
an example for later contrasts between east and west. In the Middle Ages, the
Near East provided a contrast to the West, though Hellenized since the time of
Alexander the Great, and ruled from Rome and Constantinople. In the early 21st
century, with increasing globalism, it has become more difficult to determine
which individuals fit into which category, and the East–West contrast is
sometimes criticized as relativistic and arbitrary. Globalism has spread
Western ideas so widely that almost all modern cultures are, to some extent,
influenced by aspects of Western culture. Recent stereotyped views of "the
West" have been labelled "Occidentalism", paralleling Orientalism - the term
for the 19th century stereotyped views of "the East". Boundaries of countries
that constitute "the West" remain unclear. Geographically, the "West" of today
would include Western Europe together with certain territories belonging to the
Anglosphere, the Hispanidad, the Lusofonia or the Francophonie. History.
Western culture is neither homogeneous nor unchanging. As with all other
cultures it has evolved and gradually changed over time. All generalities about
it have their exceptions at some time and place. The organisation and tactics
of the Greek Hoplites differed in many ways from the Roman legions. The "polis"
of the Greeks is not the same as the American superpower of the 21st century.
The gladiatorial games of the Roman Empire are not identical to present-day
football. The art of Pompeii is not the art of Hollywood. Nevertheless, it is
possible to follow the evolution and history of the West, and appreciate its
similarities and differences, its borrowings from, and contributions to, other
cultures of humanity. Concepts of what is "the West" arose out of legacies of
the Western Roman Empire and the Eastern Roman Empire. Later, ideas of the west
were formed by the concepts of Latin Christendom and the Holy Roman Empire.
What we think of as Western thought today originates primarily from Greco-Roman
and Germanic influences, and includes the ideals of the Middle Ages, the
Renaissance and the Enlightenment, as well as Christian culture. The Classical
West. In Homeric literature, and right up until the time of Alexander the
Great, for example in the accounts of the Persian Wars of Greeks against
Persians by Herodotus, we see the paradigm of a contrast between the West and
East. Nevertheless the Greeks felt they were the most civilized and saw
themselves (in the formulation of Aristotle) as something between the wild
barbarians of most of Europe and the soft, slavish Middle-Easterners. Ancient
Greek science, philosophy, democracy, architecture, literature, and art
provided a foundation embraced and built upon by the Roman Empire as it swept
up Europe, including the Hellenic World in its conquests in the 1st century BC.
In the meantime however, Greece, under Alexander, had become a capital of the
East, and part of an empire. For about five hundred years, the Roman Empire
maintained the Greek East and consolidated a Latin West, but an East-West
division remained, reflected in many cultural norms of the two areas, including
language. Although Rome, like Greece, was no longer democratic, the idea of
democracy remained a part of the education of citizens, as if the emperors were
a temporary emergency measure. Eventually the empire came to be increasingly
officially split into a Western and Eastern part, reviving old ideas of a
contrast between an advanced East, and a rugged West. In the Roman world one
could speak of three main directions; North (Celtic tribes and Parthians), the
East (lux ex oriente), and finally South which implied danger, historically via
the Punic wars (Quid novi ex Africa?) The West was peaceful – it contained
only the Mediterranean. Christianity emerged from Judaism on the eastern shore
of the Mediterranean, and both spread around the Roman world, with Christianity
being the more popular religion. With the rise of Christianity, much of Rome's
tradition and culture were reshaped by that religion, and transformed into
something new, which would serve as the basis for the development of Western
civilization after the fall of Rome. Also, Roman culture mixed with the pre-
existing Celtic, Germanic and Slavic cultures, which slowly became integrated
into Western culture starting, mainly, with their acceptance of Christianity.
The Medieval West. The Medieval West was at its broadest the same as
Christendom, including both the "Latin" or "Frankish" West, and the Orthodox
Eastern part, where Greek remained the language of empire. After the crowning
of Charlemagne, Charlemagne's part of Europe was referred to by its neighbors
in Byzantium and the Muslim world as "Frankish". After the fall of Rome much of
Greco-Roman art, literature, science and even technology were all but lost in
the western part of the old empire, centered around Italy, and Gaul (France).
However, this would become the centre of a new West. Europe fell into political
anarchy, with many warring kingdoms and principalities. Under the Frankish
kings, it eventually, and partially, reunified, and the anarchy evolved into
feudalism. Charlemagne was crowned Emperor of the Romans by the Pope in 800.
His reign is associated with the Carolingian Renaissance, a revival of art,
religion, and culture through the medium of the Catholic Church. Through his
foreign conquests and internal reforms, Charlemagne helped define both western
Europe and the Middle Ages. He is numbered as Charles I in the regnal lists of
France, Germany (where he is known as Karl der Große), and the Holy Roman
Empire. The re-establishment of a Western "Roman" imperium challenged the
status of the Eastern Roman Emperor in Constantinople and strained relations
between them. Much of the basis of the post-Roman cultural world had been set
before the fall of the Empire, mainly through the integration and reshaping of
Roman ideas through Christian thought. The Greek and Roman paganism had been
completely replaced by Christianity around the 4th and 5th centuries, since it
became the official State religion following the baptism of emperor Constantine
I. Roman Catholic Christianity and the Nicene Creed served as a unifying force
in Christian parts of Europe, and in some respects replaced or competed with
the secular authorities. Art and literature, law, education, and politics were
preserved in the teachings of the Church, in an environment that, otherwise,
would have probably seen their loss. The Church founded many cathedrals,
universities, monasteries and seminaries, some of which continue to exist
today. In the Medieval period, the route to power for many men was in the
Church. In a broader sense, the Middle Ages, with its fertile encounter between
Greek reasoning and Levantine monotheism was not confined to the West but also
stretched into the old East. The philosophy and science of Classical Greece was
largely forgotten in Europe after the collapse of the Western Roman Empire,
other than in isolated monastic enclaves (notably in Ireland, which had become
Christian but which was never conquered by Rome). Although the Byzantine
Emperor Justinian (the last Emperor to speak Latin as a first tongue) closed
the Academy in AD 529 (a date that is often cited as the end of Antiquity), the
learning of Classical Antiquity was better preserved in the Byzantine Eastern
Roman Empire, whose capital at Constantinople stood for another millennium,
before being captured by the Ottoman Turks. Justinian's Corpus Juris Civilis
Roman civil law code was preserved in the East and Constantinople maintained
trade and intermittent political control over outposts such as Venice in the
West for centuries. Classical Greek learning was also subsumed, preserved and
elaborated in the rising Eastern world, which gradually supplanted Roman-
Byzantine control over the Mediterranean, Middle East, North Africa, Iberia and
even Greece itself – becoming a dominant cultural-political force in those
regions. Thus, from the margins of the Roman world much of the learning of
classical antiquity was slowly reintroduced to European civilisation in the
centuries following the collapse of the Western Roman Empire. Irish
missionaries such as St Columba propagated the learning of Christianity and
Latin in Christianised parts of Europe during the Early Medieval Period and
Byzantine Greeks and Arabs reintroduced texts from Antiquity into Europe during
the Late Middle Ages and Renaissance of the 12th century, in Italy and Spain.
The rediscovery of the Justinian Code in Western Europe early in the 10th
century rekindled a passion for the discipline of law, which crossed many of
the re-forming boundaries between East and West. Eventually, it was only in the
Catholic or Frankish west, that Roman law became the foundation on which all
legal concepts and systems were based. Its influence can be traced to this day
in all Western legal systems (although in different manners and to different
extents in the common (England) and the civil (continental European) legal
traditions). The study of canon law, the legal system of the Catholic Church,
fused with that of Roman law to form the basis of the refounding of Western
legal scholarship. The ideas of civil rights, equality before the law, equality
of women, procedural justice, and democracy as the ideal form of society were
principles which formed the basis of modern Western culture. The West actively
encouraged the spreading of Christianity, which was inexorably linked to the
spread of Western culture. The rise of a competing culture, that of Islam,
caused Europeans to react, often militarily, but also in other ways. Europeans
translated many Arabic texts into Latin during the Middle Ages. Later, with the
fall of Constantinople and the Ottoman conquest of the Byzantine Empire,
followed by a massive exodus of Greek Christian priests and scholars to Italian
cities such as Venice, bringing with them as many scripts from the Byzantine
archives as they could, scholars' interest for the Greek language and its
classic works, topics and lost files, was revived. This revival eventually led
to the beginnings of the Renaissance. From the late 15th century to the 17th
century, Western culture began to spread to other parts of the world through
the vehicle of intrepid explorers and missionaries during the Age of Discovery,
and by imperialists from the 17th century to the early 20th century. The Modern
Era. Coming into the modern era, the historical understanding of the East-West
contrast – as the opposition of Christendom to its geographical neighbors –
began to weaken. As religion became less important, and Europeans came into
increasing contact with far away peoples, the old concept of Western culture
began a slow evolution towards what it is today. The Early Modern "Age of
Discovery," first led by Portugal and Spain in the 15th and 16th centuries with
France and England following in the 17th century, faded into the "Age of
Enlightenment" of the 18th century, characterized by the military advantage of
Europeans from the development of firearms and other military technologies. The
"Great Divergence" became more pronounced, making the West the bearer of
science and the accompanying revolutions of technology and industrialisation.
Western political thinking also spread rapidly and in many forms around the
world. With the early 19th century "Age of Revolution", the West entered a
period of empires, massive economic and technological advance, and bloody
international conflicts, that continued into the 20th century. As Europe
discovered the wider world, old concepts adapted. The area that had formerly
been considered "the Orient" ("the East") became the "Near East", as the
interests of the European powers interfered with Qing China and Meiji Japan for
the first time, in the 19th century. Thus, the Sino-Japanese War in 1894–1895
occurred in the "Far East", while the troubles surrounding the decline of the
Ottoman Empire simultaneously occurred in the "Near East". The term "Middle
East", in the mid-19th century, included the territory east of the Ottoman
empire but West of China - i.e. Greater Persia and Greater India, but is now
used synonymously with "Near East" in most languages. Cultural forms. Some
cultural and artistic modalities are characteristically Western in origin and
form. While dance, music, visual art, story-telling, and architecture are human
universals, they are expressed in the West in certain characteristic ways. In
Western dance, music, plays and other arts, the performers are only very
infrequently masked. There are essentially no taboos against depicting a god,
or other religious figures, in a representational fashion. Music. The symphony,
concerto, sonata, opera and oratorio have their origins in Italy. Many
important musical instruments used by cultures all over the world were also
developed in the West; among them are the violin, piano, pipe organ, saxophone,
trombone, clarinet, and the theremin. The solo piano, symphony orchestra and
the string quartet are also important performing musical forms. Historically,
the main forms of Western music are European folk, choral, classical, country,
rock and roll, hip-hop, and electronica. Many forms of popular music have been
derived from African-Americans, and their innovations of jazz and blues serve
as the basis from which much of modern popular music was derived. Folklore and
music during 20th and 19th centuries, initially by themselves, but later played
and further developed together with White & Black Americans, British people,
and Westerners in general. These include jazz, blues and rock music (that in a
wider sense include the rock and roll and heavy metal genres), rhythm and
blues, funk, Hip-Hop, techno as well as the ska and reggae genres from Jamaica.
Several other related or derived styles were developed and introduced by
Western pop culture such as pop, metal and dance music. Other well-known
Western musical genres include the music played by Mexican mariachis, the
Argentine and Uruguayan tango, North American jazz and Brazilian bossa nova.
Painting and photography. Jan van Eyck, among other renaissance painters, made
great advances in oil painting, and perspective drawings and paintings had
their earliest practitioners in Florence. In art, the Celtic knot is a very
distinctive Western repeated motif. Depictions of the nude human male and
female in photography, painting and sculpture are frequently considered to have
special artistic merit. Realistic portraiture is especially valued.
Photography, and the motion picture as both a technology and basis for entirely
new art forms, were also developed in the West. Dance and performing arts. The
ballet is a distinctively Western form of performance dance. The ballroom dance
is an important Western variety of dance for the elite. The polka, the square
dance, and the Irish step dance are very well known Western forms of folk
dance. The soap opera, a popular culture dramatic form, originated in the
United States first on radio in the 1930s, then a couple of decades later on
television. The music video was also developed in the West in the middle of the
20th century. Literature. While epic literary works in verse such as the
Mahabarata and Homer's Iliad are ancient and occurred worldwide, the novel as a
distinct form of story telling popularized by the West in the period 1200 to
1750. The first novel that was written around two centuries earlier in Heian
Japan is the Tale of Genji. Architecture. Important Western architectural
motifs include the Doric, Corinthian, and Ionic columns, and the Romanesque,
Gothic, Baroque, and Victorian styles are still widely recognised, and used
even today, in the West. Much of Western architecture emphasizes repetition of
simple motifs, straight lines and expansive, undecorated planes. A modern
ubiquitous architectural form that emphasizes this characteristic is the
skyscraper, first developed in New York, London, and Chicago. Brazil is one of
the best know centers of the Modernist architecture. Religion. Western culture,
for at least the last 1000 years, has been considered to be nearly synonymous
with Christian culture. Before this time many Europeans from the north,
especially Scandinavians, remained polytheistic, though southern Europe was
predominately Christian from the 5th century onwards. The native religions of
Europe were polytheistic but not homogenous - however they were similar insofar
as they were predominately Indo-European in origin. Roman religion was similar
to but not the same as Hellenic religion - likewise the same for indigenous
Germanic polytheism, Celtic polytheism and Slavic polytheism. From the dark
ages onwards, as the centralized Roman power waned in southern and central
Europe, the dominance of the Catholic Church was the only consistent force in
Europe. Therefore, until the Age of Enlightenment, Christian culture took over
as the predominant force in western civilization, guiding the course of
philosophy, art, and science for many years. Movements in art and philosophy,
such as the Humanist movement of the Renaissance and the Scholastic movement of
the High Middle Ages, were motivated by a drive to connect Catholicism with
Greek and Arab thought imported by Christian pilgrims. However, due to the
division in Christianity caused by the Protestant reformation and the
Enlightenment, religious influence - especially the temporal power of the Pope
- began to wane. Christianity was not the only religion practised in the West,
Islam came to Europe in various ways, as merchants (Southern Europe, Russia and
the Caucasus) and including through conquest (Al-Andalus and Tatarstan). New
research has uncovered a Böszörmény Muslim community in 12th century Hungary
with roots in Muslim merchants in commerce with Asia over the Silk Road.
Significant communities of Muslim Lipka Tatars lived throughout the Polish-
Lithuanian Commonwealth, worshiping in small wooden Mosques and playing a key
role in the history of Poland and Lithuania. The Christian conquests of the
Iberian peninsula and southern Italy helped to reintroduce ideas and concepts
lost to the Western World after the fall of Rome in A.D. 476. Arab speaking
scholars saved influential pre-Christian texts and this coupled with the
introduction of aspects of medieval Islamic culture (including the arts,
agriculture, economics, philosophy, science and technology) assisted with
fomenting conditions required for a rebirth of European thought and art
(Renaissance). (See Latin translations of the 12th century and Islamic
contributions to Medieval Europe for more information). In the 8th century,
Muslim forces pushed beyond Spain into Aquitaine, in southern France, but
suffered a temporary setback when defeated by Eudes, Duke of Aquitaine, at the
Battle of Toulouse (721). In 725 Muslim forces captured Autun in France. The
town would be the easternmost point of expansion of Umayyad forces into Europe;
just seven years later in 732, the Umayyads would be forced to begin their
withdrawal to al-Andalus after facing defeat at the Battle of Tours by Frankish
King Charles Martel. From 719 to 759, Septimania was one of the five
administrative areas of al-Andalus. The last Muslim forces were driven from
France in 759, but maintained a presence, especially in Fraxinet all the way
into Switzerland until the 10th c. At the same time, Muslim forces managed to
capture Sicily and portions of southern Italy, and even sacked Rome in 846 and
later sacked Pisa in 1004. As in the middle east, Jewish religion is found in
the Western world. As a minority group, Jews often had to contend with
discrimination just like the Muslims and persecution, this could include being
subjected to violence and/or destruction of property (this may be referred to
as a pogrom) as well as being expelled or banned from various polities, while
finding havens in other places. Religion has waned considerably in Europe,
where many are today agnostic or atheist. In terms of irreligion, over half of
the populations of the Czech Republic (79.4% of the population was agnostic,
atheist or irreligious), the United Kingdom (44–54%), Germany (41–49%),
France (43–54%) and the Netherlands (39–44%) are agnostic, atheist, or
otherwise non-religious. Religious belief in the United States remains strong;
about 75–85% of the population identified themselves as religious in one 2005
survey. Christianity remains the dominant religion in the Western world. In one
survey, 76.2% of Europeans who described themselves as religious described
themselves Christians, 86.0% of citizens of the Americas practice Christianity.
Throughout the Western world there are increasing numbers of people who seek to
revive the indigenous religions of their European ancestors, such groups
include Germanic, Roman, Hellenic, Celtic and Slavic, polytheistic
reconstructionist movements, likewise, Wicca, new age spirituality and other
neo-pagan belief systems enjoy notable minority support in Western nations.
Sport. Since Classical Antiquity, sport has been an important facet of Western
cultural expression. A wide range of sports were already established by the
time of Ancient Greece and the military culture and the development of sports
in Greece influenced one another considerably. Sports became such a prominent
part of their culture that the Greeks created the Olympic Games, which in
ancient times were held every four years in a small village in the Peloponnesus
called Olympia. Baron Pierre de Coubertin, a Frenchman, instigated the modern
revival of the Olympic movement. The first modern Olympics were held at Athens
in 1896. The Romans built immense structures such as the Colisseum in Rome to
house their festivals of sport. The Romans exhibited a passion for blood
sports, as in the infamous Gladiatorial battles which pitted contestants
against one another in a fight to the death. The Olympic Games revived many of
the sports of Classical Antiquity - such as Greco-Roman wrestling, discus and
javelin. The sport of bullfighting is a traditional spectacle of Spain,
Portugal, southern France and some Latin American countries which traces its
roots to prehistoric bull worship and sacrifice and is often linked to Rome,
where many human-versus-animal events were held. Bullfighting spread from Spain
to its Central and South American colonies, and in the 19th century to France,
where it developed into a distinctive form in its own right. Jousting and
hunting were popular sports in the Western Europe of the Middle Ages, and the
aristocratic classes of Europe developed passions for leisure activities. A
great number of the popular global sports were first developed or codified in
Europe. The modern game of golf originated in Scotland, where the first written
record of golf is James II's banning of the game in 1457, as an unwelcome
distraction to learning archery. The Industrial Revolution which began in
Britain in the 18th Century brought increased leisure time, leading to more
time for citizens to attend and follow spectator sports, greater participation
in athletic activities, and increased accessibility. These trends continued
with the advent of mass media and global communication. The bat and ball sport
of cricket was first played in England during the 16th century and was exported
around the globe via the British Empire. A number of popular modern sports were
devised or codified in Britain during the 19th Century and obtained global
prominence – these include Ping Pong, modern tennis, Association Football,
Netball and Rugby. Football (also known as soccer) remains hugely popular in
Europe but has grown from its origins to be known as the "world game".
Similarly, sports such as cricket, rugby and netball were exported around the
world, particularly among countries in the Commonwealth of Nations, thus India
and Australia are among the strongest cricketing nations, while victory in the
Rugby World Cup has been shared among the Western nations of New Zealand,
Australia, South Africa and England. Australian Rules Football, an Australian
variation of football with similarities to Gaelic football and rugby evolved in
the British colony of Victoria in the mid-19th century. The United States also
developed unique variations of English sports. English migrants took
antecedents of baseball to America during the colonial period. The history of
American football can be traced to early versions of rugby football and
association football. Many games known as "football" were being played at
colleges and universities in the United States in the first half of the 19th
century American football resulted from several major divergences from rugby,
most notably the rule changes instituted by Walter Camp, the "Father of
American Football". Basketball was invented in 1891 by James Naismith, a
Canadian physical education instructor working in Springfield, Massachusetts in
the United States. From these American origins, basketball has grown to be one
of the great international participation sports. Professionalism in sport in
the West became prevalent during the 20th Century, further adding to the
increase in sport's popularity, as sports fans began following the exploits of
professional athletes through radio, television, and the internet—all while
enjoying the exercise and competition associated with amateur participation in
sports. Scientific and technological inventions and discoveries. A feature of
Western culture is its focus on science and technology, and its ability to
generate new processes, materials and material artifacts. It was the West that
first developed steam power and adapted its use into factories, and for the
generation of electrical power. The electrical motor, dynamo, transformer, and
electric light, and indeed most of the familiar electrical appliances, were
inventions of the West. The Otto and the Diesel internal combustion engines are
products whose genesis and early development were in the West. Nuclear power
stations are derived from the first atomic pile constructed in Chicago in 1942.
Communication devices and systems including the telegraph, the telephone,
radio, television, communication and navigation satellites, mobile phone, and
the Internet were all invented by Westerners. The pencil, ballpoint pen, CRT,
LCD, LED, photograph, photocopier, laser printer, ink jet printer, plasma
display screen and world wide web were also invented in the West. Ubiquitous
materials including concrete, aluminum, clear glass, synthetic rubber,
synthetic diamond and the plastics polyethylene, polypropylene, PVC and
polystyrene were invented in the West. Iron and steel ships, bridges and
skyscrapers first appeared in the West. Nitrogen fixation and petrochemicals
were invented by Westerners. Most of the elements, were discovered and named in
the West, as well as the contemporary atomic theories to explain them. The
transistor, integrated circuit, memory chip, and computer were all first seen
in the West. The ship's chronometer, the screw propeller, the locomotive,
bicycle, automobile, and aeroplane were all invented in the West. Eyeglasses,
the telescope, the microscope and electron microscope, all the varieties of
chromatography, protein and DNA sequencing, computerised tomography, NMR, x-
rays, and light, ultraviolet and infrared spectroscopy, were all first
developed and applied in Western laboratories, hospitals and factories. In
medicine, vaccination, anesthesia, and all the pure antibiotics were created in
the West. The method of preventing Rh disease, the treatment of diabetes, and
the germ theory of disease were discovered by Westerners. The eradication of
that ancient scourge, smallpox, was led by a Westerner, Donald Henderson.
Radiography, Computed tomography, Positron emission tomography and Medical
ultrasonography are important diagnostic tools developed in the West. Other
important diagnostic tools of clinical chemistry including the methods of
spectrophotometry, electrophoresis and immunoassay were first devised by
Westerners. So were the stethoscope, electrocardiograph, and the endoscope.
Vitamins, hormonal contraception, hormones, insulin, Beta blockers and ACE
inhibitors, along with a host of other medically proven drugs were first
utilised to treat disease in the West. The double-blind study and evidence-
based medicine are critical scientific techniques widely used in the West for
medical purposes. In mathematics, calculus, statistics, logic, vectors, tensors
and complex analysis, group theory and topology were developed by Westerners.
In biology, evolution, chromosomes, DNA, genetics and the methods of molecular
biology are creatures of the West. In physics, the science of mechanics and
quantum mechanics, relativity, thermodynamics, and statistical mechanics were
all developed by Westerners. The discoveries and inventions by Westerners in
electromagnetism include Coulomb's law (1785), the first battery (1800), the
unity of electricity and magnetism (1820), Biot–Savart law (1820), Ohm's Law
(1827), and the Maxwell's equations (1871). The atom, nucleus, electron,
neutron and proton were all unveiled by Westerners. In finance, double entry
bookkeeping, the limited liability company, life insurance, and the charge card
were all first used in the West. Westerners are also known for their
explorations of the globe and Outer space. The first expedition to
circumnavigate the Earth (1522) was by Westerners, as well as the first journey
to the South Pole (1911), and the first moon landing (1969). The landing of
robots on Mars (2004 and 2012) and on an asteroid (2001), and the Voyager
explorations of the outer planets (Uranus in 1986 and Neptune in 1989 were
significant recent Western achievements. Widespread influence. Elements of
Western culture have had a very influential effect on other cultures worldwide.
People of many cultures, both Western and non-Western, equate "modernization"
(adoption of technological progress) with "Westernization" (adoption of Western
culture). Some members of the non-Western world, such as M. K. Gandhi, have
suggested that the link between technological progress and certain harmful
Western values provides a reason why much of "modernity" should be rejected as
being incompatible with their vision and the values of their societies. These
types of argument referring to imperialism and stressing the importance of
freedom from it and the relativist argument that different cultural norms
should be treated equally, are also present in Western philosophy.
