White American White Americans are people of the United States who are
considered or consider themselves White. The United States Census Bureau
defines White people as those ""having origins in any of the original peoples
of Europe, the Middle East, or North Africa. It includes people who reported
“White” or wrote in entries such as Irish, German, Italian, Near Easterner,
Arab, or Polish."" Like all official U.S. racial categories, "White" has a "Not
Hispanic or Latino" and a "Hispanic or Latino" component, the latter consisting
mostly of White Mexican Americans and white Cuban Americans. The term
"Caucasian" is often used interchangeably with "White," although the terms are
technically not synonymous. German Americans (16.5%), Irish Americans (11.9%),
English Americans (9.0%), Italian Americans (5.8%), French Americans (4%),
Polish Americans (3%), Scottish Americans (1.9%), Dutch Americans (1.6%),
Norwegian Americans (1.5%), and Swedish Americans (1.4%) constitute the ten
largest White American ancestries. Whites constitute the majority, with a total
of 223,553,265 or 72.4% of the population in the 2010 United States Census.
Historical and present definitions. Definitions of who is "white" has changed
throughout the history of the United States. At different times people of
Italian, Irish and Eastern European heritage have been considered non-White,
but are now generally considered White. Currently the question of whether
people of Hispanic and non-Jewish Middle Eastern descent should be considered
White is the topic of some discussion in the US. Current U.S. Census
definition. The term "White American" or "European American" can encompass many
different ethnic groups. Although the United States Census purports to reflect
a social definition of race, the social dimensions of race are more complex
than Census criteria. The 2000 U.S. census states that racial categories
"generally reflect a social definition of race recognized in this country. They
do not conform to any biological, anthropological or genetic criteria." The
term "White" refers to people having origins in any of the original peoples of
Europe, the Middle East, or North Africa. It includes people who reported
"White" or wrote in entries such as Irish, German, Italian, Lebanese, Near
Easterner, Arab, or Polish. In U.S. census documents, the designation "white"
overlaps, as do all other official racial categories, with the term "Hispanic
or Latino", which was introduced in the 1980 census as a category of ethnicity,
separate and independent of race. Hispanic and Latino Americans make up a
racially diverse group, and as a whole are the largest minority in the country.
In cases where individuals do not self-identify, the U.S. census parameters for
race give each national origin a racial value. Additionally, people who
reported Muslim (or a sect of Islam such as Shi'ite or Sunni), Jewish,
Zoroastrian, or Caucasian as their "race" in the "Some other race" section,
without noting a country of origin, are automatically tallied as white. The US
Census considers the write-in response of ""Caucasian"" or ""Aryan"" to be a
synonym for white in their ancestry code listing. Social definition. In the
United States, essentially anyone of European or Jewish descent is considered
white. Arab-Americans are included in the white category in the census, some
might not consider themselves white, and might not be considered white by
others. The cultural boundaries separating white Americans from other racial or
ethnic categories have changed significantly over the course of American
history. Even among Europeans, those not considered white at some time in
American history include Southern Europeans (Spaniards, Greeks, Italians etc.),
Irish Catholics, Eastern Europeans and Germans. Early on in the United States,
white generally referred to those of British Isles or northwestern European
descent. David R. Roediger argues that the construction of the white race in
the United States was an effort to mentally distance slave owners from slaves.
The process of officially being defined as "white" by law often came about in
court disputes over pursuit of citizenship. In the early 20th century, it
became common for white supremacists to promote the features of the blond,
blue-eyed "Nordic race" as the "master race". Critical race theory definition.
Critical race theory takes, as one of its founding influences, the nonfiction
essays of James Baldwin, who argued that Whiteness was a fictional category, a
construct without reference to any culture at all except for the purposes of
domination and genocide. Scholars such as David Roediger, Paul Gilroy, and
others have based some of their work on this notion. As whites, especially
White Anglo-Saxon Protestants or WASPs, are the dominant racial and cultural
group, according to sociologist Steven Seidman, writing from a critical theory
perspective, "White culture constitutes the general cultural mainstream,
causing non-White culture to be seen as deviant, in either a positive or
negative manner. Moreover, Whites tend to be disproportionately represented in
powerful positions, controlling almost all political, economic, and cultural
institutions." Yet, according to Seidman, Whites are most commonly unaware of
their "privilege" and the manner in which their culture has always been
dominant in the US, as they do not identify as members of a specific racial
group but rather incorrectly perceive their views and culture as "raceless",
when in fact it is ethno-national (ethnic/cultural) specific, with a racial
base component. Demographic information. Whites (non-Hispanic and Hispanic)
made up 79.8% or 75% of the American population in 2008. This latter number is
sometimes recorded as 77.1% when it includes about 2% of the population who are
identified as white in combination with one or more other races. The largest
ethnic groups (by ancestry) among white Americans were Germans, followed by the
Irish and the English. It is likely that many Americans who are descended of
English, Scotch-Irish, or Scottish peoples, or perhaps even more commonly a
combination of these and of these and other ethnic groups, simply identify as
"American" in the census, and that Americans of English descent are far greater
in number than those of German descent. For a better idea on why Americans of
English ancestry are likely far undercounted, see English American. In the 1980
census 49,598,035 Americans cited that they were of English ancestry, making
them 26% of the country and the largest group at the time, and in fact larger
than the population of England itself. Slightly more than half of these people
would cite that they were of "American" ancestry on subsequent censuses and
virtually everywhere that "American" ancestry predominates on the 2000 census
corresponds to places where "English" predominated on the 1980 census. White
Americans (again, non-Hispanic and Hispanic Whites) are projected to remain the
majority, though with their percentage decreasing to 72% of the total
population by 2050. However, the projections are that the non-Hispanic White
population will become less than 50% of the population by 2041, in part because
Non-Hispanic Whites have the lowest fertility rate of any major racial group in
the United States and largely due to mass-immigration. While over ten million
white people can trace part of their ancestry back to the Pilgrims who arrived
on the "Mayflower" in 1620 (this common statistic overlooks the Jamestown,
Virginia foundations of America and roots of even earlier colonist-descended
Americans, such as Spanish Americans in St. Augustine, Florida), over 35
million whites have at least one ancestor who passed through the Ellis Island
immigration station, which processed arriving immigrants from 1892 until 1954.
"See also": European Americans. Geographic distribution. According to the
Census definition, white Americans are the majority racial group in almost all
of the United States. They are not the majority in Hawaii, many American Indian
reservations, parts of the South known as the Black Belt, and in many urban
areas throughout the country. Overall the highest concentration of those
referred to as "White alone" by the Census Bureau was found in the Midwest, New
England, the Rocky Mountain states, Kentucky, and West Virginia. The lowest
concentration of whites was found in southern and mid-Atlantic states. Although
all large geographical areas are dominated by white Americans, much larger
differences can be seen between specific parts of large cities. Income and
educational attainment. White Americans have the second highest median
household income and personal income levels in the nation, by cultural
background. The median income per household member was also the highest, since
White Americans had the smallest households of any racial demographic in the
nation. In 2006, the median individual income of a White American age 25 or
older was $33,030, with those who were full-time employed, and of age 25 to 64,
earning $34,432. Since 42% of all households had two income earners, the median
household income was considerably higher than the median personal income, which
was $48,554 in 2005. Jewish Americans rank first in household income, personal
income, and educational attainment among white Americans. In 2005, white
households had a median household income of $48,977, which is 10.3% above the
national median of $44,389. Among Cuban Americans, with 86% classifying as
White, those persons born in the US have a higher median income and educational
attainment level than most other whites. The poverty rates for White Americans
are the second-lowest of any racial group, with 10.8% of white individuals
living below the poverty line, 3% lower than the national average. However, due
to Whites' majority status, 48% of Americans living in poverty are white.
Whites' educational attainment is the second-highest in the country, after
Asian Americans'. Overall, nearly one-third of White Americans had a Bachelor's
degree, with the educational attainment for whites being higher for those born
outside the United States: 37.6% of foreign born, and 29.7% of native born
Whites had a college degree. Both figures are above the national average of
27.2%. Gender income inequality was the greatest among whites, with White men
outearning white women by 48%. Census Bureau data for 2005 reveals that the
median income of white females was lower than that of males of all races. In
2005, the median income for White females was only slightly higher than that of
African American females, indicating that income inequities seem to run along
gender lines more so than along racial lines. Culture. From their earliest
presence in North America, White Americans have contributed literature, art,
agricultural skills, foods, clothing styles, music, and language to American
culture. Four regional cultures. In his 1989 book "Albion's Seed: Four British
Folkways in America" (ISBN 0-19-506905-6), David Hackett Fischer explores the
details of the folkways of four different groups of settlers from the British
Isles that came to the American colonies during the 17th and 18th centuries
from distinct regions of Britain and Ireland. His thesis is that the culture of
each group persisted (albeit in modified form), providing the basis for the
modern United States. According to Fischer, the foundation of America's four
regional cultures was formed from four mass migrations from four different
regions of the British Isles by four distinct ethno-cultural groups. New
England's formative period occurred between 1629 and 1640 when Puritans, mostly
from East Anglia in England, settled there, thus forming the basis for the New
England regional culture. The next mass migration was of southern English
Cavaliers and their Irish and Scottish servants to the Chesapeake Bay region
between 1640 and 1675. This spawned the creation of the American Southern
culture. Then, between 1675 and 1725, thousands of Irish, Cornish, English and
Welsh Quakers plus many Germans sympathetic to Quaker ideas, led by William
Penn, settled the Delaware Valley. This resulted in the formation of the
General American culture, although, according to Fischer, this is really a
"regional culture," even if it does today encompass most of the U.S. from the
mid-Atlantic states to the Pacific Coast. Finally, a huge number of settlers
from the borderlands between England and Scotland, and from northern Ireland,
migrated to Appalachia between 1717 and 1775. This resulted in the formation of
the Upland South regional culture, which has since expanded to the west to West
Texas and parts of the U.S. Southwest. In his book, Fischer brings up several
points. He states that the U.S. is not a country with one "general" culture and
several "regional" culture, as is commonly thought. Rather, there are only four
regional cultures as described above, and understanding this helps one to more
clearly understand American history as well as contemporary American life.
Fischer also asserts that it is not only important to understand where
different groups came from, but when. All population groups have, at different
times, their own unique set of beliefs, fears, hopes and prejudices. When
different groups came to America and brought certain beliefs and values with
them, these ideas became, according to Fischer, more or less frozen in time,
even if they eventually changed in their original place of origin. Admixture.
Many whites have varying amounts of Native American and African ancestry. In a
recent study, Gonçalves et al. 2007 reported Sub-Saharan and Amerindian mtDna
lineages at a frequency of 3.1% (respectively 0.90% and 2.2%) in White
Americans of European descent. In another study, about 30% of all White
Americans, approximately 66 million people, have a median of 2.3% of Black
African admixture.
