Telephone tapping Telephone tapping (also wire tapping or wiretapping in
American English) is the monitoring of telephone and Internet conversations by
a third party, often by covert means. The wire tap received its name because,
historically, the monitoring connection was an actual electrical tap on the
telephone line. Legal wiretapping by a government agency is also called lawful
interception. "Passive wiretapping" monitors or records the traffic, while
"active wiretapping" alters or otherwise affects it. Legal status. Lawful
interception is officially strictly controlled in many countries to safeguard
privacy; this is the case in all developed democracies. In theory, telephone
tapping often needs to be authorized by a court, and is, again in theory,
normally only approved when evidence shows it is not possible to detect
criminal or subversive activity in less intrusive ways; often the law and
regulations require that the crime investigated must be at least of a certain
severity. Illegal or unauthorized telephone tapping is often a criminal
offense. However, in certain jurisdictions such as Germany, courts will accept
illegally recorded phone calls without the other party's consent as evidence,
but the unauthorized telephone tapping will be prosecuted also. In the United
States, under the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act, federal intelligence
agencies can get approval for wiretaps from the United States Foreign
Intelligence Surveillance Court, a court with secret proceedings, or in certain
circumstances from the Attorney General without a court order. Under the law of
the United States and most state laws, there is nothing illegal about one of
the parties to a telephone call recording the conversation, or giving
permission for calls to be recorded or permitting their telephone line to be
tapped. However the telephone recording laws in most U.S. states require only
one party to be aware of the recording, while 12 states require both parties to
be aware. It is considered better practice to announce at the beginning of a
call that the conversation is being recorded. Methods. Official use. The
contracts or licenses by which the state controls telephone companies often
require that the companies must provide access for tapping lines to law
enforcement. In the U.S., telecommunications carriers are required by law to
cooperate in the interception of communications for law enforcement purposes
under the terms of Communications Assistance for Law Enforcement Act (CALEA).
When telephone exchanges were mechanical, a tap had to be installed by
technicians, linking circuits together to route the audio signal from the call.
Now that many exchanges have been converted to digital technology tapping is
far simpler and can be ordered remotely by computer. Telephone services
provided by cable TV companies also use digital switching technology. If the
tap is implemented at a digital switch, the switching computer simply copies
the digitized bits that represent the phone conversation to a second line and
it is impossible to tell whether a line is being tapped. A well-designed tap
installed on a phone wire can be difficult to detect. In some instances some
law enforcement maybe able to even access a mobile phone's internal microphone
even while it isn't actively being used on a phone call (unless the battery is
removed). The noises that some people believe to be telephone taps are simply
crosstalk created by the coupling of signals from other phone lines. Data on
the calling and called number, time of call and duration, will generally be
collected automatically on all calls and stored for later use by the billing
department of the phone company. These data can be accessed by security
services, often with fewer legal restrictions than for a tap. This information
used to be collected using special equipment known as "pen registers" and "trap
and trace devices" and U.S. law still refers to it under those names. Today, a
list of all calls to a specific number can be obtained by sorting billing
records. A telephone tap during which only the call information is recorded but
not the contents of the phone calls themselves, is called a "pen register" tap.
For telephone services via digital exchanges, the information collected may
additionally include a log of the type of communications media being used (some
services treat data and voice communications differently to conserve
bandwidth). Non-official use. Conversations can be recorded or monitored
unofficially, either by tapping by a third party without the knowledge of the
parties to the conversation, or recorded by one of the parties. This may or may
not be illegal, according to the circumstances and the jurisdiction. There are
a number of ways to monitor telephone conversations. One of the parties may
record the conversation, either on a tape or solid-state recording device, or
on a computer running call recording software. The recording, whether overt or
covert, may be started manually, automatically by detecting sound on the line
(VOX), or automatically whenever the phone is off the hook. The conversation
may be monitored (listened to or recorded) covertly by a third party by using
an induction coil or a direct electrical connection to the line using a beige
box. An induction coil is usually placed underneath the base of a telephone or
on the back of a telephone handset to pick up the signal inductively. An
electrical connection can be made anywhere in the telephone system, and need
not be in the same premises as the telephone. Some apparatus may require
occasional access to replace batteries or tapes. Poorly designed tapping or
transmitting equipment can cause interference audible to users of the
telephone. The tapped signal may either be recorded at the site of the tap or
transmitted by radio or over the telephone wires. state-of-the-art equipment
operates in the 30‚Äì300¬ GHz range. The transmitter may be powered from the
line to be maintenance-free, and only transmits when a call is in progress.
These devices are low-powered as not much power can be drawn from the line, but
a state-of-the-art receiver could be located as far away as ten kilometers
under ideal conditions, though usually located much closer. Research has shown
that a satellite can be used to receive terrestrial transmissions with a power
of a few milliwatts. Any sort of radio transmitter whose presence is suspected
is detectable with suitable equipment. Conversation on many early cordless
telephones could be picked up with a simple radio scanner or sometimes even a
domestic radio. Widespread digital spread spectrum technology and encryption
make eavesdropping this way much more difficult. A problem with recording a
telephone conversation is that the recorded volume of the two speakers may be
very different. A simple tap will have this problem. An in-ear microphone,
while involving an additional distorting step by converting the electrical
signal to sound and back again, in practice gives better-matched volume.
Dedicated, and relatively expensive, telephone recording equipment equalizes
the sound at both ends from a direct tap much better. Location data. Mobile
phones are, in surveillance terms, a major liability. This liability will only
increase as the new third-generation (3G), LTE, WiMAX, and fourth-generation
(4G) phones are introduced, as the base stations will be located closer
together. For mobile phones the major threat is the collection of
communications data. This data does not only include information about the
time, duration, originator and recipient of the call, but also the
identification of the base station where the call was made from, which equals
its approximate geographical location. This data is stored with the details of
the call and has utmost importance for traffic analysis. It is also possible to
get greater resolution of a phone's location by combining information from a
number of cells surrounding the location, which cells routinely communicate (to
agree on the next handoff‚Äîfor a moving phone) and measuring the timing
advance, a correction for the speed of light in the GSM standard. This
additional precision must be specifically enabled by the telephone company‚Äîit
is not part of the network's ordinary operation. Internet. In 1995, Peter
Garza, a Special Agent with the Naval Criminal Investigative Service, conducted
the first court-ordered Internet wiretap in the United States while
investigating Julio Cesar Ardita ("El Griton"). As technologies emerge,
including VoIP, new questions are raised about law enforcement access to
communications (see VoIP recording). In 2004, the Federal Communications
Commission was asked to clarify how the Communications Assistance for Law
Enforcement Act (CALEA) related to Internet service providers. The FCC stated
that ‚Äúproviders of broadband Internet access and voice over Internet protocol
(‚ÄúVoIP‚Äù) services are regulable as ‚Äútelecommunications carriers‚Äù under
the Act.‚Äù Those affected by the Act will have to provide access to law
enforcement officers who need to monitor or intercept communications
transmitted through their networks. As of 2009, warrantless surveillance of
internet activity has consistently been upheld in FISA court. The Internet
Engineering Task Force has decided not to consider requirements for wiretapping
as part of the process for creating and maintaining IETF standards. Typically,
illegal Internet wiretapping will be conducted via Wi-Fi connection to
someone's internet by cracking the WEP or WPA key, using a tool such as
Aircrack-ng or Kismet. Once in, the intruder will rely on a number of potential
tactics, for example an ARP spoofing attack which will allow the intruder to
view packets in a tool such as Wireshark or Ettercap. One issue that Internet
wiretapping is yet to overcome is that of steganography, whereby a user
encodes, or ‚Äúhides‚Äù, one file inside another (usually a larger, dense file
like a MP3 or JPEG image). With modern advancements in encoding technologies,
the resulting combined file is essentially indistinguishable to anyone
attempting to view it, unless they have the necessary protocol to extract the
hidden file. US News reported that this technique was commonly used by Osama
bin Laden as a way to communicate with his terrorist cells. There are a number
of steganographic programs available online, such as Wnstorm, QuickCrypto, and
TextHide. Mobile phone. Mobile phones have numerous privacy issues.
Governments, law enforcement and intelligence services use mobiles to perform
surveillance in the UK and the US. They possess technology to activate the
microphones in cell phones remotely in order to listen to conversations that
take place near to the person who holds the phone. Mobile phones are also
commonly used to collect location data. While the phone is turned on, the
geographical location of a mobile phone can be determined easily (whether it is
being used or not), using a technique known multilateration to calculate the
differences in time for a signal to travel from the cell phone to each of
several cell towers near the owner of the phone. The second generation mobile
phones (circa 1978 through 1990) could be easily monitored by anyone with a
'scanning all-band receiver' because the system used an analog transmission
system-like an ordinary radio transmitter. The third generation digital phones
are harder to monitor because they use digitally-encoded and compressed
transmission. However the government can tap mobile phones with the cooperation
of the phone company. It is also possible for organizations with the correct
technical equipment to monitor mobile phone communications and decrypt the
audio. A device called an "IMSI-catcher" pretends to the mobile phones in its
vicinity to be a legitimate base station of the mobile phone network,
subjecting the communication between the phone and the network to a man-in-the-
middle attack. This is possible because while the mobile phone has to
authenticate itself to the mobile telephone network, the network does not
authenticate itself to the phone. There is no defense against IMSI-catcher
based eavesdropping, except using end-to-end call encryption; products offering
this feature, secure telephones, are already beginning to appear on the market,
though they tend to be expensive and incompatible with each other, which limits
their proliferation. Webtapping. Logging the IP addresses of users that access
certain websites is commonly called "webtapping". Webtapping is used to monitor
websites that presumably contain dangerous or sensitive materials, and the
people that access them. Though it is allowed by the USA PATRIOT Act, it is
considered by many a questionable practice, if not an all-out violation of
civil liberties. History. Telephone wiretapping began in the 1890s, following
the invention of the telephone recorder, and its constitutionality was
established in the Prohibition Era conviction of bootlegger Roy Olmstead.
Wiretapping has also been carried out under most Presidents, sometimes with a
lawful warrant since the Supreme Court ruled it constitutional in 1928. On
October 19, 1963, U.S. Attorney General Robert F. Kennedy, who served under
John F. Kennedy and Lyndon B. Johnson, authorized the FBI to begin wiretapping
the communications of Rev. Martin Luther King, Jr. The wiretaps remained in
place until April 1965 at his home and June 1966 at his office. The history of
voice communication technology begins in 1876 with the invention of Alexander
Graham Bell‚Äôs telephone. In the 1890s, ‚Äúlaw enforcement agencies begin
tapping wires on early telephone networks‚Äù. Remote voice communications
‚Äúwere carried almost exclusively by circuit-switched systems,‚Äù where
telephone switches would connect wires to form a continuous circuit and
disconnect the wires when the call ended). All other telephone services, such
as call forwarding and message taking, were handled by human operators.
However, the first computerized telephone switch was developed by Bell Labs in
1965. This got rid of standard wiretapping techniques. In the 1970s, optical
fibers become a medium for telecommunications. These fiber lines, which are
‚Äúlong, thin strands of glass that carry signals via laser light,‚Äù are more
secure than radio, and have become very cheap. From the 1990s to the present,
the majority of communications from ‚Äúone fixed location to another have moved
by fiber.‚Äù Since these fiber communications are ‚Äúwired,‚Äù U.S. law
‚Äúgives them greater protection.‚Äù The earliest wiretaps were extra
wires‚Äî‚Äúconnected to the line between the telephone company‚Äôs central
office and the subscriber‚Äîthat carried the signal to a pair of earphones and
a recorder. Later on, wiretaps were installed at the central office on the
frames that held the incoming wires.‚Äù Before the Japanese attack on Pearl
Harbor and the subsequent entry of the United States into World War II, the
U.S. House of Representatives held hearings on the legality of wiretapping for
national defense. Significant legislation and judicial decisions on the
legality and constitutionality of wiretapping had taken place years before
World War II. However, it took on new urgency at that time of national crisis.
The actions of the government regarding wiretapping for the purpose of national
defense in the current war on terror have drawn considerable attention and
criticism. In the World War II era, the public was also aware of the
controversy over the question of the constitutionality and legality of
wiretapping. Furthermore, the public was concerned with the decisions that the
legislative and judicial branches of the government were making regarding
wiretapping. In the Greek telephone tapping case 2004-2005 more than 100 mobile
phone numbers belonging mostly to members of the Greek government, including
the Prime Minister of Greece, and top-ranking civil servants were found to have
been illegally tapped for a period of at least one year. The Greek government
concluded this had been done by a foreign intelligence agency, for security
reasons related to the 2004 Olympic Games, by unlawfully activating the lawful
interception subsystem of the Vodafone Greece mobile network. An Italian
tapping case which surfaced in November 2007 revealed significant manipulation
of the news at the national television company RAI. In 1967, the U.S. Supreme
Court ruled that wiretapping (or ‚Äúintercepting communications‚Äù) requires a
warrant in the Katz v. United States case. In 1968, Congress passed a law that
provided warrants for wiretapping in criminal investigations. In 1978, the
Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act (FISA) created a ‚Äúsecret federal court
for issuing wiretap warrants in national security cases.‚Äù This was in
response to findings from the Watergate break-in, which allegedly uncovered a
history of presidential operations that had used surveillance on domestic and
foreign political organizations. In 1994, Congress approved the Communications
Assistance for Law Enforcement Act (CALEA), which ‚Äúrequires telephone
companies to be able to install more effective wiretaps. In 2004, the Federal
Bureau of Investigation (FBI), United States Department of Justice (DOJ),
Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms, and Explosives (ATF), and Drug
Enforcement Administration (DEA) wanted to expand CALEA requirements to VoIP
service.‚Äù The Federal Communications Commission (FCC) ruled in August 2005
that ‚Äúbroadband-service providers and interconnected VoIP providers fall
within CALEA‚Äôs scope. Currently, instant messaging, web boards and site
visits are not included in CALEA‚Äôs jurisdiction. In 2007, Congress amended
FISA to ‚Äúallow the government to monitor more communications without a
warrant.‚Äù In 2008, President George W. Bush expanded the surveillance of
internet traffic to and from the U.S. government by signing a national security
directive. In 2008, Wired and other media reported a lamplighter disclosed a
"Quantico Circuit" ‚Äî a 45 megabit/second DS-3 line linking a carrier's most
sensitive network in an affidavit that was the basis for a lawsuit against
Verizon Wireless. The circuit provides direct access to all content and all
information concerning the origin and termination of telephone calls placed on
the Verizon Wireless network as well as the actual content of calls, according
to the filing. The most recent case of U.S. wiretapping was the NSA warrantless
surveillance controversy discovered in December 2005. It aroused much
controversy, after then President George W. Bush admitted to violating a
specific federal statute (FISA) and the warrant requirement of the Fourth
Amendment to the United States Constitution. The President claimed his
authorization was consistent with other federal statutes (AUMF) and other
provisions of the Constitution, was necessary to keep America safe from
terrorism, and could lead to the capture of notorious terrorists responsible
for the September 11 attacks in 2001. One difference between foreign
wiretapping and domestic wiretapping is that, when operating in other
countries, ‚ÄúAmerican intelligence services could not place wiretaps on phone
lines as easily as they could in the U.S.‚Äù Also, domestically, wiretapping is
regarded as an extreme investigative technique, whereas outside of the country,
the interception of communications is huge. The National Security Agency (NSA)
‚Äúspends billions of dollars every year intercepting foreign communications
from ground bases, ships, airplanes and satellites‚Äù. FISA distinguishes
between U.S. persons and foreigners, between communications inside and outside
the U.S., and between wired and wireless communications. Wired communications
within the U.S. are protected, since intercepting them requires a warrant. NSA
warrantless surveillance controversy. In 2007 a United States Foreign
Intelligence Surveillance Court court ruling required the NSA to obtain a
warrant when intercepting or eavesdropping on foreign-to-foreign intelligence
if it passes through any U.S. networks. The Bush Administration in response
passed a stopgap legislation very quickly through congress that temporarily
relieves the NSA of this prior ruling. Director of National Intelligence Mike
McConnell said to Congress that the new ruling could potentially decrease the
amount of useful information they collected on groups like al Qaeda by almost
two thirds. He also stated that applying for a warrant can run up to 90 pages
and can be time consuming and labor intensive. The American Civil Liberties
Union (ACLU) brought many legal cases challenging the constitutionality of the
bill, asserting that it violates Americans' right to free speech and privacy.
They have filed lawsuits, motions, and complaints in over 27 states so far to
oppose any legislation that encourages unchecked government surveillance. In
response to the government arguments, Caroline Fredrickson, Director of the
ACLU Washington Legislative Office has said of the bill: ‚ÄúWhere will Congress
go from here? More unfettered power for an administration that has no respect
for the privacy of the citizenry that elected it?‚Äù The stopgap expired in
February 2008. By then, Congress and FISA reached a compromise on the details
of the bill. ACLU advocates pushed to require NSA to provide individual
warrants when Americans are involved and on the other hand, U.S. intelligence
agencies and the Administration wanted as few obstacles in their way of
intercepting private information. Both sides have both shown the possibility
for a compromise to accept a Bill that would require a FISA court to approve
NSA‚Äôs procedures while intercepting foreign intelligence when it involves
Americans. However, a later addition to this bill, that was insisted on by then
President Bush and Mike McConnell, granted retroactive immunity to
telecommunications companies for any "intelligence activity involving
communications" that was "designed to detect or prevent a terrorist attack" or
attack preparations. The Bush Administration has acknowledged that intelligence
agencies conducted warrantless eavesdropping on Americans with the help of
Telecom companies such as Verizon, AT&T, and Qwest. All three of these Telecom
companies faced multiple civil lawsuits related to their handling of phone
records and the passing of this bill granted them immunity. In favor of the
bill, McConnell has said, such immunity was necessary to prevent the telecoms
from being bankrupted and to encourage them to continue to cooperate with
intelligence agencies. Bush said that he would veto any intelligence bill
passed that did not include immunity. Liz Rose, spokeswoman for the Washington
office of the ACLU, says the language of the bill is a "blank check" that would
cover not only the warrantless wiretapping program the Bush administration has
acknowledged, but any unconfirmed or previously unknown program. Sen. Russ
Feingold, D-Wis., promised to lead a filibuster to block approval of
retroactive immunity. "Retroactive immunity set the terrible precedent that
breaking the law is permissible and companies need not worry about the privacy
of their customers," Feingold said.
