Age of Sail The Age of Sail refers to the era when sailing ships were an
important means of transport. The term is normally used to refer to this era in
Western countries, lasting from the 16th to the 19th centuries, with the 19th
century peak called the Golden Age of Sail. However, in the Middle East and Far
East the dominance of sailing ships began far earlier, in the 3rd or 2nd
millennium BC. Middle East and Far East. Seafaring exploration began during the
rise of ancient civilizations including Mesopotamia, the Far East and the
Cradle of Civilization. The Arabian Sea has been an important marine trade
route since the era of the "coastal sailing vessels" from possibly as early as
the 3rd millennium BCE, certainly the late 2nd millennium BCE up to and
including the later days of the Age of Sail. By the time of Julius Caesar,
several well-established combined land-sea trade routes depended upon water
transport through the Sea around the rough inland terrain features to its
north. These routes usually began in the Far East with transshipment via
historic Bharuch (Bharakuccha), traversed past the inhospitable coast of
today's Iran then split around Hadhramaut into two streams north into the Gulf
of Aden and thence into the Levant, or south into Alexandria via Red Sea ports
such as Axum. Each major route involved transhipping to pack animal caravans,
travel through desert country and risk of bandits and extortionate tolls by
local potentiates. Southern coastal route past the rough country in the
southern Arabian peninsula (Yemen and Oman today) was significant, and the
Egyptian Pharaohs built several shallow canals to service the trade, one more
or less along the route of today's Suez canal, and another from the Red Sea to
the Nile River, both shallow works that were swallowed up by huge sand storms
in antiquity. The red sea canal was redug and existed in Egypt until the
Islamic era. Western countries. In western countries, the Age of Sail is the
period in which international trade and naval warfare were dominated by sailing
ships, lasting from the 16th to the mid 19th century. This is a significant
period during which square-rigged sailing ships carried European settlers to
many parts of the world in one of the most expansive imperialistic movements,
one of the most significant eras in recorded history as the onset of the modern
world, defined largely by foreign invasions, colonialism and human migrations.
Like most periodic eras the definition is inexact but close enough to serve as
a general description. The age of sail runs roughly from the Battle of Lepanto
in 1571, the last significant engagement in which oar-propelled galleys played
a major role, to the Battle of Hampton Roads in 1862, in which the steam-
powered ironclad CSS "Virginia" destroyed the sailing ships USS "Cumberland"
and USS "Congress", culminating with the advance of steam power, rendering sail
power in warfare obsolete. Sailing ships continued to be an economical way to
transport cargo on long voyages into the 1920s. Sailing ships do not require
fuel or complex engines to be powered; thus they tended to be more independent
from requiring a dedicated support base on the mainland. Crucially though,
steam powered ships held a speed advantage and were rarely hindered by adverse
winds, freeing steam-powered vessels from the necessity of following trade
winds. As a result, cargo and supplies could reach a foreign port in half the
time it took a sailing ship. It is this factor that drove sailing ships aside.
Sailing vessels were pushed into narrower and narrower economic niches (see
disruptive technology) and gradually disappeared from commercial trade. Today,
sailing vessels are only economically viable for small scale coastal fishing,
along with recreational uses such as yachting and passenger sail excursion
ships. Golden Age of Sail. In Europe, the Golden Age of Sail is generally
agreed to be the period in the 19th century when the efficiency and usage of
commercial sailing vessels was at its peak (clippers, tall ships, etc.) and
immediately before steamboats started to take trade away from sail. Some would
say that the Golden Age of Sail relates specifically to the clipper ship era.
while others put the Golden Age of Sail between 1850 and the early 1900s when
sailing vessels reached their peak of size and complexity. "The Golden Age" is
also a term used to describe the Golden Age of Piracy, the time period from
1690 to 1725 when well-known pirates such as Edward Teach (Blackbeard) and
Bartholomew Roberts were preying on mercantile ships, and sometimes even
blockading ports, on both sides of the Atlantic. In the United States, the
Golden Age of Sail has been said to be between the War of 1812 and the Civil
War, or approximately 1830 and 1880, a time during which sailing vessels
increasingly adopted steam engines, making overseas shipping more reliable.
