Ancient warfare Ancient warfare is war as conducted from the beginnings of
recorded history to the end of the ancient period. In Europe and the Near East,
the end of antiquity is often equated with the fall of Rome in 476, and the
wars of the Eastern Roman Empire Byzantium in its South Western Asian and North
African borders and the beginnings of the Muslim conquests in the 7th century.
In China, it can also be seen as ending with the growing role of mounted
warriors needed to counter the ever-growing threat from the north in the 5th
century and the beginning of the Tang Dynasty in 618. In India, the ancient
period ends with the decline of the Gupta Empire (6th century) and the
beginning Islamic conquests from the 8th century. In Japan, the ancient period
can be taken to end with the rise of feudalism in the Kamakura period in the
12-13th century. The difference between prehistoric and ancient warfare is less
one of technology than of organization. The development of first city-states,
and then empires, allowed warfare to change dramatically. Beginning in
Mesopotamia, states produced sufficient agricultural surplus so that full-time
ruling elites and military commanders could emerge. While the bulk of military
forces were still farmers, the society could support having them campaigning
rather than working the land for a portion of each year. Thus, organized armies
developed for the first time. These new armies could help states grow in size
and became increasingly centralized. Early ancient armies continued to
primarily use bows and spears, the same weapons that had been developed in
prehistoric times for hunting. Early armies in Egypt and China followed a
similar pattern of using massed infantry armed with bows and spears. No clear
line can be drawn between ancient and medieval warfare. The characteristic
properties of medieval warfare, notably heavy cavalry and siege engines such as
the trebuchet were first introduced in Late Antiquity. The main division within
the ancient period is rather at the beginning Iron Age with the introduction of
cavalry (resulting in the decline of chariot warfare), of naval warfare (Sea
Peoples), and of course the development of an industry based on ferrous
metallurgy which allowed for the mass production of metal weapons and thus the
equipment of large standing armies. The first military power to profit from
these innovations was the Neo-Assyrian Empire, which achieved a hitherto unseen
extent of centralized control, the first "world power" to extend over the
entire Fertile Crescent (Mesopotamia, the Levant and Egypt). Chariots. As
states grew in size, speed of movement became crucial because central power
could not hold if rebellions could not be suppressed rapidly. The first
solution to this was the chariot which became used in the Middle East from
around 1800 BC. First pulled by oxen and donkeys, they allowed rapid traversing
of the relatively flat lands of the Middle East. The chariots were light enough
that they could easily be floated across rivers. Improvements in the ability to
train horses soon allowed them to be used to pull chariots, possibly as early
as 2100 BC, and their greater speed and power made chariots even more
efficient. The major drawback of the use of chariots is similar to one of its
advantages, the fact that it is light. The lack of armor causes it to be
extremely vulnerable to spears, pikes, etc. The power of the chariot as a
device both of transportation and of battle became the central weapon of the
peoples of the Ancient Near East in the 2nd millennium BC. The typical chariot
was worked by two men: one would be a bowman and fire at the enemy forces,
while the other would control the vehicle. Over time, chariots carrying up to
five warriors were developed. The effectiveness of these vehicles is still
somewhat in doubt. In China, chariots became the central weapon of the Shang
dynasty, allowing them to unify a great area. Although chariots have been
compared to modern-day tanks in the role they played on the battlefield, i.e.,
shock attacks, this is disputed with scholars pointing out that chariots were
vulnerable and fragile, required a level terrain while tanks are all-terrain
vehicles, and thus not suitable for use in the way modern tanks have been used
as a physical shock force. The chief advantage of the chariot was the tactical
mobility they provided to bowmen. Because tightly packed infantry were the
formation of choice, in order for ancient generals to maintain command and
control during the battle as well as for mutual protection, a force of chariots
could stand off at long range and rain arrows down on the infantrymen's heads.
Because of their speed, any attempts to charge the chariots could be easily
evaded. If, on the other hand, an infantry unit spread out to minimize the
damage from arrows, they would lose the benefit of mutual protection and the
charioteers could easily overrun them. From a tactical standpoint this put any
force facing chariots on the horns of dilemma, making chariots indispensable to
armies of the day. Chariots, however, were complicated pieces of hardware that
required specialized craftsmen to maintain them. Such services, therefore, made
chariots expensive to own. When chariots were owned by individuals within a
society, it tended to give rise to a warrior class of specialists and a feudal
system (an example of which can be seen in Homer's The Iliad). Where chariots
were publicly owned, they helped in the maintenance and establishment of a
strong central government, e.g., the New Egyptian Kingdom. Chariot usage peaked
in the Battle of Kadesh in 1274 BC, which was probably the largest chariot
battle ever fought, involving perhaps 5,000 chariots. Naval warfare. The first
dateable recorded sea battle occurred about 1210 BC: Suppiluliuma II, king of
the Hittites, defeated a fleet from Cyprus, and burned their ships at sea. The
Persian Wars were the first to feature large-scale naval operations: not only
sophisticated fleet engagements with dozens of triremes on each side, but
combined land–sea operations. Ships in the ancient world could operate only
on the relatively quiet waters of seas and rivers; the oceans were off limits.
Navies were almost always used as auxiliaries to land forces, often essential
to bringing them supplies. They would rarely strike out on their own. With only
limited-range weapons, naval galleys would often attempt to ram their opponents
with their reinforced bow to cause damage or sink the enemy warships which
often caused the two ships to become joined together, and initiated a boarding
battle. Only occasionally was a decisive naval battle fought, such as the
Battle of Lade in which a Persian navy destroyed the Greek navy. The Punic Wars
led to innovation on the high seas. Rome previously had hardly touched naval
warfare, being only concerned with the Italian peninsula, while Carthage was a
trading civilization, and so had developed a large fleet. Only by examining the
ruins of Carthaginian ships did the Romans come to build an effective navy.
Moreover, they developed an implement called the corvus which was a way of
dropping a gangplank onto an enemy ship, this gave the Romans an enormous
advantage as their superiority in close-quarters combat could come into play as
legionnaires boarded the Carthaginian ships and slaughtered the crews with
ease. Tactics and weapons. Strategy. Ancient strategy focused broadly on the
twin goals of convincing the enemy that continued war was more costly than
submitting, and of making the most gain from war as possible. Forcing the enemy
to submit generally consisted of defeating their army in the field. Once the
enemy force was routed, the threat of siege, civilian deaths, and the like
often forced the enemy to the bargaining table. However, this goal could be
accomplished by other means. Burning enemy fields would force the choice of
surrendering or fighting a pitched battle. Waiting an enemy out until their
army had to disband due to the beginning of the harvest season or running out
of payment for mercenaries presented an enemy with a similar choice. The
exceptional conflicts of the ancient world were when these rules of warfare
were violated. The Spartan and Athenian refusal to accept surrender after many
years of war and near bankruptcy in the Peloponnesian War is one such
exceptional example, as is the Roman refusal to surrender after the Battle of
Cannae. A more personal goal in war was simple profit. This profit was often
monetary, as was the case with the raiding culture of the Gallic tribes. But
the profit could be political, as great leaders in war were often rewarded with
government office after their success. These strategies often contradict modern
common sense as they conflict with what would be best for the states involved
in the war. Weapons. Ancient weapons included the spear, the atlatl with light
javelin or similar projectile, the bow and arrow, the sling; polearms such as
the spear, falx and javelin; hand-to-hand weapons such as swords, spears,
clubs, maces, axes, and knives. Catapults, siege towers, and battering rams
were used during sieges. Sieges. Siege warfare of the ancient Near East took
place behind walls built of mud bricks, stone, wood or a combination of these
materials depending on local availability. The earliest representations of
siege warfare date to the Protodynastic Period of Egypt, c.3000 BC, while the
first siege equipment is known from Egyptian tomb reliefs of the 24th century
BC showing wheeled siege ladders. Assyrian palace reliefs of the 9th to 7th
centuries BC display sieges of several Near Eastern cities. Though a simple
battering ram had come into use in the previous millennium, the Assyrians
improved siege warfare. The most common practise of siege warfare was, however,
to lay siege and wait for the surrender of the enemies inside. Due to the
problem of logistics, long lasting sieges involving anything but a minor force
could seldom be maintained. By culture. Ancient Near East. Egypt. Throughout
most of its history, ancient Egypt was unified under one government. The main
military concern for the nation was to keep enemies out. The arid plains and
deserts surrounding Egypt were inhabited by nomadic tribes who occasionally
tried to raid or settle in the fertile Nile river valley. The Egyptians built
fortresses and outposts along the borders east and west of the Nile Delta, in
the Eastern Desert, and in Nubia to the south. Small garrisons could prevent
minor incursions, but if a large force was detected a message was sent for the
main army corps. Most Egyptian cities lacked city walls and other defenses. The
first Egyptian soldiers carried a simple armament consisting of a spear with a
copper spearhead and a large wooden shield covered by leather hides. A stone
mace was also carried in the Archaic period, though later this weapon was
probably only in ceremonial use, and was replaced with the bronze battle axe.
The spearmen were supported by archers carrying a composite bow and arrows with
arrowheads made of flint or copper. No armour was used during the 3rd and early
2nd Millennium BC. The major advance in weapons technology and warfare began
around 1600 BC when the Egyptians fought and defeated the Hyksos people, who
ruled Lower Egypt at the time. It was during this period the horse and chariot
were introduced into Egypt. Other new technologies included the sickle sword,
body armour and improved bronze casting. In the New Kingdom, the Egyptian
military changed from levy troops into a firm organization of professional
soldiers. Conquests of foreign territories, like Nubia, required a permanent
force to be garrisoned abroad. The Egyptians were mostly used to slowly
defeating a much weaker enemy, town by town, until beaten into submission. The
preferred tactic was to subdue a weaker city or kingdom one at a time resulting
in surrender of each fraction until complete domination was achieved. The
encounter with other powerful Near Eastern kingdoms like Mitanni, the Hittites,
and later the Assyrians and Babylonians, made it necessary for the Egyptians to
conduct campaigns far from home. The next leap forwards came in the Late Period
(712-332 BC), when mounted troops and weapons made of iron came into use. After
the conquest by Alexander the Great, Egypt was heavily Hellenized and the main
military force became the infantry phalanx. The ancient Egyptians were not
great innovators in weapons technology, and most weapons technology innovation
came from Western Asia and the Greek world. These soldiers were paid with a
plot of land for the provision of their families. After fulfilment of their
service, the veterans were allowed retirement to these estates. Generals could
become quite influential at the court, but unlike other feudal states, the
Egyptian military was completely controlled by the king. Foreign mercenaries
were also recruited; first Nubians (Medjay), and later also Libyans and
Sherdens in the New Kingdom. By the Persian period Greek mercenaries entered
service into the armies of the rebellious pharaohs. The Jewish mercenaries at
Elephantine served the Persian overlords of Egypt in the 5th century BC.
Although, they might also have served the Egyptian Pharaohs of the 6th century
BC. As far as had been seen from the royal propaganda of the time, the king or
the crown prince personally headed the Egyptian troops into battle. The army
could number tens of thousands of soldiers, so the smaller battalions
consisting of 250 men, led by an officer, may have been the key of command. The
tactics involved a massive strike by archery followed by an infantry and/or
chariotry attacking the broken enemy lines. The enemies could, however, try to
surprise the large Egyptian force with ambushes and by blocking the road as the
Egyptian campaign records informs us. Within the Nile valley itself, ships and
barges were important military elements. Ships were vital for providing
supplies for the troops. The Nile river had no fords so barges had to be used
for river crossings. Dominating the river often proved necessary for
prosecuting sieges, like the Egyptian conquest of the Hyksos capital Avaris.
Egypt had no navy to fight naval battles at sea before the Late Period.
However, a battle involving ships took place at the Egyptian coast in the 12th
century BC between Ramesses III and seafaring raiders. Persia. Ancient Persia
first emerged as a major military power under Cyrus the Great. Its form of
warfare was based on massed infantry in light armor to pin the enemy force
whilst cavalry dealt the killing blow. Cavalry was used in huge numbers but it
is not known whether they were heavily armored or not. Most Greek sources claim
the Persians wore no armor, but we do have an example from Herodotus which
claims that an unhorsed cavalryman wore a gold cuirass under his red robes.
Chariots were used in the early days but during the later days of the Persian
Empire they were surpassed by horsemen. During the Persian Empire's height,
they even possessed War elephants from North Africa and distant India. The
elite of the Persian Army were the famous Persian Immortals, a 10,000 strong
unit of professional soldiers armed with a spear, a sword and a bow. Archers
also formed a major component of the Persian Army. Persian tactics primarily
had four stages involving archers, infantry and cavalry. The archers, which
wielded longbows, would fire waves of arrows before the battle, attempting to
cut the enemy numbers down prior battle. The cavalry would then attempt to run
into the enemy and sever communications between generals and soldiers. Infantry
would then proceed to attack the disorientated soldiers, subsequently weakened
from the previous attacks. India. During the Vedic period (fl. 3500-1500 BC),
the "Vedas" and other associated texts contain references to warfare. The
earliest allusions to a specific battle are those to the Battle of the Ten
Kings in Mandala 7 of the Rigveda. The two great ancient epics of India,
"Ramayana" and "Mahabharata" (c. 1000-500 BC) are centered on conflicts and
refer to military formations, theories of warfare and esoteric weaponry.
Valmiki's "Ramayana" describes Ayodhya's military as defensive rather than
aggressive. The city, it says, was strongly fortified and was surrounded by a
deep moat. "Ramayana" describes Ayodhya in the following words: "The city
abounded in warriors undefeated in battle, fearless and chinskilled in the use
of arms, resembling lions guarding their mountain caves". "Mahabharata"
describes various military techniques, including the "Chakravyuha". The world's
first recorded military application of war elephants is in the Mahabharatha.
From India, war elephants were taken to the Persian Empire where they were used
in several campaigns. The Persian king Darius III employed about 50 Indian
elephants in the Battle of Gaugamela (331 BC) fought against Alexander the
Great. In the Battle of the Hydaspes River, the Indian king Porus, who ruled in
Punjab, with his smaller army of 200 war elephants, 2000 cavalry and 20,000
infantry, presented great difficulty for Alexander the Great's larger army of
4000 cavalry and 50,000 infantry, though Porus was eventually defeated. At this
time, the Magadha Empire further east in northern and eastern India had an army
of 6000 war elephants, 80,000 cavalry, 200,000 infantry and 8000 armed
chariots. Had Alexander the Great decided to continue his campaign in India, he
may very well have been vanquished by the much more powerful, more able and
more technologically advanced army, but it is more likely he would have adopted
the weapons and techniques of such a foe to augment and improve his own forces
and strategic aimss, as he had done throughout his career. Chanakya (c. 350-275
BC) was a professor of political science at Takshashila University, and later
the Prime Minister of emperor Chandragupta Maurya, the founder of the Maurya
Empire. Chanakya wrote the "Arthashastra", which covered various topics on
ancient Indian warfare in great detail, including various techniques and
strategies relating to war. These included the earliest uses of espionage and
assassinations. These techniques and strategies were employed by Chandragupta
Maurya, who was a student of Chanakya, and later by Ashoka the Great (304-232
BC). Chandragupta Maurya conquered the Magadha Empire and expanded to all of
northern India, establishing the Maurya Empire, which extended from the Arabian
Sea to the Bay of Bengal. In 305 BC, Chandragupta defeated Seleucus I Nicator,
who ruled the Seleucid Empire and controlled most of the territories conquered
by Alexander the Great. Seleucus eventually lost his territories in Southern
Asia, including southern Afghanistan, to Chandragupta. Seleucus exchanged
territory west of the Indus for 500 war elephants and offered his daughter to
Chandragupta. In this matrimonial alliance the enmity turned into friendship,
and Seleucus' dispatched an ambassador, Megasthenes, to the Mauryan court at
Pataliputra. As a result of this treaty, the Maurya Empire was recognized as a
great power by the Hellenistic World, and the kings of Egypt and Syria sent
their own ambassadors to his court. According to Megasthenes, Chandragupta
Maurya built an army consisting of 30,000 cavalry, 9000 war elephants, and
600,000 infantry, which was the largest army known in the ancient world. Ashoka
the Great went on to expand the Maurya Empire to almost all of South Asia,
along with much of Afghanistan and parts of Persia. Ashoka eventually gave up
on warfare after converting to Buddhism. China. Ancient China during the Shang
Dynasty was a Bronze Age society based on chariot armies. Archaeological study
of Shang sites at Anyang have revealed extensive examples of chariots and
bronze weapons. The overthrow of the Shang by the Zhou saw the creation of a
feudal social order, resting militarily on a class of aristocratic chariot
warriors (士). In the Spring and Autumn Period, warfare increased
exponentially. "Zuo zhuan" describes the wars and battles among the feudal
lords during the period. Warfare continued to be stylised and ceremonial even
as it grew more violent and decisive. The concept of military hegemon (霸) and
his "way of force" (霸道) came to dominate Chinese society. Sun Tzu created a
book that still applies to today's modern armies. Formations of the army can be
clearly seen from the Terracotta Army of Qin Shi Huang, the first Emperor in
the history of China to be successful in unification of different warring
states. Light infantry acting as shock troops lead the army, followed by heavy
infantry as the main body of the army. Wide usage of cavalry and chariots
behind the heavy infantry also gave the Qin army an edge in battles against the
other warring states. Warfare became more intense, ruthless and much more
decisive during the Warring States Period, in which great social and political
change was accompanied by the end of the system of chariot warfare and the
adoption of mass infantry armies. Cavalry was also introduced from the northern
frontier, despite the cultural challenge it posed for robe-wearing Chinese men.
Chinese river valley civilizations would adopt nomadic "pants" for their
cavalry units and soldiers. Iron Age Europe. Ancient Greece. Infantry did
almost all of the fighting in Greek battles. The Greeks did not have any
notable cavalry tradition except the Thessalians. Hoplites, Greek infantry,
fought with a long spear and a large shield, the hoplon also called aspis.
Light infantry (psiloi) peltasts, served as skirmishers. Despite the fact that
most Greek cities were well fortified (with the notable exception of Sparta)
and Greek siege technology was not up to the task of breaching these
fortifications by force, most land battles were pitched ones fought on flat-
open ground. This was because of the limited period of service Greek soldiers
could offer before they needed to return to their farms; hence, a decisive
battle was needed to settle matters at hand. To draw out a city's defenders,
its fields would be threatened with destruction, threatening the defenders with
starvation in the winter if they did not surrender or accept battle. This
pattern of warfare was broken during the Peloponnesian War, when Athens'
command of the sea allowed the city to ignore the destruction of the Athenian
crops by Sparta and her allies by shipping grain into the city from the Crimea.
This led to a warfare style in which both sides were forced to engage in
repeated raids over several years without reaching a settlement. It also made
sea battle a vital part of warfare. Greek naval battles were fought between
triremes—long and speedy rowing ships which engaged the enemy by ramming and
boarding actions. Hellenistic Era. During the time of Philip II of Macedon and
Alexander the Great, the Macedonians were regarded as the most complete well
co-ordinated military force in the known world. Although they are best known
for the achievements of Alexander the Great, his father Philip II of Macedon
created and designed the fighting force Alexander used in his conquests.Before
this time and for centuries their military prowess was nowhere near that the
sarissa phalanx offered. However prior to the improvements made by Philip II of
Macedon army fought in the traditional manner of the Greeks that of the hoplite
phalanx. Philip provided his Macedonian soldiers in the phalanx with sarissa, a
spear which was 4–6 meters in length. The sarissa, when held upright by the
rear ranks of the phalanx (there were usually eight ranks), helped hide
maneuvers behind the phalanx from the view of the enemy. When held horizontal
by the front ranks of the phalanx, enemies could be run through from far
away.The hoplite type troops were not abandoned, but were no longer the core of
the army. In 358 BC he met the Illyrians in battle with his reorganized
Macedonian phalanx, and utterly defeated them. The Illyrians fled in panic,
leaving the majority of their 9,000-strong army dead. The Macedonian army
invaded Illyria and conquered the southern Illyrian tribes. After the defeat of
the Illyrians, Macedon's policy became increasingly aggressive. Paeonia was
already forcefully integrated into Macedon under Philip's rule. In 357 BC
Philip broke the treaty with Athens and attacked Amphipolis which promised to
surrender to the Athenians in exchange for the fortified town of Pydna, a
promise he didn't keep. The city fell back in the hands of Macedonia after an
intense siege. Then he secured possession over the gold mines of nearby Mount
Pangaeus, which would enable him to finance his future wars. In 356 the
Macedonian army advanced further eastward and captured the town of Crenides
(near modern Drama) which was in the hands of the Thracians, and which Philip
renamed after himself to Philippi. The Macedonian eastern border with Thrace
was now secured at the river Nestus (Mesta). Philip next marched against his
southern enemies. In Thessaly he defeated his enemies and by 352, he was firmly
in control of this region. The Macedonian army advanced as far as the pass of
Thermopylae which divides Greece in two parts, but it did not attempt to take
it because it was strongly guarded by a joint force of Athenians, Spartans, and
Achaeans. Having secured the bordering regions of Macedon, Philip assembled a
large Macedonian army and marched deep into Thrace for a long conquering
campaign. By 339 after defeating the Thracians in series of battles, most of
Thrace was firmly in Macedonian hands save the most eastern Greek coastal
cities of Byzantium and Perinthus who successfully withstood the long and
difficult sieges. But both Byzantium and Perinthus would have surely fell had
it not been for the help they received from the various Greek city-states, and
the Persian king himself, who now viewed the rise of Macedonia and its eastern
expansion with concern. Ironically, the Greeks invited and sided with the
Persians against the Macedonians, although Persia had been the nation hated the
most by Greece for more than a century. The memory of the Persian invasion of
Greece some 150 years ago was still alive, but the current politics for the
Macedonians had put it aside. Much greater would be the conquests of his son,
Alexander the Great, who would add to the phalanx a powerful cavalry, led by
his elite Companions, and flexible, innovative formations and tactics. He
advanced Greek style of combat, and was able to muster large bodies of men for
long periods of time for his campaigns against Persia. Roman Empire. The Roman
army was the world's first professional army. It had its origins in the citizen
army of the Republic, which was staffed by citizens serving mandatory duty for
Rome. The reforms of Marius around 100 BC turned the army into a professional
structure, still largely filled by citizens, but citizens who served
continuously for 20 years before being discharged. The Romans were also noted
for making use of auxiliary troops, non-Romans who served with the legions and
filled roles that the traditional Roman military could not fill effectively,
such as light skirmish troops and heavy cavalry. Later in the Empire, these
auxiliary troops, along with foreign mercenaries, became the core of the Roman
military. By the late Empire, tribes such as the Visigoths were bribed to serve
as mercenaries. The Roman navy was traditionally considered less important,
although it remained vital for the transportation of supplies and troops, also
during the great purge of pirates from the Mediterranean sea by Pompey the
Great in the 1st century BC. Most of Rome's battles occurred on land,
especially when the Empire was at its height and all the land around the
Mediterranean was controlled by Rome. But there were notable exceptions. The
First Punic War, a pivotal war between Rome and Carthage in the 3rd century BC,
was largely a naval conflict. And the naval Battle of Actium established the
Roman empire under Augustus. Balkans. The Illyrian king Bardyllis turned part
of south Illyria into a formidable local power in the 4th century BC. He
managed to become king of the Dardanians and include other tribes under his
rule. However their power was weakened by bitter rivalries and jealousy.The
army was composed by peltasts with a variety of weapons. The Thracians fought
as peltasts using javelins and crescent or round wicker shields.Missile weapons
were favored but close combat weaponry was carried by the Thracians as
well.These close combat weapons varied from the dreaded Rhomphaia & Falx to
spears and swords.Thracians shunned armor and greaves and fought as light as
possible favoring mobility above all other traits and had excellent horsemen.
The Dacian tribes, located on modern-day Romania and Moldova were part of the
greater Thracian family of peoples. They established a highly militarized
society and, during the periods when the tribes were united under one king (82-
44 BC, 86-106) posed a major threat to the Roman provinces of Lower Danube.
Dacia was conquered and transformed into a Roman province in 106 after a long,
hard war. Celtic. Tribal warfare appears to have been a regular feature of
Celtic societies. While epic literature depicts this as more of a sport focused
on raids and hunting rather than organised territorial conquest, the historical
record is more of tribes using warfare to exert political control and harass
rivals, for economic advantage, and in some instances to conquer territory. The
Celts were described by classical writers such as Strabo, Livy, Pausanias, and
Florus as fighting like "wild beasts", and as hordes. Dionysius said that their
"manner of fighting, being in large measure that of wild beasts and frenzied,
was an erratic procedure, quite lacking in military science. Thus, at one
moment they would raise their swords aloft and smite after the manner of wild
boars, throwing the whole weight of their bodies into the blow like hewers of
wood or men digging with mattocks, and again they would deliver crosswise blows
aimed at no target, as if they intended to cut to pieces the entire bodies of
their adversaries, protective armour and all". Such descriptions have been
challenged by contemporary historians. Germanic. Historical records of the
Germanic tribes in Germania east of the Rhine and west of the Danube do not
begin until quite late in the ancient period, so only the period after 100 BC
can be examined. What is clear is that the Germanic idea of warfare was quite
different from the pitched battles fought by Rome and Greece. Instead the
Germanic tribes focused on raids. The purpose of these was generally not to
gain territory, but rather to capture resources and secure prestige. These
raids were conducted by irregular troops, often formed along family or village
lines, in groups of 10 to about 1,000. Leaders of unusual personal magnetism
could gather more soldiers for longer periods, but there was no systematic
method of gathering and training men, so the death of a charismatic leader
could mean the destruction of an army. Armies also often consisted of more than
50 percent noncombatants, as displaced people would travel with large groups of
soldiers, the elderly, women, and children. Large bodies of troops, while
figuring prominently in the history books, were the exception rather than the
rule of ancient warfare. Thus a typical Germanic force might consist of 100 men
with the sole goal of raiding a nearby Germanic or foreign village. According
to Roman sources, when the Germanic Tribes did fight pitched battles, the
infantry often adopted wedge formations, each wedge being led by a clan head.
Though often defeated by the Romans, the Germanic tribes were remembered in
Roman records as fierce combatants, whose main downfall was that they failed to
unite successfully into one fighting force, under one command. After the three
Roman legions were ambushed and destroyed by an alliance of Germanic tribes
headed by Arminius at the Battle of the Teutoburg Forest in 9 AD, the Roman
Empire made no further concentrated attempts at conquering Germania beyond the
Rhine. Prolonged warfare against the Romans accustomed the Germanic tribes to
improved tactics such as the use of reserves, military discipline and
centralised command. Germanic tribes would eventually overwhelm and conquer the
ancient world, giving rise to modern Europe and medieval warfare. For an
analysis of Germanic tactics versus the Roman empire see tactical problems in
facing the Gauls and the Germanic tribes Japanese. Horses and bows were very
important in Japan, and were used in warfare from very early times, as shown in
statues and artifacts found in tombs of early chieftains. Samurai eventually
became very skilled in using the horse. Because their main weapon at this time
was the bow and arrow, early samurai exploits were spoken of in Japanese war
tales as the “Way of the Horse and Bow.” Horse and bow combined was a
battlefield advantage to the early samurai. A bunch of arrows made of mainly
wood with poison tipped points were worn on a warrior’s right side so he
could quickly take out an arrow and fire it as he continued to gallop on his
horse. Although they weren’t as important as the bow, swords of various sizes
and types were also part of a samurai’s armory in the early days. They were
mostly for fighting close up with an enemy. Many different kinds of spears were
used also. The naginata, one of them, was a curved blade fixed to the end of a
pole several feet long. This was known as a 'woman’s spear' because samurai
girls were taught to use it from an early age. A device called the kumade that
looks like a long-handled garden rake was used to grab the clothing or helmet
of enemy horsemen and to take them off their horse. Common samurai archers had
armor made of lamellae pieces laced together with colorful cords. The
lightweight armor allowed for greater freedom of movement and was light, so it
was easier on the horse, which could even move faster. The knights of Europe
though, wore a lot of armor, and eventually they wore an entire ‘metal’
suit, which gave them a lot of trouble in movement, and was much heavier than
what the samurai wore-plus, it is therefore clear that heavy armor had its
advantages and disadvantages. The early Yamato period had seen a continual
engagement in the Korean Peninsula until Japan finally withdrew, along with the
remaining forces of the Baekje Kingdom. Several battles occurred in these
periods as the Emperor's succession gained importance. By the Nara period,
Honshū was completely under the control of the Yamato clan. Near the end of
the Heian period, samurai became a powerful political force, thus starting the
feudal period.
