History of Japan The history of Japan encompasses the history of the islands of
Japan and the Japanese people, spanning the ancient history of the region to
the modern history of Japan as a nation state. Following the last ice age,
around 12,000 BC, the rich ecosystem of the Japanese archipelago fostered human
development. The earliest-known pottery found in Japan belongs to the J≈çmon
period. The first known written reference to Japan is in the brief information
given in "Twenty-Four Histories" in the 1st century AD. The main cultural and
religious influences came from China. The first permanent capital was founded
at Nara in 710, which became a center of Buddhist art, religion and culture.
The current imperial family emerged about 700, but until 1868 (with few
exceptions) had high prestige but little power. By 1550 or so political power
was subdivided into several hundred local units, or "domains" controlled by
local "daimy≈ç" (lords), each with his own force of samurai warriors. Tokugawa
Ieyasu came to power in 1600, gave land to his supporters, set up his "bakufu"
(military government) at Edo (modern Tokyo). The "Tokugawa period" was
prosperous and peaceful and Japan terminated the Christian missions and cut off
almost all contact with the outside world. In the 1860s the Meiji period began,
and the new national leadership systematically ended feudalism and transformed
an isolated, underdeveloped island country into a world power that closely
followed Western models. Democracy was problematic, because Japan's powerful
military was semi-independent and overruled‚Äîor assassinated‚Äîcivilians in
the 1920s and 1930s. The military moved into China starting in 1931 and
declared all-out war on China in 1937. Japan controlled the coast and major
cities and set up puppet regimes, but was unable to defeat China. Its attack on
Pearl Harbor in December 1941 led to war with the United States and its allies.
After a series of naval victories by mid-1942, Japan's military forces were
overextended and its industrial base was unable to provide the needed ships,
armaments and oil. Even with his navy sunk and his main cities destroyed by
air, the Emperor Sh≈çwa held out until August 1945 when two atomic bombs and a
Soviet invasion forced a surrender. Occupied by the U.S. after the war and
stripped of its entire Empire, Japan was transformed into a peaceful and
democratic nation. After 1950 it enjoyed very high economic growth rates, and
became a world economic powerhouse, especially in engineering, automobiles and
electronics. Since the 1990s economic stagnation has been a major issue, with
an earthquake and tsunami in 2011 causing massive economic dislocations and
loss of the nuclear power supply. Japanese prehistory. Paleolithic Age. The
Japanese Paleolithic age covers a lengthy period starting as early as 50,000 BC
and ending sometime around 12,000 BC, at the end of the last ice age. Artifacts
claimed to be older than ca. 38,000 BC are not generally accepted, and most
historians therefore believe that the Japanese Paleolithic started after 40,000
years ago. The Japanese archipelago would become disconnected from the mainland
continent after the last ice age, around 11,000 BC. After a hoax by an amateur
researcher, Shinichi Fujimura, had been exposed, the Lower and Middle
Paleolithic evidence reported by Fujimura and his associates has been rejected
after thorough reinvestigation. As a result of the fallout over the hoax, now
only some Upper Paleolithic evidence (not associated with Fujimura) can
possibly be considered as having been well established. Ancient Japan. J≈çmon
period. The J≈çmon period lasted from about 14,000 until 300 BC. The first
signs of civilization and stable living patterns appeared around 14,000 BC with
the J≈çmon culture, characterized by a Mesolithic to Neolithic semi-sedentary
hunter-gatherer lifestyle of wood stilt house and pit dwellings and a
rudimentary form of agriculture. Weaving was still unknown at the time and
clothes were often made of furs. The J≈çmon people started to make clay
vessels, decorated with patterns made by impressing the wet clay with braided
or unbraided cord and sticks. Based on radio-carbon dating, some of the
surviving examples of pottery can be found in Japan along with daggers, jade,
combs made of shells, and various other household items dated to the 11th
millennium¬ BC. The most recent finds, in 1998, have been at the Odai Yamamoto
I site, where fragments of a single vessel are dated to 14,500 BC (ca 16,500
BP); this places them as or among the earliest pottery currently known in
Japan. Among older discoveries, calibrated radiocarbon measures of carbonized
material from pottery artifacts: Fukui Cave and (Kamaki & Serizawa 1967),
Kamikuroiwa rock shelter 12, 165 ¬± 350 years BP in Shikoku. although the
specific dating is disputed. Elaborate pottery figurines known as dog≈´ are
found from the Late J≈çmon period. Yayoi period. The Yayoi period lasted from
about 400 or 300 BC until 250 AD. This period followed the J≈çmon period and
completely supplanted it. This period is named after Yayoi town, the subsection
of Bunky≈ç, Tokyo, where archaeological investigations uncovered its first
recognized traces. The start of the Yayoi period marked the influx of new
practices such as weaving, rice farming, and iron and bronze making. Bronze and
iron appear to have been simultaneously introduced into Yayoi Japan. Iron was
mainly used for agricultural and other tools, whereas, bronze was used for
ritual and ceremonial artifacts. Some casting of bronze and iron began in Japan
by about 100¬ BC, but the raw materials for both metals were introduced from
the Asian continent. The Yayoi period brought Shamanism and divination by
oracles to Shinto, in order to guarantee good crops., Japan first appeared in
written records in 57 AD with the following mention in China's Book of the
Later Han: "Across the ocean from Lelang are the people of Wa. Formed from more
than one hundred tribes, they come and pay tribute frequently." The book also
recorded that Suish≈ç, the king of Wa, presented slaves to the Emperor An of
Han in¬ 107. The "Sanguo Zhi", written in the 3rd century, noted that the
country was the unification of some 30 small tribes or states and ruled by a
shaman queen named Himiko of Yamataikoku. During the Han and Wei dynasties,
Chinese travelers to Ky≈´sh≈´ recorded its inhabitants who claimed that they
were the descendants of the Grand Count (T√ ib√≥) of the Wu. The inhabitants
also show traits of the pre- Wu people with tattooing, teeth-pulling, and baby-
carrying. The "Sanguo Zhi" records the physical descriptions which are similar
to ones on "haniwa" statues, such as men wearing braided hair and tattoos and
women wearing large, single-pieced clothing. The Yoshinogari site in Ky≈´sh≈´
is the most famous archaeological site of the Yayoi period and reveals a large
settlement continuously inhabited for several hundred years. Archaeological
excavation has shown the most ancient parts to be from around 400¬ BC. It
appears that the inhabitants had frequent communication and trade relations
with the mainland. Today, some reconstructed buildings stand in the park on the
archaeological site. Kofun period. The Kofun period began around 250 AD, is
named after the large tumulus burial mounds ("kofun") that started appearing
around that time. The Kofun period (the ""Kofun-Jidai"") saw the establishment
of strong military states, each of them concentrated around powerful clans (or
"zoku"). The establishment of the dominant Yamato polity was centered in the
provinces of Yamato and Kawachi from the 3rd century AD till the 7th century,
establishing the origin of the Japanese imperial lineage. And so the polity, by
suppressing the clans and acquiring agricultural lands, maintained a strong
influence in the western part of Japan. Japan started to send tributes to
Imperial China in the 5th century. In the Chinese history records, the polity
was called Wa, and its five kings were recorded. Based upon the Chinese model,
they developed a central administration and an imperial court system, with its
society being organized into various occupation groups. Close relationships
between the Three Kingdoms of Korea and Japan began during the middle of this
period, around the end of the 4th century. Classical Japan. Asuka period.
During the Asuka period (538 to 710), the proto-Japanese Yamato polity
gradually became a clearly centralized state, defining and applying a code of
governing laws, such as the Taika Reforms and Taih≈ç Code. Also during the same
period, the Japanese developed strong economic ties with the Paikche or Baekje
people, who lived on the southwestern coast of the Korean Peninsula. Good
relations with the Baekje had begun in 391 when a Japanese expedition saved the
King of Baekje and the Baekje people from their traditional enemies‚Äîthe
Koguryo people‚Äîwho lived in the northern part of the Korean Peninsula.
Indeed, Buddhism was introduced to Japan in 538 by Baekje people, to whom Japan
continued to provide military support. In Japan, however, Buddhism was promoted
largely by the ruling class for their own purposes. Accordingly, in the early
stages, Buddhism was not a popular religion with the common people of Japan.
However, the introduction of Buddhism led to a discontinuing of the practice of
burying deceased people in large kofuns. Prince Sh≈çtoku came to power in Japan
as Regent to Empress Suiko in 594. Empress Suiko had come to the throne as the
niece of the previous Emperor‚ÄîSujun (588‚Äì593)--who had been assassinated in
593. Empress Suiko had also been married to a prior Emperor‚ÄîBidatsu
(572‚Äì585), but she was the first female ruler of Japan since the legendary
matriarchal times. As Regent to Empress Suiko, Prince Shotoku devoted his
efforts to the spread of Buddhism and Chinese culture in Japan. He is also
credited with bringing relative peace to Japan through the proclamation of the
Seventeen-article constitution, a Confucian style document that focused on the
kinds of morals and virtues that were to be expected of government officials
and the emperor's subjects. Buddhism would become a permanent part of Japanese
culture. A letter brought to the Emperor of China by an emissary from Japan in
607 stated that the "Emperor of the Land where the Sun rises (Japan) sends a
letter to the Emperor of the land where Sun sets (China)", thereby implying an
equal footing with China which angered the Chinese emperor. Nara period. The
Nara period of the 8th century marked the emergence of a strong Japanese state
and is often portrayed as a golden age. In 710, the capital city of Japan was
moved from Asuka to Nara. Hall (1966) concludes that "Japan had been
transformed from a loose federation of uji in the fifth century to an empire on
the order of Imperial China in the eighth century. A new theory of state and a
new structure of government supported the Japanese sovereign in the style and
with the powers of an absolute monarch." Traditional, political, and economic
practices were now organized through a rationally structured government
apparatus that legally defined functions and precedents. Lands were surveyed
and registered with the state. A powerful new aristocracy emerged. This
aristocracy controlled the state and was supported by taxes that were
efficiently collected. The government built great public works, including
government offices, temples, roads, and irrigation systems. A new system of
land tenure and taxation, which was designed to widely spread land ownership
throughout the rural population, was introduced. Such allotments tended to be
about one acre. However, they could be as small as one-tenth of an acre.
However, lots for slaves were about two-thirds the size of the allotments to
free men. Allotments were reviewed every five years when the census was
conducted. There was a cultural flowering during this period. Soon, dramatic
new cultural manifestations characterized the Nara period, which lasted four
centuries. Following an imperial by Empress Gemmei, the capital was moved to
Heij≈ç-ky≈ç, present-day Nara, in 710. The city was modeled on Chang'an (now
Xi'an), the capital of the Chinese Tang Dynasty. During the Nara Period,
political development was marked by a struggle between the imperial family and
the Buddhist clergy, as well as between the imperial family and the
regents‚Äîthe Fujiwara clan. Japan did enjoy peaceful relations with their
traditional foes‚Äîthe Silla people‚Äîwho occupied the southeast coast of the
Korean Peninsula. Japan also established formal relationships with the Tang
dynasty of China. In 784, the capital was again moved to Nagaoka-ky≈ç to escape
the Buddhist priests; in 794, it was moved to Heian-ky≈ç, present-day Ky≈çto.
The capital was to remain in Kyoto until 1868. In the religious town of Kyoto,
Buddhism and Shinto began to form a syncretic system. Historical writing in
Japan culminated in the early 8th century with the massive chronicles, the
"Kojiki" ("The Record of Ancient Matters", 712) and the "Nihon Shoki"
("Chronicles of Japan", 720). These chronicles give a legendary account of
Japan's beginnings, today known as the Japanese mythology. According to the
myths contained in these chronicles, Japan was founded in 660¬ BC by the
ancestral Emperor Jimmu, a direct descendant of the Shint≈ç deity, Amaterasu
(Sun Goddess). The myths recorded that Jimmu started a line of emperors that
remains to this day. Historians assume that the myths partly describe
historical facts, but the first emperor who actually existed was Emperor ≈åjin,
though the date of his reign is uncertain. Since the Nara period, actual
political power has not been in the hands of the emperor but has, instead, been
exercised at different times by the court nobility, warlords, the military,
and, more recently, the Prime Minister of Japan. Heian period. The Heian
period, lasting from 794 to 1185, is the final period of classical Japanese
history. It is considered the peak of the Japanese imperial court and noted for
its art, especially its poetry and literature. In the early 11th century, Lady
Shikibu Murasaki wrote Japan's (and one of the world's) oldest surviving
novels, "The Tale of Genji". The Man'y≈çsh≈´ and Kokin Wakash≈´, the oldest
existing collections of Japanese poetry, were compiled during this period.
Strong differences from mainland Asian cultures emerged (such as an indigenous
writing system, the kana). Due to the decline of the Tang Dynasty, Chinese
influence had reached its peak, and then effectively ended, with the last
imperially sanctioned mission to Tang China in 838, although trade expeditions
and Buddhist pilgrimages to China continued. Political power in the imperial
court was in the hands of powerful aristocratic families ("kuge"), especially
the Fujiwara clan, who ruled under the titles Sessh≈ç and Kampaku (imperial
regents). The Fujiwara clan obtained almost complete control over the imperial
family. However, the Fugiwara Regents who advised the Imperial Court were
content to derive their authority from imperial line. This meant that the
Fujiwara authority could always be challenged by a vigorous emperor. Fujiwara
domination of the Court during the time from 858 until about 1160 led to this
period being called "the Fujiwara Period." The Fujiwara clan gained this
ascendancy because of their matrimonial links with the imperial family. Indeed,
because of the number of emperors that were born to Fujiwara mothers, the
Fujiwara Regents became so closely identified with the imperial family, that
people saw no difference between the "direct rule" by the imperial family and
the rule of the Fujiwara Regents. Accordingly, when dissatisfaction with the
government arose resulting in the Hogen Rebellion (1156‚Äì1158), the Heiji
Rebellion (1160) and the Gempei War (1180‚Äì1185), the target of the
dissatisfaction was the Fujiwara Regents, as well as the Imperial family. The
Gempei War ended in 1185 with the naval battle of Dan-no-ura in which the
Minamoto clan defeated the Taira clan. In 1192, the Court appointed Yoritomo of
the Minamoto clan to a number of high positions in government. These positions
were consolidated and Yoritomo became the first person to be designated the
"Seii-tai-shogun" or "Shogun." Yoritomo then defeated the Fujiwara clan in a
military campaign in the north of Japan. This spelled the end of the Fujiwara
Period and the end of Fujiwara influence over the government. The end of the
period saw the rise of various military clans. The four most powerful clans
were the Minamoto clan, the Taira clan, the Fujiwara clan, and the Tachibana
clan. Towards the end of the 12th century, conflicts between these clans turned
into civil war, such as the H≈çgen (1156‚Äì1158). The Hogen Rebellion was of
cardinal importance to Japan, since it was the turning point that led to the
first stages of the development of feudalism in Japan. The Heiji Rebellion of
1160 also occurred during this period and the uprising was followed by the
Genpei War, from which emerged a society led by samurai clans under the
political rule of the sh≈çgun‚Äîthe beginnings of feudalism in Japan. Buddhism
began to spread during the Heian Period. However, Buddhism was split between
two sects‚Äîthe Tendai sect which had been brought to Japan from China by
Saich≈ç (767‚Äì822) and the Shingon sect which had been introduced from China
by K≈´kai (774‚Äì835). Whereas, the Tendai sect tended to be a monastic form of
Buddhism which established isolated monasteries or temples on the tops of
mountains, the Shingon variation of Buddhism was a less philosophical and more
practical and more popular version of the religion. Pure Land Buddhism (J≈çdo-
sh≈´, J≈çdo Shinsh≈´) was a form of Buddhism which was much simpler than either
the Tendai or Shingon versions of Buddhism. Pure Land Buddhism became very
popular in Japan during a time of degeneration and trouble in the latter half
of the 11th century. Feudal Japan (1185‚Äì1868). The "feudal" period of
Japanese history, dominated by the powerful regional families (daimy≈ç) and the
military rule of warlords (sh≈çgun), stretched from 1185 to 1868. The emperor
remained but was mostly kept to a "de jure" figurehead ruling position, and the
power of merchants was weak. This time is usually divided into periods
following the reigning family of the sh≈çgun. Kamakura period. The Kamakura
period, 1185 to 1333, is a period that marks the governance of the Kamakura
shogunate and the transition to the Japanese "medieval" era, a nearly 700-year
period in which the emperor, the court, and the traditional central government
were left intact but largely relegated to ceremonial functions. Civil,
military, and judicial matters were controlled by the "bushi" (samurai) class,
the most powerful of whom was the "de facto" national ruler, the sh≈çgun. This
period in Japan differed from the old "sh≈çen" system in its pervasive military
emphasis. In 1185, Minamoto no Yoritomo and his younger brother, Yoshitsune
defeated the rival Taira clan at the naval battle of Dan-no-ura. The outcome of
the Battle of Dan-no-ura meant the rise of the warrior or samurai class. Under
the feudal structure that was arising in Japan, the samurai owed military
service and loyalty to the emperor. The Samurai, in turn required loyalty and
work from the peasants who rented land from them and served them. On occasion
the samurai would conduct warfare against each other, which caused disruption
to the society. In 1192, Yoritomo was appointed "Seii Tai-Sh≈çgun" by the
emperor. The shogun was expected to run the day-to-day affairs of the
government on behalf of the emperor and to keep the samurai in line. During
this time the Imperial Court remained in their capital of Kyoto. Society at
Kyoto was regarded as more refined and cultured than the rest of the country.
However, Yoritomo established his base of power called the Bakufu in the
seaside town of Kamakura. Yoritomo became the first in a line of sh≈çguns who
ruled from Kamakura. Thus, the period of time from 1185 until 1334 became known
as the period of the Kamakura Shogunate. Society in the military or samurai
capital of Kamakura was regarded as rough and ignorant by comparison with the
refined society at Kyoto. However, Yoritomo wished to free his government from
the pernicious influence of the bureaucracy in Kyoto and, thus remained in
Kamakura. The Kamakura Shogunate based itself on the interests of this rising
class rather than on the bureaucracy at Kyoto. Accordingly, the preference of
Kamakura as the capital of the shogunate fit this new warrior class. Yoritomo
was married to H≈çj≈ç Masako of the H≈çj≈ç clan, herself a Sensei (teacher) in
kyujutsu (the art of the bow) and kenjutsu (the art of the sword), and she
contributed much to his ascent and organizing the Bafuku. However, after
Yoritomo's death, another warrior clan, the H≈çj≈ç, came to rule as "shikken"
(regents) for the sh≈çgun. A traumatic event of the period was the Mongol
invasions of Japan in 1274 and in 1281. Massive Mongol forces with superior
naval technology and weaponry attempted a full-scale invasion of the Japanese
islands in both 1274 and in 1281. However, a famous typhoon referred to as
"kamikaze" (translating as "divine wind" in Japanese) is credited with
devastating both Mongol invasion forces and saving Japan. Although the Japanese
were successful in stopping the Mongols, the invasion attempt had devastating
domestic repercussions, leading to the extinction of the Kamakura shogunate.
For two decades after the second failed Mongol invasion of Japan, the Japanese
remained fearful of a third Mongol attempt. (Indeed, Japan could not rest
assured of peace until the death of Kublai Khan in 1294.) Consequently, the
shogun required the various samurai spend money lavishly on armed forces in
order to remain in a high state of readiness for the expected third attack by
the Mongols. This vast expenditure of money had a ruinous effect on the economy
of Japan. The Kamakura Shogunate could perhaps have survived the strain of the
continual military readiness and the resultant bad economy if that had been the
only problem. However, upon the death of Emperor Go-Saga in 1272, there arose a
bitter dispute over succession to the throne within the imperial family. Kemmu
Restoration. In 1333, the Kamakura shogunate was overthrown in a coup d'√©tat
known as the Kemmu Restoration, led by Emperor Go-Daigo and his followers
(Ashikaga Takauji, Nitta Yoshisada, and Kusunoki Masashige). Emperor Go-Daigo
had come to the throne in 1318. From the beginning, Go-Daigo had made it clear
that he was not going to abdicate and become a "cloistered emperor" and that he
was intending to rule Japan from his palace in Kyoto, independent of the
Kamakura Shogunate. Go-Daigo and his supporters went to war against the
Kamakura Shogunate, the Imperial House was restored to political influence, and
the government was now civilian one, replacing the military government of the
Kamakura Shogunate. However, this did not last. The warrior class throughout
Japan was in tumult. Furthermore, Go-Daigo was not a gifted leader, tending,
instead, to alienate people. One of those that was alienated by Go-Daigo, was
his former supporter, Ashikaga Takauji. Ashikaga Takauji found that he had
support from other regional warlords in Japan. In early 1335, Ashikaga left
Kyoto and moved to Kamakura. Ashikaga, then began assuming powers that had not
been given him by the Emperor. This brought Ashikaga Takauji in direct conflict
with the governmental officials in Kyoto, including his old allies, Nitta
Yoshisada and Kusunoki Masashige. However, by assuming shogun-like powers,
Ashikaga appeared to be standing up for the warrior class against the civilian
authority that seemed intent on destroying the power of the warriors.
Accordingly, Ashikaga Takauji was joined in Kamakura by a number of other
regional warlords. On November 17, 1335, Ashikaga Tadayoshi, brother of
Takauji, issued a call (in the name of his brother Takauji) asking the warriors
throughout the country to "assemble your clansmen and hasten to join me."
Dissatisfaction with Go-Daigo was so strong that a majority of the warriors in
Japan answered this call. After initial defeats on the main island of Honshu,
Ashikaga and his troops retreated to the southern island of Kyushu, where he
immediately won over most of the regional warlords to his side and defeated the
few who remained loyal to Go-Daigo. With all of the island of Kyushu in his
hands, Ashikaga Takauji invaded the main island of Honshu again and, in 1336,
at the decisive Battle of Minatogawa, or the Battle of Minato River, defeated
the armed forces of Nitta Yoshisada and Kusunoki Masanori and the other
loyalist forces of Go-Daigo. The victorious warrior-class forces gathered
around the town of Kamakura became known as the "Northern Court." The Loyalist
forces may have been defeated but they survived to fight on. They formed the
"Southern Court" and upon the death of Go-Daigo in the late summer of 1339,
they rallied around the person of Prince Kazuhito who was enthroned as Emperor
K≈çgon. Prince Kazuhito was from a younger line of descendents in the Imperial
family and, thus, his supporters were supporters of the "junior line." On
September 20, 1336, the Ashikaga coalition of samurai opposed to Go-Daigo
enthroned Prince Yutahito as Emperor K≈çmyo. Prince Yutahito was from the
"senior line" of descendents in the Imperial family. Accordingly, the civil war
between the warriors led by the Ashikaga clan‚Äîthe Northern Court on the one
hand and the "Loyalist" Southern Court on the other hand, became a civil war of
imperial succession between followers of the "senior" and "junior" lines of
succession in the Imperial family. The warriors and the Ashikaga clan captured
Kyoto and proceeded to move their forces from Kamakura to Kyoto. Meanwhile, the
Southern Court deposed from their capital in Kyoto, now established themselves
in Yoshino. The Ashikaga Shogunate was never able to control and centralize the
government over the entire country. Rather they ruled because of a narrow and
shifting majority of warlords who supported them. There were always some
warlords that acted independently of either the Northern Court or the Southern
Court. Later, during the war of succession, these independent warlords
enthroned a third emperor‚ÄîEmperor Suko. So the civil war of succession became
a three-cornered affair. The prestige of the throne declined as the civil war
continued. This had the effect of bolstering the idea that the Imperial family
should be removed from politics and strengthened the need for a shogun to be
appointed to run the government on a day-to-day basis. In 1338, Ashikaga
Takauji was officially appointed as Shogun by the new Emperor. He was the first
of a line of Ashikaga shoguns. The attempted restoration of independent power
of the throne‚Äîthe Kemmu Restoration‚Äîwas at an end and the period of the
Ashikaga Shogunate had begun. The civil war of succession to the throne was
finally settled. As part of the settlement, all three "emperors" abdicated on
April 6, 1352. Ashikaga died in 1358 and Ashikaga Yoshiakira succeeded him as
Shogun. By 1368, however, the ascendancy of the Ashikaga Shogunate was so
complete that Ashikaga Yoshimitsu was able to rule Japan without reference to
the emperor. In 1392, the Southern Court and the Northern Court were finally
merged under an agreement that placed Emperor Kogon, of the Southern Court and
the junior line, on the throne and pledged that the throne would, henceforth,
alternate between candidates of the Northern Court and the Southern Court. This
agreement was, however, never implemented. Muromachi period. During the
Muromachi period, the Ashikaga shogunate ruled for 237 years from 1336 to 1573.
It was established by Ashikaga Takauji who seized political power from Emperor
Go-Daigo. A majority of the warrior class supported the Ashikaga clan in the
succession war. After taking Kyoto from Emperor Go-Daigo, the Ashikaga clan
made Kyoto, the capital of the Ashikaga Shogunate in late 1336. This became the
new capital of the Northern Court. Go-Daigo, then, moved to the town of Yoshino
and established the new capital of the Southern Court there. This ended the
attempted restoration of the powers of the throne‚Äîthe Kemmu restoration. The
early years (1336 to 1392) of the Muromachi period are known as the Nanboku-
ch≈ç (Northern and Southern court) period because the imperial court was split
in two. In 1392, the Northern court and the southern Court were finally merged
and Emperor Kogon was placed on the throne. There was an agreement that,
heretofore, succession to the throne would alternate between candidates of the
Northern court and candidates of the Southern Court. However, this agreement
was never acted upon. Rule of the Ashikaga Bakufu looked a lot like the rule of
the Kamakura Bakufu, as the Ashikaga clan made few changes in the offices and
councils of the prior government. However, the Ashikaga Shogunate dominated the
Imperial throne more than the Kamakura Shogunate ever did. Nonetheless, the
Ashikaga Shogunate was never able to centralize its power over the regional
warlords as much as the prior Kamakura government. The Ashikaga Shogunate was
based on a coalition of a loose majority of the various regional warlords
across the country. As a consequence, the Ashikaga Shogunate was unable to do
anything about the problem of the pirates who were operating off their own
shores, despite repeated requests to do so by both Korea and Ming dynasty
China. Warlord clans, like the Kotsuna clan and the Kiyomori branch of the
Taira clan, that lived along the coast of the Inland Sea, made money from the
pirates and supported them. In 1368, the Ming Dynasty replaced the Yuan Dynasty
of the Mongols in China. Japanese trade with China had been frozen since the
second and final attempt by Mongol China to invade Japan in 1281. Now a new
trade relationship began with the new Ming rulers in China. Part of the new
trade with China was the coming to Japan of Zen Buddhist monks. During the
Ashikaga Shogunate Zen Buddhism came to have a great influence with the ruling
class in Japan. The Muromachi period ended in 1573 when the 15th and last
sh≈çgun, Ashikaga Yoshiaki, was driven out of the capital in Kyoto by Oda
Nobunaga. In the viewpoint of a cultural history, Kitayama period (end of 14th
‚Äì first half of 15th century) and Higashiyama period (second half of 15th ‚Äì
first half of 16th century) exist in Muromachi period. Sengoku period. The
later years of the Muromachi period, 1467 to 1573, are also known as the
Sengoku period (Period of Warring Kingdoms), a time of intense internal
warfare, and correspond with the period of the first contacts with the
West‚Äîthe arrival of Portuguese "Nanban" traders. In 1543, a Portuguese ship,
blown off its course to China, landed on Tanegashima Island. Firearms
introduced by the Portuguese would bring the major innovation of the Sengoku
period, culminating in the Battle of Nagashino where reportedly 3,000
arquebuses (the actual number is believed to be around 2,000) cut down charging
ranks of samurai. During the following years, traders from Portugal, the
Netherlands, England, and Spain arrived, as did Jesuit, Dominican, and
Franciscan missionaries. Azuchi-Momoyama period. The Azuchi-Momoyama period
runs from approximately 1568 to 1603. The period, regarded as the late Warring
Kingdoms period, marks the military reunification and stabilization of the
country under a single political ruler, first by the campaigns of Oda Nobunaga
(1534‚Äì1582) who almost united Japan. Nobunaga decided to reduce the power of
the Buddhist priests, and gave protection to Christianity. He slaughtered many
Buddhist priests and captured their fortified temples. He was killed in a
revolt in 1582. Unification was finally achieved by one of Nobunaga's generals,
Toyotomi Hideyoshi. After having united Japan, Hideyoshi invaded Korea in an
attempt to conquer Korea and points beyond. However, after two unsuccessful
campaigns towards the allied forces of Korea and China and his death, his
forces returned to Japan in 1598. Following his death, Japan experienced a
short period of succession conflict. Tokugawa Ieyasu, one of the regents for
Hideyoshi's young heir, emerged victorious at the Battle of Sekigahara and
seized political power. Christian missions. Catholic Jesuit missionaries led by
Francis Xavier (1506‚Äì1552) arrived in 1549 and were welcomed in Kyoto. Their
proselytizing was most successful in Kyushu, with about 100,000 to 200,000
converts, including many daimyo. In 1587, Hideyoshi reversed course and decided
the Christian presence was divisive and might present the Europeans with an
opportunity to disrupt Japan. The Christians missionaries were seen as a
threat; the Portuguese merchants were allowed to continue their operations. The
edict was not immediately enforced but restrictions grew tighter in the next
three decades until a full-scale government persecution destroyed the Christian
community by the 1620s. The Jesuits were expelled, churches and schools were
torn down, and the daimyo were forbidden to become Christians. Converts who did
not reject Christianity were killed. Many Christians went underground, becoming
, but their communities died out. Not until the 1870s was Christianity re-
established in Japan. Edo ("Tokugawa") period (1603‚Äì1868). The Edo or
Tokugawa era saw power centralized in the hands of a hereditary shogunate that
took control of religion, regulated the entire economy, subordinated the
nobility, and set up uniform systems of taxation, government spending and
bureaucracies. It avoided international involvement and wars, established a
national judiciary and suppressed protest and criticism. The Tokugawa era
brought peace, and that brought prosperity to a nation of 31 million. Economy.
About 80% of the people were rice farmers. Rice production increased steadily,
but population remained stable, so prosperity increased. Rice paddies grew from
1.6 million ch≈ç in 1600 to 3 million by 1720. Improved technology helped
farmers control the all-important flow of irrigation to their paddies. The
daimyos operated several hundred castle towns, which became loci of domestic
trade. Large-scale rice markets developed, centered on Edo and Osaka. In the
cities and towns, guilds of merchants and artisans met the growing demand for
goods and services. The merchants, while low in status, prospered, especially
those with official patronage. Merchants invented credit instruments to
transfer money, currency came into common use, and the strengthening credit
market encouraged entrepreneurship. The samurai, forbidden to engage in farming
or business but allowed to borrow money, borrowed too much. One scholar
observed that the entire military class was living "as in an inn, that is,
consuming now and paying later". The bakufu and daimyos raised taxes on
farmers, but did not tax business, so they too fell into debt. By 1750 rising
taxes incited peasant unrest and even revolt. The nation had to deal somehow
with samurai impoverishment and treasury deficits. The financial troubles of
the samurai undermined their loyalties to the system, and the empty treasury
threatened the whole system of government. One solution was reactionary‚Äîwith
prohibitions on spending for luxuries. Other solutions were modernizing, with
the goal of increasing agrarian productivity. The eighth Tokugawa shogun,
Tokugawa Yoshimune (in office 1716‚Äì1745) had considerable success, though
much of his work had to be done again between 1787 and 1793 by the shogun's
chief councilor Matsudaira Sadanobu (1759‚Äì1829). Other shoguns debased the
coinage to pay debts, which caused inflation. By 1800 the commercialization of
the economy grew rapidly, bringing more and more remote villages into the
national economy. Rich farmers appeared who switched from rice to high-profit
commercial crops and engaged in local money-lending, trade, and small-scale
manufacturing. Some wealthy merchants sought higher social status by using
money to marry into the samurai class. A few domains, notably Ch≈çsh≈´ and
Satsuma, used innovative methods to restore their finances, but most sunk
further into debt. The financial crisis provoked a reactionary solution near
the end of the "Tenp≈ç Reforms" (1830‚Äì1843) promulgated by the chief
counselor Mizuno Tadakuni. He raised taxes, denounced luxuries and tried to
impede the growth of business; he failed and it appeared to many that the
continued existence of the entire Tokugawa system was in jeopardy. Social
structure. Japanese society had an elaborate social structure, in which
everyone knew their place and level of prestige. At the top were the emperor
and the court nobility, invincible in prestige but weak in power. Next came the
"bushi" of shogun, daimyo and layers of feudal lords whose rank was indicated
by their closeness to the Tokugawa. They had power. The "daimyo" comprised
about 250 local lords of local "han" with annual outputs of 50,000 or more
bushels of rice. The upper strata was much given to elaborate and expensive
rituals, including elegant architecture, landscaped gardens, Noh drama,
patronage of the arts, and the tea ceremony. Samurai. Next in the social
structure were the 400,000 warriors, called "samurai", whose ranks ranged in
numerous grades and degrees. A few upper samurai were eligible for high office;
most were foot soldiers (ashigaru) with minor duties. The samurai were
affiliated with senior lords in a well-established chain of command. The shogun
had 17,000 samurai retainers; the daimyo each had hundreds. Most lived in
modest homes near their lord's headquarters, and lived off hereditary rights to
collect rents and stipends. Together these high status groups comprised Japan's
ruling class making up about 6% of the total population. Lower orders. The
lower social orders were divided into two main segments‚Äîthe peasants‚Äî80% of
the population‚Äîwhose high prestige as producers was undercut by their burden
as the chief source of taxes. They were illiterate and lived in villages
controlled by appointed officials who kept the peace and collected taxes.
Peasants and villagers frequently engaged in unlawful and disruptive protests,
especially after 1780. Merchants and artisans. Near the bottom of the prestige
scale‚Äîbut much higher up in terms of income and life style‚Äîwere the
merchants and artisans of the towns and cities. They had no political power,
and even rich merchants found it difficult to rise in the world in a society in
which place and standing were fixed at birth. Finally came the entertainers,
prostitutes, day laborers and servants, and the thieves, beggars and hereditary
outcasts. They were tightly controlled by local officials and were not allowed
to mingle with higher status people. Literacy. Literacy was highly prized,
albeit made difficult by the writing system. Wood block printing had been
standard for centuries; after 1500 Japanese printers experimented with movable
type, but reverted to the wood blocks. By the 1780s Japan was publishing 3000
books a year (compared with 400 in Russia). By the 1850s the major new trend
was the translation of western scientific and geographical books, which reached
a wide audience. By 1860 about 40% of the men and 10% of the women were
literate in rural areas, with much higher rates in the cities, such as 80% in
Edo (Tokyo). Universal compulsory education only began in 1871. Government.
During the Edo period, also called the Tokugawa period, the administration of
the country was shared by over two hundred daimy≈ç in a federation governed by
the Tokugawa shogunate. The Tokugawa clan, leader of the victorious eastern
army in the Battle of Sekigahara, was the most powerful of them and for fifteen
generations monopolized the title of "Sei-i Taish≈çgun" (often shortened to
"sh≈çgun"). With their headquarters at Edo (present-day Tokyo), the Tokugawa
commanded the allegiance of the other daimy≈ç, who in turn ruled their domains
with a rather high degree of autonomy. The Tokugawa shogunate carried out a
number of significant policies. They placed the samurai class above the
commoners: the agriculturists, artisans, and merchants. They enacted sumptuary
laws limiting hairstyle, dress, and accessories. They organized commoners into
groups of five and held all responsible for the acts of each individual. To
prevent daimy≈ç from rebelling, the sh≈çguns required them to maintain lavish
residences in Edo and live at these residences on a rotating schedule; carry
out expensive processions to and from their domains; contribute to the upkeep
of shrines, temples, and roads; and seek permission before repairing their
castles. This 265-year span was called "A peaceful state". Cultural achievement
was high during this period, and many artistic developments took place. Most
significant among them were the "ukiyo-e" form of wood-block print and the
"kabuki" and "bunraku" theaters. Also, many of the most famous works for the
"koto" and "shakuhachi" date from this time period. "Sakoku"‚Äîseclusion from
the outside world. During the early part of the 17th century, the shogunate
suspected that foreign traders and missionaries were actually forerunners of a
military conquest by European powers. Christianity had spread in Japan,
especially among peasants, and the shogunate suspected the loyalty of Christian
peasants towards their daimy≈ç, severely persecuting them. This led to a revolt
by persecuted peasants and Christians in 1637 known as the Shimabara Rebellion
which saw 30,000 Christians, r≈çnin, and peasants facing a massive samurai army
of more than 100,000 sent from Edo. The rebellion was crushed at a high cost to
the sh≈çgun's army. After the eradication of the rebels at Shimabara, the
shogunate placed foreigners under progressively tighter restrictions. It
monopolized foreign policy and expelled traders, missionaries, and foreigners
with the exception of the Dutch and Chinese merchants who were restricted to
the man-made island of Dejima in Nagasaki Bay and several small trading
outposts outside the country. However, during this period of isolation
("Sakoku") that began in 1635, Japan was much less cut off from the rest of the
world than is commonly assumed, and some acquisition of western knowledge
occurred under the Rangaku system. Russian encroachments from the north led the
shogunate to extend direct rule to Hokkaid≈ç, Sakhalin and the Kuriles in 1807,
but the policy of exclusion continued. End of seclusion. The policy of
isolation lasted for more than 200 years. In 1844, William¬ II of the
Netherlands sent a message urging Japan to open its doors which was rejected by
the Japanese. On July¬ 8, 1853, Commodore Matthew Perry of the United States
Navy with four warships‚Äîthe "Mississippi", "Plymouth", "Saratoga", and
"Susquehanna"‚Äîsteamed into the bay in Yokohama and displayed the threatening
power of his ships' cannons during a Christian burial which the Japanese
observed. He requested that Japan open to trade with the West. These ships
became known as the "kurofune", the Black Ships. The following year at the
Convention of Kanagawa on March¬ 31, 1854, Perry returned with seven ships and
demanded that the sh≈çgun sign the Treaty of Peace and Amity, establishing
formal diplomatic relations between Japan and the United States. Within five
years, Japan had signed similar treaties with other Western countries. The
Harris Treaty was signed with the United States on July¬ 29, 1858. These
treaties were unequal, having been forced on Japan through gunboat diplomacy,
and were interpreted by the Japanese as a sign of Western imperialism taking
hold of the rest of the Asian continent. Among other measures, they gave the
Western nations unequivocal control of tariffs on imports and the right of
extraterritoriality to all of their visiting nationals. They would remain a
sticking point in Japan's relations with the West up to around the start of the
20th century. Empire of Japan (1868‚Äì1945). Beginning in 1868, Japan undertook
political, economic, and cultural transformations emerging as a unified and
centralized state, the Empire of Japan (also Imperial Japan or Prewar Japan).
This 77-year period, which lasted until 1945, was a time of rapid economic
growth. Japan became an imperial power, colonizing Korea and Taiwan. Starting
in 1931 it began the takeover of Manchuria and China, in defiance of the League
of Nations and the United States. Escalating tension with the U.S.--and western
control of Japan's vital oil supplies‚Äîled to World War II. Japan launched
multiple successful attacks on the U.S. as well as British and Dutch
territories in 1941‚Äì42. After a series of great naval battles, the Americans
sank the Japanese fleet and largely destroyed 50 of its largest cities through
air raids, including nuclear attacks on Hiroshima and Nagasaki. Japan
surrendered in late summer 1945, gave up its overseas holdings in Korea, China,
Taiwan and elsewhere, and was occupied and transformed into a demilitarized
democratic nation by the U.S. Meiji Restoration. Renewed contact with the West
precipitated a profound alteration of Japanese society. Importantly, within the
context of Japan's subsequent aggressive militarism, the signing of the
treaties was viewed as profoundly humiliating and a source of national shame.
The Tokugawa sh≈çgun was forced to resign, and soon after the Boshin War of
1868, the emperor was restored to power, beginning a period of fierce
nationalism and intense socio-economic restructuring known as the Meiji
Restoration. The Tokugawa system was abolished, the military was modernized,
and numerous Western institutions were adopted‚Äìincluding a Western legal
system and quasi-parliamentary constitutional government as outlined in the
Meiji Constitution. This constitution was modeled on the constitution of the
German Empire. While many aspects of the Meiji Restoration were adopted
directly from Western institutions, others, such as the dissolution of the
feudal system and removal of the shogunate, were processes that had begun long
before the arrival of Perry. Nonetheless, Perry's intervention is widely viewed
as a pivotal moment in Japanese history. Economic modernization. Japan's
industrial revolution began about 1870 as national leaders decided to catch up
with the West. The government built railroads, improved roads, and inaugurated
a land reform program to prepare the country for further development. Modern
industry first appeared in textiles, including cotton and especially silk,
which was based in home workshops in rural areas. the government inaugurated a
new Western-based education system for all young people, sent thousands of
students to the United States and Europe, and hired more than 3,000 Westerners
to teach modern science, mathematics, technology, and foreign languages in
Japan (O-yatoi gaikokujin). In 1871 a group of Japanese politicians known as
the Iwakura Mission toured Europe and the USA to learn western ways. The result
was a deliberate state-led industrialisation policy to enable Japan to quickly
catch up. The Bank of Japan, founded in 1877, used taxes to fund model steel
and textile factories. Education was expanded and Japanese students were sent
to study in the West. Wars with China and Russia. Japanese intellectuals of the
late-Meiji period espoused the concept of a "line of advantage", an idea that
would help to justify Japanese foreign policy around the start of the 20th
century. According to this principle, embodied in the slogan "fukoku ky≈çhei",
Japan would be vulnerable to aggressive Western imperialism unless it extended
a line of advantage beyond its borders which would help to repel foreign
incursions and strengthen the Japanese economy. Emphasis was especially placed
on Japan's "preeminent interests" in the Korean Peninsula, once famously
described as a "dagger pointed at the heart of Japan". It was tensions over
Korea and Manchuria, respectively, that led Japan to become involved in the
first Sino-Japanese War with China in 1894‚Äì1895 and the Russo-Japanese War
with Russia in 1904‚Äì1905. The war with China made Japan the world's first
Eastern, modern imperial power, and the war with Russia proved that a Western
power could be defeated by an Eastern state. The aftermath of these two wars
left Japan the dominant power in the Far East with a sphere of influence
extending over southern Manchuria and Korea, which was formally annexed as part
of the Japanese Empire in 1910. Japan had also gained half of Sakhalin Island
from Russia. The results of these wars established Japan's dominant interest in
Korea, while giving it the Pescadores Islands, Formosa (now Taiwan), and the
Liaodong Peninsula in Manchuria, which was eventually retroceded in the
"humiliating" Triple Intervention. Over the next decade, Japan would flaunt its
growing prowess, including a very significant contribution to the Eight-Nation
Alliance formed to quell China's Boxer Rebellion. Many Japanese, however,
believed their new empire was still regarded as inferior by the Western powers,
and they sought a means of cementing their international standing. This set the
climate for growing tensions with Russia, which would continually intrude into
Japan's "line of advantage" during this time. Russian pressure from the north
appeared again after Muraviev had gained Outer Manchuria at Aigun (1858) and
Peking (1860). This led to heavy Russian pressure on Sakhalin which the
Japanese eventually yielded in exchange for the Kuril islands (1875). The
Ryukyu Islands were similarly secured in 1879, establishing the borders within
which Japan would "enter the World". In 1898, the last of the unequal treaties
with Western powers was removed, signaling Japan's new status among the nations
of the world. In a few decades by reforming and modernizing social,
educational, economic, military, political and industrial systems, the Emperor
Meiji's "controlled revolution" had transformed a feudal and isolated state
into a world power. Significantly, the impetus for this change was the belief
that Japan had to compete with the West both industrially and militarily to
achieve equality. Anglo-Japanese Alliance. The Anglo-Japanese Alliance treaty
was signed with Britain in 1902. It was renewed in 1905 and 1911 before its
demise in 1921 and its termination in 1923. It was a military alliance between
the two countries that threatened Russia and Germany. Due to this alliance,
Japan entered World War I on the side of Great Britain. Japan seized German
bases in China and the pacific. The Treaty facilitated cultural and
technological exchange between the two countries. World War I. Japan entered
World War¬ I on the Allied side and declared war on the Central Powers. Though
Japan's role was limited largely to seizing German colonial outposts in East
Asia and the Pacific, it took advantage of the opportunity to expand its
influence in Asia and its territorial holdings in the Pacific. Acting virtually
independently of the civil government, the Japanese navy seized Germany's
Micronesian colonies. It also attacked and occupied the German coaling port of
Qingdao in the Chinese Shandong peninsula. Japan went to the peace conference
at Versailles in 1919 as one of the great military and industrial powers of the
world and received official recognition as one of the "Big Five" of the new
international order. It joined the League of Nations and received a mandate
over Pacific islands north of the Equator formerly held by Germany. Japan was
also involved in the post-war Allied intervention in Russia, occupying Russian
(Outer) Manchuria and also north Sakhalin (which held Japan's limited oil
reserves). It was the last Allied power to withdraw from the interventions
against Soviet Russia (doing so in 1925). The post‚ÄìWorld War I era brought
Japan unprecedented prosperity. Fascism in Japan. During the 1910s and 1920s,
Japan progressed towards democracy movements known as 'Taish≈ç Democracy'.
However, parliamentary government was not rooted deeply enough to withstand the
economic and political pressures of the late 1920s and 1930s during the
Depression period, and its state became increasingly militarized. This was due
to the increasing powers of military leaders and was similar to the actions
some European nations were taking leading up to World War¬ II. These shifts in
power were made possible by the ambiguity and imprecision of the Meiji
Constitution, particularly its measure that the legislative body was answerable
to the Emperor and not the people. The Kodoha, a militarist faction, even
attempted a coup d'√©tat known as the February¬ 26 Incident, which was crushed
after three days by Hirohito, the Emperor Sh≈çwa. Party politics came under
increasing fire because it was believed they were divisive to the nation and
promoted self-interest where unity was needed. As a result, the major parties
voted to dissolve themselves and were absorbed into a single party, the
Imperial Rule Assistance Association (IRAA), which also absorbed many
prefectural organizations such as women's clubs and neighborhood associations.
However, this umbrella organization did not have a cohesive political agenda
and factional in-fighting persisted throughout its existence, meaning Japan did
not devolve into a totalitarian state. The IRAA has been likened to a sponge,
in that it could soak everything up, but there is little one could do with it
afterwards. Its creation was precipitated by a series of domestic crises,
including the advent of the Great Depression in the 1930s and the actions of
extremists such as the members of the Cherry Blossom Society, who enacted the
May¬ 15 Incident. Second Sino-Japanese War. Under the pretext of the Manchurian
Incident, Lieutenant Colonel Kanji Ishiwara invaded Inner (Chinese) Manchuria
in 1931, an action the Japanese government ratified with the creation of the
puppet state of Manchukuo under the last Chinese emperor, Pu Yi. As a result of
international condemnation of the incident, Japan resigned from the League of
Nations in 1933. After several more similar incidents fueled by an expansionist
military, the second Sino-Japanese War began in 1937 after the Marco Polo
Bridge Incident.M From 1937‚Äì45, Emperor Hirohito was supreme commander of the
Imperial General Headquarters, by which the military decisions were made. After
joining the Anti-Comintern Pact in 1936, Japan formed the Axis Pact with
Germany and Italy on September¬ 27, 1940. Many Japanese politicians believed
war with the Occident to be inevitable due to inherent cultural differences and
Western imperialism. Japanese imperialism was then justified by the revival of
the traditional concept of hakko ichiu, the divine right of the emperor to
unite and rule the world. Japan was defeated by Soviet Union in 1938 in large-
scale but localized battles at Battle of Lake Khasan and in 1939 in the Battle
of Khalkhin Gol. The Army no longer wanted to fight the Soviets, so the
Soviet‚ÄìJapanese Neutrality Pact was signed in 1941. The treaty held until
August 1945 when the Soviets invaded Manchuria and Korea. World War II.
Tensions were mounting with the U.S. as a result of public outcry over Japanese
aggression and reports of atrocities in China, such as the infamous Nanjing
Massacre. The U.S. strongly supported China with money, airmen, supplies and
threats against Japan. In retaliation to the invasion of French Indochina the
U.S. began an embargo on such goods as petroleum products and scrap iron. On
July¬ 25, 1941, all Japanese assets in the US were frozen. Because Japan's
military might, especially the Navy, was dependent on their dwindling oil
reserves, this action had the contrary effect of increasing Japan's dependence
on and hunger for new acquisitions. Many civil leaders of Japan, including
Prime Minister Konoe Fumimaro, believed a war with America would end in defeat,
but felt the concessions demanded by the U.S. would almost certainly relegate
Japan from the ranks of the World Powers, leaving it prey to Western collusion.
Civil leaders offered political compromises in the form of the "Amau Doctrine,"
dubbed the "Japanese Monroe Doctrine" that would have given the Japanese free
rein with regard to war with China. These offers were flatly rejected by the
U.S.; the military leaders instead vied for quick military action. Most
military leaders such as Osami Nagano, Kotohito Kan'in, Hajime Sugiyama and
Hideki T≈çj≈ç believed that war with the Occident was inevitable. They finally
convinced the Emperor to sanction on November 1941 an attack plan against U.S.,
Great Britain and the Netherlands. However, there were dissenters in the ranks
about the wisdom of that option, most notably Admiral Yamamoto Isoroku and
Prince Takamatsu. They pointedly warned that at the beginning of hostilities
with the US, the Empire would have the advantage for six months, after which
Japan's defeat in a prolonged war with an enemy with a much larger economy
would be almost certain. The Americans were expecting an attack in the
Philippines and sent bombers to deter Japan. On Yamamoto's advice, Japan made
the decision to attack the main American fleet at Pearl Harbor in Hawaii.
American strategists believed that Japan would never be so bold as to attack so
close to its home base, and the US was taken completely by surprise. The attack
on Pearl Harbor, initially appeared to be a major success that knocked out the
American battle fleet‚Äîbut it missed the aircraft carriers that were at sea
and ignored vital shore facilities whose destruction could have crippled US
Pacific operations. Ultimately, the attack proved a long-term strategic
disaster that actually inflicted relatively little significant long-term damage
while provoking the United States to seek revenge. At the same time as the
Pearl Harbor attack, the Japanese army attacked British Hong Kong and occupied
it for nearly four years. While Nazi Germany was in the middle of its
"Blitzkrieg" through Europe, Japan was following suit in Asia. The Japanese
Army invaded and captured most of the coastal Chinese cities such as Shanghai.
Japan took over French Indochina (Vietnam, Laos, Cambodia), British Malaya
(Brunei, Malaysia, Singapore) as well as the Dutch East Indies (Indonesia)
while Thailand entered into an alliance with Japan. Japanese forces overwhelmed
the British in Burma (thus cutting off supplies to China) and reached the
borders of India and Australia. Its air raids devastated Darwin, Australia.
Japan had soon established an empire stretching over much of the Pacific.
However as Admiral Yamamoto warned, Japan's six-month window of military
advantage following Pearl Harbor ended with the Japanese Navy's offensive
ability being crippled at the hands of the American Navy in the Battle of
Midway, which established a significant American military advantage. The war
became one of mass production and logistics, the U.S. funding a far stronger
navy with more numerous warplanes, and a superior communications and logistics
system. The Japanese had stretched too far and were unable to supply its
forward bases‚Äîmany soldiers died of starvation. American submarines destroyed
the Japanese tankers, causing a severe shortage of fuel oil for ships and
aviation gasoline. Japan built warplanes in large quantity but the quality
plunged, and the performance of poorly trained pilots spiraled downward. The
Navy lost a series of major battles, from Midway (1942) to the Philippine Sea
(1944) and Leyte Gulf (1945), which put American long-range B-29 bombers in
range. A series of massive raids burned out much of Tokyo and other major
industrial cities beginning in March 1945 while Operation Starvation seriously
disrupted the nation's vital internal shipping lanes. Regardless of how the war
was becoming hopeless, the circle around the Emperor held fast and refused to
open negotiations. Finally in August, two atomic bombs and the Soviet invasion
of Manchuria demonstrated the cause was futile, and Hirohito authorized a
surrender whereby he kept his throne. Total Japanese military fatalities
between 1937 and 1945 were 2.1 million; most came in the last year of the war.
Starvation or malnutrition-re¬≠lated illness accounted for roughly 80 percent
of Japanese military deaths in the Philippines, and 50 percent of military
fatalities in China. The aerial bombing of a total of 65 Japanese cities
appears to have taken a minimum of 400,000 and possibly closer to 600,000
civilian lives (over 100,000 in Tokyo alone, over 200,000 in Hiroshima and
Nagasaki combined, and 80,000‚Äì150,000 civilian deaths in the battle of
Okina¬≠wa). Civilian death among settlers who died attempting to re¬≠turn to
Japan from Manchuria in the winter of 1945 were probably around 100,000.
Modernizing society. Childhood transformed. Childhood as a distinct phase of
life was apparent in the early modern period, when social and economic changes
brought increased attention to children, the growth of schooling and child-
centered rituals. A modern concept of childhood emerged in Japan after 1850 as
part of its engagement with the West. Meiji era leaders decided the nation-
state had the primary role in mobilizing individuals ‚Äì and children ‚Äì in
service of the state. The Western-style school was introduced as the agent to
reach that goal. By the 1890s, schools were generating new sensibilities
regarding childhood. After 1890 Japan had numerous reformers, child experts,
magazine editors, and well-educated mothers who bought into the new
sensibility. They taught the upper middle class a model of childhood that
included children having their own space where they read children's books,
played with educational toys and, especially, devoted enormous time to school
homework. These ideas rapidly disseminated through all social classes Postwar
Japan (1945‚Äìpresent). After the collapse of the Empire of Japan, Japan was
transformed into a democratic state with a revised democratic Constitution of
Japan. During the postwar period, Japan became an economic power state. This
period is characterized by the US-Japan Alliance such as the United States
Forces Japan. Occupation of Japan. Japan had never been occupied by a foreign
power, and the arrival of the Americans with strong ideas about transforming
Japan into a peaceful democracy had a major long-term impact. Japan came under
the firm direction of American General Douglas MacArthur, The main American
objective was to turn Japan into a peaceful nation and to establish democratic
self-government. The occupation transformed the Japanese government into an
engine of production, wealth redistribution, and social reform. Political
reforms included a freely elected Japanese Diet (legislature) and universal
adult suffrage. The Occupation emphasized land reform so that tenant farmers
became owners of their rice paddies, and stimulated the formation of powerful
labor unions that gave workers a say in industrial democracy. The great
zaibatsu business conglomerates were broken up, consumer culture was
encouraged, education was radically reformed and democratized, and the Shinto-
basis of emperor worship was ended. Historian John Dower says the "visible
hand" of New Deal-inspired state leadership, while keeping a capitalist
economy, was welcomed by a battered and humiliated Japanese society that was
eager to find a peaceful route forward into prosperity. The reforms were
implemented by Japanese officials under indirect American control, so that no
Japanese institutions were directly controlled by Americans. While Emperor
Hirohito was allowed to retain his throne as a symbol of national unity, actual
power was held by complex interlocking networks of elites. The Empire of Japan
was dissolved. Japan was stripped of its overseas possessions and retained only
the home islands and Okinawa. Manchukuo was dissolved, and Manchuria and
Formosa were returned to China. Korea was occupied and divided by the U.S. and
the Soviet Union. The U.S. became the sole administering authority of the
Ryukyu, Bonin, and Volcano Islands, while the USSR took southern Sakhalin and
the Kurile islands. Japan vehemently rejects Soviet control of the Kuriles, and
diplomatic tension over the issue continued into the 21st century. Shutting
down the empire meant that Japanese settlers and officials had leave. In all
Japanese repatriation centers handled over 7 million expatriates returning to
Japan. The International Military Tribunal for the Far East (Tokyo Trial), an
international war crimes tribunal, was held, in which seven politicians were
executed. Emperor Hirohito was not convicted, but instead was turned into a
figurehead emperor. Shigeru Yoshida (1878‚Äì1967) played the central role as
prime minister between 1946 and 1954 (with one interruption). His goal was
rapid rebuilding Japan and cooperation with the American Occupation. He led
Japan to adopt the ‚ÄúYoshida Doctrine‚Äù, based on three tenets: economic
growth as the primary national objective, no involvement in international
political-strategic issues, and the provision of military bases to the United
States. The Yoshida Doctrine proved immensely successful. The historiography
before 1980 was celebratory, and focused on the success of the American
occupation in transforming Japan in terms of democracy and freedom. Since the
1980s historians more often stress the limitations of the occupation's reforms
and argue that they partly reflected prewar and wartime Japanese innovations.
Dower explains the factors that promoted the success of the American
occupation: Peace treaty. Entering the Cold War with the Korean War, Japan came
to be seen as an important ally of the US government. Political, economic, and
social reforms were introduced, such as an elected Japanese Diet (legislature)
and expanded suffrage. The country's constitution took effect on May¬ 3, 1947.
The United States and 45 other Allied nations signed the Treaty of Peace with
Japan in September 1951. The U.S. Senate ratified the treaty on March¬ 20,
1952, and under the terms of the treaty, Japan regained full sovereignty on
April¬ 28, 1952. Under the terms of the peace treaty and later agreements, the
United States maintains naval bases at Sasebo, Okinawa and at Yokosuka. A
portion of the U.S. Pacific Fleet, including one aircraft carrier (currently
USS George Washington (CVN-73)), is based at Yokosuka. This arrangement is
partially intended to provide for the defense of Japan, as the treaty and the
new Japanese constitution imposed during the occupation severely restrict the
size and purposes of Japan Self-Defense Forces in the modern period. Cold War.
After a series of realignment of political parties, the conservative Liberal
Democratic Party (LDP) and the leftist Social Democratic Party (SDP) were
formed in 1955. The political map in Japan had been largely unaltered until
early 1990s and LDP had been the largest political party in the national
politics. LDP politicians and government bureaucrats focused on economic
policy. From the 1950s to the 1980s, Japan experienced its rapid development
into a major economic power, through a process often referred to as the
Japanese post-war economic miracle. Japan's biggest postwar political crisis
took place in 1960 over the revision of the Japan-United States Mutual Security
Assistance Pact. The new Treaty of Mutual Cooperation and Security, which
renewed the United States role as military protector of Japan, was pushed
through the Diet by LDP Prime Minister Eisaku Sato through the Diet in 1960
against the strong opposition of minority parties. Opponents on the left
responded with massive street protests and political upheaval occurred, and the
cabinet resigned a month after the Diet's ratification of the treaty.
Thereafter, political turmoil subsided. Japanese views of the United States,
after years of mass protests over nuclear armaments and the mutual defense
pact, improved by 1972 with the reversion of United States-occupied Okinawa to
Japanese sovereignty and the winding down of the Vietnam War. Japan had
reestablished relations with the Republic of China after World War II, and
cordial relations were maintained with the nationalist government when it was
relocated to Taiwan, a policy that won Japan the enmity of the People's
Republic of China, which was established in 1949. After the general warming of
relations between China and Western countries, especially the United States,
which shocked Japan with its sudden rapprochement with Beijing in 1971, Tokyo
established relations with Beijing in 1972. Close cooperation in the economic
sphere followed. Japan's relations with the Soviet Union continued to be
problematic after the war, but a Joint Declaration between Japan and the USSR
ending the state of war and reestablishing diplomatic relations was signed
October¬ 19, 1956. The main object of dispute was the Soviet occupation of what
Japan calls its Northern Territories, the two most southerly islands in the
Kurils (Etorofu and Kunashiri) and Shikotan and the Habomai Islands, which were
seized by the Soviet Union in the closing days of World War¬ II. Economic
growth. Throughout the postwar period, Japan's economy continued to boom, with
results far outstripping expectations. Given a massive boost by the Korean War,
in which it acted as a major supplier to the UN force, Japan's economy embarked
on a prolonged period of extremely rapid growth, led by the manufacturing
sectors. Japan emerged as a significant power in many economic spheres,
including steel working, car manufacturing and the manufacturing of electronic
goods. Japan rapidly caught up with the West in foreign trade, GNP, and general
quality of life. These achievements were underscored by the 1964 Tokyo Olympic
Games and the Osaka International Exposition in 1970. The high economic growth
and political tranquility of the mid to late 1960s were tempered by the
quadrupling of oil prices by the OPEC in 1973. Almost completely dependent on
imports for petroleum, Japan experienced its first recession since World
War¬ II. Another serious problem was Japan's growing trade surplus, which
reached record heights during Nakasone's first term. The United States
pressured Japan to remedy the imbalance, demanding that Tokyo raise the value
of the yen and open its markets further to facilitate more imports from the
United States. After the Cold War. Japan after the Cold War is also called as
the Heisei period, which starts from the year of the Revolutions of Eastern
Europe. 1989 marked one of the most rapid economic growth spurts in Japanese
history. With a strong yen and a favorable exchange rate with the dollar, the
Bank of Japan kept interest rates low, sparking an investment boom that drove
Tokyo property values up sixty percent within the year. Shortly before New
Year's Day, the Nikkei¬ 225 reached its record high of 39,000. By 1991, it had
fallen to 15,000, signifying the end of Japan's famed bubble economy.
Unemployment ran reasonably high, but not at crisis levels. Rather than suffer
large-scale unemployment and lay-offs, Japan's labor market suffered in more
subtle, yet no less profound effects that were nonetheless difficult to gauge
statistically. During the prosperous times, jobs were seen as long term even to
the point of being lifelong. In contrast, Japan during the lost decade saw a
marked increase in temporary and part-time work which only promised employment
for short periods and marginal benefits. This also created a generational gap,
as those who had entered the labor market prior to the lost decade usually
retained their employment and benefits, and were effectively insulated from the
economic slowdown, whereas younger workers who entered the market a few years
later suffered the brunt of its effects. In a series of financial scandals of
the LDP, a coalition led by Morihiro Hosokawa took power in 1993. Hosokawa
succeeded to legislate a new plurality voting election law instead of the
stalemated multi-member constituency election system. However, the coalition
collapsed the next year as parties had gathered to simply overthrow LDP and
lacked a unified position on almost every social issue. The LDP returned to the
government in 1996, when it helped to elect Social Democrat Tomiichi Murayama
as prime minister. The Great Hanshin earthquake hit Kobe on January¬ 17, 1995.
6,000 people were killed and 44,000 were injured. 250,000 houses were destroyed
or burned in a fire. The amount of damage totaled more than ten trillion yen.
In March of the same year the doomsday cult Aum Shinrikyo attacked on the Tokyo
subway system with sarin gas, killing 12 and injuring hundreds more. An
investigation later revealed that the cult was responsible for dozens of
murders that occurred prior to the gas attacks. Junichiro Koizumi was president
of the LDP and Prime Minister of Japan from April 2001 to September 2006.
Koizumi enjoyed high approval ratings. He was known as an economic reformer and
he privatized the national postal system. Koizumi also had an active
involvement in the War on Terrorism, sending 1,000 soldiers of the Japan Self-
Defense Forces to help in Iraq's reconstruction after the Iraq War, the biggest
overseas troop deployment since World War¬ II. The ruling coalition is formed
by the liberal Democratic Party of Japan (DPJ), the leftist Social Democratic
Party and the conservative People's New Party. The opposition is formed by the
liberal conservative Liberal Democratic Party (LDP). Other parties are the New
Komeito Party, a S≈çka Gakkai party and the Japanese Communist Party. On
2¬ June 2010 Prime Minister Yukio Hatoyama resigned from his position as leader
of the DPJ, citing the failure to fulfill his campaign promise of removing a
U.S. base from the island of Okinawa as his main reason for stepping down. On
March 11, 2011, Japan suffered the strongest earthquake in its recorded
history, affecting the north-east area of Honsh≈´. The magnitude 9.0 quake was
aggravated by a tsunami and also caused numerous fires and damaged several
nuclear reactors. Damage to Fukushima Nuclear Plant led to meltdown of three
reactors and release of radioactive material, in the largest nuclear accident
since the 1986 Chernobyl disaster. Regnal years. Regnal years ("Geng≈ç") in
Japan
