History of Korea The Korean Peninsula was inhabited from the Lower Paleolithic
about 400,000-700,000 years ago. The earliest known Korean pottery dates to
around 8000 BCE, and the Neolithic period began after 6000 BCE, followed by the
Bronze Age by 800 BCE, and the Iron Age around 400 BCE. According to the mythic
origin story recounted in the Samguk Yusa, the Gojoseon (Old Joseon) was
founded in northern Korea and Manchuria in 2333 BCE. The Gija Joseon was
founded in 12th century BC, and its existence and role have been controversial
in the modern era. The Jin state was formed in southern Korea in the 3rd
century BC. In the 2nd century BC, Gija Joseon was replaced by Wiman Joseon
which fell to the Han dynasty of China near the end of the century. This
resulted in the fall of Gojoseon and led to succeeding warring states, the
Proto–Three Kingdoms period that spanned the later Iron Age. Since the 1st
century, Goguryeo, Baekje, and Silla grew to control the peninsula and
Manchuria as the Three Kingdoms (57 BC – 668 AD) until unification by Silla
in 676. In 698, Dae Jo-yeong established Balhae in old territories of Goguryeo,
which led to the North South States Period (698–926). In the late 9th
century, Silla was divided into the Later Three Kingdoms (892–936), which
ended with the unification by Wang Geon's Goryeo Dynasty. Meanwhile Balhae fell
after an invasion by the Khitan Liao Dynasty and the refugees including the
last Crown Prince emigrated to Goryeo. During the Goryeo period, laws were
codified, a civil service system was introduced, and culture influenced by
Buddhism flourished. In 1392, Yi Seong-gye established the Joseon Dynasty
(1392–1910) after a coup in 1388. King Sejong the Great (1418–1450)
implemented numerous administrative, social, and economical reforms,
established royal authority in the early years of the dynasty, and promulgated
Hangul, the Korean alphabet. From the late 16th century, the Joseon dynasty
faced foreign invasions, internal power struggle and rebellions, and it
declined rapidly in the late 19th century. In 1897, the Korean Empire
(1897–1910) succeeded the Joseon Dynasty. However, Imperial Japan forced it
to sign a protectorate treaty and in 1910 annexed the Korean Empire, though all
treaties involved were later confirmed to be null and void. Korean resistance
was manifested in the widespread nonviolent March 1st Movement of 1919.
Thereafter the resistance movements, coordinated by the Provisional Government
of the Republic of Korea in exile, were largely active in neighboring
Manchuria, China and Siberia. After the liberation in 1945, the partition of
Korea created the modern two states of North and South Korea. In 1948, new
governments were established, the Democratic South Korea ("Republic of Korea")
and Communist North Korea ("Democratic People's Republic of Korea") divided at
the 38th parallel. The unresolved tensions of the division surfaced in the
Korean War of 1950, when North Korea invaded South Korea. Prehistory and
Gojoseon. No definite Homo erectus has been found in the Korean Peninsula,
though a possible Homo erectus has been reported. Tool-making artifacts from
the Palaeolithic period have been found in present-day North Hamgyong, South
P'yongan, Gyeonggi, and north and south Chungcheong Provinces of Korea., which
dates the Paleolithic Age to half a million years ago, though it may have begun
as late as 400,000 years ago or as early as 600,000-700,000 years ago. The
predominant view is that the Korean people of today are not the ethnic
descendants of these Paleolithic inhabitants. Jeulmun Pottery Period. The
earliest known Korean pottery dates back to around 8000 BC, and evidence of
Mesolithic Pit-Comb Ware culture or Yungimun Pottery is found throughout the
peninsula. An example of a Yungimun-era site is in Jeju-do. Jeulmun or Comb-
pattern Pottery is found after 7000 BC, and pottery with comb-patterns over the
whole vessel is found concentrated at sites in west-central Korea, where a
number of settlements such as Amsa-dong existed. Jeulmun pottery bears basic
design and form similarities to that of the Russian Maritime Province,
Mongolia, and the Amur and Sungari river basins of Manchuria and the Jōmon
culture in Japan. Mumun Pottery Period. Archaeological evidence demonstrates
that agricultural societies and the earliest forms of social-political
complexity emerged in the Mumun Pottery Period (c. 1500–300 BC). People in
southern Korea adopted intensive dry-field and paddy-field agriculture with a
multitude of crops in the Early Mumun Period (1500–850 BC). The first
societies led by big-men or chiefs emerged in the Middle Mumun (850–550 BC),
and the first ostentatious elite burials can be traced to the Late Mumun (c.
550–300 BC). Bronze production began in the Middle Mumun and became
increasingly important in ceremonial and political society after 700 BC.
Archeological evidence from Songguk-ri, Daepyeong, Igeum-dong, and elsewhere
indicate that the Mumun era was the first in which chiefdoms rose, expanded,
and collapsed. The increasing presence of long-distance trade, an increase in
local conflicts, and the introduction of bronze and iron metallurgy are trends
denoting the end of the Mumun around 300 BC. Gojoseon. Gojoseon was the first
Korean kingdom. The founding legend of Gojoseon, which is recorded in the
"Samguk Yusa" (1281) and other medieval Korean books, states that the country
was established in 2333 BC by Dangun, said to be descended from heaven. While
no evidence has been found that supports whatever facts may lie beneath this,
the account has played an important role in developing Korean national
identity. The first kingdom of Gojoseon with verifiable historical evidence is
Gija Joseon, which was founded in the 12th century BC by a descendant of the
Chinese Shang Dynasty's royal family named Gija, and lasted until 194 BC. The
relevant records can be found in "Records of the Grand Historian" in 91 BC,
"Book of Han" in AD 111, "Book of the Later Han" in the 5th century and
"Records of the Three Kingdoms" in the 3rd century. The existence (there is
little archeological evidence pertaining to the issue) and the role of Gija in
Korean history (whether Gija replaced the central government of an existing
state, founded the first Korean state, or was ensconced in a peripheral region)
became controversial in the 20th century. The historical Gojoseon kingdom was
first mentioned in Chinese records in the early 7th century BC, and by about
the 4th century BC it had developed to the point where its existence was well
known in China. Around 4th Century BC, its capital moved to Pyongyang. In 194
BC, King Jun fled to Jin state after a coup by Wiman, who founded Wiman Joseon.
Later the Han Dynasty defeated the Wiman Joseon and set up Four Commanderies of
Han in 108 BC. There was a significant Chinese presence in northern parts of
the Korean peninsula during the next century, and the Lelang Commandery
persisted for about 400 years until it was conquered by Goguryeo. Around 300
BC, a state called Jin arose in the southern part of the Korean peninsula. Very
little is known about Jin, but it established relations with Han China and
exported artifacts to the Yayoi of Japan. Around 100 BC, Jin evolved into the
Samhan confederacies. Many smaller states sprang from the former territory of
Gojoseon such as Buyeo, Okjeo, Dongye, Goguryeo and Baekje. The Three Kingdoms
refer to Goguryeo, Baekje, and Silla, although Buyeo and the Gaya confederacy
existed into the 5th and 6th centuries respectively. Metallurgy. The Bronze Age
is often held to have begun around 900-800 BC in Korea, though the transition
to the Bronze Age may have begun as far back as 2300 BC. Bronze daggers,
mirrors, and weaponry have been found, as well as evidence of walled-town
polities. Rice, red beans, soybeans and millet were cultivated, and rectangular
pit-houses and increasingly larger dolmen burial sites are found throughout the
peninsula. Contemporaneous records suggest that Gojoseon transitioned from a
feudal federation of walled cities into a centralised kingdom at least before
the 4th century BC. It is believed that by the 4th century BC, iron culture was
developing in Korea as the warring states of China pushed refugees east and
south. Proto–Three Kingdoms. The Proto–Three Kingdoms period, sometimes
called the Several States Period (열국시대), is the time before the rise of
the Three Kingdoms of Korea, which included Goguryeo, Silla, and Baekje, and
occurred after the fall of Gojoseon. This time period consisted of numerous
states that sprang up from the former territories of Gojoseon. Among these
states, the largest and most influential were Dongbuyeo and Bukbuyeo. Buyeo and
other Northern states. After the fall of Gojoseon, Buyeo arose in today's North
Korea and southern Manchuria, from about the 2nd century BC to 494. Its
remnants were absorbed by Goguryeo in 494, and both Goguryeo and Baekje, two of
the Three Kingdoms of Korea, considered themselves its successor. Although
records are sparse and contradictory, it is thought that in 86 BC, Dongbuyeo
(East Buyeo) branched out, after which the original Buyeo is sometimes referred
to as Bukbuyeo (North Buyeo). Jolbon Buyeo was the predecessor to Goguryeo, and
in 538, Baekje renamed itself "Nambuyeo" (South Buyeo). Okjeo was a tribal
state that was located in the northern Korean Peninsula, and was established
after the fall of Gojoseon. Okjeo had been a part of Gojoseon before its fall.
It never became a fully developed kingdom due to the intervention of its
neighboring kingdoms. Okjeo became a tributary of Goguryeo, and was eventually
annexed into Goguryeo by Gwanggaeto Taewang in the 5th century. Dongye was
another small kingdom that was situated in the northern Korean Peninsula.
Dongye bordered Okjeo, and the two kingdoms faced the same fate of becoming
tributaries of the growing empire of Goguryeo. Dongye was also a former part of
Gojoseon before its fall. Samhan. Sam han (삼한, 三韓) refers to the three
confederacies of Mahan, Jinhan, and Byeonhan. The Samhan were located in the
southern region of the Korean Peninsula. The Samhan countries were strictly
governed by law, with religion playing an important role. Mahan was the
largest, consisting of 54 states, and assumed political, economic, and cultural
dominance. Byeonhan and Jinhan both consisted of 12 states, bringing a total of
78 states within the Samhan. The Samhan were eventually conquered by Baekje,
Silla, and Gaya in the 4th century. Three Kingdoms Era. Goguryeo. Goguryeo was
founded in 37 BC by Jumong (posthumous name Dongmyeongseong). Later, King Taejo
centralized the government. Goguryeo was the first Korean kingdom to adopt
Buddhism as the state religion in 372, in King Sosurim's reign. Goguryeo
reached its zenith in the 5th century, when King Gwanggaeto the Great and his
son, King Jangsu, expanded the country into almost all of Manchuria and part of
inner Mongolia, and took the present-day Seoul from Baekje. Gwanggaeto and
Jangsu subdued Baekje and Silla during their times. Goguryeo later fought and
defeated massive Chinese invasions in the Goguryeo-Sui War of 598 – 614,
which contributed to Sui's fall, and continued to repel the Tang dynasty under
several generals including Yeon Gaesomun and Yang Manchun (see Goguryeo–Tang
War). However, numerous wars with China exhausted Goguryeo and it fell into a
weak state. After internal power struggles, it was conquered by allied Silla-
Tang forces in 668. Baekje. Baekje's foundation by King Onjo in 18 BC as stated
in the Samguk Sagi, followed those of Goguryeo and Silla. The Sanguo Zhi
mentions Baekje as a member of the Mahan confederacy in the Han River basin
(near present-day Seoul). It expanded into the southwest (Chungcheong and
Jeolla provinces) of the peninsula and became a significant political and
military power. In the process, Baekje came into fierce confrontation with
Goguryeo and the Chinese commanderies in the vicinity of its territorial
ambitions. At its peak in the 4th century in the reign of King Geunchogo, it
had absorbed all of the Mahan states and subjugated most of the western Korean
peninsula (including the modern provinces of Gyeonggi, Chungcheong, and Jeolla,
as well as part of Hwanghae and Gangwon) to a centralized government. Baekje
acquired Chinese culture and technology through contacts with the Southern
Dynasties during the expansion of its territory. Baekje played a fundamental
role in transmitting cultural developments, such as Chinese characters,
Buddhism, iron-making, advanced pottery, and ceremonial burial into ancient
Japan. Other aspects of culture were also transmitted when the Baekje court
retreated to Japan after Baekje was conquered. Baekje was defeated by a
coalition of Silla and Tang Dynasty forces in 660. Silla. According to legend,
the kingdom Silla began with the unification of six chiefdoms of the Jinhan
confederacy by Bak Hyeokgeose in 57 BC, in the southeastern area of Korea. Its
territory included the present-day port city of Busan, and Silla later emerged
as a sea power responsible for destroying Japanese pirates, especially during
the Unified Silla period. Silla artifacts, including unique gold metalwork,
show influence from the northern nomadic steppes, with less Chinese influence
than are shown by Goguryeo and Baekje. Silla expanded rapidly by occupying the
Nakdong River basin and uniting the city-states. By the 2nd century, Silla was
a large state, occupying and influencing nearby city states. Silla gained
further power when it annexed the Gaya confederacy in 562. Silla often faced
pressure from Gougryeo, Baekje and Japan, and at various times allied and
warred with Baekje and Goguryeo. In 660, King Muyeol of Silla ordered his
armies to attack Baekje. General Kim Yu-shin, aided by Tang forces, conquered
Baekje. In 661, Silla and Tang moved on Goguryeo but were repelled. King Munmu,
son of Muyeol and nephew of Kim, launched another campaign in 667 and Goguryeo
fell in the following year. Gaya. Gaya was a confederacy of small kingdoms in
the Nakdong River valley of southern Korea, growing out of the Byeonhan
confederacy of the Samhan period. Gaya's plains were rich in iron, so export of
iron tools was possible and agriculture flourished. In the early centuries, the
Confederacy was led by Geumgwan Gaya in the Gimhae region. However, its leading
power changed to Daegaya in the Goryeong region after the 5th century.
Constantly engaged in war with the three kingdoms surrounding it, Gaya was not
developed to form a unified state, and was ultimately absorbed into Silla in
562. North and South States. The term North-South States refers to Unified
Silla and Balhae, during the time when Silla controlled the majority of the
Korean peninsula while Balhae expanded into Manchuria. During this time,
culture and technology significantly advanced, especially in Unified Silla.
Unified Silla (Later Silla). After the unification wars, the Tang Dynasty
established outposts in the former Goguryeo, and began to establish and
administer communities in Baekje. Silla attacked Tang forces in Baekje and
northern Korea in 671. Tang then invaded Silla in 674 but Silla drove the Tang
forces out of the peninsula by 676 to achieve unification of most of the Korean
peninsula. Unified Silla was a time when Korean arts flourished dramatically
and Buddhism became a large part of culture. Buddhist monasteries such as the
World Heritage Sites Bulguksa temple and Seokguram Grotto are examples of
advanced Korean architecture and Buddhist influence. Other state-sponsored art
and architecture from this period include Hwangnyongsa Temple and Bunhwangsa
Temple. Silla began to experience political troubles in late 8th century. This
severely weakened Silla and soon thereafter, descendants of the former Baekje
established Hubaekje. In the north, rebels revived Goguryeo, beginning the
Later Three Kingdoms period. Unified Silla lasted for 267 years until King
Gyeongsun surrendered the country to Goryeo in 935, after 992 years and 56
monarchs. Balhae. Balhae was founded only thirty years after Goguryeo had
fallen. It was founded in the northern part of former lands of Goguryeo by Dae
Joyeong, a former Goguryeo general. Balhae controlled the northern areas of the
Korean Peninsula, much of Manchuria (though it didn't occupy Liaodong peninsula
for much of history), and expanded into present-day Russian Primorsky Krai.
Balhae styled itself as Goguryeo's successor state. It also adapted the culture
of Tang Dynasty, such as the government structure and geopolitical system. In a
time of relative peace and stability in the region, Balhae flourished,
especially during the reigns of the third Emperor Mun (r. 737–793) and
Emperor Seon. However, Balhae was severely weakened by the 10th century, and
the Khitan Liao Dynasty conquered Balhae in 926. Tens of thousands of refugees,
including Dae Gwang-hyeon, the last Crown Prince, emigrated to Goryeo. No
historical records from Balhae have survived, and the Liao left no histories of
Balhae. While Goryeo absorbed some Balhae territory and received Balhae
refugees, it compiled no known histories of Balhae either. The Samguk Sagi
("History of the Three Kingdoms"), for instance, includes passages on Balhae,
but does not include a dynastic history of Balhae. The 18th century Joseon
dynasty historian Yu Deukgong advocated the proper study of Balhae as part of
Korean history, and coined the term "North and South States Period" to refer to
this era. Later Three Kingdoms. The Later Three Kingdoms (892 – 936 CE)
consisted of Silla, Hubaekje ("Later Baekje"), and Taebong (also known as
Hugoguryeo, "Later Goguryeo"). The latter two, established as Unified Silla
declined in power, claimed to be heirs to Baekje and Goguryeo. Taebong (Later
Goguryeo) was originally led by Gung Ye, a Buddhist monk who founded Later
Goguryeo. The unpopular Gung Ye was deposed by Wang Geon in 918. Wang Geon was
popular with his people, and he decided to unite the entire peninsula under one
government. He attacked Later Baekje in 934 and received the surrender of Silla
in the following year. In 936, Goryeo conquered Hubaekje. Goryeo. Goryeo was
founded in 918 AD and became the ruling dynasty of Korea by 936. "Goryeo" was
named as Wang Geon deemed the nation as a successor of Goguryeo. The dynasty
lasted until 1392, and it is the source of the English name "Korea." During
this period laws were codified, and a civil service system was introduced.
Buddhism flourished, and spread throughout the peninsula. The development of
celadon pottery flourished in the 12th and 13th century. The publication of
Tripitaka Koreana onto 81,258 wooden blocks and the invention of movable-metal-
type printing press attest to Goryeo's cultural achievements. In 1231 the
Mongols began their campaigns against Korea and after 25 years of struggle,
Goryeo relented by signing a treaty with the Mongols. For the following 80
years Goryeo survived as a tributary ally of the Mongol-ruled Yuan Dynasty in
China. In the 1350s, the Yuan Dynasty declined rapidly due to internal
struggles, enabling King Gongmin to reform the Goryeo government. Gongmin had
various problems that needed to be dealt with, including the removal of pro-
Mongol aristocrats and military officials, the question of land holding, and
quelling the growing animosity between the Buddhists and Confucian scholars.
The Goryeo dynasty would last until 1392. Taejo of Joseon, the founder of the
Joseon Dynasty, took power in a coup in 1388 and after serving as a power
behind the throne for two monarchs, established the Joseon Dynasty in 1392.
Joseon. Political history. In 1392, the general Yi Seong-gye, later known as
Taejo, established the Joseon Dynasty (1392–1897), named in honor of the
ancient kingdom Gojoseon and based on idealistic Confucianism-based ideology.
Taejo moved the capital to Hanyang (modern-day Seoul) and built Gyeongbokgung
palace. In 1394 he adopted Neo-Confucianism as the country's official religion,
and pursued the creation of a strong bureaucratic state. His son and grandson,
King Taejong and King Sejong the Great, implemented numerous administrative,
social, and economical reforms and established royal authority in the early
years of the dynasty. Internal conflicts within the royal court, civil unrest
and other political struggles plagued the nation in the years that followed,
worsened by the Japanese invasion of Korea between 1592 and 1598. Toyotomi
Hideyoshi marshalled his forces and tried to invade the Asian continent through
Korea, but was eventually repelled by righteous armies, Korean Army and Navy,
and assistance from Ming China. This war also saw the rise of the career of
Admiral Yi Sun-sin with the "turtle ship". As Joseon was striving to rebuild
itself after the war, it suffered from the invasions by the Manchu in 1627 and
1636. Different views regarding foreign policy divided the royal court, and
ascensions to the throne during that period were decided after much political
conflict and struggle. A period of peace followed in the 18th century during
the years of King Yeongjo and King Jeongjo, who led a new renaissance of the
Joseon dynasty, with fundamental reforms to ease the political tension between
the Confucian scholars, who held high positions. However, corruption in
government and social unrest prevailed in the years thereafter, causing
numerous civil uprisings and revolts. The government made sweeping reforms in
the late 19th century, but adhered to a strict isolationist policy, earning
Joseon the nickname "Hermit Kingdom". The policy had been established primarily
for protection against Western imperialism, but before long Joseon was forced
to open trade, beginning an era leading into Japanese colonial rule. Culture
and society. Joseon's culture was based on the philosophy of Neo-Confucianism,
which emphasizes morality, righteousness, and practical ethics. Wide interest
in scholarly study resulted in the establishment of private academies and
educational institutions. Many documents were written about history, geography,
medicine, and Confucian principles. The arts flourished in painting,
calligraphy, music, dance, and ceramics. The most notable cultural event of
this era is the promulgation of the Korean alphabet "Hangul" by King Sejong the
Great in 1446. This period also saw various other cultural, scientific and
technological advances. During Joseon, a social hierarchy system existed that
greatly affected Korea's social development. The king and the royal family were
atop the hereditary system, with the next tier being a class of civil or
military officials and land owners known as "yangban", who worked for the
government and lived off the efforts of tenant farmers and slaves. A middle
class, "jungin", were technical specialists such as scribes, medical officers,
technicians in science-related fields, artists and musicians. Commoners, i.e.
peasants, constituted the largest class in Joseon. They had obligations to pay
taxes, provide labor, and serve in the military. By paying land taxes to the
state, they were allowed to cultivate land and farm. The lowest class included
tenant farmers, slaves, entertainers, craftsmen, prostitutes, laborers,
shamans, vagabonds, outcasts, and criminals. Although slave status was
hereditary, they could be sold or freed at officially set prices, and the
mistreatment of slaves was forbidden. This "yangban" focused system started to
change in the late 17th century as political, economic and social changes came
into place. By the 19th century, new commercial groups emerged, and the active
social mobility caused the "yangban" class to expand, resulting in the
weakening of the old class system. The Joseon government ordered the freedom of
government slaves in 1801. The class system of Joseon was completely banned in
1894. Foreign invasions. Joseon dealt with a pair of Japanese invasions from
1592 to 1598 ("Imjin War" or the "Seven Years war"). Prior to the war, Korea
sent two ambassadors to scout for signs of Japan's intentions of invading
Korea. However, they came back with 2 different reports, and while the
politicians split into sides, little proactive measures were taken. This
conflict brought prominence to Admiral Yi Sun-sin as he contributed to
eventually repelling the Japanese forces with the innovative use of his
invention, the turtle ship, a massive, yet swift, ramming/cannon ship fitted
with iron spikes and, according to some sources, an iron-plated deck). The use
of the hwacha was also highly effective in repelling the Japanese invaders from
the land. Subsequently, Korea was invaded by the Manchus in 1627 and again in
1636, after which the Joseon dynasty recognized the suzerainty of the Qing
Empire. During the 19th century, Joseon tried to control foreign influence by
closing the borders to all nations but China. In 1853 the USS South America, an
American gunboat, visited Busan for 10 days and had amiable contact with local
officials. Several Americans shipwrecked on Korea in 1855 and 1865 were also
treated well and sent to China for repatriation. The Joseon court was aware of
the foreign invasions and treaties involving Qing China, as well as the First
and Second Opium Wars, and followed a cautious policy of slow exchange with the
West. In 1866, reacting to greater numbers of Korean converts to Catholicism
despite several waves of persecutions, the Joseon court clamped down on them,
massacring French Catholic missionaries and Korean converts alike. Later in the
year France invaded and occupied portions of Ganghwa Island. The Korean army
lost heavily, but the French abandoned the island. The "General Sherman", a
American-owned armed merchant marine sidewheel schooner, attempted to open
Korea to trade in 1866. After an initial miscommunication, the ship sailed
upriver and became stranded near Pyongyang. After being ordered to leave by the
Korean officials, the American crewmen killed four Korean inhabitants,
kidnapped a military officer and engaged in sporadic fighting that continued
for four days. After two efforts to destroy the ship failed, she was finally
set aflame by Korean fireships laden with explosives. In response, the United
States confronted Korea militarily in 1871, killing 243 Koreans in Ganghwa
island before withdrawing. This incident is called the Sinmiyangyo in Korea.
Five years later, the reclusive Korea signed a trade treaty with Japan, and in
1882 signed a treaty with the United States, ending centuries of isolationism.
In 1885, United Kingdom occupied Geomun Island, and withdrew in 1887. After a
rapidly modernizing Japan forced Korea to open its ports in 1876, it
successfully challenged the Qing Empire in the Sino-Japanese War (1894–1895).
In 1895, the Japanese were involved in the murder of Empress Myeongseong, who
had sought Russian help, and the Russians were forced to retreat from Korea for
the time. Korean Empire. As a result of the Sino-Japanese War (1894–1895),
the 1895 Treaty of Shimonoseki was concluded between China and Japan. It
stipulated the abolition of traditional relationships Korea had with China, the
latter of which recognised the complete independence of Joseon and repudiated
the former's political influence over the latter. In 1897, Joseon was renamed
the Korean Empire, and King Gojong became Emperor Gojong. The imperial
government aimed to become a strong and independent nation by implementing
domestic reforms; strengthening military forces, developing commerce and
industry, and surveying land ownership. Organizations like the Independence
Club also rallied to assert the rights of the Joseon people, but clashed with
the government which proclaimed absolute monarchy and power. Russian influence
was strong in the Empire until being defeated by Japan in the Russo-Japanese
War (1904–1905). Korea effectively became a protectorate of Japan on 17
November 1905, the 1905 Protectorate Treaty having been promulgated without
Emperor Gojong's required seal or commission. Following the signing of the
treaty, many intellectuals and scholars set up various organizations and
associations, embarking on movements for independence. In 1907, Gojong was
forced to abdicate after Japan learned that he sent secret envoys to the Second
Hague Conventions to protest against the protectorate treaty, leading to the
accession of Gojong's son, Emperor Sunjong. In 1909, independence activist An
Jung-geun assassinated Itō Hirobumi, the Resident-General of Korea, for Ito's
intrusions on the Korean politics. This prompted the Japanese to ban all
political organisations and proceed with plans for annexation. Japanese rule.
In 1910 Japan effectively annexed Korea by the Japan–Korea Annexation Treaty,
which along with all other prior treaties between Korea and Japan was confirmed
to be null and void in 1965. While Japan asserts that the treaty was concluded
legally, this argument is generally not accepted in Korea because it was not
signed by the Emperor of Korea as required and violated international
convention on external pressures regarding treaties. Korea was controlled by
Japan under a Governor-General of Korea until Japan's unconditional surrender
to the Allied Forces on 15 August 1945, with "de jure" sovereignty deemed to
have passed from the Joseon Dynasty to the Provisional Government of the
Republic of Korea. After the annexation, Japan set out to repress Korean
traditions and culture, develop and implement policies primarily for the
Japanese benefit. European-styled transport and communication networks were
established across the nation in order to extract the resources and labor of
the Korean people; these networks were mostly destroyed later during the Korean
War. The banking system was consolidated and the Korean currency abolished. The
Japanese removed the Joseon hierarchy, destroyed much of the Gyeongbokgung
palace and replaced it with the Government office building. After Emperor
Gojong died in January 1919, with a rumor of poisoning, independence rallies
against Japanese invaders took place nationwide on 1 March 1919 (the March 1st
Movement). This movement was suppressed by force and about 7,000 were killed by
Japanese soldiers and police. An estimated 2 million people took part in
peaceful, pro-liberation rallies, although Japanese records claim participation
of less than half million. This movement was partly inspired by United States
President Woodrow Wilson's speech of 1919, declaring support for right of self-
determination and an end to colonial rule for Europeans. No comment was made by
Wilson on Korean independence, perhaps as a pro-Japan faction in the USA sought
trade inroads into China through the Korean peninsula. The Provisional
Government of the Republic of Korea was established in Shanghai, China, in the
aftermath of March 1 Movement, which coordinated the Liberation effort and
resistance against Japanese control. Some of the achievements of the
Provisional Government include the Battle of Chingshanli of 1920 and the ambush
of Japanese Military Leadership in China in 1932. The Provisional Government is
considered to be the de jure government of the Korean people between 1919 and
1948, and its legitimacy is enshrined in the preamble to the constitution of
the Republic of Korea. Continued anti-Japanese uprisings, such as the
nationwide uprising of students in November 1929, led to the strengthening of
military rule in 1931. After the outbreaks of the Sino-Japanese War in 1937 and
World War II Japan attempted to exterminate Korea as a nation. The continuance
of Korean culture itself began to be illegal. Worship at Japanese Shinto
shrines was made compulsory. The school curriculum was radically modified to
eliminate teaching in the Korean language and history. The Korean language was
banned and Koreans were forced to adopt Japanese names, and newspapers were
prohibited from publishing in Korean. Numerous Korean cultural artifacts were
destroyed or taken to Japan. According to an investigation by the South Korean
government, 75,311 cultural assets were taken from Korea. Some Koreans left the
Korean peninsula to Manchuria and Primorsky Krai. Koreans in Manchuria formed
resistance groups known as Dongnipgun (Liberation Army) which would travel in
and out of the Korean-Chinese boundary, fighting guerrilla warfare with the
Japanese forces. Some of them would come together in 1940s as Korean Liberation
Army which took part in allied action in China and parts of South East Asia.
Tens of thousands of Koreans also joined the Peoples Liberation Army and the
National Revolutionary Army. During World War II, Koreans at home were forced
to support the Japanese war effort. Tens of thousands of men were conscripted
into Japan's military. Around 200,000 girls and women, mostly from Korea and
China, were conscripted into sexual slavery, with the euphemism "comfort
women". Previous Korean "comfort women" are still protesting against the
Japanese Government for compensation of their sufferings. The division of
Korea. At the Cairo Conference on November 22, 1943, it was agreed that "in due
course Korea shall become free and independent”; at a later meeting in Yalta
in February 1945, it was agreed to establish a four-power trusteeship over
Korea. On August 9, 1945, Soviet tanks entered northern Korea from Siberia,
meeting little resistance. Japan surrendered to the Allied Forces on August 15,
1945. The unconditional surrender of Japan, combined with fundamental shifts in
global politics and ideology, led to the division of Korea into two occupation
zones effectively starting on September 8, 1945, with the United States
administering the southern half of the peninsula and the Soviet Union taking
over the area north of the 38th parallel. The Provisional Government was
ignored, mainly due to American perception that it was too communist-aligned.
This division was meant to be temporary and was first intended to return a
unified Korea back to its people after the United States, United Kingdom,
Soviet Union, and Republic of China could arrange a single government. In
December 1945, a conference convened in Moscow to discuss the future of Korea.
A 5-year trusteeship was discussed, and a joint Soviet-American commission was
established. The commission met intermittently in Seoul but deadlocked over the
issue of establishing a national government. In September 1947, with no
solution in sight, the United States submitted the Korean question to the
United Nations General Assembly. Initial hopes for a unified, independent Korea
quickly evaporated as the politics of the Cold War and opposition to the
trusteeship plan from anti-communists resulted in the 1948 establishment of two
separate nations with diametrically opposed political, economic, and social
systems. On December 12, 1948, the General Assembly of the United Nations
recognised the Republic of Korea as the sole legal government of Korea. In June
25, 1950 the Korean War broke out when North Korea breached the 38th parallel
line to invade the South, ending any hope of a peaceful reunification for the
time being. After the war, the 1954 Geneva conference failed to adopt a
solution for a unified Korea. Beginning with Syngman Rhee, a series of
oppressive autocratic governments took power in South Korea with American
support and influence. The country eventually transitioned to become a market-
oriented democracy in 1987 largely due to popular demand for reform, and became
a developed economy by the 2000s. Due to the Soviet influence, North Korea
established a communist government with a hereditary succession of leadership,
with ties to China and Russia. "See History of North Korea and History of South
Korea for the post-war period."
