Antiques restoration Antiques restoration refers to either the practice of
"restoration"- restoring an antique or work of art to a like-new condition (or
what might be perceived by a viewer or potential buyer as like-new), or
"conservation"- the practice of preserving an antique or work of art against
further deterioration. Restoration. Restoration can be as simple as light
cleaning to remove disfiguring dirt or grime, such as on the surface of a
painting, or it may include near complete rebuilding or replacement, as might
be the case with old automobiles or furniture. Often done in preparation for
sale, or by a collector upon acquiring a new piece, the main goal of
restoration is to "restore" the original appearance or functionality of a
piece. There is a lot of difference between restoring and repairing. You may
achieve functionality with a repair, but restoring an item properly is an art-
form. Finishes might/may be stripped and redone, but it is essential that the
original patination is retained, if possible. Stripping is only done as a last
resort, especially with antique furniture. Engines might be rebuilt with new
parts as necessary, or holes in a silver pot might/may be patched. While some
of these practices are frowned on by many museums, scholars, and other experts,
for many people there is little value in an antique that is unusable or not
able to be displayed. Poor restoration is the bane of a trained restorer.
Working on someone else's bad repair is the worst possible situation. Often
with antique restoration, there are also other issues as well. For example,
some collectors value "patina", or also want an item to still reflect an
aesthetic that shows its age- in this respect, an "over restored" item can
actually take away from its value than if nothing has been done to the item at
all. Therefore, restoration should always be left to professionals who are
sensitive to all of the issues- insuring that a piece retains or increases its
value after restoration. Restorers are often trained craftspersons, such as
furniture makers, mechanics, or metalsmiths. Some have years of experience in
their fields, whereas others are self-taught volunteers. Many of the antique
aircraft around the United States are restored by trained aircraft engineers
assisted by volunteers, some of whom are men who flew those same aircraft years
ago. "French Polishing" was the industry standard in Europe during the 18th and
19th centuries, pushed aside by the efficient advantage of modern methods in
the Industrial Revolution. Lacquers and spray systems replaced the original
French polish finish, which is impractical for mass furniture production due to
the labor-intensive process of application. As the desire for antiques was not
idle, neither was the need for them to be appropriately restored; thus, the
trade has been kept alive by a thread. Conservation. In contrast, conservation
typically aims to preserve the remaining material as being worthy or valuable
on its own without necessarily being functional or looking new. There are
several criteria for what work is necessary and how far to take any work
performed. Chiefly, is the object (book, painting, car, statue, etc.) actively
deteriorating? Slowing or stopping deterioration and eliminating or mitigating
the root cause is the first task of the conservator. To this end, conservators
are usually trained in the science of materials and chemistry, as well as art
history, archaeology, and other disciplines related to their areas of
expertise.
