Aragonese Crusade The Aragonese Crusade or Crusade of Aragon, a part of the
larger War of the Sicilian Vespers, was declared by Pope Martin IV against the
King of Aragon, Peter III the Great, in 1284 and 1285. Because of the recent
conquest of Sicily by Peter, the Pope declared a crusade against him and
officially deposed him as king, on the grounds that Sicily was a papal fief:
Peter's grandfather and namesake, Peter II, had surrendered the kingdom as a
fief to the Holy See. Martin bestowed it on Charles, Count of Valois, son of
the French king, Philip III, and nephew of Peter III. The conflict quickly
became a kind of civil war, as Peter's brother, King James II of Majorca,
joined the French. James had also inherited the County of Roussillon and thus
stood between the dominions of the French and Aragonese monarchs. Peter had
opposed James' inheritance as a younger son and reaped the consequence of such
rivalry in the crusade. In 1284, the first French armies under Philip and
Charles entered Roussillon. They included 16,000 cavalry, 17,000 crossbowmen,
and 100,000 infantry, along with 100 ships in south French ports. Though they
had James' support, the local populace rose against them. The city of Elne was
valiantly defended by the so-called "Bâtard de Roussillon" (Bastard of
Roussillon), the illegitimate son of Nuño Sánchez, late count of Roussillon
(1212–1242). Eventually he was overcome and the cathedral was burnt, despite
the presence of papal legates, while the population was massacred, all save the
"Bâtard". He succeeded in negotiating his surrender and accompanied the
advancing royal forces as a prisoner. In 1285, Philip the Bold entrenched
himself before Girona in an attempt to besiege it. The resistance was strong,
but the city was taken. Charles was crowned there, but without an actual crown.
On 28 April, Cardinal Jean Cholet placed his own hat on the count's head. For
this, Charles was derisively but not unaffectionately nicknamed "roi du
chapeau" ("king of the hat"). The French soon experienced a reversal, however,
at the hands of Peter III's admiral, Roger de Lauria. The French fleet was
defeated and destroyed at the Battle of Les Formigues. As well, the French camp
was hit hard by an epidemic of dysentery. Philip himself was afflicted. The
heir to the French throne, Philip, opened negotiations with Peter for free
passage for the royal family through the Pyrenees. But the troops were not
offered such passage and were decimated at the Battle of the Col de Panissars.
The king of France himself died at Perpignan, the capital of James of Majorca,
and was buried in Narbonne. Peter did not long survive him. Historian H. J.
Chaytor described the Aragonese Crusade as "perhaps the most unjust,
unnecessary and calamitous enterprise ever undertaken by the Capetian
monarchy." W. C. Jordan has blamed it for the attitude the young Philip took
towards papal interference in French foreign policy upon his succession: a view
with long-reaching consequences for Europe. The crusade's legacy to France was
slight, but Majorca was devastated as an independent polity. Peter's son
Alfonso III annexed Majorca, Ibiza, and Minorca in the following years. In
1295, the Treaty of Anagni returned the islands to James and the Treaty of
Tarascon of 1291 officially restored Aragon to Alfonso and lifted the ban of
the church.
