Assyria Assyria or Athura (Aramaic for Assyria) was a Semitic Akkadian kingdom,
extant as a nation state from the late 25th or early‚Äì24th century BC to 608
BC. Assyria was centered on the Upper Tigris river, in northern Mesopotamia
(present day northern Iraq). The Assyrians came to rule powerful empires a
number of times through history. It was named for its original capital, the
ancient city of Assur/Ashur (Akkadian: '; Aramaic: '; Hebrew: '; Arabic: ').
Assyria was also sometimes known as Subartu, and after its fall, from 605 BC
through to the late seventh century AD variously as Athura, "Syria" (Greek),
"Assyria" (Latin) and Assuristan. The term "Assyria" can also refer to the
geographic region or heartland where Assyria, its empires and the Assyrian
people were centred. The modern Assyrian Christian minority in northern Iraq,
north east Syria, south east Turkey and north west Iran are the descendants of
the ancient Assyrians (see Assyrian continuity). Assyria evolved originally as
one of a number of Akkadian kingdoms in Mesopotamia. From the late 24th Century
BC Assyrian kings would certainly have been regional leaders only, and subject
to Sargon of Akkad who united all the Akkadian and Sumerian speaking peoples of
Mesopotamia under the Akkadian Empire which lasted from 2334 BC to 2154 BC.
After the fall of the Akkadian Empire circa 2154 BC, and the succeeding
Sumerian Third Dynasty of Ur, Mesopotamia eventually coalesced into just two
separate nations; Assyria in the north, and some century and a half later,
Babylonia in the south. In the Old Assyrian period of the Early Bronze Age,
Assyria had been a kingdom of northern Mesopotamia, initially competing with
their fellow Sumero-Akkadian states in southern Mesopotamia for dominance of
the region, and also with the Hattians and Hurrians to the north in Asia Minor,
the Gutians to the east in the Zagros Mountains and the Eblaites and later
Amorites in the Levant to the west. During the 20th century BC, it established
colonies in Asia Minor, and under king Ilushuma it asserted itself over
southern Mesopotamia. From the late 19th century BC Assyria came into conflict
with the newly created state of Babylonia which eventually eclipsed the older
Sumero-Akkadian states in the south. Assyria experienced fluctuating fortunes
in the Middle Assyrian period. Assyria had a period of empire under Shamshi-
Adad I and Ishme-Dagan in the 19th and 18th centuries BC. Following this it
found itself under short periods of Babylonian and Mitanni-Hurrian domination
in the 18th and 15th centuries BC respectively, and another period of great
power with the rise of the Middle Assyrian Empire (from 1365 BC to 1075 BC)
that included the riegns of great kings such as Ashur-uballit I, Arik-den-ili,
Tukulti-Ninurta I and Tiglath-Pileser I. During this period Assyria overthrew
the Mitanni and eclipsed both the Hittite Empire and Egyptian Empire in the
Near East. Beginning with the campaigns of Adad-nirari II from 911 BC, it again
became a great power over the next 3 centuries, overthrowing the Twenty-fifth
dynasty of Egypt and conquering Egypt, Babylonia, Elam, Urartu/Armenia, Media,
Persia, Mannea, Gutium, Phoenicia/Canaan, Aramea (Syria), Arabia, Israel,
Judah, Edom, Moab, Samarra, Cilicia, Cyprus, Chaldea, Nabatea, Commagene,
Dilmun and the Hurrians, Sutu and Neo-Hittites, driving the Ethiopians and
Nubians from Egypt, defeating the Cimmerians and Scythians and exacting tribute
from Phrygia, Magan and Punt among others. After its fall, (between 612 BC and
605 BC), Assyria remained a province and Geo-political entity under the
Babylonian, Median, Achaemenid, Seleucid, Parthian, Roman and Sassanid empires
until the Arab Islamic invasion and conquest of Mesopotamia in the mid 7th
century AD, when it was finally dissolved. Early history. In prehistoric times
the region was home to a Neanderthal culture such as has been found at the
Shanidar Cave. The earliest Neolithic sites in Assyria were the Jarmo culture
circa 7100 BC and Tell Hassuna, the centre of the "Hassuna culture", circa 6000
BC. During the 3rd millennium BC, there developed a very intimate cultural
symbiosis between the Sumerians and the Semitic Akkadians throughout
Mesopotamia, which included widespread . The influence of Sumerian (which was a
language isolate and thus not related to any other language) on Akkadian (and
vice versa) is evident in all areas, from lexical borrowing on a massive scale,
to syntactic, morphological, and phonological convergence. This has prompted
scholars to refer to Sumerian and Akkadian in the third millennium as a
"sprachbund". Akkadian gradually replaced Sumerian as the spoken language of
Mesopotamia somewhere after the turn of the 3rd and the 2nd millennium BC (the
exact dating being a matter of debate), but Sumerian continued to be used as a
sacred, ceremonial, literary and scientific language in Mesopotamia until the
1st century AD. The city of Assur (Ashur) existed since at least before the
middle of the third millennium BC (circa 2600 - 2500 BC), although it appears
to have been a Sumerian ruled administrative centre at this time rather than an
independent state. Assyrian kings are attested as far back as the late 25th to
early 24th Century BC, beginning with Tudiya. During the Akkadian Empire (2334-
2154 BC) the Assyrians, like all the Akkadian peoples, were subject to the
dynasty of Akkad. The Akkadian Empire of Sargon the Great, which united all the
Akkadian speaking Semites, including the Assyrians, claimed to encompass the
surrounding "four quarters"; the regions north of the seat of the empire in
central Mesopotamia had been known as Subartu. The name Azuhinum in Akkadian
records also seems to refer to Assyria proper. During the Akkadian Empire, the
city of Ashur was a regional administrative center of the Empire, implicated by
Nuzi tablets, subject to their fellow Akkadian Sargon and his successors.
However, towards the end of the reign of Sargon the Great, the Assyrian faction
rebelled against him; "the tribes of Assyria of the upper country‚Äîin their
turn attacked, but they submitted to his arms, and Sargon settled their
habitations, and he smote them grievously". The Akkadian Empire was destroyed
by economic decline, internal strife and barbarian Gutian people in 2154 BC.
The rulers of Assyria during the period between 2154 BC and 2112 BC may have
once again been fully independent as the Gutians are only known to have
administered southern Mesopotamia, however there is no information from Assyria
bar the king list for this period. Assyria became part of the Empire of the
Sumerian 3rd dynasty of Ur founded in 2112 BC, and appears to have remained
lagely under Sumerian domination until the mid 21st century BC. According to
some Judaeo-Christian theological traditions, the city of Ashur (also spelled
Assur or A≈°≈°ur) was founded by Ashur the son of Shem, who was deified by
later generations as the city's patron god. However, there is absolutely no
historical basis whatsoever for this tradition in the far older Mesopotamian
annals; Assyrian tradition itself lists an early Assyrian king named Ushpia as
having dedicated the first temple to the god Ashur in the city in the 21st
century BC. It is highly likely that the city was named in honour of the
Assyrian god of the same name. Classical dating. George Syncellus in his
"Chronographia" quotes a fragment from Julius Africanus which dates the
founding of Assyria to 2284 BC. The Roman historian Velleius Paterculus citing
Aemilius Sura states that Assyria was founded 1995 years before Philip V was
defeated in 197 BC (at the Battle of Cynoscephalae) by the Romans. The sum
therefore 197 + 1995 = 2192 BC for the foundation of Assyria. Diodorus Siculus
recorded another tradition from Ctesias, that dates Assyria 1306 years before
883 BC (the starting date of the reign of Ashurnasirpal II) and so the sum 883
+ 1306 = 2189 BC. The "Chronicle" of Eusebius yet provides another date for the
founding of Assyria, with the accession of Ninus, dating to 2057 BC, but the
Armenian translation of the "Chronicle" puts back this figure slightly back to
2116 BC. Another classical dating tradition found in the "Excerpta Latina
Barbari" dates the foundation of Assyria, under Belus, to 2206 BC. Old Assyrian
period. Of the early history of the kingdom of Assyria, little is positively
known. In the Assyrian King List, the earliest king recorded was Tudiya. He was
a contemporary of Ibrium of Ebla who appears to have lived in the late 25th or
early 24th century BC, according to the king list. Tudiya concluded a treaty
with Ibrium for the use of a trading post in The Levant officially controlled
by Ebla. Apart from this reference to trading activity, nothing further has yet
been discovered about Tudiya. He was succeeded by Adamu and then a further
thirteen rulers (Yangi, Suhlamu, Harharu, Mandaru, Imshu, Harshu, Didanu, Hanu,
Zuabu, Nuabu, Abazu, Belu and Azarah) about all of whom nothing is yet known.
The earliest kings such as Tudiya, who are recorded as "kings who lived in
tents" were likely to have been independent Akkadian semi nomadic pasturalist
rulers. However, these Assyrian kings became subject to the Akkadian Empire
from the late 24th century BC. These kings, who dominated the region at some
point during this period became fully urbanised and founded the "city state" of
Ashur. The first written inscriptions by 'urbanised' Assyrian kings appear in
the mid 21st century BC. Assyria then consisted of a number of city states and
small Semitic Akkadian kingdoms. The foundation of the first true urbanised
Assyrian monarchy was traditionally ascribed to Ushpia a contemporary of Ishbi-
Erra of Isin and Naplanum of Larsa. circa 2030 BC. He was succeeded in
succession by Apiashal, Sulili, Kikkiya and Akiya of whom nothing is yet known.
In approximately 1975 BC, Puzur-Ashur I (a contemporary of Shu-ilishu of Larsa
and Samium of Isin) founded a new dynasty, and his successors such as Shalim-
ahum (died 1946 BC), Ilushuma (1945- 1906 BC), Erishum I (1905- 1867 BC),
Ikunum (1867- 1860 BC), Sargon I, Naram-Sin and Puzur-Ashur II left
inscriptions regarding the building of temples to Ashur, Adad and Ishtar in
Assyria. Ilushuma in particular appears to have been a powerful king and the
dominant ruler in the region, who made many raids into southern Mesopotamia
between 1945 BC and 1906 BC, attacking the independent Sumero-Akkadian city
states of the region such as Isin, and founding colonies at the expense of the
Hattians and Hurrians in Asia Minor. The conflict between Assyria and the
states of the south was to become a pattern throughout the history of ancient
Mesopotamia, with the future rivalry between Assyria and Babylonia. However,
Babylonia did not exist at this time, but was founded in 1894 BC by an Amorite
prince named Sumuabum during the reign of Erishum I. The Amorites, a Semitic
people hailing from the north eastern Levant had overrun southern Mesopotamia
from the mid 20th century BC, deposing native Sumero-Akkadian dynasties and
setting up their own kingdoms. However, they were repelled by the Assyrian
kings of the 20th and 19th centuries BC. The main rivals to early Assyrian
kings during the 22nd, 21st and 20th centuries BC would have been the Hattians
and Hurrians to the north in Asia Minor, the Gutians to the east in the Zagros
Mountains of Iran, the Elamites to the south east in what now south central
Iran, the Amorites to the west in what is today Syria and the Sumero-Akkadian
City-States of southern Mesopotamia such as Isin, Ur and Larsa. Assyria had
extensive contact with Hattian, Hittite and Hurrian cities on the Anatolian
plateau in Asia Minor. The Assyrians established colonies in Cappadocia,
("e.g.," at Kanesh (modern K√ºltepe) from 1945 BC to 1740 BC. These colonies,
called "karum", the Akkadian word for 'port', were attached to Hattian and
Hurrian cities in Anatolia, but physically separate, and had special tax
status. They must have arisen from a long tradition of trade between Assyria
and the Anatolian cities, but no archaeological or written records show this.
The trade consisted of metal (perhaps lead or tin; the terminology here is not
entirely clear) and textiles from Assyria, that were traded for precious metals
in Anatolia. Like many city-states in Mesopotamian history, Ashur was, to a
great extent, an oligarchy rather than a monarchy. Authority was considered to
lie with "the City", and the polity had three main centres of power¬ ‚Äî an
assembly of elders, a hereditary ruler, and an eponym. The ruler presided over
the assembly and carried out its decisions. He was not referred to with the
usual Akkadian term for "king", "≈°arrum"; that was instead reserved for the
city's patron deity Assur, of whom the ruler was the high priest. The ruler
himself was only designated as "the steward of Assur" ("i≈°≈°iak Assur"), where
the term for steward is a borrowing from Sumerian "ensi(k)". The third centre
of power was the eponym ("limmum"), who gave the year his name, similarly to
the archons and consuls of Classical Antiquity. He was annually elected by lot
and was responsible for the economic administration of the city, which included
the power to detain people and confiscate property. The institution of the
eponym as well as the formula "i≈°≈°iak Assur" lingered on as ceremonial
vestiges of this early system throughout the history of the Assyrian monarchy.
Assyrian Empire of Shamshi-Adad I. In 1813 BC the native Akkadian king of
Assyria Erishum II (1819- 1813 BC) was deposed, and the throne of Assyria was
usurped by Shamshi-Adad I (1813 BC¬ ‚Äì 1791 BC) in the expansion of Semitic
Amorite tribes from the Khabur River delta. Although regarded as an Amorite by
later Assyrian tradition, Shamshi-Adad is also credited with descent from the
native ruler Ushpia in the Assyrian King List. He put his son Ishme-Dagan on
the throne of a nearby Assyrian city, Ekallatum, and maintained Assyria's
Anatolian colonies. Shamshi-Adad I then went on to conquer the kingdom of Mari
on the Euphrates putting another of his sons, Yasmah-Adad on the throne there.
Shamshi-Adad's Assyria now encompassed the whole of northern Mesopotamia and
included territory in Asia Minor and northern Syria. He himself resided in a
new capital city founded in the Khabur valley, called Shubat-Enlil. Ishme-Dagan
inherited Assyria, but Yasmah-Adad was overthrown by a new king called Zimrilim
in Mari. The new king of Mari allied himself with king Hammurabi, who had made
the recently created, and originally minor state of Babylon a major power.
Hammurabi was also an Amorite. Assyria now faced the rising power of Babylon in
the south. Ishme-Dagan responded by making an alliance with the enemies of
Babylon, and the power struggle continued without resolution for decades.
Ishme-Dagan, like his father was a great warrior, and in addition to repelling
Babylonian attacks, campaigned successfully against the Turukku and Lullubi who
had attacked the Assyrian city of Ekallatum, and against Dadusha, king of
Eshnunna and Iamhad (modern Aleppo) Assyria under Babylonian domination.
Hammurabi after first conquering Mari, Larsa and Eshnunna eventually prevailed
over Ishme-Dagan's successors, and conquered Assyria for Babylon in 1756 BC.
With Hammurabi, the various "karum" colonies in Anatolia ceased trade
activity¬ ‚Äî probably because the goods of Assyria were now being traded with
the Babylonians. The Assyrian monarchy survived, however the three Amorite
kings succeeding Ishme-Dagan; Mut-Ashkur (who was the son of Ishme-Dagan and
married to a Hurrian queen), Rimush and Asinum were vassals, dependent on the
Babylonians during the reign of Hammurabi. Assyrian dynasty restored. The short
lived Babylonian Empire quickly began to unravel upon the death of Hammurabi,
and Babylonia lost control over Assyria during the reign of Hammurabi's
successor Samsu-iluna. A period of civil war ensued after the deposition of the
Amorite vassal king of Assyria Asinum, who was a grandson of Shamshi-Adad I, by
a powerful native Akkadian vice regent named Puzur-Sin. A native king named
Ashur-dugul then seized the throne with the help of Puzur-Sin, and a period of
internal instability ensued with five further kings (Ashur-apla-idi, Nasir-Sin,
Sin-namir, Ipqi-Ishtar and Adad-salulu) all reigning in quick succession.
Babylonia seems to have been too powerless to intervene or take advantage of
this situation. Finally, a king named Adasi came to the fore circa 1720 BC and
completely freed Assyria from any pretence of Babylonian dominance. Adasi drove
the Babylonians and Amorites from Assyria during the late 18th century BC and
Babylonian power began to quickly wane in Mesopotamia as a whole, although the
Amorites would retain control over Babylonia and southern Mesopotamia until
1595 BC when they were overthrown by the Kassites, a people from the Zagros
Mountains who spoke a language isolate and were neither Semites nor Indo-
Europeans. Adasi was succeeded by Bel-bani (1700-1691 BC). Little is known of
many of the kings that followed such as; Libaya (1690-1674 BC), Sharma-Adad I
(1673-1662 BC), Iptar-Sin (1661-1650 BC), Bazaya (1649-1622 BC), Lullaya (1621-
1618 BC), Shu-Ninua (1615-1602 BC), Sharma-Adad II (1601-1599 BC), Erishum III
(1598-1586 BC), and Shamshi-Adad II (1585-1580 BC). However Assyria seems to
have been a relatively strong and stable nation, existing undisturbed by its
neighbours such as the Hatti, Hittites, Hurrians, Amorites, Babylonians or
Mitanni for well over 200 years. When Babylon fell to the Kassites in 1595 BC,
they were unable to make any inroads into Assyria, and there seems to have been
no trouble between the first Kassite ruler of Babylon, Agum II and Erishum III
of Assyria, and a treaty was signed between the two rulers. Similarly, Ashur-
nirari I (1547-1522 BC) seems not to have been troubled by the newly founded
Mitanni Empire in Asia Minor, the Hittite empire or Babylon during his 25 year
reign. Puzur-Ashur III (1521-1498 BC) proved to be a strong and energetic
ruler. He undertook much rebuilding work in Assur, the city was refortified and
the southern quarters incorporated into the main city defences. Temples to the
moon god Sin (Nanna) and the sun god Shamash were erected during his reign. He
signed a treaty with Burna-Buriash I the Kassite king of Babylon, defining the
borders of the two nations in the late 16th century BC. He was succeeded by
Enlil-nasir I (1497-1483 BC) who appears to have had an uneventful reign.
Assyria under Mitanni domination. The emergence of the Mitanni Empire in the
16th century BC did eventually lead to a period of Mitanni-Hurrian domination
in the 15th century. The Mitanni were an Indo-European people who conquered and
formed the ruling class over the indigenous Hurrians of Asia Minor/Anatolia.
The Hurrians were a Caucasoid people who spoke a language isolate and were
neither Semites nor Indo-Europeans. Some time after the death of the capable
Puzur-Ashur III in 1498 BC, Saushtatar, king of Hanilgalbat (Hurrians of
Mitanni), sacked Ashur and Assyria became a sometime vassal state. This event
is most likely to have happened during the rule of Nur-ili (1483 - 1471 BC).
The Assyrian monarchy survived, and the Mitanni influence appears to have been
only sporadic, and they appear not to have been always willing or able to
interfere in Assyrian internal affairs For example the son of Nur-ili, Ashur-
shaduni (1470 BC) was deposed by his uncle Ashur-rabi I in his first year of
rule, and similarly, Ashur-nadin-ahhe I (who had made an alliance with Egypt,
which sent him a consignment of gold) was deposed by his own brother Enlil-
nasir II in 1420 BC. Assyrian kings seemed to have been free of Mitanni
influence regarding international affairs at times also, as evidenced by the
border treaty between Ashur-bel-nisheshu (1417‚Äì1409 BC) and Karaindash of
Babylon in the late 15th century. Ashur-rim-nisheshu (1408‚Äì1401 BC) and
Ashur-nadin-ahhe II (1400‚Äì1391 BC) were the final two kings subject to the
Mitanni empire. Eriba-Adad I, a son of Ashur-bel-nisheshu, ascended the throne
in 1390 BC and the ties to Mitanni began to unravel. There are dozens of
Mesopotamian cuneiform texts from this period, with precise observations of
solar and lunar eclipses, that have been used as 'anchors' in the various
attempts to define the chronology of Babylonia and Assyria for the early second
millennium (i.e., the "high", "middle", and "low" chronologies.) Middle
Assyrian Empire¬ ‚Äî Assyrian resurgence. Scholars variously date the beginning
of the "Middle Assyrian period" to either the fall of the Old Assyrian kingdom
of Shamshi-Adad I, or to the ascension of Ashur-uballit I to the throne of
Assyria. Assyrian expansion and empire 1390 - 1076 BC. By the reign of Eriba-
Adad I (1390 BC - 1366 BC) Mitanni influence over Assyria was on the wane.
Eriba-Adad I became involved in a dynastic battle between Tushratta and his
brother Artatama II and after this his son Shuttarna II, who called himself
king of the Hurri while seeking support from the Assyrians. A pro-Hurri/Assyria
faction appeared at the royal Mitanni court. Eriba-Adad I had thus loosened
Mitanni influence over Assyria, and in turn had now made Assyria an influence
over Mitanni affairs. During the reign of Ashur-uballit I (1365 BC¬ ‚Äì 1330
BC). Assyrian pressure from the east and Hittite pressure from the north-west,
enabled Ashur-uballit I to gain the upper hand over the Mitannians, and again
make Assyria an imperial power at the expense of not only the Mitanni
themselves, but also Kassite Babylonia, the Hurrians and the Hittites; and a
time came when the Kassite king in Babylon was glad to marry Muballi·π≠at-
≈ ƒìr≈´a, the daughter of Ashur-uballit, whose letters to Akhenaten of Egypt
form part of the Amarna letters. This marriage led to disastrous results, as
the Kassite faction at court murdered the Babylonian king and placed a
pretender on the throne. Assur-uballit promptly invaded Babylonia to avenge his
son-in-law, entering Babylon, deposing the king and installing Kurigalzu II of
the royal line king there. Ashur-uballit I then attacked and defeated Mattiwaza
the Mitanni king despite attempts by the Hittite king Suppiluliumas, now
fearful of growing Assyrian power, attempting to preserve his throne with
military support. The lands of the Mitanni and Hurrians were duly appropriated
by Assyria, making it a large and powerful empire. Enlil-nirari (1329- 1308 BC)
succeeded Ashur-uballit I. He described himself as a "Great-King" ("Sharru
rab√ª") in letters to the Hittite kings. He was immediately attacked by
Kurigalzu II of Babylon who had been installed by his father, but succeeded in
defeating him, repelling Babylonian attempts to invade Assyria, counter
attacking and appropriating Babylonian territory in the process, thus further
expanding Assyria. The successor of Enlil-nirari, Arik-den-ili (c. 1307-1296
BC), consolidated Assyrian power, and successfully campaigned in the Zagros
Mountains to the east, subjugating the Lullubi and Gutians. In the Levant, he
defeated Semitic tribes of the so-called Ahlamu group. He was followed by Adad-
nirari I (1295- 1275 BC) who made Kalhu (Biblical Calah/Nimrud) his capital,
and continued expansion to the northwest, mainly at the expense of the Hittites
and Hurrians, conquering Hittite territories such as Carchemish and beyond.
Adad-nirari I made further gains to the south, annexing Babylonian territory
and forcing the Kassite rulers of Babylon into accepting a new frontier
agreement in Assyria's favour. Adad-nirari's inscriptions are more detailed
than any of his predecessors. He declares that the gods called him to war, a
statement used by most subsequent Assyrian kings. He referred to himself again
as "Sharru Rabi" ("The Great King") and conducted extensive building projects
in Ashur and the provinces. In 1274 BC Shalmaneser I ascended the throne. He
proved to be a great warrior king. During his reign he conquered the powerful
kingdom of Urartu in the Caucasus Mountains and the fierce Gutians of the
Zagros Mountains in modern Iran. He then attacked the Mitanni-Hurrians,
defeating both King Shattuara and his Hittite and Aramean allies, finally
completely destroying the Hurrian kingdom in the process. During the campaign
against the Hittites, Shattuara cut off the Assyrian army from their supply of
food and water, but the Assyrians broke free in a desperate battle, counter
attacked, and conquered and annexed what remained of the Mitanni kingdom.
Shalmaneser I installed an Assyrian prince, Ilu-ippada as ruler of Mitanni,
with Assyrian governors such as Meli-sah, installed to rule individual cities.
The Hittites tried unsuccessfully to save Mitanni. In alliance with Babylon,
they fought an economic war against Assyria for many years. Assyria was now a
large and powerful empire, and a major threat to Egyptian and Hittite interests
in the region, and was perhaps the reason that these two powers made peace with
one another. Like his father, Shalmaneser was a great builder and he further
expanded the city of Kalhu (the biblical Calah/Nimrud) at the juncture of the
Tigris and Zab Rivers. Shalmaneser's son and successor, Tukulti-Ninurta I (1244
BC -1208 BC), won a major victory against the Hittites and their king Tudhaliya
IV at the Battle of Nihriya and took thousands of prisoners. He then conquered
Babylonia, taking Kashtiliash IV as a captive and ruled there himself as king
for seven years, taking on the old title "King of Sumer and Akkad" first used
by Sargon of Akkad. Tukulti-Ninurta I became the first native Mesopotamian to
rule the state of Babylonia, its founders having been Amorites, succeeded by
Kassites. Tukulti-Ninurta petitioned the god Shamash before beginning his
counter offensive. Kashtiliash IV was captured, single-handed by Tukulti-
Ninurta according to "his" account, who ‚Äútrod with my feet upon his lordly
neck as though it were a footstool‚Äù and deported him ignominiously in chains
to Assyria. The victorious Assyrian demolished the walls of Babylon, massacred
many of the inhabitants, pillaged and plundered his way across the city to the
Esagila temple, where he made off with the statue of Marduk. He then proclaimed
himself ‚Äúking of Karduniash, king of Sumer and Akkad, king of Sippar and
Babylon, king of Tilmun and Meluhha.‚Äù Middle Assyrian texts recovered at
ancient D≈´r-Katlimmu, include a letter from Tukulti-Ninurta to his "sukkal
rabi‚Äôu", or grand vizier, Ashur-iddin advising him of the approach of his
general Shulman-mushabshu escorting the captive Kashtiliash, his wife, and his
retinue which incorporated a large number of women, on his way to exile after
his defeat. In the process he defeated the Elamites, who had themselves coveted
Babylon. He also wrote an epic poem documenting his wars against Babylon and
Elam. After a Babylonian revolt, he raided and plundered the temples in
Babylon, regarded as an act of sacrilege. As relations with the priesthood in
Ashur began deteriorating, Tukulti-Ninurta built a new capital city; Kar-
Tukulti-Ninurta. However, Tukulti-Ninurta's sons rebelled and besieged him in
his capital. He was murdered and then succeeded by Ashur-nadin-apli. Another
unstable period for Assyria followed, it was riven by periods of internal
strife and the new king only made token and unsuccessful attempts to recapture
Babylon, whose Kassite kings had taken advantage of the upheavals in Assyria
and freed themselves from Assyrian rule. However, Assyria itself was not
threatened by foreign powers during the reigns of Ashur-nirari III, Enlil-
kudurri-usur and Ninurta-apal-Ekur (1192-1180 BC), although Ninurta-apal-Ekur
usurped the throne from Enlil-kudurri-usur. Ashur-Dan I (1179-1133 BC)
stabilised Assyria during his unusually long reign. He maintained friendly
relations with Babylonia and other neighbours of Assyria, and seems to have
quelled internal instability. However, another brief period of internal
upheaval followed the death of Ashur-Dan I when his son and successor Ninurta-
tukulti-Ashur (1133 BC) was deposed in his first year of rule by his own
brother Mutakkil-Nusku and forced to flee to Babylonia. Mutakkil-Nusku himself
died in the same year (1133 BC) leaving a third brother Ashur-resh-ishi I (1133
-1116 BC) the throne. This was to lead to a renewed period of Assyrian
expansion and empire. As the Hittite empire collapsed from the onslaught of the
Phrygians (called Mushki in Assyrian annals), Babylon and Assyria began to vie
for Aramean regions (in modern Syria), formerly under firm Hittite control.
When their forces encountered one another in this region, the Assyrian king
Ashur-resh-ishi I met and defeated Nebuchadnezzar I of Babylon on a number of
occasions. Assyria then invaded and annexed Hittite controlled lands in Asia
Minor and Aram (Syria), marking an upsurge in imperian expansion. Tiglath-
Pileser I (1115- 1077 BC), vies with Shamshi-Adad I and Ashur-uballit I among
historians as being regarded as the founder of the first Assyrian empire. The
son of Ashur-resh-ishi I, he ascended to the throne upon his father's death,
and became one of the greatest of Assyrian conquerors during his 38 year reign.
His first campaign in 1112 BC was against the Phrygians who had attempted to
occupy certain Assyrian districts in the Upper Euphrates; after driving out the
Phrygians he then overran the Luwian kingdoms of Commagene, Cilicia and
Cappadocia, and drove the Hittites from the Assyrian province of Subartu,
northeast of Malatia. In a subsequent campaign, the Assyrian forces penetrated
Urartu, into the mountains south of Lake Van and then turned westward to
receive the submission of Malatia. In his fifth year, Tiglath-Pileser again
attacked Commagene, Cilicia and Cappadocia, and placed a record of his
victories engraved on copper plates in a fortress he built to secure his
Cilician conquests. The Aramaeans of northern Syria were the next targets of
the Assyrian king, who made his way as far as the sources of the Tigris. The
control of the high road to the Mediterranean was secured by the possession of
the Hittite town of Pitru at the junction between the Euphrates and Sajur;
thence he proceeded to conquer the Canaanite/Phoenician cities of (Byblos),
Sidon, and finally Arvad where he embarked onto a ship to sail the
Mediterranean, on which he killed a "nahiru" or "sea-horse" (which A. Leo
Oppenheim translates as a narwhal) in the sea. He was passionately fond of
hunting and was also a great builder. The general view is that the restoration
of the temple of the gods Ashur and Hadad at the Assyrian capital of Assur
(Ashur) was one of his initiatives. He also invaded and defeated Babylon twice,
assuming the old title "King of Sumer and Akkad", forcing tribute from Babylon,
although he did not actually depose the actual king in Babylonia, where the old
"Kassite Dynasty" had now succumbed to an Elamite one. Assyria in the Ancient
Dark Ages, 1075-912 BC. The period from 1200 BC to 900 BC was a dark age for
the entire Near East, North Africa, Caucasus, Mediterranean and Balkan regions,
with great upheavals and mass movements of people. Assyria and its empire were
not unduly affected by these tumultuous events for some 125 years, perhaps the
only ancient power that was not. However, after Tiglath-Pileser I died in 1076
BC, Assyria was in "comparative" decline for the next 150 years. The empire
shrank significantly, and Assyria appears to have controlled only areas close
to Assyria itself, essential to keeping trade routes open in eastern Syria,
south eastern Asia Minor central Mesopotamia and north western Iran. Semitic
peoples such as the Arameans, Chaldeans and Suteans moved into areas to the
west and south of Assyria, including overrunning much of Babylonia to the
south, Indo-European/Iranic peoples such as the Medes and Persians moved into
the lands to the east of Assyria, displacing the native Gutians and pressuring
Elam and Mannea (which were both ancient non Indo-European civilisations of
Iran), and to the north the Indo-European Phrygians overran their fellow Indo
European Hittites, Urartians (Armenians) rose in the Caucasus, and Cimmerians,
Colchians and Scythians around The Black Sea. Egypt was divided and in
disarray, and Semitic Israelites were battling with other fellow Semitic
Canaanite peoples and the Peleset (Philistines) for the control of southern
Canaan. Despite the apparent weakness of Assyria, at heart it in fact remained
a solid, well defended nation whose warriors were the best in the world.
Assyria, with its stable monarchy and secure borders was in a stronger position
during this time than potential rivals such as Egypt, Babylonia, Elam, Phrygia,
Urartu, Persia and Media Kings such as Ashur-bel-kala, Eriba-Adad II, Ashur-
rabi II, Ashurnasirpal I, Tiglath-Pileser II and Ashur-Dan II successfully
defended Assyria's borders and upheld stability during this tumultuous time.
Assyrian kings during this period appear to have adopted a policy of
maintaining and defending a compact, secure nation and satellite colonies
immediately surrounding it, and interspersed this with sporadic punitive raids
and invasions of neighbouring territories when the need arose; For example,
during the reign of Ashur-rabi II (1013‚Äì972 BC) Aramaean tribes took the
cities of Pitru and Mutkinu (which had been taken and colonized by Tiglath
Pileser I.) This event showed how far Assyria could assert itself militarily
when the need arose. The Assyrian king attacked the Arameans, forced his way to
the far off Mediterranean and constructed a stele in the area of Mount Atalur.
Similarly, Ashur-Dan II (935‚Äì912 BC) is recorded as having made punitive
raids outside the borders of Assyria to clear Aramean and other tribal peoples
from the regions surrounding Assyria. Ashur-dan II concentrated on rebuilding
Assyria within its natural borders, from Tur Abdin to the foothills beyond
Arbela, he built government offices in all provinces, and as an economic boost,
provided ploughs throughout the land, which yielded record grain production.
Society in the Middle Assyrian period. Assyria had difficulties with keeping
the trade routes open. Unlike the situation in the Old Assyrian period, the
Anatolian metal trade was effectively dominated by the Hittites and the
Hurrians. These people now controlled the Mediterranean ports, while the
Kassites controlled the river route south to the Persian Gulf. The Middle
Assyrian kingdom was well organized, and in the firm control of the king, who
also functioned as the High Priest of Ashur, the state god. He had certain
obligations to fulfill in the cult, and had to provide resources for the
temples. The priesthood became a major power in Assyrian society. Conflicts
with the priesthood are thought to have been behind the murder of king Tukulti-
Ninurta I. The main Assyrian cities of the middle period were Ashur, Kalhu
(Nimrud) and Nineveh, all situated in the Tigris River valley. At the end of
the Bronze Age, Nineveh was much smaller than Babylon, but still one of the
world's major cities (population ca. 33,000). By the end of the Neo-Assyrian
period, it had grown to a population of some 120,000, and was possibly the
largest city in the world at that time. All free male citizens were obliged to
serve in the army for a time, a system which was called the "ilku"-service. A
legal code was produced during the 14th-13th century which, among other things,
clearly shows that the social position of women in Assyria was lower than that
of neighbouring societies. Men were permitted to divorce their wives with no
compensation paid to the latter. If a woman committed adultery, she could be
beaten or put to death. It's not certain if these laws were seriously enforced,
but they appear to be a backlash against some older documents which granted
things like equal compensation to both partners in divorce. The women of the
king's harem and their servants were also subject to harsh punishments such as
beatings, mutilation, and death. Assyria in general had much harsher laws than
most of the region. Executions were not uncommon, nor were whippings followed
by forced labour. Some offenses allowed the accused a trial under torture/
duress. One tablet that covers property rights has brutal penalties for
violators. A creditor could force debtors to work for him, but not sell them.
The Middle Assyrian Period is marked by the long wars fought during this period
that helped build Assyria into a warrior society. The king depended both on the
citizen class and priests in his capital, and the landed nobility who supplied
the horses needed by Assyria's military. Documents and letters illustrate the
importance of the latter to Assyrian society. Assyria needed less artificial
irrigation than Babylon, and horse-breeding was extensive. Portions of
elaborate texts about the care and training of them have been found. Trade was
carried out in all directions. The mountain country to the north and west of
Assyria was a major source of metal ore, as well as lumber. Economic factors
were a common "casus belli". Assyrian architecture, like that of Babylonia, was
influenced by Sumero-Akkadian styles (and to some degree Mitanni), but early on
developed its own distinctive style. Palaces sported colourful wall
decorations, and seal-cutting (an art learned from Mittani) developed apace.
Schools for scribes taught both the Babylonian and Assyrian dialects of
Akkadian, and Sumerian and Akkadian literary works were often copied with an
Assyrian flavour. The Assyrian dialect of Akkadian was used in legal, official,
religious, and practical texts such as medicine or instructions on
manufacturing items. During the 13th-10th centuries, picture tales appeared as
a new art form: a continuous series of images carved on square stone steles.
Somewhat reminiscent of a comic book, these show events such as warfare or
hunting, placed in order from the upper left to the lower right corner of the
stele with captions written underneath them. These and the excellent cut seals
show that Assyrian art was beginning to surpass that of Babylon. Architecture
saw the introduction of a new style of ziggurat, with two towers and colorful
enameled tiles. Neo-Assyrian Empire. The Neo-Assyrian Empire is usually
considered to have begun with the accession of Adad-nirari II, in 911 BC,
lasting until the fall of Nineveh at the hands of the Babylonians, Medes,
Scythians and Cimmerians in 612 BC. In the Old and Middle Assyrian periods,
Assyria had at times been a strong kingdom and imperial power based in northern
Mesopotamia, competing for dominance with Babylonia to the south and with the
Hittites and Arameans to the west, the Hittite empire and the Phrygians to the
north, and the Elamites to the east. Expansion, 911-627 BC. Beginning with the
campaigns of Adad-nirari II (911-892 BC), Assyria once more became a great
power, growing to be the greatest empire the world had yet seen. He firmly
subjugated the areas previously under only nominal Assyrian vassalage,
conquering and deporting troublesome Aramean, Neo-Hittite and Hurrian
populations in the north to far-off places. Adadinirari II then twice attacked
and defeated Shamash-mudammiq of Babylonia, annexing a large area of land north
of the Diyala River and the towns of Hƒ´t and Zanqu in mid Mesopotamia. He made
further gains over Babylonia under Nabu-shuma-ukin I later in his reign. His
successor, Tukulti-Ninurta II (891-884 BC) consolidated Assyria's gains and
expanded into the Zagros Mountains in modern Iran, subjugating the newly
arrived Persians and Medes as well as pushing into central Asia Minor.
Ashurnasirpal II (883‚Äì859 BC) was a fierce and ruthless ruler who advanced
without opposition through Aram and Canaan (modern Syria) and Asia Minor as far
as the Mediterranean and conquered and exacted tribute from Aramea, Phrygia and
Phoenicia among others. Ashurnasirpal II also repressed revolts among the Medes
and Persians in the Zagros Mountains, and moved his capital to the city of
Kalhu (Calah/Nimrud). The palaces, temples and other buildings raised by him
bear witness to a considerable development of wealth, science, architecture and
art. He also built a number of new heavily fortified towns, such as Imgur-Enlil
(Balawat), Tushhan, Kar-Ashurnasirpal and Nibarti-Ashur. Ashurnasirpal II also
had a keen interest in Botany and Zoology; collecting all manner of plants,
seeds and animals to be displayed in Assyria. Shalmaneser III (858‚Äì823 BC)
attacked and reduced Babylonia to vassalage, and defeated Aramea, Israel,
Urartu, Phoenicia, the neo Hittite states and the Arabs, forcing all of these
to pay tribute to Assyria. Shalmanesser III fought the Battle of Qarqar against
an alliance of 12 nations (including Egypt, Israel, Hamath, Phoenicia, the
Arabs, Arameans, and neo Hittites among others). His armies penetrated to, The
Caucasus, Lake Van and the Taurus Mountains; the Hittites of Carchemish were
compelled to pay tribute, and the kingdoms of Hamath and Aram Damascus were
subdued. In 831 BC he received the submission of the Georgian kingdom of Tabal.
He consolidated Assyrian control over the regions conquered by his
predecessors, and by the end of his 27 year reign Assyria was master of
Mesopotamia, The Levant, western Iran, Israel, Jordan and much of Asia Minor.
Due to old age, in the last 6 years of his reign he passed command of his
armies to the "Turtanu" (General) Dayyan-Assur. However, his successor Shamshi-
Adad V (822-811 BC) inherited an empire beset by civil war in Assyria, The
first years of his reign saw a serious struggle for the succession of the aged
Shalmaneser. The revolt was led by Shamshi-Adad's brother Assur-danin-pal, and
had broken by 826 BC. The rebellious brother, according to Shamshi-Adad's own
inscriptions, succeeded in bringing to his side 27 important cities, including
Nineveh. The rebellion lasted until 820 BC, preventing Assyria expanding its
empire further until it was quelled. Later in his reign, Shamshi-Adad V
successfully campaigned against both Babylonia and Elam, and forced a treaty in
Assyria's favour on the Babylonian king Marduk-zakir-shumi I. In 814 BCE he won
the battle of Dur-Papsukkal against the Babylonian king Murduk-balassu-iqbi,
and went on to subjugate the Aramean, Sutean and Chaldean tribes newly settled
in parts of Babylonia. He was succeeded by Adad-nirari III (810- 782 BC) who
was merely a boy. The Empire was thus ruled by his mother, the famed queen
Semiramis (Shammuramat) until 806 BC. Semiramis held the empire together, and
appears to have campaigned successfully in subjugating the Persians and Medes
during her regency, leading to the later Iranic myths and legends surrounding
her. In 806 BC, Adad-nirari III took the reins of power from Semiramis. He
invaded the Levant and subjugated the Arameans, Phoenicians, Philistines,
Israelites, neo Hittites, Moabites and Edomites. He entered Damascus and forced
tribute upon its Aramean king Ben-Hadad III. He next turned eastward to Iran,
and subjugated the Persians, Medes and the pre Iranic Manneans, penetrating as
far north east as the Caspian Sea. He then turned south, forcing Babylonia to
pay tribute. His next targets were the Chaldean and Sutu tribes who had settled
in the far south eastern corner of Mesopotamia, whom he conquered and reduced
to vassalage, then the Arabs in the deserts of the Arabian Peninsula to the
south of Mesopotamia were invaded, vanquished and forced to pay tribute also.
Adad-nirari III died prematurely in 782 BC and this led to a temporary period
of stagnation within the empire. Shalmaneser IV (782 - 773 BC) seems to have
wielded little personal authority, and a victory over Argishti I, king of
Urartu at Til Barsip is accredited to an Assyrian General ('Turtanu') named
Shamshi-ilu who does not even bother to mention his king. Shamshi-ilu also
scored victories over the Arameans and neo Hittites, and again, takes personal
credit at the expense of his king. Ashur-dan III ascended the throne in 772 BC.
He proved to be a largely ineffectual ruler who was beset by internal
rebellions in the cities Ashur, Arrapkha and Guzana. He failed to make any
further gains in Babylonia and Aram (modern Syria). His reign was also marred
by Plague and an ominous Solar Eclipse. Ashur-nirari V became king in 754 BC,
his reign seems to have been one of permanent internal revolution, and he
apprears to have barely left his palace in Nineveh, although he did lead a
successful campaign in Asia Minor in 750 BC. He was deposed by Tiglath-pileser
III in 745 BC bringing a resurgence to Assyrian expansion. Tiglath-Pileser III
(745-727 BC) initiated a renewed period of Assyrian expansion; Urartu, Persia,
Media, Mannea, Babylonia, Arabia, Phoenicia, Israel, Judah, Samaria, Palestine,
Nabatea, Chaldea, Cyprus, Moab, Edom and the Neo-Hittites were subjugated,
Tiglath-Pileser III was declared king in Babylon and the Assyrian empire was
now stretched from the Caucasus Mountains to Arabia and from the Caspian Sea to
Cyprus. Tiglath-Pileser III had reorganised the Assyrian army into a
professional fighting force, and greatly improved the civil administration of
his empire, setting the template for all future ancient empires Tiglath-Pileser
III introduced eastern Aramaic as the "Lingua Franca" of Assyria and its vast
empire. Shalmaneser V (726-723 BC) consolidated Assyrian power during his short
reign, and repressed Egyptian attempts to gain a foothold in the near east.
Sargon II (722-705 BC) maintained the empire, driving the Cimmerians and
Scythians from Iran, where they had invaded and attacked the Persians, who were
vassals of Assyria. Mannea, Cilicia Cappadocia and Commagene were conquered,
Urartu was ravaged, and Babylon, Aram, Phoenicia, Israel, Arabia, Cyprus, and
the famed Midas, (king of Phrygia) were forced to pay tribute. His "stele" has
been found as far west as Larnaca in Cyprus. Sargon II conquered Gurgum, Milid,
the Georgian state of Tabal, and all of the Hittite kingdoms of the Taurus
Mountains. He was killed in 705 BC while on a punitive raid against the
Cimmerians, and was succeeded by Sennacherib. Sennacherib (705-681 BC), a
ruthless ruler, defeated the Greeks who were attempting to gain a foothold in
Cilicia, and defeated and drove the Nubian ruled Egyptians from the Near East
where the Nubian Pharaoh Taharqa had fomented revolt against Assyria. Babylon
revolted, and Sennacherib laid waste to the city, defeating its Elamite and
Chaldean allies in the process. He sacked Israel and laid siege to Judah. He
installed his own son Ashur-nadin-shumi as king in Babylonia. He maintained
Assyrian domination over the Medes, Manneans and Persians to the east, Asia
Minor to the north and north west, and the Levant, Phonecia and Aram in the
west. Sennacherib was murdered by his own sons in a palace revolt, apparently
in revenge for the destruction of Babylon. Esarhaddon (680-669 BC) expanded
Assyria still further, campaigning deep into the Caucasus Mountains in the
north, breaking Urartu completely in the process. Tiring of Egyptian
interference in the Assyrian Empire, Esarhaddon crossed the Sinai Desert, and
invaded and conquered Egypt, driving its foreign Nubian/Kushite and Ethiopian
rulers out and destroying the Kushite Empire in the process. He expanded the
empire as far south as Arabia and Dilmun (modern Bahrain or Qatar). Esarhaddon
also completely rebuilt Babylon during his reign, bringing peace to Mesopotamia
as a whole. The Babylonians, Egyptians, Elamites, Cimmerians, Scythians,
Persians, Medes, Manneans, Arameans, Chaldeans, Israelites, Phoenecians and
Urartu were vanquished and regarded as vassals and Assyria's empire was kept
secure. Esarhaddon died whilst preparing to leave for Egypt to once more eject
the Nubians, who were attempting to encroach on the southern part of the
country. This task was successfully completed by his successor, Ashurbanipal.
Under Ashurbanipal (669-627 BC) Assyrian domination spanned from the Caucasus
Mountains in the north to Nubia, Egypt and Arabia in the south, and from Cyprus
and Antioch in the west to Persia in the east. Ashurbanipal destroyed Elam and
smashed a rebellion led by his own brother Shamash-shum-ukin who was the
Assyrian king of Babylon, exacting savage revenge on the coalition of
Chaldeans, Nabateans, Arameans, Sutu, Arabs and Elamites who had supported him.
An Assyrian governor named Kandalanu was installed to rule Babylonia on
Ashurbanipal's behalf. Ashurbanipal easily crushed the Nubian/Cushite king
Tantamani, who had attempted to invade Assyrian controlled Egypt, Tantamani
fled back to Nubia and was never again to pose a threat. Persia and Media were
regarded as vassals of Ashurbanipal. He built vast libraries and initiated a
surge in the building of temples and palaces. After the crushing of the
Babylonian revolt Ashurbanipal appeared master of all he surveyed. To the east,
Elam was devastated and prostrate before Assyria, the Manneans and the Iranic
Persians and Medes were vassals. To the south, Babylonia was occupied, the
Chaldeans, Arabs, Sutu and Nabateans subjugated, the Nubian empire destroyed,
and Egypt paid tribute. To the north, the Scythians and Cimmerians had been
vanquished and driven from Assyrian territory, Urartu (Armenia), Phrygia,
Corduene and the neo Hittites were in vassalage, and Lydia pleading for
Assyrian protection. To the west, Aramea (Syria), the Phoenicians, Israel,
Judah, Samarra and Cyprus were subjugated, and the Hellenised inhabitants of
Caria, Cilicia, Cappadocia and Commagene paid tribute to Assyria. Assyria now
appeared stronger than ever. However, the long struggle with Babylonia and Elam
and their allies, and the constant campaigning to control and expand its vast
empire in all directions, left Assyria exhausted. It had been drained of wealth
and manpower; the devastated provinces could yield nothing to supply the needs
of the imperial exchequer, and it was difficult to find sufficient troops to
garrison the huge empire. At its height Assyria conquered the 25th dynasty
Egypt (and expelled its Nubian/Kushite dynasty) as well as Babylonia, Chaldea,
Elam, Media, Persia, Ararat (Armenia), Phoenicia, Aramea/Syria, Phrygia, the
Neo-Hittites, Hurrians, northern Arabia, Gutium, Israel, Judah, Moab, Edom,
Corduene, Cilicia, Mannea and parts of Ancient Greece (such as Cyprus), and
defeated and/or exacted tribute from Scythia, Cimmeria, Lydia, Nubia, Ethiopia
and others. The Assyrian Empire at its height encompassed the whole of the
modern nations of Iraq, Syria, Egypt, Lebanon, Israel, Jordan, Kuwait, Bahrain,
Palestine and Cyprus, together with swathes of Iran, Saudi Arabia, Turkey,
Sudan, Libya, Armenia, Georgia and Azerbaijan. Downfall, 626-605 BC. The
Assyrian Empire was severely crippled following the death of Ashurbanipal in
627 BC ‚Äî the nation descending into a prolonged and brutal series of civil
wars involving three rival kings, Ashur-etil-ilani, Sin-shumu-lishir and Sin-
shar-ishkun. Ashur-etil-ilani came to the throne in 626 BC, and was immediately
beset by a series of internal civil wars. He was deposed in 623 BC, after four
years of bitter fighting by Sin-shumu-lishir, an Assyrian "Turtanu" (General)
who also occupied and claimed the throne of Babylon in that year. In turn, Sin-
shumu-lishir was deposed as ruler of Assyria and Babylonia after a year of
warfare by Sin-shar-ishkun (622 - 612 BC) ‚Äî who was then himself faced with
constant violent rebellion in the Assyrian homeland. This situation led to
wholesale revolution in Babylonia, and during his reign many Assyrian colonies
to the west, east and north similarly took advantage and ceased to pay tribute
to Assyria, most significantly the Medes, Persians and Scythians. By 620 BC,
Nabopolassar, a member of the Chaldean people from the far southeast of
Mesopotamia, had claimed Babylonia in the confusion. Sin-shar-ishkun amassed a
large army to eject Nabopolassar from Babylon, however yet another revolt broke
out in Assyria proper, forcing the bulk of his army to turn back, where they
promptly joined the rebels in Nineveh; similarly, Nabopolassar was unable to
make any inroads into Assyria despite its weakened state, being repelled at
every attempt, and the next four years saw bitter fighting in the heart of
Babylonia itself, as the Assyrians tried to wrest back control. However,
Nabopolassar entered into an alliance with the Median king Cyaxares the Great,
who had taken advantage of the upheavals in Assyria to free his people from
Assyrian vassalage and unite the Iranic Medes and Persians, and the remnants of
the pre-Iranic Elamites and Manneans, into a powerful Median-dominated force.
The Babylonians and Medes, together with the Scythians and Cimmerians to the
north, attacked Assyria in 616 BC, sacking the city of Kalhu. After four years
of bitter fighting, Nineveh was finally sacked in 612 BC, after a prolonged
siege followed by house to house fighting. Sin-shar-ishkun was killed defending
his capital. Despite the loss of its major cities and in the face of
overwhelming odds, Assyrian resistance continued. Ashur-uballit II (612- 605?
BC) took the throne, won a few battles, and occupied and held out at Harran
(where he founded a new capital) from 612 BC until 608 BC when he was overrun
by the Babylonians and Medes. Egypt, a former Assyrian colony whose current
dynasty had been installed by the Assyrians, then came to Assyria's aid,
possibly in fear that without Assyria they would be next to succumb. Ashur-
uballit II and Necho of Egypt made a failed attempt to recapture Harran in 608
BC, Ashur-uballit II was possibly killed during this battle or at Carchemish in
605 BC, although neither is certain. The next three years saw the Egyptians and
the remnants of the Assyrian army vainly attempting to eject the invaders from
Assyria. In 605 BC, the Babylonians and Medes defeated the Egyptians and
Assyrians at Carchemish, bringing an end to Assyria as an independent political
entity, although it was to remain a geo-political region and colonised province
until the late 7th Century AD. Assyria after the empire. Athura, Assuristan,
Assyria province. Assyria was ruled by Babylon from 605 BC until 539 BC, and in
a twist of fate, Nabonidus the last king of Babylon was himself an Assyrian
from Harran; however apart from plans to dedicate religious temples in that
city, Nabonidus showed little interest in rebuilding Assyria. Nineveh and Kalhu
remained in ruins, conversely a number of towns and cities such as Arrapkha,
Guzana and Harran remained intact, and Assur and Arbela were not completely
destroyed, as is attested by their later revival. However, Assyria spent much
of this period in a degree of devastation following its fall. After this, it
was ruled by the Persian Achaemenid Empire (as Athura) from 539 BC to 330 BC
(see Achaemenid Assyria). Assyria seems to have recovered dramatically, and
flourished during this period. It became a major agricultural and
administrative centre of the Achaemenid Empire, and its soldiers were a
mainstay of the Persian Army. In fact Assyria even became powerful enough to
raise a full scale revolt against the empire in 520 BC. The Persians had spent
centuries under Assyrian domination, and Assyrian influence can be seen in
Achaemenid art, infrastructure and administration. Early Persian rulers saw
themselves as successors to Ashurbanipal, and Mesopotamian Aramaic was retained
as the "lingua franca" of the empire for over two hundred years. Nineveh was
never rebuilt however, and 200 years after it was sacked Xenophon reported only
small numbers of people living amongst its ruins. In 330 BC, Assyria fell to
Alexander the Great, the Macedonian Emperor from Greece; it thereafter became
part of the Seleucid Empire and was renamed Syria, a Hurrian, Luwian and Greek
corruption of Assyria. It is from this period that the later "Syria" Vs
"Assyria" naming controversy arises, the Seleucids applied the name not only to
Assyria itself, but also to the lands to the west (Aram modern Syria) which had
been part of the Assyrian empire. When they lost control of Assyria itself, the
name "Syria" survived and was applied only to the land of Aramea to the west,
that had once been part of the Assyrian empire. This was to lead to both the
Assyrians from Mesopotamia and Arameans from the Levant being dubbed Syrians in
Greco-Roman culture. By 150 BC, Assyria was under the control of the Parthian
Empire as Athura (the Parthian word for Assyria) where the Assyrian city of
Ashur seems to have gained a degree of autonomy, and temples to the native gods
of Assyria were resurrected. A number of neo-Assyrian states arose, namely
Adiabene, Osroene and Hatra. In 116 AD, under Trajan, it was taken over by Rome
as the Roman Province of Assyria. The Assyrians began to convert to
Christianity from Ashurism during the period between the early 1st and 3rd
centuries AD. Romans and Parthians fought over Assyria and the rest of
Mesopotamia until 226 AD, when it was taken over by the Sassanid (Persian)
Empire. It was known as Asuristan during this period, and became a main centre
of the Church of the East (now the Assyrian Church of the East), with a
flourishing Syriac (Assyrian) Christian culture which exists there to this day.
The city of Ashur again flourished, and appears to have gained a great deal of
autonomy during this period. The noted Assyriologist Simo Parpola has
speculated that it may even have once again been independent for a while prior
to being sacked by Shapur I in 256 AD. Temples were still being dedicated to
the national god Ashur in his home city and in Harran during the 4th century
AD, indicating an Assyrian identity was still strong. After the Arab Islamic
conquest in the 7th century AD Assyria was dissolved as an entity. Under Arab
rule Mesopotamia as a whole underwent a process of "Arabisation" and
"Islamification", and the region saw a large influx of non indigenous Arabs,
Kurds, and later Turkic peoples. However, a percentage of the indigenous
Assyrian population (known as Ashuriyun by the Arabs) resisted this process,
Assyrian Aramaic language and Church of the East Christianity were still
dominant in the north, as late as the 11th and 12th centuries AD. The city of
Assur was still occupied by Assyrians during the Islamic period until the 14th
century when Tamurlane conducted a massacre of indigenous Assyrian Christians.
After that there are no traces of a settlement in the archaeological and
numismatic record. The massacres by Tamurlane massively reduced the Assyrian
population throughout Mesopotamia. The Hamidian Massacre of the 19th Century
further greatly reduced numbers. An Assyrian war of independence was fought
during World War I following the Assyrian Genocide suffered at the hands of the
Ottomans and their Kurdish allies. The Assyrians fought successfully against
overwhelming numbers for a time, until their Russian allies left the war and
the Armenian line broke. The Assyrian Levies were founded by the British in
1928, with ancient Assyrian military rankings such as Rab-shakeh, Rab-talia and
Tartan, being revived for the first time in millennia for this force. The
Assyrians were prized by the British rulers for their fighting qualities,
loyalty, bravery and discipline, and were used to help the British put down
insurrections among the Arabs and Kurds. During World War II,Eleven Assyrian
companies saw action in Palestine and another four served in Cyprus. The
Parachute Company was attached to the Royal Marine Commando and were involved
in fighting in Albania, Italy and Greece. Many persecutions have befallen the
Assyrians since, such as the Simele Massacre, Anfal campaign and Baathist,
Kurdish and Islamist persecutions. Germany and West Africa theories. Thus far
the only people who have been attested with a high level of genetic,
historical, linguistic and cultural research to be the descendants of the
ancient Mesopotamians are the Assyrian Christians of Iraq and its surrounding
areas in north west Iran, north east Syria and south eastern Turkey. Assyria
continued to exist as a geopolitical entity until the Arab-Islamic conquest in
the mid 7th century AD, and Assyrian identity, personal names and both spoken
and written evolutions of Mesopotamian Aramaic (which still contain many
Akkadian loan words) have survived among the Assyrian people from ancient times
to this day. (see Assyrian people). However, there have been many wild claims
of ancient mid eastern ancestry (including Assyrian) throughout Europe, Africa
and even the Americas, none of which have been supported by mainstream opinion
or strong evidence, let alone proof. The most long standing and popularised
theory has been the attempts to link Assyrian ancestry to the ancient Germans.
The idea has also some backing in German legend, for example the "Gesta
Treverorum" (a 12th century German medieval chronicle) makes Trebeta son of
Ninus the founder of Trier. This legend of Trebeta as having founded Trier is
also found in Godfrey of Viterbo's "Pantheon" (1185) and several other German
chronicles of the 12th or 13th century, including the works of Sigebert of
Gembloux. The legend is also found cited in compendiums of historical sources
from later periods, for example Gottfried Leibniz's "Scriptures rerum
Brunsvicensium" (1710) and the "Anthologia veterum latinorum epigrammatum et
poematum" (1835). As with the West Africa theory, this idea does not have the
backing of serious historians, nor contemporary written records of the time in
the Near East. There have been no studies or records which show such a link,
and it must be pointed out that Ninus and Trebeta were fictional figures, and
not historically attested. In addition, there are no traces of Akkadian or
Mesopotamian Aramaic in any Germanic Language. According to a single
unsupported piece of recent research, refugees from the collapsed Assyrian
Empire claim to have reached the region of Lake Chad and founded the kingdoms
of Kanem and Kebbi. These alleged refugees claimed the ancestry of Sargon of
Akkad (whose dynasty died out some 15 centuries before the fall of Assyria),
they also contradictionally claimed ancestry from Nabopolassar, a Babylonian
king of Chaldean extraction who played a major part in the destruction of the
Assyrian Empire. From the Medieval Arabic king lists of both African states,
allegedly copied from earlier lists in ancient Near Eastern languages it
appears that the state founders claimed to be deportees of the Assyrian empire
who had fled from Syria and Samaria after the defeat of the Egyptian-Assyrian
army at Carchemish in 605 BCE. A counterpoint to this argument would be that
neither Samaria nor Syria where these refugees were claimed to have originated
from were actually ever part of Assyria, but were colonies inhabited largely by
Hebrews, Nabateans and Arameans respectively. In addition, there is no evidence
whatsoever in Assyrian, Babylonian, Median, Persian, Greek or Egyptian records
of the time mentioning deportations of Assyrians from their homelands
Additionally, the claimants to this ancestry also claim descendancy from Sargon
of Akkad (whose dynasty died out over 1500 years before the Assyrian dynasty
fell), and from Nabopolassar, who was a Chaldean, politically and militarily
opposed to Assyria, and not in fact an Assyrian. Assyrian Religion. The
Assyrians, like the rest of the Mesopotamian peoples, followed the Sumero-
Akkadian Mesopotamian Religion, with the national god Ashur having pride of
place at the head of the pantheon. Other major gods within the pantheon were;
Anu, Ea, Enlil, Ishtar (Astarte), Shamash, Tammuz, Adad/Hadad, Sin (Nanna),
Dagan, Ninurta, Nisroch, Nergal, Tiamat, Ninlil, Mullissu, Zababa and El.
Native religion survived at least until the 4th century AD, although Assyrians
had begun to adopt Eastern Rite Christianity which had its birthplace in
Assyria between the 1st and 3rd centuries AD, which they still adhere to to
this day. Language. During the third millennium BC, there developed a very
intimate cultural symbiosis between the Sumerians and the Akkadians, which
included widespread . The influence of Sumerian on Akkadian (and vice versa) is
evident in all areas, from lexical borrowing on a massive scale, to syntactic,
morphological, and phonological convergence. This has prompted scholars to
refer to Sumerian and Akkadian in the third millennium as a "sprachbund".
Akkadian gradually replaced Sumerian as the spoken language of Mesopotamia
somewhere around the turn of the 3rd and the 2nd millennium BC (the exact
dating being a matter of debate), but Sumerian continued to be used as a
sacred, ceremonial, literary and scientific language in Mesopotamia until the
1st century AD. In ancient times Assyrians spoke a dialect of the Akkadian
language, an eastern branch of the Semitic languages. The first inscriptions,
called Old Assyrian (OA), were made in the Old Assyrian period. In the Neo-
Assyrian period the Aramaic language became increasingly common, more so than
Akkadian¬ ‚Äî this was thought to be largely due to the mass deportations
undertaken by Assyrian kings, in which large Aramaic-speaking populations,
conquered by the Assyrians, were relocated to Assyria and interbred with the
Assyrians. The ancient Assyrians also used the Sumerian language in their
literature and liturgy, although to a more limited extent in the Middle- and
Neo-Assyrian periods, when Akkadian became the main literary language. The
destruction of the Assyrian capitals of Nineveh and Assur by the Babylonians,
Medes and their allies ensured that much of the bilingual elite (but not all)
were wiped out. By the 7th century BC, much of the Assyrian population used
Akkadian influenced Eastern Aramaic and not Akkadian itself. The last Akkadian
inscriptions in Mesopotamia date from the 1st century AD. However, Eastern
Aramaic dialects, as well as Akkadian and Mesopotamian Aramaic personal and
family names, still survive to this day among Assyrians in the regions of
northern Iraq, southeast Turkey, northwest Iran and northeast Syria that
constituted old Assyria. After 90 years of effort, the University of Chicago
has published an Assyrian Dictionary, whose form is more encyclopedia in style
than dictionary. Arts and sciences. Assyrian art preserved to the present day
predominantly dates to the Neo-Assyrian period. Art depicting battle scenes,
and occasionally the impaling of whole villages in gory detail, was intended to
show the power of the emperor, and was generally made for propaganda purposes.
These stone reliefs lined the walls in the royal palaces where foreigners were
received by the king. Other stone reliefs depict the king with different
deities and conducting religious ceremonies. Many stone reliefs were discovered
in the royal palaces at Nimrud (Kalhu) and Khorsabad (Dur-Sharrukin). A rare
discovery of metal plates belonging to wooden doors was made at Balawat (Imgur-
Enlil). Assyrian sculpture reached a high level of refinement in the Neo-
Assyrian period. One prominent example is the winged bull "Lamassu", or shedu
that guard the entrances to the king's court. These were apotropaic meaning
they were intended to ward off evil. C. W. Ceram states in "The March of
Archaeology" that "lamassi" were typically sculpted with five legs so that four
legs were always visible, whether the image were viewed frontally or in
profile. Although works of precious gems and metals usually do not survive the
ravages of time, some fine pieces of Assyrian jewelry were found in royal tombs
at Nimrud. There is ongoing discussion among academics over the nature of the
Nimrud lens, a piece of quartz unearthed by Austen Henry Layard in 1850, in the
Nimrud palace complex in northern Iraq. A small minority believe that it is
evidence for the existence of ancient Assyrian telescopes, which could explain
the great accuracy of Assyrian astronomy. Other suggestions include its use as
a magnifying glass for jewellers, or as a decorative furniture inlay. The
Nimrud Lens is held in the British Museum. The Assyrians were also innovative
in military technology with the use of heavy cavalry, sappers, siege engines
etc. Legacy and rediscovery. Achaemenid Assyria (539 BC ‚Äì 330 BC) retained a
separate identity (Athura), official correspondence being in Imperial Aramaic,
and there was even a determined revolt of the two Assyrian provinces of Mada
and Athura in 520 BC. Under Seleucid rule (330 BC ‚Äì approximately 150 BC),
however, Aramaic gave way to Greek as the official administrative language.
Aramaic was marginalised as an official language, but remained spoken in both
Assyria and Babylonia by the general populace. It also remained the spoken
tongue of the indigenous Assyrian/Babylonian citizens of all Mesopotamia under
Persian, Greek and Roman rule, and indeed well into the Arab period it was
still the language of the majority, particularly in the north of Mesopotamia,
surviving to this day among the Assyrian Christians. Between 150 BC and 226 AD
Assyria changed hands between the Parthians and Romans (Roman Province of
Assyria) until coming under the rule of Sassanid Persia in 226 AD ‚Äì 651 AD,
where it was known as Asuristan. A number of at least partly neo-Assyrian
kingdoms existed in the area between in the late classical and early Christian
period also; Adiabene, Hatra and Osroene. Classical historiographers had only
retained a very dim picture of Assyria. It was remembered that there had been
an Assyrian empire predating the Persian one, but all particulars were lost.
Thus Jerome's "Chronicon" lists 36 kings of the Assyrians, beginning with
Ninus, son of Belus, down to Sardanapalus, the last king of the Assyrians
before the empire fell to Arbaces the Median. Almost none of these have been
substantiated as historical, with the exception of the Neo-Assyrian and
Babylonian rulers listed in Ptolemy's Canon, beginning with Nabonassar. The
modern discovery of Babylonia and Assyria begins with excavations in Nineveh in
1845, which revealed the Library of Ashurbanipal. Decipherment of cuneiform was
a formidable task that took more than a decade, but by 1857, the Royal Asiatic
Society was convinced that reliable reading of cuneiform texts was possible.
Assyriology has since pieced together the formerly largely forgotten history of
Mesopotamia. In the wake of the archaeological and philological rediscovery of
ancient Assyria, Assyrian nationalism became increasingly popular among the
surviving remnants of the Assyrian people, and has come to strongly identify
with ancient Assyria.
