Chalcolithic The Chalcolithic ( "khalkos" "copper" + "lithos" "stone") period
or Copper Age, also known as the Eneolithic/Æneolithic (from Latin "aeneus"
"of bronze"), is a phase of the Bronze Age in which the addition of tin to
copper to form bronze during smelting remained yet unknown by the metallurgists
of the times. The Copper Age was originally defined as a transition between the
Neolithic and the Bronze Age. An archaeological site in southeastern Europe
(Serbia) contains the oldest securely dated evidence of copper making at high
temperature, from 7,000 years ago. Copper smelting may have been invented in
separate parts of Asia and Europe at that time or spread from an initial source
by long-distance trade. Origin of name. The multiple names result from multiple
recognitions of the period. Originally the term "Bronze Age" meant that either
copper or bronze was being used as the chief hard substance for the manufacture
of tools and weapons. In 1881 John Evans, recognizing that the use of copper
often preceded the use of bronze, distinguished between a transitional Copper
Age and the Bronze Age proper. He did not include this transitional period in
the tripartite system of Early, Middle and Late Bronze Age but placed it at the
beginning outside of it. He did not, however, present it as a fourth age, but
chose to retain the traditional three-age system. In 1884 Gaetano Chierici,
perhaps following Evans' lead, renamed it in Italian as the Eneo-litica (hyphen
his) or "Bronze-stone" transition. This phrase never meant that the period is
one in which both bronze and stone were used. The Copper Age features the use
of copper, excluding bronze; moreover, stone continued to be used in a minor
industry throughout both the Bronze Age and the Iron Age. "Litica" simply names
the Stone Age as the point from which the transition began and is not another -
lithic age. The Eneolithic was never part of the Stone Age, which ended
conclusively the moment the first smelterer succeeded in obtaining copper from
copper ore for the first time. Subsequently the British used either Evans'
Copper Age or the Eneo- or Aeneo-lithic, a translation of Chierici's eneo-
litica. After several years a number of complainants appeared in the literature
that Eneolithic seemed to the untrained eye to be produced from e-neolithic,
"outside the Neolithic," clearly not a definitive characterization of the
Copper Age. About the year 1900 many began to substitute Chalcolithic for
Eneolithic to avoid the false segmentation. It was at this time that the
misunderstanding began among those who had not understood the Italian. The -
lithic was seen as a new -lithic age, a part of the Stone Age in which copper
was used. Today Copper Age, Eneolithic and Chalcolithic are used synonymously
to mean Evans' original definition of Copper Age. The period is a transitional
one but not outside of the traditional three-age system. It appears that copper
was not widely exploited at first and that efforts in alloying it with tin and
other metals began quite soon, making it difficult to distinguish the distinct
Chalcolithic cultures from later periods. The boundary between the Copper and
Bronze Ages is indistinct, since alloys sputtered in and out of use due to the
erratic supply of tin. The emergence of metallurgy occurred first in the
Fertile Crescent, where it gave rise to the Bronze Age in the 4th millennium
BC. There was an independent and limited invention of copper and bronze
smelting by the Incas in South America and the Mesoamerican civilization in
West Mexico (see Metallurgy in pre-Columbian Mesoamerica). The literature of
European archaeology, in general, avoids the use of 'chalcolithic' (the term
'Copper Age' is preferred), whereas Middle Eastern archaeologists regularly use
it. The Copper Age in the Middle East and the Caucasus began in the late 5th
millennium BC and lasted for about a millennium before it gave rise to the
Early Bronze Age. The transition from the European Copper Age to Bronze Age
Europe occurs about the same time, between the late 5th and the late 3rd
millennia BC. According to Parpola, ceramic similarities between the Indus
Civilization, southern Turkmenistan, and northern Iran during 4300–3300 BC of
the Chalcolithic period (Copper Age) suggest considerable mobility and trade.
Europe. An archaeological site in southeastern Europe (Serbia) contains the
oldest securely dated evidence of copper making at high temperature, from 7,000
years ago. The find in June 2010 extends the known record of copper smelting by
about 500 years, and suggests that copper smelting may have been invented in
separate parts of Asia and Europe at that time rather than spreading from a
single source. In Serbia, a copper axe was found at Prokuplje, which indicates
that humans were using metals in Europe by 7,500 years ago (~5,500 BC), many
years earlier than previously believed. Knowledge of the use of copper was far
wider spread than the metal itself. The European Battle Axe culture used stone
axes modeled on copper axes, even with imitation "mold marks" carved in the
stone. Ötzi the Iceman, who was found in the Ötztal Alps in 1991 and whose
remains were dated to about 3300 BC, was found with a Mondsee copper axe. Since
copper metallurgy was already known to have existed in Europe since 7000 BC,
with heavy axes of natural bronze produced in bulk since 5500 BC, and since
true bronze, made by deliberately alloying copper with tin had already been
used in parts of east-central Europe since 3700 BC, Ötzi's axe came as no
surprise to archaeologists. Examples of Chalcolithic cultures in Europe include
Vila Nova de São Pedro and Los Millares on the Iberian Peninsula. Pottery of
the Beaker people has been found at both sites, dating to several centuries
after copper-working began there. The Beaker culture appears to have spread
copper and bronze technologies in Europe, along with Indo-European languages.
The Varna Necropolis, Bulgaria, is internationally considered one of the key
archaeological sites in world prehistory. The oldest golden treasure in the
world, dating to 5,000 BC, was discovered at the site. Each one of three graves
(No.1, 36 and 43) contains more gold than has been found in the entire rest of
the world for that epoch. The total weight of more than 3000 golden artifacts
found in Varna necropolis is near 6.5 kg. South Asia. The South Asian
inhabitants of Mehrgarh fashioned tools with local copper ore (ore used as
pigment) between 7700–3300 BC. East Asia. 5th millennia BC copper artifacts
start to appear in East Asia, such as Jiangzhai and Hongshan culture, but those
metal artifacts were not widely used. Africa. The Iron Age and Bronze Age
occurred simultaneously in much of Africa. North Africa and the Nile Valley
imported its iron technology from the Near East and followed Near Eastern
course of Bronze Age and Iron Age development. The earliest dating of iron in
Sub-Saharan Africa is 2500 BC at Egaro, west of Termit, making it contemporary
to the Middle East. The Egaro date is debatable with archaeologists, due to
method used to attain it. The Termit date of 1500 BC is widely accepted. In the
region of the Aïr Mountains in Niger we have the development of independent
copper smelting between 3000–2500 BC. The process was not in a developed
state, indication smelting was not foreign. It became mature about the 1500 BC.
Americas. The term is also applied to American civilizations that already used
copper and copper alloys thousands of years before European conquest. The Old
Copper Complex, located in present-day Michigan and Wisconsin in the United
States, used copper for tools, weapons, and other implements. Artifacts from
these sites have been dated from 4000 to 1000 BC.
