Death of Alexander the Great The death of Alexander the Great and subsequent
related events have been the subjects of debates. According to a Babylonian
astronomical diary, Alexander died between the evening of June 10 and the
evening of June 11, 323 BC. This happened in the palace of Nebuchadnezzar II in
Babylon. Macedonians and local residents wept at the news of the death, while
Achaemenid subjects shaved their heads. Sisygambis, having learned of
Alexander's death, refused sustenance and died a few days later. Historians
vary in their assessments of primary sources about Alexander's death, which
results in different views. Background. In February 323 BC, Alexander ordered
his armies to prepare for the march to Babylon. According to Arrian, after
crossing the Tigris Alexander was met by Chaldeans, who advised him not to
enter the city because their deity Bel had warned them that to do so at that
time would be fatal for Alexander. The Chaldeans also warned Alexander against
marching westwards as he would then look to the setting sun, a symbol of
decline. It was suggested that he enter Babylon via the Royal Gate, in the
western wall, where he would face to the east. Alexander followed this advice,
but the route turned to be unfavorable because of swampy terrain. According to
Jona Lendering, "it seems that in May 323" the Babylonian astrologers tried to
avert the misfortune by substituting Alexander with an ordinary person on the
Babylonian throne, who would take the brunt of the omen. The Greeks and
Macedonians, however, did not understand that ritual. Prophecy of Calanus.
Calanus was likely to be Hindu Naga sadhu, whom Greeks called gymnosophists. He
had accompanied the Greek army back from Punjab, upon request by Alexander. He
was seventy-three years of age at that time. However, when Persian weather and
travel fatigue weakened him, he informed Alexander that he would rather die
than live disabled. He decided to take away his life by self-immolation.
Although, Alexander tried to desist him from doing so but upon the insistence
of Calanus, Alexander relented and the job of building a pyre was entrusted to
Ptolemy.The place where this incident took place was Susa in the year 322 B.C.
Calanus is mentioned also by Alexander's admiral, Nearchus and Chares of
Mytilene. He did not flinch as he burnt to the astonishment of those who
watched. Before, immolating him-self alive on pyre, his last words to Alexander
were "We shall meet in Babylon". Thus he is said to have prophesied death of
Alexander in Babylon. At the time of death of Calanus, Alexander, however, did
not have any plan to go to Babylon.No one understood the meaning of his words
"We shall meet in Babylon". It was only after Alexander fell sick and died in
Babylon, Greeks came to realize what Calanus wanted to say. Causes. Proposed
causes of Alexander's death included alcoholic liver disease and strychnine
poisoning, but little data support either version. According to the University
of Maryland School of Medicine report of 1998, Alexander probably died of
typhoid fever (which, along with malaria, was common in ancient Babylon). In
the week before Alexander's death, historical accounts mention chills, sweats,
exhaustion and high fever, typical symptoms of infectious diseases, including
typhoid fever. According to David W. Oldach from the University of Maryland
Medical Center, Alexander also had "severe abdominal pain, causing him to cry
out in agony". The associated account, however, comes from unreliable Alexander
romance. Previous most popular theories hold that Alexander either died of
malaria or was poisoned. Other retrodiagnoses include noninfectious diseases as
well. According to author Andrew Chugg, there is evidence Alexander died of
malaria, having contracted it two weeks before his death while sailing in the
marshes to inspect flood defences. Chugg based his argument on "Ephemerides" by
otherwise unknown Diodotus of Erythrae, although the authenticity of this
source has been questioned. It was also noted that the absence of the signature
fever curve of "Plasmodium falciparum" (the expected parasite, given
Alexander's travel history) diminishes the possibility of malaria. The malaria
version was nonetheless supported by Paul Cartledge. In "Alexander the Great:
The Death of a God", Paul C. Doherty claimed that Alexander was poisoned with
arsenic by his possibly illegitimate half-brother Ptolemy I Soter. Throughout
the centuries suspicions of possible poisoning have fallen on a number of
alleged perpetrators, including one of Alexander's wives, his generals, his
illegitimate half-brother or the royal cup-bearer. The poisoning version is
featured particularly in politically motivated "Liber de Morte Testamentoque
Alexandri" ("The Book On the Death and Testament of Alexander"), which tries to
discredit the family of Antipater. It was argued that the book was compiled in
Polyperchon's circle, not before ca. 317 BC. Epidemiologist John Marr and
Charles Calisher put forward the West Nile fever as possible cause of
Alexander's death. This version was deemed as "fairly compelling" by the
University of Rhode Island epidemiologist Thomas Mather, who nonetheless noted
that the West Nile virus tends to kill the elders or those with weakened immune
systems. The version of Marr and Calisher was also criticized by Burke A. Cunha
from Winthrop University Hospital. According to analysis of other authors in
response to Marr and Calisher, the West Nile virus could not have infected
humans before the 8th century AD. Other causes that have been put forward
include acute pancreatitis provoked by "heavy alcohol consumption and a very
rich meal", acute endocarditis, schistosomiasis brought on by "Schistosoma
haematobium", and porphyria. Fritz Schachermeyr proposed leukemia and malaria.
When Alexander's symptoms were entered to the Global Infectious Disease
Epidemiology Network, influenza gained the highest probability (41.2%) on the
list of differential diagnoses. However, according to Cunha, the symptoms and
time course of Alexander's disease are inconsistent with influenza, as well as
with malaria, schistosomiasis and poisoning in particular. Body preservation.
One ancient account reports that the planning and construction of an
appropriate funerary cart to convey the body out from Babylon took two years
from the time of Alexander's death. It is not known exactly how the body was
preserved for about two years before it was moved from Babylon. In 1889 E. A.
Wallis Budge suggested that the body was submerged in a vat of honey, while
Plutarch reported treatment by Egyptian embalmers. Egyptian and Chaldean
embalmers who arrived on June 16 are said to have attested to Alexander's
lifelike appearance. This was interpreted as a complication of typhoid fever,
known as ascending paralysis, which causes a person to appear dead prior to
death. Resting place. On its way back to Macedonia, the funerary cart with
Alexander's body was met in Syria by one of Alexander's generals, the future
ruler Ptolemy I Soter. In late in 322 or early 321 BC Ptolemy diverted the body
to Egypt where it was interred in Memphis, Egypt. In the late 4th or early 3rd
century BC Alexander's body was transferred from the Memphis tomb to Alexandria
for reburial (by Ptolemy Philadelphus in c. 280 BC, according to Pausanias).
Later Ptolemy Philopator placed Alexander's body in Alexandria's communal
mausoleum. Shortly after the death of Cleopatra, Alexander's resting place was
visited by Augustus, who is said to have placed flowers on the tomb and a
golden diadem upon Alexander's head. By the 4th century AD the resting place of
Alexander was no longer known; later authors, such as Ibn 'Abd al-Hakam, Al-
Masudi and Leo the African, report having seen Alexander's tomb, but do not
specify its location. According to one legend, the body lies in a crypt beneath
an early Christian church.
