Early Modern history of Germany The Holy Roman Empire was dominated by the
House of Habsburg throughout the Early Modern period. The Habsburg Monarchy
refers to the territories ruled by the Austrian branch of the House of
Habsburg, and then by the successor House of Habsburg-Lorraine, between 1526
and 1867/1918. The capital was Vienna (from 1583 to 1611 Prague). The 16th
century. German Renaissance. The German Renaissance, part of the Northern
Renaissance, was a cultural and artistic movement that spread among German
thinkers in the 15th and 16th centuries, which originated with the Italian
Renaissance in Italy. This was a result of German artists who had traveled to
Italy to learn more and become inspired by the Renaissance movement. Many areas
of the arts and sciences were influenced, notably by the spread of humanism to
the various German states and principalities. There were many advances made in
the development of new techniques in the fields of architecture, the arts, and
the sciences. This also marked the time within Germany of a rise of power,
independent city states, and spread of Franciscan humanism. German Reformation.
The German Reformation initiated by Martin Luther leads to the German Peasants'
War in 1524-1525. Luther, along with his colleague Philipp Melanchthon,
emphasized this point in his plea for the Reformation at the "Reichstag" in
1529 amid charges of heresy, but the edict by the Diet of Worms (1521)
prohibited all innovations. Meanwhile, in these efforts to retain the guise of
a Catholic reformer as opposed to a heretical revolutionary, and to appeal to
German princes with his religious condemnation of the peasant revolts backed up
by the Doctrine of the Two Kingdoms, Luther's growing conservatism would
provoke more radical reformers. At a religious conference with the Zwinglians
in 1529, Melanchthon joined with Luther in opposing a union with Zwingli. With
the protestation of the Lutheran princes at the "Reichstag" of Speyer (1529)
and rejection of the Lutheran "Augsburg Confession" at Augsburg (1530), a
separate Lutheran church finally emerged. In Northern Europe Luther appealed to
the growing national consciousness of the German states because he denounced
the Pope for involvement in politics as well as religion. Moreover, he backed
the nobility, which was now justified to crush the Great Peasant Revolt of 1525
and to confiscate church property by Luther's Doctrine of the Two Kingdoms.
This explains the attraction of some territorial princes to Lutheranism.
However, the Elector of Brandenburg, Joachim I, blamed Lutheranism for the
revolt and so did others. In Brandenburg, it was only under his successor
Joachim II that Lutheranism was established, and the old religion was not
formally extinct in Brandenburg until the death of the last Catholic bishop
there, Georg von Blumenthal, who was Bishop of Lebus and sovereign Prince-
Bishop of Ratzeburg. Though Charles V fought the Reformation, it is no
coincidence either that the reign of his nationalistic predecessor Maximilian I
saw the beginning of the Reformation. While the centralized states of western
Europe had reached accords with the Vatican permitting them to draw on the rich
property of the church for government expenditures, enabling them to form state
churches that were greatly autonomous of Rome, similar moves on behalf of the
Reich were unsuccessful so long as princes and prince bishops fought reforms to
drop the pretension of the secular universal empire. The printing press and
literacy. The Reformation and printing press combined to mark a major
breakthrough in the spread of literacy. From 1517 onward religious pamphlets
flooded Germany and much of Europe. By 1530 over 10,000 publications are known,
with a total of ten million copies. The Reformation was thus a media
revolution. Luther strengthened his attacks on Rome by depicting a "good"
against "bad" church. From there, it became clear that print could be used for
propaganda in the Reformation for particular agendas. Reformist writers used
pre-Reformation styles, clichés, and stereotypes and changed items as needed
for their own purposes. Illustrations in the newly translated Bible and in many
tracts popularized Luther's ideas. Lucas Cranach the Elder (1472-1553), the
great painter patronized by the electors of Wittenberg, was a close friend of
Luther, and illustrated Luther's theology for a popular audience. He dramatized
Luther's views on the relationship between the Old and New Testaments, while
remaining mindful of Luther's careful distinctions about proper and improper
uses of visual imagery. Baroque period and Thirty Years' War. The Thirty Years'
War (1618–1648) was a religious war principally fought in Germany, where it
involved most of the European powers. The conflict began between Protestants
and Catholics in the Holy Roman Empire, but gradually developed into a general,
political war involving most of Europe. The Thirty Years' War was a
continuation of the France-Habsburg rivalry for European political pre-
eminence, and in turn led to further warfare between France and the Habsburg
powers. The major impact of the Thirty Years' War, fought mostly by mercenary
armies, was the extensive destruction of entire regions, denuded by the
foraging armies. Episodes of famine and disease significantly decreased the
populace of the German states and the Low Countries and Italy, while
bankrupting most of the combatant powers. Some of the quarrels that provoked
the war went unresolved for much longer time. The Thirty Years' War was ended
with the Treaty of Münster, a part of the wider Peace of Westphalia. The
Baroque period (1600 to 1720) was one of the most fertile times in German
literature. Many writers reflected the horrible experiences of the Thirty
Years' War, in poetry and prose. Grimmelshausen's adventures of the young and
naïve Simplicissimus, in the eponymous book Simplicius Simplicissimus, became
the most famous novel of the Baroque period. Andreas Gryphius and Daniel Caspar
von Lohenstein wrote German language tragedies, or "Trauerspiele", often on
Classical themes and frequently quite violent. Erotic, religious and occasional
poetry appeared in both German and Latin. Rise of Prussia and the end of the
Holy Roman Empire. The 18th century history of Germany sees the ascendancy of
the Kingdom of Prussia and the outbreak of the Napoleonic Wars which lead to
the final dissolution of the Holy Roman Empire in 1806. Silesia. When Emperor
Charles VI failed to produce a male heir, he bequethed lands to his daughter
Maria Theresa by the "Pragmatic sanction" of 1713." After his death in 1740 the
Prussian king Frederick the Great attacked Austria and invaded Silesia in the
First Silesian War (1740 – 1742). Austria lost and in the Treaty of Berlin
(1742) Prussia acquired nearly all of Silesia. Prussia's victory weakened
Austria's prestige and Maria Theresa, and gave Prussia an effective equality
with Austria within the Holy Roman Empire" for the next century. French
Revolutionary Wars and final dissolution of the Holy Roman Empire. From 1792
onwards, revolutionary France was at war with various parts of the Empire
intermittently. The German Mediatisation was the series of mediatisations and
secularisations that occurred in 1795–1814, during the latter part of the era
of the French Revolution and then the Napoleonic Era. "Mediatisation" was the
process of annexing the lands of one sovereign monarchy to another, often
leaving the annexed some rights. "Secularisation" was the redistribution to
secular states of the secular lands held by an ecclesiastical ruler such as a
bishop or an abbot. The Empire was formally dissolved on 6 August 1806 when the
last Holy Roman Emperor Francis II (from 1804, Emperor Francis I of Austria)
abdicated, following a military defeat by the French under Napoleon (see Treaty
of Pressburg). Napoleon reorganized much of the Empire into the Confederation
of the Rhine, a French satellite. Francis' House of Habsburg-Lorraine survived
the demise of the Empire, continuing to reign as Emperors of Austria and Kings
of Hungary until the Habsburg empire's final dissolution in 1918 in the
aftermath of World War I. The Napoleonic Confederation of the Rhine was
replaced by a new union, the German Confederation, in 1815, following the end
of the Napoleonic Wars. It lasted until 1866 when Prussia founded the North
German Confederation, a forerunner of the German Empire which united the
German-speaking territories outside of Austria and Switzerland under Prussian
leadership in 1871. This later served as the predecessor-state of modern
Germany.
