Restoration (England) The Restoration of the English monarchy began in 1660
when the English, Scottish and Irish monarchies were all restored under Charles
II after the Interregnum that followed the Wars of the Three Kingdoms. The term
"Restoration" is used to describe both the actual event by which the monarchy
was restored, and the period of several years afterwards in which a new
political settlement was established. It is very often used to cover the whole
reign of Charles II (1660-1685) and often the brief reign of his younger
brother James II (1685-1688). In certain contexts it may be used to cover the
whole period of the later Stuart monarchs as far as the death of Queen Anne and
the accession of the Hanoverian George I in 1714; for example Restoration
comedy typically encompasses works written as late as 1710. End of the
Protectorate and Commonwealth. The Protectorate, which followed the
Commonwealth and preceded the English Restoration, might have continued if
Oliver Cromwell's son Richard, who was made Lord Protector on his father's
death, had been capable of carrying on his father's policies. Richard
Cromwell's main weakness was that he did not have the confidence of the army.
After seven months, an army faction known as the Wallingford House party
removed him on 6 May 1659 and reinstalled the Rump Parliament. Charles
Fleetwood was appointed a member of the Committee of Safety and of the Council
of State, and one of the seven commissioners for the army. On 9 June 1659, he
was nominated lord-general (commander-in-chief) of the army. However, his
leadership was undermined in Parliament, which chose to disregard the army's
authority in a similar fashion to the post-First Civil War Parliament. A
royalist uprising was planned for 1 August 1659, but it was foiled. However,
Sir George Booth gained control of Cheshire; Charles II hoped that with Spanish
support he could effect a landing, but none was forthcoming. Booth held
Cheshire until the end of August when he was defeated by General Lambert. The
Commons, on 12 October 1659, cashiered General John Lambert and other officers,
and installed Fleetwood as chief of a military council under the authority of
the Speaker. The next day Lambert ordered that the doors of the House be shut
and the members kept out. On 26 October a "Committee of Safety" was appointed,
of which Fleetwood and Lambert were members. Lambert was appointed major-
general of all the forces in England and Scotland, Fleetwood being general. The
Committee of Safety sent Lambert with a large force to meet George Monck, who
was in command of the English forces in Scotland, and either negotiate with him
or force him to come to terms. It was into this atmosphere that Monck, the
governor of Scotland under the Cromwells, marched south with his army from
Scotland. Lambert's army began to desert him, and he returned to London almost
alone. Monck marched to London unopposed. The Presbyterian members, excluded in
Pride's Purge of 1648, were recalled, and on 24 December the army restored the
Long Parliament. Fleetwood was deprived of his command and ordered to appear
before Parliament to answer for his conduct. On 3 March 1660, Lambert was sent
to the Tower of London, from which he escaped a month later. He tried to
rekindle the civil war in favour of the Commonwealth by issuing a proclamation
calling on all supporters of the "Good Old Cause" to rally on the battlefield
of Edgehill. But he was recaptured by Colonel Richard Ingoldsby, a participant
in the regicide of Charles I who hoped to win a pardon by handing Lambert over
to the new regime. Lambert was incarcerated and died in custody on Drake's
Island in 1684; Ingoldsby was pardoned. Restoration of Charles II. On 4 April
1660, Charles II issued the Declaration of Breda, in which he made several
promises in relation to the reclamation of the crown of England. Monck
organised the Convention Parliament, which met for the first time on 25 April.
On 8 May it proclaimed that King Charles II had been the lawful monarch since
the execution of Charles I on 30 January 1649. "Constitutionally, it was as if
the last nineteen years had never happened". Charles returned from exile,
leaving The Hague on 23 May and landing at Dover on 25 May. He entered London
on 29 May, his birthday. To celebrate his Majesty's Return to his Parliament",
29 May was made a public holiday, popularly known as Oak Apple Day. He was
crowned at Westminster Abbey on 23 April 1661. Some contemporaries described
the Restoration as "a divinely ordained miracle. The sudden and unexpected
deliverance from usurpation and tyranny was interpreted as a restoration of the
natural and divine order". The Cavalier Parliament convened for the first time
on 8 May 1661, and it would endure for over 17 years, finally being dissolved
on 24 January 1679. Like its predecessor, it was overwhelmingly Royalist. It is
also known as the Pensionary Parliament for the many pensions it granted to
adherents of the King. The leading political figure at the beginning of the
Restoration was Edward Hyde, 1st Earl of Clarendon. It was the "skill and
wisdom of Clarendon" which had "made the Restoration unconditional". Many
Royalist exiles returned and were rewarded. Prince Rupert of the Rhine returned
to the service of England, became a member of the privy council, and was
provided with an annuity. George Goring, 1st Earl of Norwich, returned to be
the Captain of the King's guard and received a pension. Marmaduke Langdale
returned and was made "Baron Langdale". William Cavendish, Marquess of
Newcastle, returned and was able to regain the greater part of his estates. He
was invested in 1666 with the Order of the Garter (which had been bestowed upon
him in 1650), and was advanced to a dukedom on 16 March 1665. Regicides and
rebels. The Indemnity and Oblivion Act, which became law on 29 August 1660,
pardoned all past treason against the crown, but specifically excluded those
involved in the trial and execution of Charles I. 31 of the 59 commissioners
(judges) who had signed the death warrant in 1649 were living. In the ensuing
trials, twelve were condemned to death, the full penalty for Fifth Monarchy
Men. Thomas Harrison, the first person found guilty of regicide, was the
seventeenth of the 59 commissioners to sign the death warrant. He was the first
regicide to be hanged, drawn and quartered because he was considered by the new
government still to represent a real threat to the re-established order. In
October 1660, at Charing Cross or Tyburn, London, ten were publicly hanged,
drawn and quartered: Thomas Harrison, John Jones, Adrian Scroope, John Carew,
Thomas Scot, and Gregory Clement, who had signed the king's death warrant; the
preacher Hugh Peters; Francis Hacker and Daniel Axtell, who commanded the
guards at the king's trial and execution; and John Cooke, the solicitor who
directed the prosecution. On 6 January 1661, 50 Fifth Monarchy Men, headed by a
wine-cooper named Thomas Venner, tried to gain possession of London in the name
of "King Jesus". Most of the 50 were either killed or taken prisoner; on 19 and
21 January, Venner and 10 others were hanged, drawn and quartered for high
treason. John Okey, one of the regicides who signed the death warrant of
Charles I, was brought back from Holland along with Miles Corbet, friend and
lawyer to Cromwell, and John Barkstead, former constable of the Tower of
London. They were all imprisoned in the Tower. From there they were taken to
Tyburn to be hanged, drawn and quartered. A further 19 were imprisoned for
life. Oliver Cromwell, Henry Ireton, Judge Thomas Pride, and Judge John
Bradshaw were posthumously attainted for high treason. Because Parliament is a
court, the highest in the land, a bill of attainder is a legislative act
declaring a person guilty of treason or felony, in contrast to the regular
judicial process of trial and conviction. In January 1661, the corpses of
Cromwell, Ireton and Bradshaw were exhumed and hung in chains at Tyburn.
Regrant of certain Commonwealth titles. The Commonwealth's written
constitutions gave to the Lord Protector the King's power to grant titles of
honour. Cromwell created over 30 new knights. These knighthoods were all
declared invalid upon the Restoration of Charles II. Many were regranted by the
restored King. Of the twelve Cromwellian baronetcies, Charles II regranted half
of them. Only one now continues: Sir Richard Thomas Willy, 14th baronet, is the
direct successor of Sir Griffith Williams. Edmund Dunch was created Baron
Burnell of East Wittenham in April 1658, but this barony was not regranted. The
male line failed in 1719 with the death of his grandson, also Edmund Dunch, so
no one can lay claim to the title. The one hereditary viscountcy Cromwell
created (making Charles Howard Viscount Howard of Morpeth and Baron Gilsland)
continues to this day. In April 1661, Howard was created Earl of Carlisle,
Viscount Howard of Morpeth, and Baron Dacre of Gillesland. The present Earl is
a direct descendant of this Cromwellian creation and Restoration recreation.
Religious settlement. The Church of England was restored as the national Church
in England, backed by the Clarendon Code and the Act of Uniformity 1662. People
reportedly "pranced around May poles as a way of taunting the Presbyterians and
Independents" and "burned copies of the Solemn League and Covenant".
Restoration Britain. Theatres reopened after having been closed during the
protectorship of Oliver Cromwell, Puritanism lost its momentum, and the bawdy
"Restoration comedy" became a recognisable genre. In addition, women were
allowed to perform on stage for the first time. In Scotland, Episcopacy was
reinstated. To celebrate the occasion and cement their diplomatic relations,
the Dutch Republic presented Charles with the Dutch Gift, a fine collection of
old master paintings, classical sculptures, furniture, and a yacht.
