Fifth Crusade The Fifth Crusade (1213–1221) was an attempt to reacquire
Jerusalem and the rest of the Holy Land by first conquering the powerful
Ayyubid state in Egypt. Pope Innocent III and his successor Pope Honorius III
organized crusading armies led by King Andrew II of Hungary and Duke Leopold VI
of Austria, and a foray against Jerusalem ultimately left the city in Muslim
hands. Later in 1218, a German army led by Oliver of Cologne, and a mixed army
of Dutch, Flemish and Frisian soldiers led by William I, Count of Holland
joined the crusade. In order to attack Damietta in Egypt, they allied in
Anatolia with the Seljuk Sultanate of Rûm which attacked the Ayyubids in Syria
in an attempt to free the Crusaders from fighting on two fronts. After
occupying the port of Damietta, the Crusaders marched south towards Cairo in
July 1221, but were turned back after their dwindling supplies led to a forced
retreat. A nighttime attack by Sultan Al-Kamil resulted in a great number of
crusader losses, and eventually in the surrender of the army. Al-Kamil agreed
to an eight-year peace agreement with Europe. Preparations. Innocent III had
already planned since 1208 a crusade in order to destroy the Ayyubid Empire and
to recapture Jerusalem. On April, 1213, Pope Innocent III issued the papal bull
"Quia maior", calling all of Christendom to join a new crusade. This was
followed by another papal bull, the "Ad Liberandam" in 1215. France. The
message of the crusade was preached in France by Robert of Courçon; however,
unlike other Crusades, not many French knights joined, as they were already
fighting the Albigensian Crusade against the heretical Cathar sect in southern
France. In 1215 Pope Innocent III summoned the Fourth Lateran Council, where,
along with the Latin Patriarch of Jerusalem, Raoul of Merencourt, he discussed
the recovery of the Holy Land, among other church business. Pope Innocent
wanted it to be led by the papacy, as the First Crusade should have been, in
order to avoid the mistakes of the Fourth Crusade, which had been taken over by
the Venetians. Pope Innocent planned for the crusaders to meet at Brindisi in
1216, and prohibited trade with the Muslims, to ensure that the crusaders would
have ships and weapons. Every crusader would receive an indulgence, including
those who simply helped pay the expenses of a crusader, but did not go on
crusade themselves. Hungary and Germany. Oliver of Cologne had preached the
crusade in Germany, and Emperor Frederick II attempted to join in 1215.
Frederick was the last monarch Innocent wanted to join, as he had challenged
the Papacy (and would do so in the years to come). Innocent, however, died in
1216. He was succeeded by Pope Honorius III, who barred Frederick from
participating, but organized crusading armies led by king Andrew II of Hungary
and duke Leopold VI of Austria. Campaign. Jerusalem. Andrew and his troops
embarked on 23 August 1217, in Spalato. They were transported by the Venetian
fleet, which was the largest European fleet in the era. They landed on 9
October on Cyprus from where they sailed to Acre and joined John of Brienne,
ruler of the Kingdom of Jerusalem, Hugh I of Cyprus, and Prince Bohemund IV of
Antioch to fight against the Ayyubids in Syria. In Jerusalem, the walls and
fortifications were demolished to prevent the Christians from being able to
defend the city, if they did manage reach it and take it. Muslims fled the
city, afraid that there would be a repeat of the bloodbath of the First Crusade
in 1099. Andrew's well-mounted army defeated sultan Al-Adil I at Bethsaida on
the Jordan River on November 10. Muslim forces retreated in their fortresses
and towns. The catapults and trebuchets did not arrive in time, so he had
fruitless assaults on the fortresses of the Lebanon and on Mount Tabor.
Afterwards, Andrew spent his time collecting alleged relics. At the beginning
of 1218 King Andrew II, who was very sick, decided to return to Hungary. Andrew
and his army departed to Hungary in February 1218, and Bohemund and Hugh also
returned home. Alliance with the Sultanate of Rum. Later in 1218 Oliver of
Cologne arrived with a new German army and the count of Holland William I
arrived with a mixed army consisting of Dutch, Flemish and Frisian soldiers.
With Leopold and John they discussed attacking Damietta in Egypt. To accomplish
this, they allied with Keykavus I, the leader in Anatolia, who attacked the
Ayyubids in Syria in an attempt to free the Crusaders from fighting on two
fronts. Egypt. In June 1218 the crusaders began their siege of Damietta, and
despite resistance from the unprepared sultan Al-Adil, the tower outside the
city was taken on August 25. They could not gain Damietta itself, and in the
ensuing months diseases killed many of the crusaders, including Robert of
Courcon. Al-Adil also died and was succeeded by Al-Kamil. Meanwhile, Honorius
III sent Pelagius of Albano to lead the crusade in 1219 . Al-Kamil tried to
negotiate peace with the crusaders. He offered to trade Damietta for Jerusalem,
but Pelagius would not accept these offers. After hearing this Count William I
of Holland left the crusade and sailed home. In August or September, Francis of
Assisi arrived in the crusader camp and crossed over to preach to Al-Kamil. By
November, the crusaders had worn out the sultan's forces, and were finally able
to occupy the port. Immediately the papal and secular powers fought for control
of the town, with John of Brienne claiming it for himself in 1220 . Pelagius
would not accept this, and John returned to Acre later that year. Pelagius
hoped Frederick II would arrive with a fresh army, but he never did; instead,
after a year of inactivity in both Syria and Egypt, John of Brienne returned,
and the crusaders marched south towards Cairo in July 1221 . This march was
observed by the forces of Al-Kamil, and frequent raids along the flanks of the
army led to the withdrawal of some 2000 German troops who refused to continue
the advance and returned to Damietta. By now Al-Kamil was able to ally with the
other Ayyubids in Syria, who had defeated Keykavus I. The crusader march to
Cairo was disastrous; the river Nile flooded ahead of them, stopping the
crusader advance. A dry canal that was previously crossed by the crusaders
flooded, thus blocking the crusader army's retreat. With supplies dwindling, a
forced retreat began, culminating in a night time attack by Al-Kamil which
resulted in a great number of crusader losses and eventually in the surrender
of the army under Pelagius. Aftermath. The terms of this surrender meant the
relinquishing of Damietta to Al-Kamil in exchange for the release of the
crusaders. Al-Kamil agreed to an eight-year peace agreement with Europe and to
return a piece of the true cross. However, the cross was never returned as Al-
Kamil did not, in fact, have it. The failure of the Crusade caused an
outpouring of anti-papal sentiment from the Occitan poet Guilhem Figueira. The
more orthodox Gormonda de Monpeslier responded to Figueira's "D'un sirventes
far" with a song of her own, "Greu m'es a durar". Instead of blaming the
Pelagius or the Papacy, she laid the blame on the "foolishness" of the wicked.
