Five Dynasties and Ten Kingdoms period Five Dynasties and Ten Kingdoms () was
between 907–960/979 AD and an era of political upheaval in China, between the
fall of the Tang Dynasty and the founding of the Song Dynasty. During this
period, five dynasties quickly succeeded one another in the north, and more
than 12 independent states were established, mainly in the south. However, only
ten are traditionally listed, hence the era's name, "Ten Kingdoms." Some
historians, such as Bo Yang, count 11, including Yan and Qi, but not Northern
Han, viewing it as simply a continuation of Later Han. This era also led to the
founding of the Liao Dynasty. The Ten Kingdoms: Wu (907-937), Wuyue (907-978),
Min (909-945), Chu (907-951), Southern Han (917-971), Former Shu (907-925),
Later Shu (934-965), Jingnan (924-963), Southern Tang (937-975), Northern Han
(951-979). Other regimes: Yan, Qi, Zhao, Yiwu Jiedushi, Dingnan Jiedushi,
Wuping Jiedushi, Qingyuan Jiedushi, Yin, Ganzhou, Shazhou, Liangzhou.
Background. Towards the end of the Tang Dynasty, the imperial government
granted increased powers to the "jiedushi", the regional military governors.
The Huang Chao Rebellion weakened the imperial government's authority, and by
the early 10th century the jiedushi, who commanded "de facto" independence,
were not subject to the authority of the imperial government. Thus, the Five
Dynasties and Ten Kingdoms ensued. North China South China Northern China.
Later Liang Dynasty. During the Liang Dynasty, the warlord Zhu Wen held the
most power in northern China. Although he was originally a member of Huang
Chao's rebel army, he took on a crucial role in suppressing the Huang Chao
Rebellion. For this function, he was awarded the Xuanwu Jiedushi title. Within
a few years, he had consolidated his power by destroying neighbours and forcing
the move of the imperial capital to Luoyang (in modern Henan province), which
was within his region of influence. In 904, he executed Emperor Zhaozong and
made his 13-year-old son a subordinate ruler. Three years later, he induced the
boy emperor to abdicate in his favour. He then proclaimed himself emperor, thus
beginning the Later Liang Dynasty. Later Tang Dynasty. During the Tang Dynasty,
rival warlords declared independence in their governing provinces — not all
of whom recognized the emperor's authority. Li Cunxu and Liu Shouguang
(劉守光) fiercely fought the regime forces to conquer northern China; Li
Cunxu succeeded. He defeated Liu Shouguang (who had proclaimed a Yan Empire in
911) in 915, and declared himself emperor in 923; within a few months, he
brought down the Later Liang regime. Thus began the Later Tang Dynasty — the
first in a long line of conquest dynasties. After reuniting much of northern
China, Cunxu conquered Former Shu in 925, a regime that had been set up in
Sichuan. Later Jin Dynasty. The Later Tang Dynasty had a few years of relative
calm, followed by unrest. In 934, Sichuan again asserted independence. In 936,
Shi Jingtang, a Shatuo Turk jiedushi from Taiyuan, was aided by the Manchurian
Khitan Empire in a rebellion against the dynasty. In return for their aid, Shi
Jingtang promised annual tribute and 16 prefectures in the Youyun area (modern
northern Hebei province and Beijing) to the Khitans. The rebellion succeeded;
Shi Jingtang became emperor in this same year. Not long after the Jin Dynasty's
founding, the Khitans regarded the emperor as a proxy ruler for China proper.
In 943, they declared war on this kingdom, and within three years seized the
capital, Kaifeng—thus marking the end of Later Jin Dynasty. But, although
they had conquered vast regions of China, they were unable or unwilling to
control those regions and retreated from them early in the next year. Later Han
Dynasty. To fill the power vacuum, the "jiedushi" Liu Zhiyuan entered the
imperial capital in 947, and proclaimed the advent of the Later Han Dynasty,
establishing a third successive Shatuo Turk dynasty. This was the shortest of
the five dynasties; following a coup in 951, General Guo Wei, a Han Chinese,
was enthroned, thus beginning the Later Zhou Dynasty. However, Liu Chong, a
member of the Later Han imperial family, established a rival Northern Han
regime in Taiyuan, and requested Khitan aid to defeat the Later Zhou. Later
Zhou Dynasty. After the death of Guo Wei in 951, his adopted son Chai Rong
succeeded the throne and began a policy of expansion and reunification. In 954,
his army defeated combined Khitan and Northern Han forces, ending their
ambition of toppling the Later Zhou dynasty. Between 956 and 958, forces of
Later Zhou conquered much of Southern Tang, the most powerful regime in
southern China, which ceded all the territory north of the Yangtze River in
defeat. In 959, Chai Rong attacked the Khitan Empire in an attempt to recover
territories ceded during the Later Jin Dynasty. After many victories, he
succumbed to illness. In 960, the general Zhao Kuangyin staged a coup and took
the throne for himself, founding the Northern Song Dynasty. This is the
official end of the Five Dynasties and Ten Kingdoms period. During the next two
decades, Zhao Kuangyin and his successor Zhao Kuangyi defeated the other
remaining regimes in China proper, conquering Northern Han in 979, and
reunifying China completely in 982. Northern Han. Though considered one of the
ten kingdoms, the Northern Han was based in the traditional Shatuo Turk
stronghold of Shanxi. It was created after the last of three dynasties created
by Shatuo Turks fell to the Han-governed Later Zhou Dynasty in 951. With the
protection of the powerful Khitan Liao empire, the Northern Han maintained
nominal independence until the Song Dynasty wrested it from the Khitan in 979.
Southern China: The Ten Kingdoms. Unlike the dynasties of northern China, which
succeeded one other in rapid succession, the regimes of southern China were
generally concurrent, each controlling a specific geographical area. These were
known as "The Ten Kingdoms". Wu. The Kingdom of Wu (902–937) was established
in modern-day Jiangsu, Anhui, and Jiangxi provinces. It was founded by Yang
Xingmi, who became a Tang Dynasty military governor in 892. The capital was
initially at Guangling (present-day Yangzhou) and later moved to Jinling
(present-day Nanjing). The kingdom fell in 937 when it was taken from within by
the founder of the Southern Tang. Wuyue. The Kingdom of Wuyue was the longest-
lived (907–978) and among the most powerful of the southern states. Wuyue was
known for its learning and culture. It was founded by Qian Liu, who set up his
capital at Xifu (modern-day Hangzhou). It was based mostly in modern Zhejiang
province but also held parts of southern Jiangsu. Qian Liu was named the Prince
of Yue by the Tang emperor in 902; the Prince of Wu was added in 904. After the
fall of the Tang Dynasty in 907, he declared himself king of Wuyue. Wuyue
survived until the eighteenth year of the Song Dynasty, when Qian Shu
surrendered to the expanding dynasty. Min. The Kingdom of Min (909–945) was
founded by Wang Shenzhi, who named himself the Prince of Min with its capital
at Changle (present-day Fuzhou). One of Shenzhi’s sons proclaimed the
independent state of Yin in the northeast of Min territory. The Southern Tang
took that territory after the Min asked for help. Despite declaring loyalty to
the neighboring Wuyue, the Southern Tang finished its conquest of Min in 945.
Southern Han. The Southern Han (917–971) was founded in Guangzhou (also known
as Canton) by Liu Yan. His brother, Liu Yin, was named regional governor by the
Tang court. The kingdom included Guangdong, Guangxi, Hanoi (North Vietnam),
Hainan island. Chu. The Chu (927–951) was founded by Ma Yin with the capital
at Changsha. The kingdom held Hunan and northeastern Guangxi. Ma was named
regional military governor by the Tang court in 896, and named himself the
Prince of Chu with the fall of the Tang Dynasty in 907. This status as the
Prince of Chu was confirmed by the Later Tang Dynasty in 927. The Southern Tang
absorbed the state in 951 and moved the royal family to its capital in Nanjing,
although Southern Tang rule of the region was temporary, as the next year
former Chu military officers under the leadership of Liu Yan seized the
territory. In the waning years of the Five Dynasties and Ten Kingdoms period,
the region was ruled by Zhou Xingfeng. Northern Han. The Northern Han was
founded by Liu Min (劉旻), formerly known as Liu Chong (劉崇), and lasted
from 951 to 979. It has the capital at Taiyuan. Jingnan (also known as
Nanping). The smallest of the southern states, Jingnan (924–963), was founded
by Gao Jichang. It was based in Jiangling and held two other districts
southwest of present-day Wuhan in Hubei. Gao was in the service of the Later
Liang Dynasty (the successor of the Tang Dynasty in northern China). Gao’s
successors claimed the title of King of Nanping after the fall of the Later
Liang in 924. It was a small and weak kingdom, and thus tried to maintain good
relations with each of the Five Dynasties. The kingdom fell to advancing armies
of the Song Dynasty in 963. Former Shu. The Kingdom of Shu (907–925) was
founded after the fall of the Tang Dynasty by Wang Jian, who held his court in
Chengdu. The kingdom held most of present-day Sichuan, western Hubei, and parts
of southern Gansu and Shaanxi. Wang was named military governor of western
Sichuan by the Tang court in 891. The kingdom fell when his incompetent son
surrendered in the face of an advance by the Later Tang Dynasty in 925. Later
Shu. The Later Shu (935–965) is essentially a resurrection of the previous
Shu state that had fallen a decade earlier to the Later Tang Dynasty. Because
the Later Tang was in decline, Meng Zhixiang found the opportunity to reassert
Shu’s independence. Like the Former Shu, the capital was at Chengdu and it
basically controlled the same territory as its predecessor. The kingdom was
ruled well until forced to succumb to Northern Song armies in 965. Southern
Tang. The Southern Tang (937–975) was the successor state of Wu as Li Bian
(Emperor Liezu) took the state over from within in 937. Expanding from the
original domains of Wu, it eventually took over Yin, Min, and Chu, holding
present-day southern Anhui, southern Jiangsu, much of Jiangxi, Hunan, and
eastern Hubei at its height. The kingdom became nominally subordinate to the
expanding Song Dynasty in 961 and was invaded outright in 975, when it was
formally absorbed into the Song Dynasty. Transitions between kingdoms. Although
more stable than northern China as a whole, southern China was also torn apart
by warfare. Wu quarrelled with its neighbours, a trend that continued as Wu was
replaced with Southern Tang. In the 940s Min and Chu underwent internal crises
which Southern Tang handily took advantage of, destroying Min in 945 and Chu in
951. Remnants of Min and Chu, however, survived in the form of Qingyuan
Jiedushi and Wuping Jiedushi for many years after. With this, Southern Tang
became the undisputedly most powerful regime in southern China. However, it was
unable to defeat incursions by the Later Zhou Dynasty between 956 and 958, and
ceded all of its land north of the Yangtze River. The Northern Song Dynasty,
established in 960, was determined to reunify China. Jingnan and Wuping were
swept away in 963, Later Shu in 965, Southern Han in 971, and Southern Tang in
975. Finally, Wuyue and Qingyuan gave up their land to Northern Song in 978,
bringing all of southern China under the control of the central government.
