Gender history Gender history is a sub-field of history and gender studies,
which looks at the past from the perspective of gender. It is in many ways, an
outgrowth of women's history. Impact. Despite its relatively short life, Gender
History (and its forerunner Women's History) has had a rather significant
effect on the general study of history. Since the 1960s, when the initially
small field first achieved a measure of acceptance, it has gone through a
number of different phases, each with its own challenges and outcomes, but
always making an impact of some kind on the historical discipline. Although
some of the changes to the study of history have been quite obvious, such as
increased numbers of books on famous women or simply the admission of greater
numbers of women into the historical profession, other influences are more
subtle, even though they may be more politically groundbreaking in the end.
Within the Profession. According to historian Joan Scott, conflict occurred
between Women's History historians and other historians in a number of ways. In
the American Historical Association, when feminists argued that female
historians were treated unequally within the field and underrepresented in the
association, they were essentially leveling charges of historical negligence by
traditional historians. Notions of professionalism were not rejected outright,
but they were accused of being biased. Supplementary History. According to
Scott, the construction of Women's History as "supplementary" to the rest of
history had a similar effect. At first glance, a supplement simply adds
information which has been missing from the greater story, but as Scott points
out, it also questions why the information was left out in the first place.
Whenever it is noticed that a woman found to be missing from written history,
Women's History first describes her role, second, examines which mechanisms
allowed her role to be omitted, and third, asks to what other information these
mechanisms were blind. Gender Theory. Finally, the advent of gender theory once
again challenged commonly held ideas of the discipline, including those
scholars studying Women's History. Post-modern criticism of essentialising
socially constructed groups, be they gender groups or otherwise, pointed out
the weaknesses in various sorts of history. In the past, historians have
attempted to describe the shared experience of large numbers of people, as
though these people and their experiences were homogeneous and uniform. Women
have multiple identities, influenced by any number of factors including race
and class, and any examination of history which conflates their experiences,
fails to provide an accurate picture.
