Great Depression in France The Great Depression affected France from about 1931
through the remainder of the decade. The depression had drastic effects on the
local economy, which can partly explain the 6 February 1934 crisis and even
more the formation of the Popular Front, led by SFIO socialist leader Léon
Blum, who won the election of 1936. Economic crisis of the 1920s. Like the
United Kingdom, France had initially struggled to recover from the devastation
of World War I, trying without much success to recover war reparations from
Germany. Unlike Britain, though, France had a more self-sufficient economy. In
1929, France seemed an island of prosperity, for three reasons. First, it was a
country traditionally wary of trusts and big companies. The economy of France
was above all founded in small and medium-sized businesses not financed by
shares. Unlike the Anglosphere and particularly Americans, the French invested
little on the stock exchange and put their confidence into gold, which in the
crisis of 1929 was a currency of refuge. Gold had played the same role in the
first world war, which explained French attachment to it. Finally, France had
had a positive balance of payments for some years thanks mainly to invisible
exports such as tourism. French investments abroad were numerous. The German
reparations decided by the Treaty of Versailles in 1919 brought in large
amounts of money which served principally to repay war loans to the United
States. Reparations payments ended in 1923. In January of that year, Germany
defaulted on its payments and the French president, Raymond Poincaré, invoked
a clause of the Versailles Treaty and sent troops to occupy the Ruhr valley in
the hope of enforcing payment. Germany responded by flooding the area with
inflated money, ruining its currency and denying France any hope of full
reparations. Poincaré accepted an agreement mediated by the United States in
which it received smaller payments, but Poincaré's government fell soon
afterward. While the United States experienced a sharp rise in unemployment,
France had almost none. Much of that was due to a simple lack of manpower; at
the end of the war, France had 1,322,000 dead and three million wounded. One in
four of the dead was younger than 24. That in turn lowered the birth rate, so
that by 1938 France still had only half the number of 19-to-21 year-olds it
would have had had the war not happened. But whatever the causes of full
employment, confidence in the government was high. The French economy was
stronger than those of its neighbours, notably because of the solidarity of the
franc. The introduction of the American economic model, inspired particularly
by Ford, ended suddenly and, with it, the modernisation of French businesses.
Everything seemed to favour the French; production didn't weaken before 1930,
particularly in primary materials, and the country was the world's leading
producer of iron in 1930. France felt confident in its systems and proud of its
"vertu budgétaire", in other words the balancing of the budget, which France
had managed more or less for nearly a decade. In 1927, France gained from the
world crisis in becoming the world's largest holder of gold, its reserves
growing from 18 billion francs in 1927 to 80 billion in 1930. Le Figaro said:
"For our part let us rejoice in our timid yet prosperous economy as opposed to
the presumptuousness and decadent economy of the Anglo-Saxon races." Problems
of financial policy. There was a further contrast in the way France and Anglo-
Saxon nations viewed their economies. The Anglo-Saxon model encouraged growth
of the money stock; in France, the Depression was seen as a necessary evil, to
"purge" the excess liquidity in the world economy and to push over-indebted
companies into failure. Successive governments maintained restrictive policies
into 1934 and interest rates were kept high to maintain the attractiveness of
the franc. The absence of contra-cyclical policies kept the state budget in
balance. In 1934-35, the Pierre-Étienne Flandin government allowed a less
restrictive policy allowing short-term indebtedness. The Banque de France lost
15 per cent of its reserves and the government was replaced by one led by
Pierre Laval, who installed a provisionally deflationist policy before himself
accepting a public deficit. The franc ran into a new crisis. Laval tried in
1935 to reduce salaries in an effort to lessen unemployment. He ran into the
resistance of unions in the public sector. The inability of French production
to take off was in contrast to the experience of the United Kingdom, which had
devalued in 1931. Devaluation was something France didn't want and it happened
only in 1936. An undeveloped economy. France became uncompetitive with other
industrialised countries during the 1920s. The reason was its archaic economic
model. There was practically no concentration of capital and agriculture, the
country's strength for centuries, was totally unmechanised. Three-quarters of
French farms in the 1930s were of less than 10 hectares. And while a start was
made on modernisation in the 1920s because of revenue linked to the war,
farmers using the money to buy land (medium-scale farms making up 22 per cent
of cultivated land and large farms less than three per cent) and machinery. The
crisis of 1929 impoverished all the countries of the world and even if France
could hold out for a while thanks to its invisible exports, it could not do so
for long. Exports of goods dropped sharply, and tourism, one of the country's
largest sources of income, also declined, as fewer tourists could afford to
travel. The end of German reparations was a further blow. France appeared to go
into the crisis with an advantage over its neighbours. The crisis took hold,
however, and France was the last country to come out of it because the
country's economic policies hindered recovery. Although it had appeared
competitive at the beginning of the decade, the devaluation of most currencies
and especially of sterling took away this advantage. Successive governments
refused to devalue the franc and unsettle the balance of the economy. The
consequences of French policy were multiple but in the first half of the 1930s
they showed in interrelated ways. The economic situation already established
grew worse. While in Germany and America the crisis brought greater
concentration of capital and therefore, in the medium term, the modernisation
of the country, the absence of large companies made this impossible in France.
In addition, the crisis slowed activity in small and medium-sized businesses.
In strongly industrialised countries, the economy could be relaunched by
merging companies into still more productive ones; in France, workers could do
no more than reduce their working hours. The less time companies were active,
the less they produced, and the less they bought. From depression to war. The
distress of the population had political consequences. A riot on 6 February
1934 led to the fall of the government and a nation which had traditionally
leaned to the right elected the socialist Popular Front government in 1936. The
Popular Front, an alliance of Socialists and Radicals with support outside the
government of the Communists, was led by Léon Blum. The Popular Front
introduced many measures such as the 40-hour working week and holidays with
pay, but Blum felt handicapped in introducing more than limited changes to the
economy because of his dependence on the more right-wing Radicals. This did
little to placate a population anxious for change and a wave of strikes broke
involving two million workers Factories were occupied and membership of the
Communist party rose to 300,000 in 1937. In the night of 7–8 June 1936,
employers and unions signed the Matignon agreement by which they raised wages
by seven to 15 per cent to increase workers' buying power, to stimulate the
economy and to bring an end to the strikes. Blum brought in measures to control
cereal prices, to insist that the Banque de France place the national interest
above that of the shareholders, and nationalised the armaments industry. That
upset the Left, which saw too much legislation, and did nothing to please the
Right, which believed that state involvement in a capitalist economy would
bring about disaster. The Radicals would not accept currency controls and the
result of the unrest was that capital fled abroad. That weakened the economy
and employers tried to minimise the results of the Matignon agreement, which
created more social tension and in turn a further flight of capital.
Devaluation of the franc by 30 per cent became inevitable, despite government
assurances that it would not happen. In January 1937, Blum went further and
announced "a pause" to social reforms. The Senate refused to give him emergency
powers to cope with the recession and he resigned on 20 June 1937 and the first
Popular Front began to fall apart. A second had even less success. The
President, Lebrun, called on the Radical leader Édouard Daladier to form a new
government without the Socialists. Daladier relied on liberal economics to
rescue, or at any rate keep afloat the economy on a worldwide sea of financial
difficulties. Employers and police acted harshly against strikers and
determined to root out "troublemakers". In 1938 the Senate gave Daladier the
emergency powers that Blum had been denied and the government favoured
employers over workers in industrial disputes, particularly in companies which
had come close to coming under the control of their workers. Under Daladier,
economic conditions slightly improved, to a backdrop of growing, increasingly
vocal communist and fascist movements. This gains, however, were due as much as
anything to the growth of the armaments industry. In September 1939, France
declared war on Germany.
