History of American Samoa Originally inhabited as early as 850 AD, Samoa was
not reached by European explorers until the 18th century. By the 20th and 21st
century, the islands were incorporated into Samoa (Western Samoa, Independent
Samoa) and American Samoa (Eastern Samoa). Early occupation by Polynesian
people. The pre-Western history of Eastern Samoa (now American Samoa) is
inextricably bound with the history of Western Samoa (now independent Samoa).
The islands of Tutuila and Aunu'u were politically connected to 'Upolu island
in what is now independent Samoa. It can be said that all the Samoa islands are
politically connected today through the faamatai chiefly system and through
family connections that are as strong as ever. This system of the faamatai and
the customs of faasamoa originated with two of the most famous early chiefs of
Samoa, who were both women and related, Nafanua and Salamasina. Initial
European discovery. Early Western contact included a battle in the 18th century
between French explorers and islanders in Tutuila, for which the Samoans were
blamed in the West, giving them a reputation for ferocity. Early 19th century
Rarotongan missionaries to the Samoa islands were followed by a group of
Western missionaries led by John Williams (missionary) of the
(Congregationalist) London Missionary Society in the 1830s, officially bringing
Christianity to Samoa. Less than a hundred years later, the Samoan
Congregationalist Church became the first independent indigenous church of the
South Pacific. Division of the Samoan archipelago. International rivalries in
the later half of the 19th century were settled by an 1899 Treaty of Berlin in
which Germany and the U.S. divided the Samoan archipelago. The U.S. formally
occupied its portion—a smaller group of eastern islands with the noted harbor
of Pago Pago—the following year. The western islands are now the independent
state of Samoa. Colonization by the United States and conflicts with native
Samoans. American Samoa is the result of the Second Samoan Civil War and an
agreement made between Germany, the United States, and the United Kingdom in
the Tripartite Convention of 1899. After the U.S. took possession of American
Samoa, the U.S. Navy built a coaling station on Pago Pago Bay for its Pacific
Squadron and appointed a local Secretary. Several chiefs of the island of
Tutuila swore allegiance, and ceded the island, to the United States in the
Treaty of Cession of Tutuila of 1900. The last sovereign of , the , was forced
to sign the Treaty of Cession of Manuʻa of 1904 following a series of US Naval
trials, known as the "Trial of the Ipu", in Pago Pago, , and aboard a Pacific
Squadron gunboat. The treaties where ratified by the United States in the
Ratification Act of 1929. After World War I, during the time of the Mau
movement in Western Samoa (then a New Zealand protectorate), there was a
corresponding American Samoa Mau movement, led by Samuel Sailele Ripley, who
was from Leone village and was a WWI war veteran. After meetings in America, he
was prevented from disembarking from the ship that brought him home to American
Samoa and was not allowed to return. The American Samoa Mau movement having
been suppressed by the US Navy, in 1930 the US Congress sent a committee to
investigate the status of American Samoa, led by Americans who had had a part
in the overthrow of the Hawaiian Kingdom. During World War II, U.S. Marines in
American Samoa outnumbered the local population, having a huge cultural
influence. Young Samoan men from the age of 14 and above were combat trained by
US military personnel. As in WWI, American Samoans served in WWII as
combatants, medical personnel, code personnel, ship repairs, etc. Current
status of the territory and attempts of incorporation in the United States.
After the war, Organic Act 4500, a U.S. Department of Interior-sponsored
attempt to incorporate American Samoa, was defeated in Congress, primarily
through the efforts of American Samoan chiefs, led by Tuiasosopo Mariota. These
chiefs' efforts led to the creation of a local legislature, the American Samoa
"Fono" which meets in the village of Fagatogo, the territory's "de facto" and
"de jure" capital. In time, the Navy-appointed governor was replaced by a
locally elected one. Although technically considered "unorganized" in that the
U.S. Congress has not passed an Organic Act for the territory, American Samoa
is self-governing under a constitution that became effective on July 1, 1967.
The U.S. Territory of American Samoa is on the United Nations list of Non-Self-
Governing Territories, a listing which is disputed by territorial government
officials. The islands have been reluctant to separate from the USA in any
manner. The maritime boundaries of American Samoa with New Zealand (Tokelau,
the Cook Islands, and Niue) have been determined in a series of treaties.
Maritime boundaries with Tonga and Samoa have yet to be agreed upon. Economy of
American Samoa. Employment on the island basically falls into three relatively
equally-sized categories of approximately 5,000 workers each: the public
sector, the two tuna canneries, and the rest of the private sector. There are
only a few federal employees in American Samoa and no active military personnel
(there is an Army Reserve unit, however); the overwhelming majority of public
sector employees work for the American Samoa Government. The two tuna canneries
(StarKist and Samoa Packing) export several hundred million dollars worth of
canned tuna to the United States.
