History of Nepal The history of Nepal is characterized by its isolated position
in the Himalayas and its two neighbors, India and Tibet. Due to the arrival of
disparate settler groups from outside through the ages, it is now a multi-
ethnic, multi-cultural, multilingual country. Central Nepal was split in three
kingdoms from the 15th century until the 18th century, when it was unified
under the Shah monarchy. The national language of Nepal is Nepali, which is
also the most-spoken language of Nepal. Nepal experienced a struggle for
democracy in the 20th century. During the 1990s and until 2008, the country was
in civil strife. A peace treaty was signed in 2008 and elections were held in
the same year. Many of the ills of Nepal have been blamed on the royal family
of Nepal. In a historical vote for the election of the constituent assembly,
Nepalese voted to oust the monarchy in Nepal. In June 2008, Nepalese ousted the
royal household. Nepal was formally renamed the Federal Democratic Republic of
Nepal when it became a federal republic. Toponymy. The word Nepal is first
attested in the Atharvaveda Parisista (c. 1978). "Nepal" was derived from the
Sanskrit "nipalaya", which means "at the foot of the mountains" or "abode at
the foot", a reference to its location in relation to the Himalayas. Thus, it
may be an Eastern equivalent of the European toponym "Piedmont." Early ages.
Prehistory It appears that people who were probably of Kirant ethnicity lived
in Nepal more than 2,500 years ago. The Kirant are aboriginal tribe of Nepal
Legendary accounts of the Kirati Period. Nepal's very first recorded, though
still legendary, history began with the Devkotas, who may have arrived from the
west to the Kathmandu valley. Little is known about them, other than their
deftness as sheep farmers and great fondness for carrying long knives.
According to the Gopalavamsa chronicle, the Kiratas ruled for about 1225 years
(800 BCE–300 CE), their reign had a total of 29 kings during that time. Their
first king was Elam; also known as Yalambar, who is referenced in the epic
Mahabharata. During the rule of the 7th Kirat King Jitedasti, Lord Gautam
Buddha is said to have come to the valley with his several disciples and to
have visited holy places of Swayambhu, Guheswari, etc., and to have preached
his religious teaching. The Kiratas of the valley refused to follow his
doctrine but welcomed Lord Buddha and his disciples. During the rule of the
14th Kirat King Sthunko, the Indian Emperor Ashoka is said to have come to the
Kathmandu Valley with his daughter, princess Charumati. During his stay in the
valley, he is said to have four stupas built around Patan in the four cardinal
directions and one in the centre. He is said to have arranged his daughter
Charumati's marriage with a local young prince named Devapala. Prince Devapala
and his consort Charumati lived at Chabahil near Pashupati area. Later
Charumati had the stupas of Devapatana built after the death of her husband in
his memory. Charumati later on become a nun herself and built a convent where
she resided and practiced Lord Buddha's doctrine. During the rule of the 15th
Kirata King Jinghri, another religious doctrine, Jainism, was being preached by
Mahavir in India. Bhadrabhau, a disciple of Mahavira Jaina, is said to have
come to Nepal. But Jainism did not gain as much popularity as Buddhism in
Nepal. During the rule of the 28th Kirata King Paruka, the Sombanshi ruler
attacked his regime many times from the west. Although he successfully repelled
their attacks, he was forced to move to Shankhamul from Gokarna. He had a royal
palace called "Patuka" built there for him. The 'Patuka' palace can no longer
be seen, except its ruins in the form of a mound. Patuka changed Shankhamul
into a beautiful town. The last King of the Kirat dynasty was Gasti, a weak
ruler, who is said to have been overthrown by the Somavanshi ruler Nimisha.
This ended the powerful Kirata dynasty that had lasted for about 1225 years.
After their defeat, the Kiratas moved to the Eastern hills of Nepal and settled
down, divided into small principalities. Their settlements were divided into
three regions, i.e., 'Wallokirat' that lay to the East of the Kathmandu Valley,
'Majkirat' or Central Kirat region and 'Pallokirat' that lay to the far East of
the Kathmandu valley . These regions are still heavily populated by Kiratas
(Rai and Limboo, Sunuwar, Yakkha etc.). Birth of Buddha. One of the early
polities of South Asia was that of the Shakya clan, whose capital was
Kapilvastu, Nepal. Siddhartha Gautama Buddha, Siddharta Gautama (563–483
BCE), who renounced his royalty to lead an ascetic life and came to be known as
the "Buddha" ("the enlightened one") was born to the Shakya king Sudhodhana.
After finding enlightenment, Lord Gautama Buddha returned to his home place
Kapilavastu to teach his wife Yasodhara what he had learned. Buddha and his
disciple Ananda are said to have visited the Kathmandu Valley and stayed for
some time in Patan. History of Nepal. Before Nepal's emergence as a nation in
the later half of the 18th century, the designation 'Nepal' was largely applied
only to the Kathmandu Valley and its surroundings. Thus, up to the unification
of the country, Nepal's recorded history is largely that of the Kathmandu
Valley. References to Nepal in the Mahabharata epic, in Puranas and in Buddhist
and Jaina scriptures establish the country's antiquity as an independent
political and territorial entity. The oldest Vamshavali or chronicle, the
Gopalarajavamsavali, was copied from older manuscripts during the late 14th
century, is a fairly reliable basis for Nepal's ancient history. The
Vamshavalis mention the rule of several dynasties the Gopalas, the Abhiras and
the Kiratas—over a stretch of millennia. However, no historical evidence
exists for the rule of these legendary dynasties. The documented history of
Nepal begins with the Changu Narayan temple inscription of King Manadeva I (c.
464–505 AD) of the Licchavi dynasty. Thakuri Dynasty. Rule of the Thakuri
kings. The Thakuri Dynasty was a Rajput Dynasty. After Aramudi, who is
mentioned in the Kashmirian chronicle, the Rajatarangini of Kalhana (1150 CE),
many Thakuri kings ruled over the country up to the middle of the 12th century
AD. Raghava Deva is said to have founded a ruling dynasty in 879 AD, when the
Lichhavi rule came to an end. To commemorate this important event, Raghu Deva
started the 'Nepal Era' which began on 20 October, 879 AD. After Amshuvarma,
who ruled from 605 AD onward, the Thakuris had lost power and they could regain
it only in 869 AD. Gunakam Deva. After the death of King Raghava Dev, many
Thakuri kings ruled over Nepal up to the middle of the 12th century AD. During
that period, Gunakama Deva was one of the famous kings. He ruled form 949 to
994 AD. During his rule, a big wooden house was built out of one single tree
which was called 'Kasthamandapa', from which the name of the capital,
'Kathmandu', is derived. Gunakama Deva founded a town called Kantipur, the
modern Kathmandu. It was also Gunakama Deva who started the 'Indra Jatra'
festival. He repaired the temple that lies to the northern part of the temple
of Pashupatinath. He introduced Krishna Jatra and Lakhe Jatra as well. He also
performed Kotihoma. Successors of Gunakama Dev. Bhola Deva succeeded Gunakama
Deva. The next ruler was Laksmikama Deva who ruled from 1024 to 1040 AD. He
built Laksmi Vihara and introduced the custom of worshipping a virgin girl as
'Kumari'. Then, Vijayakama Deva, the son of Laksmikama, became the king of
Nepal. Vijaykama Deva was the last ruler of this dynasty. He introduced the
worship of the "Naga" and "Vasuki". After his death, the Thakuri clan of
Nuwakot occupied the throne of Nepal. Nuwakot Thakuri Kings. Bhaskara Deva, a
Thakuri form Nuwakot, succeeded Vijayakama Deva and established Nuwakot-Thakuri
rule. He is said to have built Navabahal and Hemavarna Vihara. After Bhaskara
Deva, four kings of this line ruled over the country. They were Bala Deva,
Padma Deva, Nagarjuna Deva and Shankara Deva. Shankara Deva (1067–1080 AD)
was the most illustrious ruler of this dynasty. He established the image of
'Shantesvara Mahadeva' and 'Manohara Bhagavati'. The custom of pasting the
pictures of Nagas and Vasuki on the doors of houses on the day of Nagapanchami
was introduced by him. During his time, the Buddhists wreaked vengeance on the
Hindu Brahmins (especially the followers of Shaivism) for the harm they had
received earlier from Shankaracharya. Shankara Deva tried to pacify the
Brahmins harassed by the Buddhists. Suryavansi (the Solar Dynasty). Bama Deva,
a descendant of Amshuvarma, defeated Shankar Deva in 1080 AD. He suppressed the
Nuwakot-Thankuris with the help of nobles and restored the old Solar Dynasty
rule in Nepal for the second time. Harsha Deva, the successor of Bama Deva was
a weak ruler. There was no unity among the nobles and they asserted themselves
in their respective spheres of influence. Taking that opportunity, Nanya Deva,
a Karnataka king attack Nepal from Simraungar in reply Army of Nepal defend and
won the battle and success to protect nepal from foreign invasion. Shivadeva
III. After Harsha Deva, Shivadeva, the third, ruled from 1099 to 1126 A.D. He
was a brave and powerful king. He founded the town of Kirtipur and roofed the
temple of Pashupatinath with gold. He introduced twenty-five paisa coins. He
also constructed wells, canals and tanks at different places. After Sivadeva
III, Mahendra Deva, Mana Deva, Narendra Deva II, Ananda Deva, Rudra Deva,
Amrita Deva, Ratna Deva II, Somesvara Deva, Gunakama Deva II, Lakmikama Deva
III and Vijayakama Deva II ruled Nepal in quick succession. Historians differ
about the rule of several kings and their respective times. After the fall of
the Thakuri dynasty, a new dynasty was founded by Arideva or Ari Malla,
popularly known as the 'Malla Dynasty'. Malla Dynasty. Early Malla rule started
with Ari Malla in the 12th century. Over the next two centuries his kingdom
expanded widely, into the Terai and western Tibet, before disintegrating into
small principalities, which later became known as the Baise Jayasthiti Malla,
with whom commences the later Malla dynasty of the Kathmandu Valley, began to
reign at the end of the 14th century. Though his rule was rather short, his
place among the rulers in the Valley is eminent for the various social and
economic reforms such as the 'Sanskritization' of the Valley people, new
methods of land measurement and allocation etc. Yaksha Malla, the grandson of
Jayasthiti Malla, ruled the Kathmandu Valley until almost the end of the 15th
century. After his demise, the Valley was divided into three independent Valley
kingdoms—Kathmandu, Bhaktapur and Patan—in about 1484 AD. This division led
the Malla rulers into internecine clashes and wars for territorial and
commercial gains. Mutually debilitating wars gradually weakened them, that
facilitated conquest of the Kathmandu Valley by King Prithvi Narayan Shah of
Gorkha. The last Malla rulers were Jaya Prakasha Malla, Teja Narasingha Malla
and Ranjit Malla of Kathmandu, Patan and Bhaktapur respectively. Shah Dynasty,
unification of Nepal. Prithvi Narayan Shah (c. 1769–1775), with whom we move
into the modern period of Nepal's history, was the ninth generation descendant
of Dravya Shah (1559–1570), the founder of the ruling house of Gorkha.
Prithvi Narayan Shah succeeded his father King Nara Bhupal Shah to the throne
of Gorkha in 1743 AD. King Prithvi Narayan Shah was quite aware of the
political situation of the Valley kingdoms as well as of the Baise and Chaubise
principalities. He foresaw the need for unifying the small principalities as an
urgent condition for survival in the future and set himself to the task
accordingly. His assessment of the situation among the hill principalities was
correct, and the principalities were subjugated fairly easily. King Prithvi
Narayan Shah's victory march began with the conquest of Nuwakot, which lies
between Kathmandu and Gorkha, in 1744. After Nuwakot, he occupied strategic
points in the hills surrounding the Kathmandu Valley. The Valley's
communications with the outside world were thus cut off. The occupation of the
Kuti Pass in about 1756 stopped the Valley's trade with Tibet. Finally, King
Prithvi Narayan Shah entered the Valley. After the victory of Kirtipur. King
Jaya Prakash Malla of Kathmandu sought help from the British and so the East
India Company sent a contingent of soldiers under Captain Kinloch in 1767. The
British force was defeated at Sindhuli by King Prithvi Narayan Shah's army.
This defeat of the British completely shattered the hopes of King Jaya Prakash
Malla. The capture of Kathmandu (September 25, 1768) was dramatic. As the
people of Kathmandu were celebrating the festival of Indrajatra, Prithvi
Narayan Shah and his men marched into the city. A throne was put on the palace
courtyard for the king of Kathmandu. Prithvi Narayan Shah sat on the throne and
was hailed by the people as the king of Kathmandu. Jaya Prakash Malla managed
to escape with his life and took asylum in Patan. When Patan was captured a few
weeks later, both Jaya Prakash Malla and the king of Patan, Tej Narsingh Mallal
took refuge in Bhaktapur, which was also captured after some time. Thus the
Kathmandu Valley was conquered by King Prithvi Narayan Shah and Kathmandu
became the capital of the modern Nepal by 1769. King Prithvi started annexing
parts of Baise-Rajya in the Rapti region around 1760AD. By 1763, Tulsipur-Dang
Rajya fell and by 1775 AD, Chauhan Raja Nawal Singh of House of Tulsipur was
completely defeated. After losing his northern hill territories to King
Prithvi, Chauhan Raja Nawal Singh was forced to move to his southern
territories (currently Tulsipur / Balarampur in India) and ruled as one of the
largest Taluqdar of Oudh. King Prithvi Narayan Shah was successful in bringing
together diverse religio-ethnic groups under one national. He was a true
nationalist in his outlook and was in favor of adopting a closed-door policy
with regard to the British. Not only his social and economic views guided the
country's socio-economic course for a long time, his use of the imagery, 'a yam
between two boulders' in Nepal's geopolitical context, formed the principal
guideline of the country's foreign policy for future centuries. The War with
British—The Nepalese had differences of opinion with the East India Company
regarding the ownership of the land strip of the western Terai, particularly
Butwal and Seoraj. The outcome of the conflict was a war with the British. The
British launched their attack on the Nepali forces at Nalapani, the western
most point of Nepal's frontier at the close of 1814. Though the Nepalese were
able to inflict heavy losses to the British army on various fronts, the larger
army and the superior weapons of the British proved too strong. The Nepali army
evacuated the areas west of the Mahakali river and ultimately the treaty of
Sugauli was signed with the British in 1816. Among other things, this treaty
took away a large chunk of the Terai from Nepal and the rivers Mahakali and
Mechi were fixed as the country's western and eastern boundaries. At this time,
King Girvana Yuddha Biktram Shah was on the throne of Nepal, and the power of
state was in the hands of Prime Minister Bhimsen Thapa who wielded enormous
power during the rule of King Girvana Yuddha Bikram Shah and his son King
Rajendra Bikram Shah.after the certain death of king partap malla , nepal had
already got the token of love from the King Pratap Malla as his recognizing
padt the Temple Rani Pokhari. Age of Principalities. Three city-states After
the 15th century, the Kathmandu Valley lost its central control and was ruled
as three city-states: Kathmandu, Patan, and Bhadgaon. Many Nepalese
architectural heritages, such as temples, palaces, including many UNESCO world
heritage sites, were built during the rule of the Newar Kings. These include
the Kathmandu Old Palace (Kathmandu Durbar Square), Patan Palace (Patan Durbar
Square), Bhaktapur Palace (Bhaktapur Durbar Square) etc. By this time, people
living in and around Kathmandu Valley (irrespective of their ethnic origins)
were called "Newars" (or "Nepa:mi" in "Newari" language meaning, the citizens
of Nepal). Magar Principalities Magars are martial people that first
established their kingdom in present day western Nepal. They were animistic and
shamanic in their religious practices. The Kham Magar of the upper Karnali
basin and their brethren of the mid-hills of Nepal had a flourishing and
empirical kingdom. Much archaeological proof of their existence can be found in
the western mid-hills of Nepal. The Magar have a strong military and warrior
tradition. However, their hospitality and concern for their fellow human beings
is also legendary. Two waves of immigrants became the undoing of the Magar
empire. Firstly, the Khasas were welcomed and assimilated within Magar empire.
Secondly, due to the advance of Muslim forces into the Gangetic plains of
India, the Brahmins entered the Magar empire as refugees. These two groups were
given sanctuary in the Magar empire. The latter group of refugees started to
impose their view of Hinduism upon the Magars, while the former group were
given the status of Chettri by the latter group in accordance with their view
of Hinduism. This left the Magar people boxed into the third tier in their own
kingdom (the first being the Brahmins, the second being the newly elevated
Chettri, previously the Khasas). This meant that the one-time rulers of the
Nepali mid-hills became the ruled upon. This was the start of the degradation
of the Magar empire. The introduction of Hinduism in itself became the
cataclysmic event in the undoing of the Magar empire. History of Kirat. In the
meantime, the History of Kirat covers much of the history and achievements of
the Kirant people of Eastern Nepal/Kiratdesh from ancient period until the
Gorkha conquest in the eastern Nepal. History of Limbuwan. History of Limbuwan
shows the history and political development of the people of Limbuwan until
their unification with the Kingdom of Gorkha in 1774 AD. During King Prithivi
Narayan Shah's unification of Nepal, the present-day Nepal east of Arun and
Koshi River was known as Pallo Kirant Limbuwan. It was divided into ten Limbu
Kingdoms of which the Morang Kingdom was the most powerful and had the central
government. The capital of the Morang Kingdom of Limbuwan was Bijaypur, now
Dharan. After the Limbuwan-Gorkha War and seeing the threat of the rising power
of the British East India Company, kings and ministers of all the ten Limbu
Kingdoms of Limbuwan gathered in Bijaypur, present day Dharan, to agree upon
the Limbuwan-Gorkha treaty. This Treaty formally united ten Limbu Kingdoms into
the Gorkha Kingdom, but it also gave Limbuwan full autonomy under Limbuwan
Kipat System. The stone inscription tells us that, the kirants probably ruled
Nepal about 1000 years ago. The first and best remembered king was Yalambar.
Legend credits him with meeting Indra, the lord of heaven, who ventured into
the Valley in human guise. He had the dubious honor of being slain in the epic
battle of the Mahabharata, in which gods and mortals fought alongside each
other. Another remarkable event during this period is the coming of Gautam
Buddha in the time of the seventh king. The Buddha supposedly spent time in
Patan, where he elevated the blacksmith caste to goldsmiths and bestowed upon
them the name of his own clan, Sakya. The great emperor of India, Ashoka, was
also a visitor to Kathmandu in this period. As a follower of Buddhism, Ashoka
visited Lumbini, the birthplace of Buddha, and erected stupas in Kathmandu. His
daughter married a local prince and further spread the religion. As the Kirat
dynasty came to an end in the valley, parts still remained in the eastern
mountains where they are considered to be the forefathers of today. Kingdom of
Nepal. Gorkha rule. After decades of rivalry between the medieval kingdoms,
modern Nepal was created in the latter half of the 18th century, when Prithvi
Narayan Shah, the ruler of the small principality of Gorkha, formed a unified
country from a number of independent hill states. Prithvi Narayan Shah
dedicated himself at an early age to the conquest of the Kathmandu Valley and
the creation of a single state, which he achieved in 1768. The country was
frequently called the Gorkha Kingdom. It is a misconception that the Gorkhali
took their name from the Gorkha region of Nepal; actually, the region was given
its name after the Gorkhali had established their control of these areas. The
Gorkhali take their name from the legendary 8th-century Hindu warrior-saint
Guru Gorakhnath. The Gorkhali claimed descent from the Hindu Rajputs and
Brahmins of Northern India, who entered modern Nepal from the west. After
Shah's death, the Shah dynasty began to expand their kingdom into what is
present day North India. Between 1788 and 1791, during the Sino-Nepalese War,
Nepal invaded Tibet and robbed Tashilhunpo Monastery in Shigatse. Alarmed, the
Chinese emperor Qianlong appointed Fukang'an commander-in-chief of the Tibetan
campaign; Fu defeated the Gorkhali army and the Gorkhali were forced to accept
surrender on China's terms. After 1800, the heirs of Prithvi Narayan Shah
proved unable to maintain firm political control over Nepal. A period of
internal turmoil followed. Rivalry between Nepal and the British East India
Company over the princely states bordering Nepal and India eventually led to
the Anglo-Nepalese War (1814–16), in which Nepal suffered a complete rout.
The Treaty of Sugauli was signed in 1816, ceding large parts of the Nepali
territories of Terrai, (nearly one third of the country), to the British, in
exchange for Nepalese autonomy. As the ceded territories were not restored to
Nepal by the British when freedom was granted to the people of British India,
these have become a part of the Republic of India (see Greater Nepal). The
Kingdom of Sikkim, which had already lost its Darjeeling region to British
India in 1853, was annexed by the post-colonial Republic of India in April 1975
and, in the following month, Sikkim's people voted to join the Indian Union.
Rana rule. The Rana dynasty of Rajputs ruled the Kingdom of Nepal from 1846
until 1953, reducing the Shah monarch to a figurehead and making Prime Minister
and other government positions hereditary. It is descended from one Bal
Narsingh Kunwar of Kaski, who moved to Gorkha in the early 18th century and
entered the service of Raja Nara Bhupal Shah around 1740. Originally, the Rana
dynasty hails from the Sisodiya Rajput Royal family of Chittor now Udaipur in
India, capital of the Mewar region. The dynasty traces its roots to Maharaj
Kumbhakaran Singh of Chittor, Mewar. Maharaj Kumbhakaran Singh was the younger
brother of Rana Ratan Singh of Mewar. Rana Ratan Singh married Rani Padmini
(She along with hundreds of other women undertook Jauhar and the male members
performed Saka during the siege of the Chittorgarh fort by the ignominious
sultan of Delhi, Allauddin Khilji ). Unlike claimed ancestral root to Chittor,
per se Dor Bahadur Bista, a notable anthropologist,brought to light that the
ancestors of Ranas were Jumli Khadka who joined the army of Kaski
principalities whom king of kaski honored with the title of Kunwar. Kunwar
became Rana only after the time of Jung Bahadur Rana. In some historical
evidences, King Surendra has referred Junga as a lowly Khas. To accept the
marriage proposal of Jung's son's with the King Surendra's daughter, it is said
that clever Jung linked his ancestral root to Chittor Rajput to be superior to
khas and equivalent to Shahs. Jung Bahadur was the first ruler from this
dynasty. His original family name was Rana but in Nepal people mistook his
Rajput title of Kunwar for his family name, Kunwar is a title denoting royal
lineage used by Rajput princes in northern India. Rana rulers were titled "Shri
Teen" and "Maharaja", whereas Shah kings were "Shri Panch" and "Maharajdiraj".
Both the Rana dynasty and Shah dynasty are Rajput caste in the Hindu tradition,
in contrast with the native Himalayan culture which is largely Buddhist and
Bön. Jung Bahadur codified laws and modernized the state's bureaucracy. In
1855 he attempted to impose his influence in Tibet but was stopped in the
Nepalese-Tibetan War (1855–1856). Originally Jung Bahadur and his brother
Ranodip Singh brought a lot of upliftment and modernisation to Nepalese
society, the abolishment of slavery, upliftment of the untouchable class,
public access to education etc. but these dreams were short lived when in the
coup d'état of 1885 the nephews of Jung Bahadur and Ranodip Singh (the
Shumshers J.B., S.J.B. or Satra (17) Family) murdered Ranodip Singh and the
sons of Jung Bahadur, stole the name of Jung Bahadur and took control of Nepal.
After the murder of Sri Teen Maharaja Ranodip Singh, the Shumshers occupied the
hereditary throne of Prime Minister and added "Jung Bahadur" to their name,
although they were descended from Jung's younger brother Dhir Shumsher. This
was done after Sri Teen Maharaja Chandra Shumsher realised the British gave
more weight and importance to the "Jung Bahadur" name. Maharaja Sir Jung
Bahadur Rana]'s eldest son was Gen. Jagat Jung, known as "Mukhiya Jarnel". His
eldest grandson and Gen. Jagat Jung's eldest son was Gen. Yuddha Pratap, known
as "Naati Jarnel". Their descendants currently live in Manahara, Kathmandu. Two
of Jung Bahadur's sons Gen. Ranabir Jung and Commander-in-Chief Gen. Padma Jung
Bahadur Rana KIH Gold Medal 1877 were escorted to Allahabad. Gen. Ranabir Jung
later attempted to reclaim his position, after having raised an army, but was
thwarted and finally killed in battle. Ranabir Jungs descendants with the title
Bir Jung Bahadur are very widespread, and live in Kathmandu, Dehra Dun, Delhi,
Kolkata, Australia and The UK. Descendants of Commander-in-Chief Gen. Padma
Jung Bahadur Rana KIH Gold Medal 1877 today live in Allahabad, Nepalgunj,
Dehradun, Kathmandu, New York, Australia and United Kingdom. Gen. Padma Jung
Bahadur Rana later wrote the book called "Life of Sir Jung Bahadur" which was
published in early 1900 in India. His sons and grand-sons fought and commanded
forces in places like France, Italy, Afghanistan, Burma, Flanders, Egypt,
Mesopotamia and Wazirstan during the Great World War I and the Great World War
II and won long list of medals. Many of his daughters, grand-daughters and
great-grand-daughters were/are married to various Maharajas of Indian
Principality States. Similarly many of his sons, grandsons and great-grandsons
were/are married to various Princesses of Indian Royal Houses. Maharaja Sir
Jung Bahadur Rana of Kaski & Lamjung himself started the process of marrying
Rana Gentlemen and Ladies to the Indian Royal Households in mid 1800 AD.
Commander-in-Chief Gen. Padma Jung KIH Gold Medal 1877 continued the process of
marrying his sons and daughters to the Indian Royal Households in late 1800 AD.
One of his great-granddaughter Sita Rani Devi is Rajmata of Indian Princely
State of Makrai. Another great-granddaughter is Geeta Rani Rana who is married
to Late Thakuri Prachanda Singh of Royal House of Tulsipur. Present rulers of
Kingdom of Nepal, Jajorkot, Bajhang and Indian Princely States such as Jhalai,
Jubbal, Bagribari, Tripura, Oel Kaimara, Khairagarh, Rajgarh, Tehri-Garhwal,
Thalrai, Benaras, Ramnagar and many other states share a direct bloodline with
Commander-in-Chief Gen. Padma Jung Bahadur Rana KIH Gold Medal 1877 and
Maharaja of Kaski & Lamjung Sir Jung Bahadur Rana. Crown Prince General Dhoj
Narsingh Rana, adopted son of Sri Teen Maharaja Ranodip Singh (His biological
father was Badri Narsingh Rana) had to go into exile with his family to India
along with many of Jung Bahadur's surviving descendants. Many of Crown Prince
General Dhoj Narsingh's children and family remained with Sri Teen Ranodip
Singh's widow in Benares and were then relocated later relocated to Udaipur
upon the invitation by Maharana Fateh Singh, who sought to give refuge to his
Rana cousins. Out of seven sons and three daughters of Gen. Dwaj Narsingh three
sons and one daughter moved to Udaipur on an invitation from the Maharana who
graciously requested them to settle in Udaipur. While Neel Narsingh died at an
early age the Rana princes Shri Narsingh & Dev Narsingh established themselves
and carry on the family's name in the city of their forefathers. Their families
established marital relations with the royal families and Thikanas like Jasmor
(head of the Pundir clan), Banka, Gogunda, Samode, Neemrana (descendents of
Prithviraj Chauhan), Mahendragarh, Medhas (From the family of Riyan which is
the main seat of the Mertiya Rathores), Fatehnagar:Zorawar Singhji Ka Khera
(From the family of the famous Chauhans of Kotharia) etc. The British
government did not help any of the exiled princes whose fathers had saved the
British and their empire in 1857. The shortest serving Rana was Deva Shumsher
Jung Bahadur Rana who ruled for two months in 1901, he was deposed by his
brothers because of his open display of guilt for what has happened during the
coup. Known as "The Reformist" for his progressive policies, he proclaimed
universal education, began to building schools, took steps to abolish slavery,
and introduced several other social welfare schemes. He also made improvements
to the arsenal at Nakkhu (south of Kathmandu) and started The Gorkhapatra
newspaper. Dev Shumsher felt guilty for what had transpired during the coup,
also a key incident happened during the coup which affected him deeply. He was
held at gunpoint by General Dhoj Narsingh Rana, but was allowed to live and
forgiven. For this he felt a lot of guilt and asked for the exiled family
members to return to Nepal. This brought him in clash with his immediate
brothers. He was deposed by his relatives, where he settled in Jhari Pani, near
Mussoorie, where his Fairlawn Palace once stood. A developer purchased the
palace and tore it down, replacing it with cottages. All that remains are a few
of the original gates and a small portion of the palace skeleton. Even the last
Prime Minister of Nepal Maharaja Mohan Shumshere Rana, who later settled in
Bangalore, exchanged letters with the Rana family in Udaipur which was
definitely an effort to reunite with his estranged family. The Rana family in
Udaipur has till date preserved all such letters along with some photographs of
Mohan Shumshere. Under the British Raj, the Ranas were acclaimed and given much
prestige and a 19-gun salute; all with the exception of Deva Shumsher received
knighthoods. The Rana dynasty developed into a powerful family clan and are
still very influential in the country today. The family formed a close alliance
with the Shah dynasty via marriage and business alliances. 20th century. In
1923 Britain and Nepal formally signed an agreement of friendship (called the
"Sugauli Treaty"), in which Nepal and India (then "British India Company" under
the rule of the British Queen) negotiated that Nepal had to lose most of its
territories. Slavery was abolished in Nepal in 1924. Democratic reform. Popular
dissatisfaction against the family rule of the Ranas had started emerging from
among the few educated people, who had studied in various Indian schools and
colleges, and also from within the Ranas, many of whom were marginalised within
the ruling Rana hierarchy. Many of these Nepalese in exile had actively taken
part in the Indian Independence struggle and wanted to liberate Nepal as well
from the internal autocratic Rana occupation. The political parties such as
"The Prajaparishad" and "Nepali Congress" were already formed in exile by
leaders such as B. P. Koirala, Ganesh Man Singh, Subarna Sumsher Rana, Krishna
Prasad Bhattarai, Girija Prasad Koirala, and many other patriotic-minded
Nepalis who urged the military and popular political movement in Nepal to
overthrow the autocratic Rana Regime. Among the prominent martyrs to die for
the cause, executed at the hands of the Ranas, were Dharma Bhakta Mathema,
Shukraraj Shastri, Gangalal Shrestha, and Dasharath Chand. This turmoil
culminated in King Tribhuvan, a direct descendant of Prithvi Narayan Shah,
fleeing from his "palace prison" in 1950, to newly independent India, touching
off an armed revolt against the Rana administration. This eventually ended in
the return of the Shah family to power and the appointment of a non-Rana as
prime minister. A period of quasi-constitutional rule followed, during which
the monarch, assisted by the leaders of fledgling political parties, governed
the country. During the 1950s, efforts were made to frame a constitution for
Nepal that would establish a representative form of government, based on a
British model. In early 1959, Tribhuvan's son King Mahendra issued a new
constitution, and the first democratic elections for a national assembly were
held. The Nepali Congress Party, a moderate socialist group, gained a
substantial victory in the election. Its leader, Bishweshwar Prasad Koirala,
formed a government and served as prime minister. After years of power
wrangling between the kings (Tribhuvan and Mahendra) and the government,
Mahendra dissolved the democratic experiment in 1960. Royal coup by King
Mahendra. Declaring parliamentary democracy a failure, King Mahendra carried
out a royal coup 18 months later, in 1960. He dismissed the elected Koirala
government, declared that a "partyless" panchayat system would govern Nepal,
and promulgated another new constitution on December 16, 1960. Subsequently,
the elected Prime Minister, Members of Parliament and hundreds of democratic
activists were arrested. (In fact, this trend of arrest of political activists
and democratic supporters continued for the entire 30 year period of partyless
Panchayati System under King Mahendra and then his son, King Birendra). The new
constitution established a "partyless" system of panchayats (councils) which
King Mahendra considered to be a democratic form of government, closer to
Nepalese traditions. As a pyramidal structure, progressing from village
assemblies to a Rastriya Panchayat (National Parliament), the panchayat system
constitutionalised the absolute power of the monarchy and kept the King as head
of state with sole authority over all governmental institutions, including the
Cabinet (Council of Ministers) and the Parliament. One-state-one-language
became the national policy in an effort to carry out state unification, uniting
various ethnic and regional groups into a singular nepali nationalist bond.
King Mahendra was succeeded by his 27-year-old son, King Birendra, in 1972.
Amid student demonstrations and anti-regime activities in 1979, King Birendra
called for a national referendum to decide on the nature of Nepal's government:
either the continuation of the panchayat system with democratic reforms or the
establishment of a multiparty system. The referendum was held in May 1980, and
the panchayat system won a narrow victory. The king carried out the promised
reforms, including selection of the prime minister by the Rastriya Panchayat.
People in rural areas had expected that their interests would be better
represented after the adoption of parliamentary democracy in 1990. The Nepali
Congress with support of "Alliance of leftist parties" decided to launch a
decisive agitational movement, Jana Andolan, which forced the monarchy to
accept constitutional reforms and to establish a multiparty parliament. In May
1991, Nepal held its first parliamentary elections in nearly 50 years. The
Nepali Congress won 110 of the 205 seats and formed the first elected
government in 32 years. Civil strife. In 1992, in a situation of economic
crisis and chaos, with spiralling prices as a result of implementation of
changes in policy of the new Congress government, the radical left stepped up
their political agitation. A Joint People's Agitation Committee was set up by
the various groups. A general strike was called for April 6. Violent incidents
began to occur on the evening before of the strike. The Joint People's
Agitation Committee had called for a 30-minute 'lights out' in the capital, and
violence erupted outside Bir Hospital when activists tried to enforce the
'lights out'. At dawn on April 6, clashes between strike activists and police,
outside a police station in Pulchok (Patan), left two activists dead. Later in
the day, a mass rally of the Agitation Committee at Tundikhel in the capital
Kathmandu was attacked by police forces. As a result, riots broke out and the
Nepal Telecommunications building was set on fire; police opened fire at the
crowd, killing several persons. The Human Rights Organisation of Nepal
estimated that 14 persons, including several onlookers, had been killed in
police firing. When promised land reforms failed to appear, people in some
districts started to organize to enact their own land reform and to gain some
power over their lives in the face of usurious landlords. However, this
movement was repressed by the Nepali government, in "Operation Romeo" and
"Operation Kilo Sera II", which took the lives of many of the leading activists
of the struggle. As a result, many witnesses to this repression became
radicalized. Nepalese Civil War. In February 1996, the Communist Party of Nepal
(Maoist) started a bid to replace the parliamentary monarchy with a people's
new democratic republic, through a Maoist revolutionary strategy known as the
people's war, which led to the Nepalese Civil War. Led by Dr. Baburam Bhattarai
and Pushpa Kamal Dahal (also known as "Prachanda"), the insurgency began in
five districts in Nepal: Rolpa, Rukum, Jajarkot, Gorkha, and Sindhuli. The
Communist Party of Nepal (Maoist)established a provisional "people's
government" at the district level in several locations. On June 1, 2001, Crown
Prince Dipendra went on a shooting-spree, assassinating 9 members of the royal
family, including King Birendra and Queen Aishwarya, before shooting himself.
Due to his survival he temporarily became king before dying of his wounds,
after which Prince Gyanendra (Birendra's brother) inherited the throne,
according to tradition. Meanwhile, the rebellion escalated, and in October 2002
the king temporarily deposed the government and took complete control of it. A
week later he reappointed another government, but the country was still very
unstable. In the face of unstable governments and a siege on the Kathmandu
Valley in August 2004, popular support for the monarchy began to wane. On
February 1, 2005, Gyanendra dismissed the entire government and assumed full
executive powers, declaring a "state of emergency" to quash the revolution.
Politicians were placed under house arrest, phone and internet lines were cut,
and freedom of the press was severely curtailed. The king's new regime made
little progress in his stated aim to suppress the insurgents. Municipal
elections in February 2006 were described by the European Union as "a backward
step for democracy", as the major parties boycotted the election and some
candidates were forced to run for office by the army. In April 2006 strikes and
street protests in Kathmandu forced the king to reinstate the parliament. A
seven-party coalition resumed control of the government and stripped the king
of most of his powers. As of 15 January 2007, Nepal was governed by an
unicameral legislature under an interim constitution. On December 24, 2007,
seven parties, including the former Maoist rebels and the ruling party, agreed
to abolish the monarchy and declare Nepal a Federal Republic. In the elections
held on 10 April 2008, the Maoists secured a simple majority, with the prospect
of forming a government to rule the proposed 'Republic of Nepal'. Federal
Democratic Republic. On May 28, 2008 the newly elected Constituent Assembly
declared Nepal a Federal Democratic Republic, abolishing the 240-year-old
monarchy. The motion for abolition of monarchy was carried by a huge majority;
out of 564 members present in the assembly, 560 voted for the motion while 4
members voted against it. Finally, on June 11, 2008 ex-king Gyanendra left the
palace. Ram Baran Yadav of the Nepali Congress became the first president of
the Federal Democratic Republic of Nepal on July 23, 2008. Similarly, Pushpa
Kamal Dahal, popularly known as Prachanda, of the Unified Communist Party of
Nepal (Maoist) was elected as the first Prime Minister on August 15, 2008,
defeating Sher Bahadur Deuba of the Nepali Congress Party. Ruling UCPN-Moaist
party suspended Prakash Dahal, son of the Prime Minister Prachanda, from the
membership of the party and from the powerful state afiars committee over his
alleged extra-marital affair with a student leader.
