History of Liberia Liberia was established by citizens of the United States as
a colony for former African-American slaves. It is one of only two sovereign
states in the world that were started by citizens of a political power as a
colony for former slaves of the same political power: Sierra Leone was begun as
a colony for resettlement of Black Loyalists and poor blacks from England for
the same purpose by Britain. Early times (pre–1821). Historians believe that
many of the indigenous peoples of Liberia migrated there from the north and
east between the 12th and 16th centuries AD. Portuguese explorers established
contacts with people of the land later known as "Liberia" as early as 1461.
They named the area "Costa da Pimenta" (Pepper Coast) because of the abundance
of melegueta pepper. In 1602 the Dutch established a trading post at Grand Cape
Mount but destroyed it a year later. In 1663, the British installed trading
posts on the Pepper Coast. No further known settlements by non-African
colonists occurred along the Grain Coast (an alternative name) until the
arrival in 1821 of free blacks from the United States. Colonization
(1821–1847). From around 1800, in the United States, people agreed to slavery
were planning ways to alleviate the problem. Some abolitionists and
slaveholders collaborated on the idea to set up a colony in Africa for former
African-American slaves. Between 1821 and 1847, by a combination of purchase
and conquest, American ‘Societies’ developed the colony ‘Liberia.’ On
July 26, 1847, it declared its independence. First ideas of colonization. As
early as the period of the American Revolution, many white members of American
society thought that African Americans could not succeed in living in
‘their’ society as free people. Some considered blacks physically and
mentally inferior to whites, and others believed that the racism and societal
polarization resulting from slavery were insurmountable obstacles for
integration of the races. The young politician Thomas Jefferson was among those
who proposed colonization in Africa; relocating free blacks outside the new
nation. Growing numbers of free blacks. After 1783 the ranks of free blacks
expanded markedly, due both to manumission of the enslaved in the South during
the first two decades after the Revolutionary War, attributable both to
slaveholders inspired by its ideals and to others inspired to manumission by
Quaker, Methodist and Baptist preachers active in those years. The Northeast
states abolished slavery following the war, generally on a graduated basis
where it was still economically viable, as in the mid-Atlantic states. In 1800
and 1802, slave rebellions occurred (see Gabriel’s rebellion) in Virginia,
and were brutally suppressed by slaveholders. Some planters feared that free
blacks would encourage slaves to run away or revolt. From 1782-1810, the number
and percentage of free blacks in the Upper South increased from less than one
percent to 13.5%. In the nation as a whole, the number of free people of color
also increased. In 1790, there were 59,467 free blacks, out of a total U.S.
population of almost four million and a total black U.S. population of 800,000.
By 1800, there were 108,378 free blacks in a population of 7.2 million. These
factors significantly influenced the popularity of the concept of colonization
as a ‘solution’ to the ‘problem’ of free blacks. Sierra Leone. In 1787,
Britain had started to resettle the Black Poor of London in the colony of
Freetown in modern-day Sierra Leone, many of whom were Black Loyalists who had
been freed in exchange for their services during the American Revolution. The
Crown also offered resettlement to former slaves from Nova Scotia. The wealthy
African-American shipowner Paul Cuffee thought this was a worthwhile exercise,
and with support from certain members of Congress and British officials
conveyed 38 American Blacks to Freetown in 1816 at his own expense. Despite
such voyages ceasing with his death in 1817, his private initiative served to
arouse public interest. Cape Mesurado. In this same period, on the initiative
of the Virginian politician Charles F. Mercer and the Presbyterian minister
Robert Finley from New Jersey, in 1816 the American Colonization Society (ACS)
was established in Washington D.C. by American politicians, senators and
religious leaders from a variety of orientations. They united on the project of
‘colonizing’ free blacks out of the U.S., to Africa. From January 1820, the
ACS sent ships from New York to West Africa. The first had 88 free black
emigrants and three white ACS agents on board, who intended to seek an
appropriate area to ground a settlement. After several attempts and hardships,
ACS representatives in December 1821 succeeded, perhaps with some threat of
force (see ), to buy Cape Mesurado, a 36-mile long strip of land near current
day Monrovia, from the indigenous ruler King Peter. From the beginning, the
colonists were attacked by indigenous peoples, such as the Malinké tribes. In
addition, they suffered from diseases, the harsh climate, lack of food and
medicine, and poor housing conditions. Expansion. Up until 1835, five more
colonies were started by American Societies other than the ACS, and one by the
U.S. government, all on the same West African coast. The first colony on Cape
Mesurado was extended, along the coast as well as inland, sometimes by use of
force. In 1824 it was named Liberia, with the capital of Monrovia. By 1842,
four of the other American colonies were incorporated into Liberia, and one was
destroyed by indigenous people. The colonists of African-American descent
became known as Americo-Liberians. Not only were many racially mixed and of
European descent, but their education, religion and culture made them distinct
from the indigenous peoples, with whom they did not identify. Handing over
command to Americo-Liberians. The maturing colony was gradually given more
self-governance. In 1839, it was renamed the Commonwealth of Liberia; 1841 saw
the Commonwealth's first black Governor, J.J. Roberts. By the 1840s, the ACS
was effectively bankrupt; Liberia had become a financial burden for it. In
1846, the ACS directed the Americo-Liberians to proclaim their independence. In
1847, Roberts proclaimed the colony the free and independent republic of
Liberia. It then counted some 3000 settlers. A Constitution was drawn up along
the lines of the United States’, denying voting rights to the indigenous
Liberians. Americo-Liberian Rule (1847–1980). Between 1847 and 1980, the
state of Liberia was governed by the small minority of African-American
colonists and their offspring, together called Americo-Liberians, suppressing
the large indigenous majority of 95% of the Liberian population. The history of
Liberia in this period can be described as four major, intertwined and
interacting developments: Relations between Americo-Liberians and the
indigenous peoples. Relations between colonists and natives were contentious
from the founding of Liberia, and eventually led to the overthrow of the
Americo-Liberian regime in 1980. Resistance. The original inhabitants of the
area resented the American settlements and their territorial expansions. They
engaged in resistance in all imaginable forms from the inception of
colonization until at least 1980. Americo-Liberian domination and suppression.
The Americo-Liberians had been cut off from their African cultural inheritance
by the conditions of slavery, and were entirely acculturated to contemporary
Euro-America society. They were of mixed African and European ancestry and
therefore generally lighter-skinned than the indigenous blacks. Crucially, they
had absorbed beliefs in the religious superiority of Protestant Christianity,
the cultural superiority of European civilization, and the aesthetic
superiority of European skin color and hair texture. They created a social and
material facsimile of American society in Liberia, maintaining their English-
speaking, Americanized way of life, and building churches and houses resembling
those of the Southern U.S. The Americo-Liberians never constituted more than
five percent of the population of Liberia, yet they controlled key resources
that allowed them to dominate the local native peoples: access to the ocean,
modern technical skills, literacy and higher levels of education, and valuable
relationships with many American institutions, including the American
government. Ironically, one aspect of American society that the Americo-
Liberians recreated was a cultural and racial caste system—however, in this
case with themselves at the top instead of the bottom. To them, their society
must have seemed radically different from the USA because it rejected the
ubiquitous Western belief in immutable racial hierarchy, which had led the
colonists to despair of life in the USA. They, on the other hand, believed in
racial equality, and therefore in the potential of all people to become
'civilized' through evangelization and education. Like many white missionaries
before and after them, they were frustrated by the natives' lack of interest in
becoming 'civilized.' Some local people assimilated into Americo-Liberian
society, often by marriage. Some entire coastal tribes became Protestants and
learned English. But most indigenous Africans kept to their traditional
languages and religions. Before long, the Americo-Liberian ruling elite was
living rather prosperously, sending their children to America for (often
racially segregated) high school and college education, and keeping the
indigenous peoples excluded from all political and economic leadership. Native
insurgencies. The Americo-Liberian settlers in 1878 organized their political
power in the True Whig Party, which permitted no organized political
opposition. Until 1980, the Americo-Liberians firmly held onto their position
of authority, meeting with unremitting uprising, rebellion and riots from the
native peoples. The United States would, at least until 1915, take sides with
the ruling Americo-Liberians in these struggles (see Relations between the U.S.
and Liberia); European powers would, in the 19th century, stir up internal
unrest in Liberia (see military threats). 1856: war with Grebo and Kru peoples,
leading to the last American African colony, Republic of Maryland, joining
Liberia. It was annexed into Liberia as Maryland County in 1857. (See 1856-64,
Presidency Benson.) 1864: uprisings of inland and coastal tribes (Presidency
Benson) 1875-76: war in Cape Palmas (see 1876-78, Presidency Payne-II) circa
1886: an uprising (Presidency Johnson) mid 1880s until late 1890s: some tribes
stay at war (see 1896-1900, Presidency Coleman) 1893: Grebo tribe attacked
settlement of Harper (Presidency Cheeseman) 1900: bloody battle (Presidency
Coleman) 1915: rebellion of the Kru (Presidency Howard) 1912-20: internal wars
(Presidency Howard) Admonishment from the League of Nations. After 1927, the
League of Nations investigated accusations that the Liberian government
recruited and sold indigenous people as contract labor or slaves. In its 1930
report the League admonished the Liberian government for ‘systematically and
for years fostering and encouraging a policy of gross intimidation and
suppression’, “in order to suppress the native, prevent him from realizing
his powers and limitations and prevent him from asserting himself in any way
whatever, for the benefit of the dominant and colonizing race, although
originally the same African stock as themselves” (see also Presidency Charles
King 1920-1930). President King hastily resigned. Social tensions 1940–1980.
During World War II thousands of indigenous Liberians came from the nation's
interior to the coastal regions in search of jobs. The Liberian Government had
long opposed this kind of migration, but was no longer able to restrain it. In
the decades after 1945, the Liberian government received hundreds of millions
of dollars of unrestricted foreign investment, which destabilized the Liberian
economy. Liberian Government revenue rose enormously, but was being grossly
embezzled by government officials. Growing economic disparities caused
increased hostility between indigenous groups and Americo-Liberians. The social
tensions led President Tubman to enfranchise the indigenous Liberians either in
1951 or 1963 (accounts differ). Regardless of the date, this was
enfranchisement in name only, since Tubman continued to repress political
opposition, and to rig elections. President Tolbert (1971–80) continued to
suppress opposition harshly. Dissatisfaction over governmental plans to raise
the price of rice in 1979 led to protest demonstrations in the streets of
Monrovia. Tolbert ordered his troops to fire on the demonstrators, and seventy
people were killed. Rioting ensued throughout Liberia, finally leading to a
military coup d'état in April 1980. Relations between the U.S. and Liberia.
During their 133 years in power (1847–1980), the Americo-Liberian ruling
class had a complicated relationship with the U.S. U.S. assists Americo-
Liberians. The United States had a long history of intervening in Liberia's
internal affairs, occasionally sending naval vessels to help the Americo-
Liberian (freed slave) ruling minority put down insurrections by indigenous
tribes (in 1821, 1843, 1876, 1910, and 1915). By 1909, Liberia faced serious
external threats to its sovereignty from the European colonial powers over
unpaid foreign loans and annexation of its borderlands.http://
www.globalsecurity.org/military/ops/liberia.htm President William Howard Taft
devoted a considerable portion of his First Annual Message to Congress
(December 7, 1909) to the Liberian question, noting the close historical ties
between the two countries that gave an opening for a wider intervention: "It
will be remembered that the interest of the United States in the Republic of
Liberia springs from the historical fact of the foundation of the Republic by
the colonization of American citizens of the African race. In an early treaty
with Liberia there is a provision under which the United States may be called
upon for advice or assistance. Pursuant to this provision and in the spirit of
the moral relationship of the United States to Liberia, that Republic last year
asked this Government to lend assistance in the solution of certain of their
national problems, and hence the Commission was sent" across the ocean on two
cruisers.http://www.unz.org/Pub/LiteraryDigest-1909dec25-01167 In 1912 the U.S.
arranged a 40-year international loan of $ 1.7 million, against which Liberia
had to agree to four Western powers (America, Britain, France and Germany)
controlling Liberian Government revenues for the next 14 years, until 1926.
American administration of the border police also stabilized the frontier with
Sierra Leone and checked French ambitions to annex more Liberian territory. The
American navy also established a coaling station in Liberia, cementing its
presence. When World War I started, Liberia declared war on Germany and
expelled its resident German merchants, who constituted the country's largest
investors and trading partners – Liberia suffered economically as a
result.http://www.globalsecurity.org/military/ops/grebo2.htm In 1926, the
Liberian government gave a concession to the American rubber company Firestone
to start the world’s largest rubber plantation at Harbel, Liberia. At the
same time, Firestone arranged a $5 million private loan to Liberia. In the
1930s Liberia was again virtually bankrupt, and, after some American pressure,
agreed to an assistance plan from the League of Nations. As part of this plan,
two key officials of the League were placed in positions to ´advise´ the
Liberian government. War involvement. In World War II, Liberia signed a Defence
Pact with the U.S. in 1942, and assured the Americans and their allies of all
the supply of natural rubber (a strategic commodity in wartime) that they
needed. It also allowed the U.S. to use its territory for military bases, and
as a bridgehead for American transports of soldiers and war supplies. U.S.
subsidized the construction of airports (Roberts Field), the Freeport of
Monrovia, and roads into the interior of Liberia. Cold War, foreign investment,
exploitation. After World War II, the U.S. positioned Liberia to resist the
expansion of Soviet influence in Africa during the Cold War. Liberian president
Tubman was agreeable to this policy. Between 1946 and 1960 Liberia received
from some $500 million in unrestricted foreign investment, mainly from the U.S.
From 1962 to 1980, the U.S. donated $280 million in aid to Liberia. In the
1970s under president Tolbert, Liberia strove for a more non-aligned and
independent posture, and established diplomatic relations with the Soviet
Union, China, Cuba and Eastern bloc countries. It also severed ties with Israel
during the Yom Kippur War in 1973, but kept supporting the U.S. on the Vietnam
War. Relations between non-U.S. foreign powers and Liberia. Dubious commerce,
military threats. From the founding of Liberia, Europeans had commercial
contacts with the nation. During the period 1856-64 European merchants
consistently evaded Liberian import and export duties, in which they were
supported by their own governments. This practice started or aggravated the
financial tightness of the new state. By 1870 Liberia had sunk into financial
crisis, which dragged on into the 1930s. Several times the Liberian government
borrowed money from English banks on severe terms, and even from local German
merchants. In 1912 the U.S. intervened into Liberia’s dire financial
situation (see Relations between the U.S. and Liberia). Between 1878 and 1919
Britain, France and Germany, busy extending their own colonial territories in
the region, threatened Liberia militarily, and France and Britain forced
Liberia to cede parts of its territory to them (1883, 1885, 1892, 1903, 1919).
Only after 1892 were Liberia's borders officially negotiated with these
European powers. The British (in 1875) and French (in 1886) are also alleged to
have fuelled internal Liberian uprisings and wars. From 1878 onwards Liberian
presidents regularly called for more foreign trade and more foreign investment
in Liberia. Two World Wars. Between 1910 and 1943 Germany was Liberia’s major
trading partner. In World War I, Liberia nevertheless tended to support the
Allies, partly because it was French and British colonial territories that
surrounded Liberia but also because Allied control of the Atlantic sea lanes
made continued trade with Germany unviable. As a result Germany withdrew
business from Liberia, causing Liberian customs revenue to decrease
significantly. In the 1930s Dutch, Danish, German and Polish investors signed
agreements for economic activities. In the Second World War, the U.S. pressured
Liberia to side with the Allies, and to expel all German citizens and business
representatives in 1944. This would have again significantly disturbed the
Liberian economy, but America had already in 1942 begun investing substantially
in Liberia, in projects related to America’s war effort. Large scale
investments. Between 1945 and 1980, the posture of Western European states
towards Liberia was largely that of the U.S.. Americo-Liberian rulers received
hundreds of millions of dollars in unrestricted foreign investment, mainly from
the U.S., but also from Western Europe. Many Western politicians courted
president Tubman. Liberian rulers also built up ties with the Soviet bloc and
other powers, striving for an independent position in world politics, as far as
their strong bonds with the Western world allowed them to. Liberian economy,
industry and natural resources. The Liberian economy between 1847 and 1980
expanded from primitive agriculture, through large scale rubber industry, to
exploitation of mineral resources and rendering services. Agriculture. From its
foundation, Liberia had flourishing trade contacts in West Africa, and soon
started trading with Europeans. Primary export products were coffee, rice, palm
oil, palm kernels, piassava, sugarcane and (hardwood) timber. Shipbuilding was
important, until it declined in the 1870s with the competition from steamships.
Also in the 1870s competition from Brazilian coffee and European sugar beets
caused a decline in Liberian exports. Liberia then tried to modernize its
largely agricultural economy. President Gardiner (1878–83) called for
increases of foreign trade and investment. President Coleman (1896–1900)
considered the future of Liberia to depend on exploitation of the resources of
Liberia’s interior. President Gibson (1900–04) granted rights to Union
Mining Company to investigate the hinterland for minerals. During World War I,
Germany, at that time Liberia’s major trading partner, withdrew from the
country, causing Liberian customs revenue to decrease. Additionally a German
submarine blockade of Liberia caused trade with Britain, France and the U.S. to
decrease to negligible amounts. Natural resources. In 1926, Firestone, an
American rubber company, started the worlds largest rubber plantation in
Liberia. This industry created 25,000 jobs, and rubber quickly became the
backbone of the Liberian economy; in the 1950s, rubber accounted for 40 percent
of the national budget. In the 1930s, Liberia signed concession agreements with
Dutch, Danish, German and Polish investors. In World War II, rubber was
strategically important, and Liberia assured the U.S. and its allies of all the
natural rubber they needed. Also, Liberia allowed the U.S. to use its territory
as a bridgehead for transports of soldiers and war supplies, to construct
military bases, airports, the Freeport of Monrovia, roads to the interior, etc.
The American military presence boosted the Liberian economy; thousands of
laborers descended from the interior to the coastal region. The country’s
huge iron ore deposits were made accessible to commerce. Between 1946 and 1960,
the Liberian government attracted $500 million in foreign investment, mainly
American, partly also from multinational corporations. By 1971, this amounted
to more than $1 billion. Exports of iron, timber and rubber rose strongly. In
1971, Liberia had the world’s largest rubber industry, and was the third
largest exporter of iron ore. Other mineral deposits also generated state
income. From 1948 Ship registrations became another large new source of state
revenue. From 1962 until 1980, the U.S. donated $280 million in aid to Liberia,
in exchange for which Liberia offered its land free of rent for U.S. government
facilities. Throughout the 1970s the price of rubber in the world commodities
market was depressed, putting pressure on Liberian state finances. Samuel Doe
and the People’s Redemption Council (1980–1989). After a bloody overthrow
of the Americo-Liberian régime by indigenous Liberians in 1980, a
‘Redemption Council’ took control of Liberia. Internal unrest, opposition
to the new military regime, and governmental repression steadily grew, until in
1989 Liberia sank into outright tribal and civil war. Coup d’état; relations
with U.S.. Samuel Kanyon Doe (1951–1990) was a member of the small ethnic
group of the Krahn, a master sergeant in the Liberian army, and trained by U.S.
Army Special Forces. On April 12, 1980, Doe led a bloody "coup d'état" against
president Tolbert, in which Tolbert and twenty-six of his supporters were
murdered; ten days later thirteen of Tolbert’s Cabinet members were publicly
executed. Thus ended 133 years of Americo-Liberian political domination over
Liberia. Doe established a military regime called the People's Redemption
Council (PRC). Many people welcomed Doe's takeover as a shift favouring the
majority of the population that had been excluded from power. Immediately
following the coup, the PRC tolerated a relatively free press. Doe quickly
established good relations with the United States, especially after U.S.
President Ronald Reagan took office in 1981. Reagan increased financial aid for
Liberia, from the $20 million it had been in 1979, to $75 million, and later
$95 million per year. Liberia became again an important Cold War ally of the
U.S.. Liberia served to protect important U.S. facilities and investments, and
to counter the perceived spread of Soviet influence in Africa. Doe closed the
Libyan mission in Monrovia and even severed diplomatic relations with the
Soviet Union. He agreed to a modification of the mutual defence pact with the
U.S. granting staging rights on 24-hour notice at Liberia's sea- and airports
for the U.S. Rapid Deployment Forces. Under Doe, Liberian ports were opened to
American, Canadian, and European ships, which brought in considerable foreign
investment from shipping firms and earned Liberia a reputation as a tax haven.
Fear of counter-coup; repression. Doe overcame seven coup attempts between 1981
and 1985. In August 1981 he had Thomas Weh Syen and four other PRC members
arrested and executed for allegedly conspiring against him. Then Doe’s
government declared an amnesty for all political prisoners and exiles, and
released sixty political prisoners. Soon there were more internal rifts in the
PRC. Doe became paranoid about the possibility of a counter-coup, and his
government grew increasingly corrupt and repressive, banning political
opposition, shutting down newspapers and jailing reporters. He began to
systematically eliminate PRC members who challenged his authority, and to place
people of his own ethnic Krahn background in key positions, which intensified
popular anger. Meanwhile, the economy deteriorated precipitously. Popular
support for Doe's government evaporated. 1985 presidential election. A draft
constitution providing for a multiparty republic had been issued in 1983 and
was approved by referendum in 1984. After the referendum, Doe staged a
presidential election on October 15, 1985. Nine political parties sought to
challenge Doe's National Democratic Party of Liberia (NDPL), but only three
were allowed to take part. Prior to the election, more than fifty of Doe's
opponents were murdered. Doe was ‘elected’ with 51% of the vote, but the
election was heavily rigged. Foreign observers declared the elections
fraudulent, and most of the elected opposition candidates refused to take their
seats. U.S. Assistant Secretary of State for Africa Chester Crocker testified
before Congress that the election was imperfect but that at least it was a step
toward democracy. He further justified his support for the election results
with the claim that, in any case, all African elections were known to be rigged
at that time. Repression escalates into tribal warfare. "(see also First
Liberian Civil War)" In November 1985 Thomas Quiwonkpa, Doe’s former second-
in-command, with an estimated 500 to 600 people, failed in an attempt to seize
power; all were killed. Doe was sworn in as President on January 6, 1986. Doe
then initiated crackdowns against certain tribes, such as the Gio (or Dan) and
Mano, in the north, where most of the coup plotters came from. This
government's mistreatment of certain ethnic groups resulted in divisions and
violence among indigenous populations, who until then had coexisted relatively
peacefully. In the late 1980s, as fiscal austerity took hold in the United
States and the perceived threat of Communism declined with the waning of the
Cold War, the U.S. became disenchanted with Doe's government and began cutting
off critical foreign aid to Liberia. This, together with the popular
opposition, made Doe’s position precarious. Nonetheless, the Krahn tribe of
president Doe attacked tribes in Nimba County in the north; some northerners
fled to bordering Côte d’Ivoire (Ivory Coast). In the late 1980s, Charles
Taylor assembled rebels from Gio and Mano tribes in Ivory Coast into a militia,
invaded Nimba County in 1989, and by 1990 a full-blown tribal war was taking
place. First Liberian Civil War (1989–1996). "(See also: First Liberian Civil
War and Charles Taylor)" In the late 1980s opposition from abroad to Doe’s
regime led to economic collapse. Doe had already been repressing and crushing
internal opposition for some time, when in November 1985 another coup attempt
against him failed. Doe retaliated against tribes such as the Gio (or Dan) and
Mano in the north, where most of the coup plotters had come from. Perhaps as a
sequel to these governmental retaliations, perhaps as another circumscription
of these same events: Doe’s Krahn tribe began attacking other tribes,
particularly in Nimba County in the northeast of Liberia, bordering on Côte
d’Ivoire (Ivory Coast) and on Guinea. Some Liberian northerners fled brutal
treatment from the Liberian army into the Ivory Coast. Charles Taylor and the
NPFL 1980-’89. Charles Taylor, born 1948, is son to a Gola mother and either
an Americo-Liberian or an Afro-Trinidadian father. Taylor was a student at
Bentley College in Waltham, Massachusetts, U.S.A., from 1972 to 1977, earning a
degree in economics. After the 1980 "coup d’état" he served some time in
Doe’s government until he was sacked in 1983 on accusation of embezzling
government funds. He fled Liberia, was arrested in 1984 in Massachusetts on a
Liberian warrant for extradition, and jailed in Massachusetts; escaped from
jail in 1985, and probably fled to Libya. Some time later, while in the Ivory
Coast, Taylor assembled a group of rebels into the National Patriotic Front of
Liberia (NPFL), mostly from the Gio and Mano tribes. War. December 1989, NPFL
invaded Nimba County in Liberia. Thousands of Gio and Mano joined them,
Liberians of other ethnic background as well. The Liberian army (AFL)
counterattacked, and retaliated against the whole population of the region. Mid
1990, a war was raging between Krahn on one side, and Gio and Mano on the
other. On both sides, thousands of civilians were massacred. 1990-1991. By the
middle of 1990, Taylor controlled much of the country, and by June laid siege
to Monrovia. In July, Yormie Johnson split off from NPFL and formed the
Independent National Patriotic Front of Liberia (INPFL), based on the Gio
tribe. Both NPFL and INPFL continued siege on Monrovia. Bloodshed was all over.
In August 1990, the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS), an
organisation of West African states, created a military intervention force
called Economic Community of West African States Monitoring Group (ECOMOG) of
4,000 troops, to restore order. President Doe and Yormie Johnson (INPFL) agreed
to this intervention, Taylor didn’t. On 9 September, President Doe paid a
visit to the barely established headquarters of ECOMOG in the Free Port of
Monrovia, was at the ECOMOG headquarters attacked by INPFL, taken to the
INPFL’s Caldwell base, tortured and killed. November 1990, ECOWAS agreed with
some principal Liberian players but without Charles Taylor, on an Interim
Government of National Unity (IGNU) under President Dr. Amos Sawyer. Sawyer
established his authority over most of Monrovia, with the help of a
paramilitary police force, the 'Black Berets', under Brownie Samukai, while the
rest of the country was in the hands of the various warring factions. June
1991, former Liberain army fighters formed rebel group United Liberation
Movement of Liberia for Democracy (ULIMO), entered western Liberia in September
’91, and gained territories from the NPFL. 1993-1996. 1993, ECOWAS brokered a
peace agreement in Cotonou, Benin. On 22 September 1993, the United Nations
established the United Nations Observer Mission in Liberia (UNOMIL) to support
ECOMOG in implementing the Cotonou agreement. March 1994, the ‘interim
government’ of Sawyer was succeeded by a "Council of State" collective
presidency of six members headed by David D. Kpormakpor. May 1994, renewed
armed hostilities broke out and held on. Somewhere 1994, ULIMO broke into two
militias: ULIMO-J, a Krahn faction led by Roosevelt Johnson and ULIMO-K, a
Mandigo-based faction under Alhaji G.V. Kromah. September ’94, factional
leaders agreed to the Akosombo peace agreement in Ghana, but to little
consequence. October ‘94, the UN reduced its number of UNOMIL observers to
about 90 because of the lack of will of combatants to honour peace agreements.
December ’94, factions and parties signed the Accra agreement, but fighting
continued. August 1995, factions signed an agreement largely brokered by Jerry
Rawlings, Ghanaian President; Charles Taylor agreed. September ’95,
Kpormakpor’s "Council of State" is succeeded by one under civilian Wilton G.
S. Sankawulo and with the factional heads Charles Taylor, Alhaji Kromah and
George Boley in it. April 1996, followers of Taylor and Kromah assaulted the
headquarters of Roosevelt Johnson in Monrovia, and the peace accord collapsed.
In August ’96, a new ceasefire is reached in Abuja, Nigeria. 3 September
1996, Ruth Perry followed Sankawulo as chairwoman of the "Council of State",
with the same three militia leaders in it. Second Liberian Civil War
(1997–2003). "(See also: First Liberian Civil War, Charles Taylor and Second
Liberian Civil War) " Elections 1997. Charles Taylor won the 1997 presidential
elections with 75.33 percent of the vote, while the runner-up, Unity Party
leader Ellen Johnson Sirleaf, received a mere 9.58 percent of the vote.
Accordingly, Taylor's National Patriotic Party gained 21 of a possible 26 seats
in the Senate, and 49 of a possible 64 seats in the House of Representatives.
The election was judged free and fair by some observers although it was charged
that Taylor had employed widespread intimidation to achieve victory at the
polls. 1997-1999. Bloodshed in Liberia did slow considerably, but it did not
end. Violence kept flaring up. During his entire reign, Taylor had to fight
insurgencies against his government. Suspicions were, Taylor continued to
assist rebel forces in neighbouring countries, like Sierra Leone, trading
weapons for diamonds. 1999-2003. Some ULIMO forces reformed themselves as the
Liberians United for Reconciliation and Democracy (LURD), backed by the
government of neighbouring Guinea. In 1999, they emerged in northern Liberia,
in April 2000 they started fighting in Lofa County in northernmost Liberia. By
the spring of 2001 they were posing a major threat to the Taylor government.
Liberia was now engaged in a complex three-way conflict with Sierra Leone and
the Guinea Republic. Meanwhile, the United Nations Security Council in March
2001 (Resolution 1343) concluded that Liberia and Charles Taylor played roles
in the civil war in Sierra Leone, and therefore: By the beginning of 2002,
Sierra Leone and Guinea were supporting the LURD, while Taylor was supporting
opposition factions in both countries. By supporting Sierra Leonean rebels,
Taylor also drew the enmity of the British and Americans. Other elements of the
former ULIMO-factions formed another new rebel group, the Movement for
Democracy in Liberia (MODEL). Early 2003, MODEL emerged in the south of
Liberia. Women of Liberia. In 2002, the women in Liberia were tired of seeing
their country torn apart. Organized by social worker Leymah Gbowee, women
started gathering and praying in a fish market to protest the violence. They
organized the Women in Peacebuilding Network (WIPNET), and issued a statement
of intent: "In the past we were silent, but after being killed, raped,
dehumanized, and infected with diseases, and watching our children and families
destroyed, war has taught us that the future lies in saying NO to violence and
YES to peace! We will not relent until peace prevails." Joined by Liberian
Muslim Women's Organization, Christian and Muslim women joined forces to create
Women of Liberia Mass Action for Peace. They wore white, to symbolize peace.
They staged silent nonviolence protests and forced a meeting with President
Charles Taylor and extracted a promise from him to attend peace talks in Ghana.
In 2003, a delegation of Liberian women went to Ghana to continue to apply
pressure on the warring factions during the peace process. They staged a sit in
outside of the Presidential Palace, blocking all the doors and windows and
preventing anyone from leaving the peace talks without a resolution. Women of
Liberia Mass Action for Peace became a political force against violence and
against their government. Their actions brought about an agreement during the
stalled peace talks. As a result, the women were able to achieve peace in
Liberia after a 14-year civil war and later helped bring to power the country's
first female head of state, Ellen Johnson Sirleaf. Another UN embargo, and
arrest warrant against Taylor. On March 7, 2003, the war tribunal Special Court
for Sierra Leone (SCSL) decided to summon Charles Taylor and charge him with
war crimes and crimes against humanity, but they kept this decision and this
charge secret until June that year. May 6, 2003, the UN Security Council
(Resolution 1478) decided to an embargo also on Liberian “round logs and
timber products”. By mid-2003, LURD controlled the northern third of the
country and was threatening the capital, MODEL was active in the south, and
Taylor's government controlled only a third of the country: Monrovia and
central Liberia. On June 4, 2003, ECOWAS organized peace talks in Accra, Ghana,
among the Government of Liberia, civil society, and the rebel groups LURD and
MODEL. On the opening ceremony, in Taylor’s presence, the SCSL revealed their
charge against Taylor which they had kept secret since March, and also issued
an international arrest warrant for Taylor. The SCSL indicted Taylor for
“bearing the greatest responsibility” for atrocities in Sierra Leone since
November 1996. The Ghanaian authorities did not attempt to arrest Taylor,
declaring they could not round up a president they themselves had invited as a
guest for peace talks. The same day, Taylor returned to Liberia. Pressure of
rebels, Presidents, and UN: Taylor resigns. June 2003, LURD began a siege of
Monrovia. July 9, the Nigerian President offered Taylor safe exile in his
country, if Taylor stayed out of Liberian politics. Also in July, American
President Bush stated twice that Taylor “must leave Liberia”. Taylor
insisted that he would resign only if American peacekeeping troops were
deployed to Liberia. 1 August 2003, the Security Council, (Resolution 1497)
decided on a multinational force in Liberia, to be followed-on by a United
Nations stabilization force. ECOWAS sent troops under the banner of 'ECOMIL' to
Liberia. These troops started to arrive in Liberia probably as of 15 August.
The U.S. provided logistical support. President Taylor resigned, and flew into
exile in Nigeria. Vice-President Moses Blah replaced Taylor as interim-
President. A ECOWAS-ECOMIL force of 1000 Nigerian troops was airlifted into
Liberia on August 15, to halt the occupation of Monrovia by rebel forces.
Meanwhile, U.S. stationed a Marine Expeditionary Unit with 2300 Marines
offshore Liberia. Peace agreement and transitional government (2003–2005). On
August 18, 2003, the Liberian Government, the rebels, political parties, and
leaders from civil society signed a peace agreement that laid the framework for
a two-year National Transitional Government of Liberia. August 21, they
selected businessman Charles Gyude Bryant as Chair of the National Transitional
Government of Liberia (NTGL), effective on October 14. These changes paved the
way for the ECOWAS peacekeeping mission to expand into a 3,600-strong force,
constituted by Benin, Gambia, Ghana, Guinea-Bissau, Mali, Nigeria, Senegal and
Togo. On October 1, 2003, UNMIL took over the peacekeeping duties from ECOWAS.
Some 3,500 West African troops were provisionally ‘re-hatted’ as United
Nations peacekeepers. The UN Secretary-General commended the African
Governments who have contributed to UNMIL, as well as the United States for its
support to the regional force. October 14, 2003, Blah handed power to Charles
Gyude Bryant. Fighting initially continued in parts of the country, and
tensions between the factions did not immediately vanish. But fighters were
being disarmed; in June 2004, a program to reintegrate the fighters into
society began; the economy recovered somewhat in 2004; by year's end, the funds
for the re-integration program proved inadequate; also by the end of 2004, more
than 100,000 Liberian fighters had been disarmed, and the disarmament program
was ended. In light of the progress made, President Bryant requested an end to
the UN embargo on Liberian diamonds (since March 2001) and timber (since May
2003), but the Security Council postponed such a move until the peace was more
secure. Because of a supposed ‘fundamentally broken system of governance that
contributed to 23 years of conflict in Liberia’, and failures of the
Transitional Government in curbing corruption, the Liberian government and the
International Contact Group on Liberia signed onto the anti-corruption program
GEMAP, starting September 2005. Ellen Johnson Sirleaf elected president (2005).
The transitional government prepared for fair and peaceful democratic elections
on October 11, 2005, with UNMIL troops safeguarding the peace. Twenty three
candidates stood for the presidential election, with George Weah,
internationally famous footballer, UNICEF Goodwill Ambassador and member of the
Kru ethnic group, and Ellen Johnson Sirleaf, a former World Bank economist and
finance minister, Harvard-trained economist and of mixed Americo-Liberian and
indigenous descent. In the first round, no candidate took the required
majority, Weah won this round with 28% of the vote. A run-off between the top
two vote getters, Weah and Ellen Johnson Sirleaf, was necessary. The second
round of elections took place on November 8, 2005. Ellen Johnson Sirleaf won
this runoff decisively. Both the general election and runoff were marked by
peace and order, with thousands of Liberians waiting patiently in the Liberian
heat to cast their ballots. Sirleaf claimed victory of this round, winning 59
per cent of the vote. However, Weah alleged electoral fraud, despite
international observers declaring the election to be free and fair. Although
Weah was still threatening to take his claims to the Supreme Court if no
evidence of fraud was found, Johnson-Sirleaf was declared winner on November
23, 2005, and took office on January 16, 2006. Recent events (2006–present).
Allegations of labor rights abuses by Firestone. In November 2005, the
International Labor Rights Fund filed an Alien Tort Claims Act (ATCA) case
against Bridgestone, the parent company of Firestone, alleging “forced labor,
the modern equivalent of slavery”, on the Firestone Plantation in Harbel. In
May 2006, the United Nations Mission in Liberia (UNMIL) released a report:
“Human Rights in Liberia’s Rubber Plantations: Tapping into the Future”
which detailed the results of its investigation into the conditions on the
Firestone plantation in Liberia. Extradition and trial of Charles Taylor,
arrest of Bryant. Under international pressure, President Sirleaf requested in
March 2006 that Nigeria extradite Charles Taylor, who was then brought before
an international tribunal in Sierra Leone to face charges of crimes against
humanity, arising from events during the Sierra Leone civil war (his trial was
later transferred to The Hague for security purposes). In June, 2006, the
United Nations ended its embargo on Liberian timber (effective since May 2003),
but continued its diamond embargo (effective since March 2001) until an
effective certificate of origin program was established, a decision that was
reaffirmed in October 2006. In March 2007, former interim president Bryant was
arrested and charged with having embezzled government funds while in office. In
August 2007, the Supreme Court of Liberia allowed the criminal prosecution for
this to proceed in the lower courts. The court ruled that Bryant was not
entitled to immunity as the head of state under the Constitution as he was not
elected to the position and he was not acting in accordance with law when he
allegedly stole USD $1.3 million in property from the government. 2008-2009. In
July 2008, the Legislature reintroduced the death penalty into Liberian law,
with President Sirleaf signing the bill into law. The law allowed for
executions for convictions of armed robbery, rape, terrorism, and hijacking.
Some parts of the country were declared disaster zones due to a plague of
caterpillars.
