History of Mexico The history of Mexico, a country located in the southern
portion of North America, covers a period of more than two millennia. First
populated more than 13,000 years ago, the country produced complex indigenous
civilizations before being conquered by the Spanish in the 16th century. Since
the Spanish conquest, Mexico has fused its long-established native
civilizations with European culture. Perhaps nothing better represents this
hybrid background than Mexico's languages: the country is both the most
populous Spanish-speaking country in the world and home to the largest number
of Native American language speakers on the continent. From 1519, the Spaniards
absorbed the native peoples into Spain's vast colonial empire. For three
centuries Mexico was just another kingdom (the New Spain) of the Spanish
Empire, during which time its indigenous population fell by more than half and
was partially replaced by Spaniards and the now predominant Mestizos or mixture
of Indigenous and Spanish populations. It was also then that the current
Spanish-speaking, Catholic and Westernized Mexican culture was born. After a
protracted struggle Mexico declared its independence from Spain in 1810. In
1846, the Mexican American War broke out, ending two years later with Mexico
ceding almost half of its territory to the United States. Later in the 19th
century, France invaded Mexico (1861) and set Maximilian I on the Mexican
throne, which lasted until 1867. A half-century of economic stagnation and
political chaos ended as Porfirio Díaz held power and promoted order and the
modernization of the society and economy. Mexico's infrastructure was
modernized by a strong, stable central government. Increased tax revenues and
better administration brought dramatic improvements in public safety, public
health, railways, mining, industry, foreign trade, and national finances.
Little had been done for the nation's poor, and they revolted in the Mexican
Revolution (1910–1929). Roaming armies killed a tenth of the nation's
population, but the Revolution freed the peons from the system of large
haciendas that had originated with the Spanish Conquest. The center-left
Partido Revolucionario Institucional (PRI) controlled national and state
politics after 1929, and nationalized the oil industry in the 1930s. The
population grew rapidly even as millions moved to the United States. Mexico's
economy was further integrated with the U.S. after the NAFTA agreement began
lowering trade barriers in 1994. Seven decades of PRI rule ended in the year
2000 with the election of Vicente Fox of the Partido Acción Nacional (PAN). In
the face of extremely violent drug wars, the PRI returned to power in 2012,
promising that it had reformed itself. Prehistory and pre-Columbian
civilizations. Sources. The pre-history of Mexico is known through the work of
archaeologists and epigraphers. Accounts written by the Spanish at time of
their conquest (the "conquistadores") and by indigenous chroniclers of the
post-conquest period constitute the principal source of information regarding
Mexico at the time of the Spanish Conquest. While relatively few parchments (or
codices) of the Mixtec and Aztec cultures of the Post-Classic period survive,
progress has been made in the area of Maya archaeology and epigraphy.
Beginnings. The presence of people in Mesoamerica was once thought to date back
40,000 years, an estimate based on what were believed to be ancient footprints
discovered in the Valley of Mexico; but after further investigation using
radiocarbon dating, it appears this date may not be accurate. It is currently
unclear whether 21,000-year-old campfire remains found in the Valley of Mexico
are the earliest human remains uncovered so far in Mexico. The first people to
settle in Mexico encountered a climate far milder than the current one. In
particular, the Valley of Mexico contained several large paleo-lakes surrounded
by dense forest. Bison and deer roamed in large numbers. Such conditions
encouraged the pursuit of a hunter-gatherer existence. Corn, squash, and beans.
The diet of ancient Mexico was varied, including corn (or maize), squashes such
as pumpkin and butternut squash, common or pinto beans, tomatoes, peppers,
cassava, pineapples, chocolate, and tobacco. The Three Sisters (corn, squash,
and beans) constituted the principal diet. Indigenous peoples in western Mexico
began to selectively breed maize ("Zea mays") plants from precursor grasses
(e.g., teosinte) around 8000 BC, and intensive corn farming began between 1800
and 1500 BC. Religion. The Mesoamerican had the concept of god and religion,
but were very different from Abrahamic concepts. The Mesoamericans had a belief
where everything, every element of the cosmos, the earth, the sun, the moon,
the stars, which mankind inhabits, everything that forms part of nature such as
animals, plants, water and mountains all represented a manifestation of the
supernatural. In most cases gods and goddesses are often depicted in stone
reliefs, pottery decoration, wall paintings and in the various Maya, Aztec and
Mixtec codices. The spiritual pantheon was vast and extremely complex. However,
many of the deities depicted are common to the various civilizations and their
worship survived over long periods of time. They frequently took on different
characteristics and even names in different areas, but in effect they
transcended cultures and time. Great masks with gaping jaws and monstrous
features in stone or stucco were often located at the entrance to temples,
symbolizing a cavern or cave on the flanks of the mountains that allowed access
to the depths of Mother Earth and the shadowy roads that lead to the
underworld. Cults connected with the jaguar and jade especially permeated
religion throughout Mesoamerica. Jade, with its translucent green color was
revered along with water as a symbol of life and fertility. The jaguar, agile,
powerful and fast, was especially connected with warriors and as spirit guides
of shamans. Despite differences of chronology or geography, the crucial aspects
of this religious pantheon were shared amongst the people of ancient
Mesoamerica. Thus, this quality of acceptance of new gods to the collection of
existing gods may have been one of the shaping characteristics for the success
during the Christianization of Mesoamerica. New gods did not at once replace
the old; they initially joined the ever growing family of deities or were
merged with existing ones that seemed to share similar characteristics or
responsibilities. Writing. Mesoamerica is the only place in the Americas where
indigenous writing systems were invented and used before European colonization.
While the types of writing systems in Mesoamerica range from minimalist
"picture-writing" to complex logophonetic systems capable of recording speech
and literature, they all share some core features that make them visually and
functionally distinct from other writing systems of the world. The great
civilizations. During the pre-Columbian period, many city-states, kingdoms, and
empires competed with one another for power and prestige. Ancient Mexico can be
said to have produced five major civilizations: the Olmec, Maya,
Teotihuacan,Toltec, and Aztec. Unlike other indigenous Mexican societies, these
civilizations (with the exception of the politically fragmented Maya) extended
their political and cultural reach across Mexico and beyond. They consolidated
power and exercised influence in matters of trade, art, politics, technology,
and religion. Over a span of 3,000 years, other regional powers made economic
and political alliances with them; many made war on them. But almost all found
themselves within their spheres of influence. The Olmec (1400–400 BC). The
Olmec first appeared along the Atlantic coast (in what is now the state of
Tabasco) in the period 1500-900 BC. The Olmecs were the first Mesoamerican
culture to produce an identifiable artistic and cultural style, and may also
have been the society that invented writing in Mesoamerica. By the Middle
Preclassic Period (900-300 BC), Olmec artistic styles had been adopted as far
away as the Valley of Mexico and Costa Rica. The Maya. Mayan cultural
characteristics, such as the rise of the "ahau", or king, can be traced from
300 BC onwards. During the centuries preceding the classical period, Mayan
kingdoms sprang up in an area stretching from the Pacific coasts of southern
Mexico and Guatemala to the northern Yucatán Peninsula. The egalitarian Mayan
society of pre-royal centuries gradually gave way to a society controlled by a
wealthy elite that began building large ceremonial temples and complexes. The
earliest known long-count date, 199 AD, heralds the classic period, during
which the Mayan kingdoms supported a population numbering in the millions.
Tikal, the largest of the kingdoms, alone had 500,000 inhabitants, though the
average population of a kingdom was much smaller—somewhere under 50,000
people. When the Spaniards came, they brought disease, guns, and steel. With
those tools they wiped out most of Mayan civilization. The Teotihuacan.
Teotihuacan is an enormous archaeological site in the Basin of Mexico,
containing some of the largest pyramidal structures built in the pre-Columbian
Americas. Apart from the pyramidal structures, Teotihuacan is also known for
its large residential complexes, the Avenue of the Dead, and numerous colorful,
well-preserved murals. Additionally, Teotihuacan produced a thin orange pottery
style that spread through Mesoamerica. The city is thought to have been
established around 100 BCE and continued to be built until about 250 CE. The
city may have lasted until sometime between the 7th and 8th centuries CE. At
its zenith, perhaps in the first half of the 1st millennium CE, Teotihuacan was
the largest city in the pre-Columbian Americas. At this time it may have had
more than 200,000 inhabitants, placing it among the largest cities of the world
in this period. Teotihuacan was even home to multi-floor apartment compounds
built to accommodate this large population. The civilization and cultural
complex associated with the site is also referred to as Teotihuacan or
Teotihuacano. Although it is a subject of debate whether Teotihuacan was the
center of a state empire, its influence throughout Mesoamerica is well
documented; evidence of Teotihuacano presence can be seen at numerous sites in
Veracruz and the Maya region. The Aztecs may have been influenced by this city.
The ethnicity of the inhabitants of Teotihuacan is also a subject of debate.
Possible candidates are the Nahua, Otomi or Totonac ethnic groups. Scholars
have also suggested that Teotihuacan was a multiethnic state. The Toltec. The
Toltec culture is an archaeological Mesoamerican culture that dominated a state
centered in Tula, Hidalgo in the early post-classic period of Mesoamerican
chronology (ca 800–1000 CE). The later Aztec culture saw the Toltecs as their
intellectual and cultural predecessors and described Toltec culture emanating
from Tollan (Nahuatl for Tula) as the epitome of civilization, indeed in the
Nahuatl language the word "Toltec" came to take on the meaning "artisan". The
Aztec oral and pictographic tradition also described the history of the Toltec
empire giving lists of rulers and their exploits. Among modern scholars it is a
matter of debate whether the Aztec narratives of Toltec history should be given
credence as descriptions of actual historical events. While all scholars
acknowledge that there is a large mythological part of the narrative some
maintain that by using a critical comparative method some level of historicity
can be salvaged from the sources, whereas others maintain that continued
analysis of the narratives as sources of actual history is futile and hinders
access to actual knowledge of the culture of Tula, Hidalgo. Other controversy
relating to the Toltecs include how best to understand reasons behind the
perceived similarities in architecture and iconography between the
archaeological site of Tula and the Maya site of Chichén Itzá - as of yet no
consensus has emerged about the degree or direction of influence between the
two sites. The Aztec Empire (1325–1521 AD). The Nahua peoples began to enter
central Mexico in the 6th century AD. By the 12th century, they had established
their center at Azcapotzalco, the city of the Tepanecs. The Mexica people
arrived in the Valley of Mexico in 1248 AD. They had migrated from the deserts
north of the Rio Grande over a period traditionally said to have been 100
years. They may have thought of themselves as the heirs to the prestigious
civilizations that had preceded them. What the Aztec initially lacked in
political power, however, they made up for with ambition and military skill. In
1325, they established the biggest city in the world at that time,
Tenochtitlan. Aztec religion was based on the belief of the constant offering
of human blood to continue functioning; to meet this need, the Aztec sacrificed
thousands of people. This belief is thought to have been common throughout
Nahuatl people. To acquire captives in times of peace, the Aztec resorted to a
form of ritual warfare called flower war. The Tlaxcalteca, among other Nahuatl
nations, were forced into such wars. In 1428, the Aztec led a war of liberation
against their rulers from the city of Azcapotzalco, which had subjugated most
of the Valley of Mexico's peoples. The revolt was successful, and the Aztecs
became the rulers of central Mexico as the leaders of the Triple Alliance. The
alliance was composed of the city-states of Tenochtitlan, Texcoco, and
Tlacopan. At their peak, 350,000 Aztec presided over a wealthy tribute-empire
comprising 10 million people, almost half of Mexico's estimated population of
24 million. Their empire stretched from ocean to ocean, and extended into
Central America. The westward expansion of the empire was halted by a
devastating military defeat at the hands of the Purepecha (who possessed
weapons made of copper). The empire relied upon a system of taxation (of goods
and services), which were collected through an elaborate bureaucracy of tax
collectors, courts, civil servants, and local officials who were installed as
loyalists to the Triple Alliance. By 1519, the Aztec capital, Mexico-
Tenochtitlan, the site of modern-day Mexico City, was one of the largest cities
in the world, with a population of 30,000 (estimates range as high as 60,000).
The Spanish conquest. Mesoamerica on the eve of the conquest. The first
mainland explorations were followed by a phase of inland expeditions and
conquest. The Spanish crown extended the Reconquista effort, completed in Spain
in 1492, to non-Catholic people in new territories. In 1502 on the coast of
present day Colombia, near the Gulf of Urabá, Spanish explorers led by Vasco
Núñez de Balboa explored and conquered the area near the Atrato River. The
conquest was of the Chibchan speaking nations, mainly the Muisca and Tairona
indigenous people that lived here. The Spanish founded San Sebastian de Uraba
in 1509—abandoned within the year, and in 1510 the first permanent Spanish
mainland settlement in America, Santa María la Antigua del Darién. The first
Europeans to arrive in what is modern day Mexico were the survivors of a
Spanish shipwreck in 1511. Only two managed to survive Gerónimo de Aguilar and
Gonzalo Guerrero until further contact was made with Spanish explorers years
later. On 8 February 1517 an expedition led by Francisco Hernández de Córdoba
left the harbor of Santiago de Cuba to explore the shores of southern Mexico.
During the course of this expedition many of Hernández' men were killed, most
during a battle near the town of Champotón against a Maya army. He himself was
injured, and died a few days shortly after his return to Cuba. This was the
Europeans' first encounter with an "advanced civilization" in the Americas,
with solidly built buildings and a complex social organization which they
recognized as being comparable to those of the Old World. Hernán Cortés led a
new expedition to Mexico landing ashore at present day Veracruz on 22 April
1519, a date which marks the beginning of 300 years of Spanish hegemony over
the region. There is a difference in the 'Spanish conquest of Mexico' between
the Spanish conquest of the Aztec Empire and the Spanish conquest of Yucatán.
The former is conquest of the campaign, led by Hernán Cortés from 1519–21
and his Tlaxcala and other 'indigenous peoples' allied against the Mexica/Aztec
empire. The Spanish conquest of Yucatán is the much longer campaign, from
1551–1697, against the Maya peoples of the Maya civilization in the Yucatán
Peninsula of present day Mexico and northern Central America. T The aftermath.
Tenochtitlan, the Aztecs, and the Tlaxcalteca. Tenochtitlan had been almost
totally destroyed by fire and cannon shots. Those Aztecs who survived were
forbidden to live in the city and the surrounding isles, and they went to live
in Tlatelolco. Cortés imprisoned the royal families of the valley. To prevent
another revolt, he personally tortured and killed Cuauhtémoc, the last Aztec
Emperor; Coanacoch, the King of Texcoco, and Tetlepanquetzal, King of Tlacopan.
The Spanish had no intentions of turning over Tenochtitlan to the Tlaxcalteca.
While Tlaxcalteca troops continued to help the Spaniards, and Tlaxcala received
better treatment than other indigenous nations, the Spanish eventually disowned
the treaty. Forty years after the conquest, the Tlaxcalteca had to pay the same
tribute as any other indigenous community. Analysis of the defeat. "Military
Tactics". The Alliance's use of ambush during indigenous ceremonies allowed the
Spanish to avoid fighting the best Aztec warriors in direct armed battle, such
as during The Feast of Huitzilopochtli. "Smallpox and its Toll". Smallpox
("Variola major" and "Variola minor") began to spread in Mesoamerica
immediately after the arrival of Europeans. The indigenous peoples, who had no
immunity to it, eventually died in the hundreds of thousands. A third of all
the natives of the Valley of Mexico succumbed to it within six months of the
arrival of the Spanish. The colonial period (1521–1810). The capture of
Tenochtitlan marked the beginning of a 300-year-long colonial period, during
which Mexico was known as "New Spain". Period of the conquest (1521–1650).
Contrary to a widespread misconception, Spain did not conquer all of the Aztec
Empire when Cortes took Tenochtitlan. It required another two centuries to
complete the conquest: rebellions broke out within the old Empire and wars
continued with other native peoples. After the fall of Tenochtitlan, it took
decades of sporadic warfare to subdue the rest of Mesoamerica. Particularly
fierce was the Chichimeca War (1576–1606) in the north. "Economics". The
Council of Indies and the mendicant establishments, which arose in Mesoamerica
as early as 1524, labored to generate capital for the crown of Spain and
convert the Indian populations to Catholicism. During this period and the
following Colonial periods the sponsorship of mendicant friars and a process of
religious syncretism combined the Pre-Hispanic cultures with Spanish socio-
religious tradition. The resulting hodgepodge of culture was a pluriethnic
State that relied on the "repartimiento", a system of peasant "Republic of
Indians" labor that carried out any necessary work. Thus, the existing feudal
system of pre-Hispanic Mesoamerican culture was replaced by the encomienda
feudal-style system of Spain, probably adapted to the pre-Hispanic tradition.
This in turn was finally replaced by a debt-based inscription of labor that led
to widespread revitalization movements and prompted the revolution that ended
colonial New Spain. "Evolution of the Race". During the three centuries of
colonial rule, less than 700,000 Spaniards, most of them men, settled in
Mexico. The settlers intermarried with indigenous women, fathering the mixed
race ("mestizo") descendents who today constitute the majority of Mexico's
population. The colonial period (1650–1810). During this period, Mexico was
part of the much larger Viceroyalty of New Spain, which included Cuba, Puerto
Rico, Central America as far south as Costa Rica, the southwestern United
States including Florida, and the Philippines. Spain during the 16th century
focused its energies on areas with dense populations that had produced Pre-
Columbian civilizations, since these areas could provide the settlers with a
disciplined labor force and a population to catechize. Territories populated by
nomadic peoples were harder to conquer, and though the Spanish did explore a
good part of North America, seeking the fabled "El Dorado", they made no
concerted effort to settle the northern desert regions in what is now the
United States until the end of 16th century (Santa Fe, 1598). Colonial law with
Spanish roots but native originalities was introduced, creating a balance
between local jurisdiction (the Cabildos) and the Crown's, whereby upper
administrative offices were closed to the natives, even those of pure Spanish
blood. Administration was based on the racial separation of the population
between the Republics of Spaniards, Indians and Mestizos, autonomous and
directly dependent on the king himself. From an economic point of view, New
Spain was administered principally for the benefit of the Empire and its
military and defensive efforts (Mexico provided more than half of the Empire
taxes and supported the administration of all North and Central America).
Competition with the metropolis was discouraged, and for instance the
cultivation of grapes and olives, introduced by Cortez himself, was banned out
of fear that these crops would compete with Spain's. In order to protect the
country from the attacks of English, French and Dutch pirates, as well as the
Crown's revenue, only two ports were open to foreign trade—Veracruz on the
Atlantic and Acapulco on the Pacific. The pirates attacked, plundered and
ravaged several cities like Campeche (1557), Veracruz (1568) and Alvarado
(1667). Education was encouraged by the Crown from the very beginning, and
Mexico boasts the first primary school (Texcoco, 1523), first university (1551)
and the first printing house (1524) of the Americas. Indigenous languages were
studied mainly by the religious orders during the first centuries, and became
official languages in the so-called Republic of Indians, only to be outlawed
and ignored after independence by the prevailing Spanish-speaking creoles.
Mexico produced important cultural achievements during the colonial period,
like the literature of Sor Juana Inés de la Cruz and Ruiz de Alarcón, as well
as cathedrals, civil monuments, forts and colonial cities such as Puebla,
Mexico City, Querétaro, Zacatecas and others, today part of Unesco's World
Heritage. The syncretism between indigenous and Spanish cultures gave way in
New Spain to many of nowadays Mexican staple and world-famous cultural traits
like tequila (first distilled in the 16th century), mariachi (18th), jarabe
(17th), charros (17th) and the highly prized Mexican cuisine, fruit of the
mixture of European and indigenous ingredients and techniques. Mexican
independence and the 19th century (1807–1910). After independence, Mexican
politics was chaotic, with the presidency changing hands 75 times in the next
55 years (1821–76). Mexico was poorer (in per capita terms) in 1876 than it
was in 1821. Some commentators explain Mexico's slow economic growth before
1876 in terms of the negative impact of Spanish rule, the concentration of
landholding in the hands of a few families, and the reactionary role of the
Catholic Church. Coatsworth rejects those arguments and says the chief
obstacles were poor transportation and inefficient economic organization. Under
the Porfiriato regime (1876–1910), economic growth was much faster. War of
Independence. Insurgents, inspired by the record of the American and French
Revolutions, saw their opportunity in 1808 as the king abdicated in Madrid and
Spain was overwhelmed by war and occupation. The rebellion began as an
idealistic peasants' and miners' movement led by a local priest Miguel Hidalgo
y Costilla who issued the "The Cry of Dolores" on 16 September 1810; the day is
celebrated as Independence Day. Shouting "Independence and death to the
Spaniards!" they marched on the capital with a very large, poorly organized
army. It was routed by the Spanish and Hidalgo was executed. Another priest
Jose Maria Morelos took over and was more successful in his quest for
republicanism and independence. Spain, its reactionary monarchy restored in
1814 after Napoleon's defeat, fought back. Spain executed Morelos in 1815; the
scattered insurgents formed guerrilla bands. In 1820 the creoles, led by
Augustin de Iturbide, joined the rebellion. The rebels formulated the "Plan of
Iguala", demanding for an independent constitutional monarchy, a religious
monopoly for the Catholic Church, and equality for Spaniards and creoles. On
Sept. 27, 1821, Iturbide and the viceroy signed the Treaty of Cordoba whereby
Spain granted the demands and withdrew. After independence (1821–1846).
Empire or republic? The United Mexican States (Spanish: Estados Unidos
Mexicanos), was established on 4 October 1824, after the overthrow of the
Mexican Empire of Agustin de Iturbide. In the new constitution, the republic
took the name of United Mexican States, and was defined as a representative
federal republic, with Catholicism as the official and unique religion.
However, most of the population largely ignored it. When Guadalupe Victoria was
followed in office by Vicente Guerrero, who won the electoral but lost the
popular vote, the Conservative Party saw an opportunity to seize control and
led a coup under Anastasio Bustamante, who served as president from 1830 to
1832, and again from 1837 to 1841. Political developments in the South and
North. Santa Anna. The federalists asked Gen. Antonio López de Santa Anna to
overthrow Bustamante; he did, declaring General Manuel Gómez Pedraza (who won
the electoral vote in 1828) as president. Elections were held, and Santa Anna
took office in 1832. Constantly changing political beliefs, as president (he
served as president 11 times), in 1834, Santa Anna abrogated the federal
constitution, causing insurgencies in the southeastern state of Yucatán and
the northernmost portion of the northern state of Coahuila y Tejas. Both areas
sought independence from the central government. Negotiations and the presence
of Santa Anna's army brought Yucatán to recognize Mexican sovereignty, Santa
Anna's army turned to the northern rebellion. The inhabitants of "Tejas",
calling themselves Texans and led mainly by relatively recently arrived
English-speaking settlers, declared independence from Mexico at Washington-on-
the-Brazos on 2 March 1836, giving birth to the Republic of Texas. At the
Battle of San Jacinto on April 21, 1836, Texan militias defeated the Mexican
army and captured General Santa Anna. In 1845, the U.S. Congress ratified
Texas' petition for statehood. Comanche raids. The northern states grew
increasingly isolated, economically and politically, due to prolonged Comanche
raids and attacks. New Mexico in particular had been gravitating toward
Comancheria. In the 1820s, when the United States began to exert influence over
the region, New Mexico had already begun to question its loyalty to Mexico. By
the time of the Mexican-American War, the Comanches had raided and pillaged
large portions of northern Mexico, resulting in sustained impoverishment,
political fragmentation, and general frustration at the inability—or
unwillingness—of the Mexican government to discipline the Comanches. Texas.
Soon after achieving independence, the Mexican government, in an effort to
populate its northern territories, awarded extensive land grants in Coahuila y
Tejas to thousands of families from the United States, on condition that the
settlers convert to Catholicism and become Mexican citizens. The Mexican
government also forbade the importation of slaves. These conditions were
largely ignored. A key factor in the decision to allow Americans in was the
belief that they would a) protect northern Mexico from Comanche attacks and b)
buffer the northern states against U.S. westward expansion. The policy failed
on both counts: the Americans tended to settle far from the Comanche raiding
zones and used the Mexican government's failure to suppress the raids as a
pretext for declaring independence. The Texas Revolution or Texas War of
Independence was a military conflict between Mexico and settlers in the Texas
portion of the Mexican state Coahuila y Tejas. The war lasted from October 2,
1835 to April 21, 1836. However, a war at sea between Mexico and Texas would
continue into the 1840s. Animosity between the Mexican government and the
American settlers in Texas, as well as many Texas residents of Mexican
ancestry, began with the Siete Leyes of 1835, when Mexican President and
General Antonio López de Santa Anna abolished the federal Constitution of 1824
and proclaimed the more centralizing 1835 constitution in its place. War began
in Texas on October 2, 1835, with the Battle of Gonzales. Early Texian Army
successes at La Bahia and San Antonio were soon met with crushing defeat at the
same locations a few months later. The war ended at the Battle of San Jacinto
where General Sam Houston led the Texian Army to victory over a portion of the
Mexican Army under Santa Anna, who was captured shortly after the battle. The
conclusion of the war resulted in the creation of the Republic of Texas in
1836. The Mexican-American War (1846–1848). In response to a Mexican massacre
of an American army detachment in disputed territory, the U.S. Congress
declared war on May 13, 1846; Mexico followed suit on 23 May. The
Mexican–American War took place in two theatres: the western (aimed at
California) and Central Mexico (aimed at capturing Mexico City) campaigns. In
March 1847, U.S. President James K. Polk sent an army of 12,000 volunteer and
regular soldiers under General Winfield Scott to the port of Veracruz. The 70
ships of the invading forces arrived at the city on 7 March and began a naval
bombombardment. After landing his men, horses, and supplies, Scott began the
Siege of Veracruz. The city (at that time still walled) was defended by Mexican
General Juan Morales with 3,400 men. Veracruz replied as best it could with
artillery to the bombardment from land and sea, but the city walls were
reduced. After 12 days, the Mexicans surrendered. Scott marched west with 8,500
men, while Santa Anna entrenched with artillery and 12,000 troops on the main
road halfway to Mexico City. At the Battle of Cerro Gordo, Santa Anna was
outflanked and routed. Scott pushed on to Puebla, Mexico's second largest city,
which capitulated without resistance on 1 May—the citizens were hostile to
Santa Anna. After the Battle of Chapultepec (13 September 1847), Mexico City
was occupied; Scott became its military governor. Many other parts of Mexico
were also occupied. Some Mexican units fought with distinction. One of the
justly commemorated units was a group of six young Military College cadets (now
considered Mexican national heroes). These cadets fought to the death defending
their college during the Battle of Chapultepec. The war ended with the Treaty
of Guadalupe Hidalgo, which stipulated that a) Mexico must sell its northern
territories to the United States for US $15 million; b) the United States would
give full citizenship and voting rights, and protect the property rights of
Mexicans living in the ceded territories; and c) the United States would assume
$3.25 million in debt owed by Mexico to Americans. The war was Mexico's first
encounter with a modern well-organized and well-equipped army. The primary
reason for Mexico's defeat was its problematic internal situation, which led to
a lack of unity and organization for a successful defense. After the war
Washington discovered that a much easier railroad route to California lay
slightly south of the Gila River, in Mexico. In 1853, President Santa Anna sold
off the Gadsden Strip to the US for $5 million in the Gadsden Purchase. This
loss of still more territory provoked considerable outrage among the Mexican
populace, but Santa Anna claimed that he needed money to rebuild the army from
the war. In the end, he kept or squandered most of it. The struggle for liberal
reform (1855–1872). La Reforma was a period halfway through the 19th century
characterized by liberal reforms and the transformation of Mexico into a nation
state. Mexico had a largely rural population of eight million, half of them
poorly educated Indians. The reformers, based in the cities, knew they had to
reach out to the countryside. The younger generation of political leaders were
shocked at the poor fight Mexico against the United States in 1848, and saw
modernization as a way to strengthen the nation. Notable liberal politicians in
the reform period include Benito Juárez, Juan Álvarez, Ignacio Comonfort,
Miguel Lerdo de Tejada, Sebastián Lerdo de Tejada, Melchor Ocampo, José
María Iglesias and Santos Degollado. Their strategy was to sharply limit the
traditional privileges land holdings of the Catholic Church and thereby
revitalize the market in land. However, no class of small peasants identified
with the Liberal program emerged. Many merchants acquired land (and control
over the associated tenant farmers). Many existing landowners expanded their
holdings at peasant expense, and some upwardly mobile ranch owners, often
mestizos, acquired land. The Reforma began with the final overthrow of Santa
Anna in the Revolution of Ayutla in 1855. The moderate Liberal Ignacio
Comonfort became president. The "Moderados" tried to find a middle ground
between the nation's liberals and conservatives. There is less consensus about
the ending point of the Reforma. Common dates are 1861, after the liberal
victory in the Reform War; 1867, after the republican victory over the French
intervention in Mexico; and 1876 when Porfirio Díaz overthrew president
Sebastián Lerdo de Tejada. Liberalism dominated Mexico as an intellectual
force into the 20th century. Liberals championed reform and supported
republicanism, capitalism, and individualism; they fought to reduce the
Church's reactionary roles in education, land ownership and politics. The 1857
Constitution. Colonel Ignacio Comonfort became president in 1855 after a revolt
based in Ayutla overthrew Santa Anna. Comonfort was a moderate liberal who
tried to maintain an uncertain coalition, but the moderate liberals and the
radical liberals were unable to resolve their sharp differences. During his
presidency, the Constitution of 1857 was drafted creating the Second Federal
Republic of Mexico. The new constitution restricted some of the Catholic
Church's traditional privileges, land holdings, revenues and control over
education. It granted religious freedom, stating only that the Catholic Church
was the favored faith. The anti-clerical radicals scored a major victory with
the ratification of the constitution, because it weakened the Church and
enfranchised illiterate commoners. The constitution was unacceptable to the
clergy and the conservatives, and they plotted a revolt. With the "Plan of
Tacubaya" in December 1857, Comonfort tried to regain the popular support from
the growing conservative pro-clerical movement. The liberals failed, however,
as conservative General Félix Zuloaga succeeded in a coup in the capital in
January, 1858. The War of Reform. The revolt led to the War of Reform (December
1857 to January 1861), which grew increasingly bloody as it progressed and
polarized the nation's politics. Many Moderates, convinced that the Church's
political power had to be curbed, came over to the side of the Liberals. For
some time, the Liberals and Conservatives simultaneously administered separate
governments, the Conservatives from Mexico City and the Liberals from Veracruz.
The war ended with a Liberal victory, and liberal President Benito Juárez
moved his administration to Mexico City. French intervention and the Second
Mexican Empire (1861–1867). In the 1860s, the country was invaded by France,
which installed Archduke Ferdinand Maximilian of Austria as Emperor Maximilian
I of Mexico, with support from the Church, conservative elements of the upper
class, and some indigenous communities. Although the French suffered an initial
defeat (the Battle of Puebla—now commemorated as the Cinco de Mayo holiday),
they eventually defeated the Mexican army and set Maximilian on the throne. The
Mexican-French monarchy set up administration in Mexico City, governing from
the National Palace. Maximilian's consort was Empress Carlota of Mexico. The
Imperial couple chose as their home Chapultepec Castle. The Imperial couple
noticed how the people of Mexico (and especially the Indians) were mal-treated,
and wanted to ensure their human rights. They were interested in a Mexico for
the Mexicans, and did not share the views of Napoleon III, who was more
interested in exploiting the rich mines in the northwest of the country, and
the possibility of growing cotton. Maximilian was a liberal: he favored the
establishment of a limited monarchy, one that would share its powers with a
democratically elected congress. This was too liberal to please Mexico's
conservatives, while the liberals refused to accept any monarch, leaving
Maximilian with few enthusiastic allies within Mexico. Meanwhile Juárez kept
the federal government functioning during the French intervention. France never
made a profit in Mexico and increasingly the Mexican expedition grew unpopular.
Finally in the spring of 1865, with the Civil War over, the United States
demanded the withdrawal of French troops from Mexico; Napoleon III quietly
complied. In mid-1867, following repeated losses in battle to the Republican
Army and ever decreasing support from Napoleon III, Maximilian was captured and
executed. Juárez remained in office until his death in 1872. Juarez and the
restoration of the republic (1867–1872). In 1867, the republic was restored
and Juárez reelected; he continued to implement his reforms. In 1871, he was
elected a second time, much to the dismay of his opponents within the Liberal
party, who considered reelection to be somewhat undemocratic. Juárez died one
year later and was succeeded by Sebastián Lerdo de Tejada. Part of Juarez's
reforms included fully secularizing the country. The Catholic Church was barred
from owning property aside from houses of worship and monasteries, and
education and marriage were put in the hands of the state. The Porfiriato
(1876–1910). The dictatorship the Porfirio Díaz (1876–1911) was dedicated
to order—which meant the rule by law and the suppression of violence—and
modernization of all aspects of the society and economy. Diaz was an astute
politician who built a national base of supporters; to avoid antagonizing
Catholics he avoided enforcement of the anticlerical laws (but they remained on
the books.) During this period, the country's infrastructure was greatly
improved, thanks to increased foreign investment from Britain and the U.S., and
a strong, stable central government. Increased tax revenues and better
administration brought dramatic improvements in public safety, public health,
railways, mining, industry, foreign trade, and national finances. He modernized
the army and suppressed some banditry. After a half-century of stagnation,
where per capita income was merely a tenth of the developed nations such as
Britain and the U.S., the Mexican economy took off and grew at an annual rate
of 2.3% (1877 to 1910), which was quite high by world standards. Mexico moved
from ridicule to international pride. As traditional ways were under challenge,
urban Mexicans debated national identity, the rejection of indigenous cultures,
the new passion for French culture, and the challenge of creating a modern
nation by means of industrialization and scientific modernization. The middle
class and the rich prospered, but little was done for the peasants and workers
beyond better health. Order, progress, and dictatorship. In 1876, Lerdo was
reelected, defeating Porfirio Díaz. Díaz rebelled against the government with
the proclamation of the Plan de Tuxtepec, in which he opposed reelection, in
1876. Díaz managed to overthrow Lerdo, who fled the country, and was named
president. Díaz became the new president. Thus began a period of more than 30
years (1876–1911) during which Díaz was Mexico's strong man. He was legally
elected president eight times, turning over power once, from 1880 to 1884, to a
trusted ally, General Manuel Gonzailez. This period of relative prosperity and
peace is known as the "Porfiriato". He remained in power by rigging elections
and censoring the press. Possible rivals were destroyed, and popular generals
were moved to new areas so they could not build a permanent base of support.
Banditry on roads leading to major cities was largely suppressed by the
"Rurales", a new police force that he controlled. Banditry remained a major
threat in more remote areas, for the Rurales comprised fewer than 1000 men. The
Army was reduced in size from 30,000 to under 20,000 men for such a large
country. However the army was modernized, well-trained, and equipped with the
latest technology. It was top-heavy with 5,000 officers, many of them elderly
but politically well connected veterans of the wars of the 1860s. The political
skills that Diaz used so effectively before 1900 faded, as he and his closest
advisors were less open to negotiations with younger leaders. His announcement
in 1908 that he would retire in 1911 unleashed a widespread feeling that Diaz
was on the way out, and that new coalitions had to be built. He nevertheless
ran for reelection but was overthrown in 1911 and forced into exile when Army
units rebelled. Population and public health. Under Díaz, the population grew
steadily from 11 million in 1877 to 15 million in 1910. Because of very high
infant mortality (22% of new babies died) the life expectancy at birth was only
25.0 years in 1900. Few immigrants arrived. Diaz gave enormous power and
prestige to the Superior Health Council, which developed a consistent and
assertive strategy using up-to-date international scientific standards. It took
control of disease certification; required prompt reporting of disease; and
launched campaigns against tropical disease such as yellow fever. Economy.
Fiscal stability was achieved by José Yves Limantour (1854–1935) Secretary
of the Finance of Mexico from 1893 until 1910. He was the leader of the well-
educated technocrats known as Científicos, who were committed to modernity and
sound finance. Limantour expanded foreign investment, supported free trade, and
balanced the budget for the first time and generated a budget surplus by 1894.
However, he was unable to halt the rising cost of food, which alienated the
poor. The American Panic of 1907 was an economic downturn that caused a sudden
drop in demand for Mexican copper, silver, gold, zinc, and other metals. Mexico
in turn cut its imports of horses and mules, mining machinery, and railroad
supplies. The result was an economic depression in Mexico in 1908-09 that
soured optimism and raised the level of discontent with the Diaz regime, thus
helping to set the stage for revolution in 1910. Mexico was vulnerable to
external shocks because of its weak banking system. The banking system was
controlled by a small oligarchy, which typically made long-term loans to their
own directors. The banks were the financial arms of extended kinship-based
business coalitions that used banks to raise additional capital to expand
enterprises. Economic growth was largely based on trade with the United States.
Mexico had few factories by 1880, but then industrialization took hold in the
Northeast, especially in Monterrey. Factories produced machinery, textiles and
beer, while smelters processed ores. Convenient rail links with the nearby U.S.
gave local entrepreneurs from seven wealthy merchant families a competitive
advantage over more distant cities. New federal laws in 1884 and 1887 allowed
corporations to be more flexible. By the 1920s American Smelting and Refining
Company (ASARCO), an American firm controlled by the Guggenheim family, had
invested over 20 million pesos and employed nearly two thousand workers
smelting copper and making wire to meet the demand for electrical wiring in the
U.S. and Mexico. Modernity. The modernizers insisted that schools lead the way,
and that science replace superstition. They reformed elementary schools by
mandating uniformity, secularization, and rationality. The followed
international trends in teaching methods. There was an emphasis on punctuality
and assiduity as well as the health of children in order to break the
traditional peasant habits that hindered industrialization and rationalization.
In 1910, the National University was opened as an elite school for the next
generation of leaders. Cities were rebuilt with modernizing architects favoring
the latest European styles, especially the Beaux-Arts style, to symbolize the
break with the past. A highly visible exemplar was the Federal Legislative
Palace, built 1897-1910. Rural unrest. Tutino examines the impact of the
Porfiriato in the highland basins south of Mexico City, which became the
Zapatista heartland during the Revolution. Population growth, railways and
concentration of land in a few families generated a commercial expansion that
undercut the traditional powers of the villagers. There was anxiety and
insecurity among the young men regarding the patriarchal roles they had
expected to fill. The first signs came in violent crime within families and
communities. However, after the defeat of Diaz in 1910 villagers expressed
their rage in revolutionary assaults on local elites who had profited most from
the Porfiriato. on those who presumed to rule and profit. The young men were
radicalized, as they fought for their traditional roles regarding land,
community, and patriarchy. The Mexican Revolution (1910–1929). The Revolution
grew increasingly broad based, radical and violent. The Revolution sought far-
reaching social and economic reforms by strengthening the state and weakening
the conservative forces represented by the Church, the rich landowners, and the
foreign capitalist. Different strong men fought bitterly for control of
regions; millions of people were uprooted; many died or fled to the United
States. The United States intervened and was on the verge of war by 1917, but
drew back. Finally in 1920 after many leaders were assassinated peace returned
under presidents Álvaro Obregón (1920–24) and Plutarco Elías Calles
(1924–28). First Phase: The Constitution of 1917 (1910–1921). The election
of 1910. In 1910, the 80-year-old Díaz decided to hold an election for another
term; he thought he had long since eliminated any serious opposition. However,
Francisco I. Madero, an academic from a rich family, decided to run against him
and quickly gathered popular support, despite his arrest and imprisonment by
Díaz. When the official election results were announced, it was declared that
Díaz had won reelection almost unanimously, with Madero receiving only a few
hundred votes in the entire country. This fraud by the Porfiriato was too
blatant for the public to swallow, and riots broke out. On November 20, 1910,
Madero prepared a document known as the Plan de San Luis Potosí, in which he
called the Mexican people to take up weapons and fight against the Díaz
government. Madero managed to flee prison, escaping to San Antonio, Texas,
where he began preparations for the overthrow of Díaz—an action today
regarded as the start of the Mexican Revolution. Diaz attempted to use the army
to suppress the revolts, but most of the ranking generals were old men close to
his own age and they did not act swiftly or with sufficient energy to stem the
chaos. Revolutionary force—led by, among others, Emiliano Zapata in the
South, Pancho Villa and Pascual Orozco in the North, and Venustiano
Carranza—defeated the Federal Army, and Díaz resigned in 1911 for the "sake
of the peace of the nation." He went into exile in France, where he died in
1915 at the age of 85. Violent disagreements (1911–1920). The revolutionary
leaders had many different objectives; revolutionary figures varied from
liberals such as Madero to radicals such as Emiliano Zapata and Pancho Villa.
As a consequence, it proved impossible to reach agreement on how to organize
the government that emerged from the triumphant first phase of the revolution.
This standoff over political principles lead quickly to a struggle for control
of the government, a violent conflict that lasted more than 20 years. Although
this period is usually referred to as part of the Mexican Revolution, it might
also be termed a civil war. Presidents Francisco I. Madero (1913), Venustiano
Carranza (1920), and former revolutionary leaders Emiliano Zapata (1919) and
Pancho Villa (1923) all were assassinated during this period. Following the
resignation of Díaz and a brief reactionary intercourse, Madero was elected
president in 1911, only to be ousted and killed in 1913 by Victoriano Huerta,
one of Diaz' generals. This coup had the support of the U.S. ambassador to
Mexico, Henry Lane Wilson, but not that of U.S. President-elect Woodrow Wilson.
Huerta's brutality soon lost him domestic support, and the Wilson
Administration actively opposed his regime, for example by the naval
bombardment of Veracruz. In 1915, Huerta was overthrown by Venustiano Carranza,
a former revolutionary general. Carranza promulgated a new constitution on
February 5, 1917. The Mexican Constitution of 1917 still governs Mexico. On 19
January 1917, a secret message (the Zimmermann Telegram) was sent from the
German foreign minister to Mexico proposing joint military action against the
United States if war broke out. The offer included material aid to Mexico to
assist in the reclamation of territory lost during the Mexican-American War,
specifically the American states of Texas, New Mexico and Arizona. Carranza
consulted with his generals about this, and was told Mexico was certain to be
defeated by its much more powerful neighbor. Zimmermann's message was
intercepted and published, and outraged American opinion, leading to a
declaration of war in early April. Carranza then formally rejected the offer,
and the threat of war with the U.S. eased. Carranza was assassinated in 1919
during an internal feud among his former supporters over who would replace him
as president. Obregon, Calles and liberalization (1921–1926). In 1920,
Álvaro Obregón, one of Carranza's allies who had plotted against him, became
president. His government managed to accommodate all elements of Mexican
society except the most reactionary clergy and landlords. As a result, he was
able to successfully catalyze social liberalization, particularly in curbing
the role of the Catholic Church, improving education, and taking steps toward
instituting women's civil rights. Ineligible for reelection, Obregón chose his
interior minister Plutarco Elías Calles as his successor. The 1924 Calles
presidential campaign was the first populist presidential campaign in the
nation's history, as he called for land redistribution and promised equal
justice, more education, additional labor rights, and democratic governance.
Calles indeed tried to fulfill his promises during his populist phase
(1924–26), but entered a repressive anti-Catholic phase (1926–28). The
Cristero Wars of 1926–1929, erupted in reaction to the intense official anti-
Catholism. Second Phase: The Cristero War (1926–1929). The Cristero War of
1926 to 1929 was a counter-revolution against the Calles regime set off by his
persecution of the Catholic Church and specifically the strict enforcement of
the anti-clerical provisions of the Mexican Constitution of 1917 and the
expansion of further anti-clerical laws. A number of articles of the 1917
Constitution were at issue: a) Article 5 (outlawing monastic religious orders);
b) Article 24 (forbidding public worship outside of church buildings); and c)
Article 27 (restricting religious organizations' rights to own property).
Finally, Article 130 took away basic civil rights of the clergy: priests and
religious leaders were prevented from wearing their habits, were denied the
right to vote, and were not permitted to comment on public affairs in the
press. The formal rebellions began early in 1927, with the rebels calling
themselves "Cristeros" because they felt they were fighting for Jesus Christ
himself. The Cristeros used terrorism, kidnapping, and murder and leaned on the
"just war" concept as a rationale for assassination. The laity stepped into the
vacuum created by the removal of priests, and in the long run the Church was
strengthened. The Cristero War was resolved diplomatically, largely with the
help of the U.S. Ambassador, Dwight Whitney Morrow. The conflict claimed about
90,000 lives: 57,000 on the federal side, 30,000 Cristeros, and civilians and
Cristeros killed in anticlerical raids after the war's end. As promised in the
diplomatic resolution, the laws considered offensive by the Cristeros remained
on the books, but the federal government made no organized attempt to enforce
them. Nonetheless, persecution of Catholic priests continued in several
localities, fueled by local officials' interpretation of the law. The
Institutional Revolutionary Party (PRI) (1929–2000). One-party rule. In 1929,
the National Mexican Party (PNM) was formed by the president, General Plutarco
Elías Calles. The PNM convinced most of the remaining revolutionary generals
to hand over their personal armies to the Mexican Army; the party's foundation
is thus considered by some the end of the Revolution. Later renamed the Partido
Revolucionario Institucional (PRI), the new party ruled Mexico for the rest of
the 20th century. The PRI set up a new type of system, led by a "caudillo". The
party is typically referred to as the three-legged stool, in reference to
Mexican workers, peasants, and bureaucrats. After its establishment as the
ruling party, the PRI monopolized all the political branches: it did not lose a
senate seat until 1988 or a gubernatorial race until 1989. It was not until
July 2, 2000, that Vicente Fox of the opposition "Alliance for Change"
coalition, headed by the National Action Party (PAN), was elected president.
His victory ended the PRI's 71-year hold on the presidency. President Lázaro
Cárdenas. President Lázaro Cárdenas came to power in 1934 and transformed
Mexico. Cárdenas managed to unite the different forces in the PRI and set the
rules that allowed his party to rule unchallenged for decades to come without
internal fights. He nationalized the oil industry (on 18 March 1938), the
electricity industry, created the National Polytechnic Institute, and started
land reform and the distribution of free textbooks to children. In 1936 he
exiled Calles, the last general with dictatorial ambitions, thereby removing
the army from power. On the eve of World War II, the Cárdenas administration
(1934–1940) was just stabilizing, and consolidating control over, a Mexican
nation that, for decades, had been in revolutionary flux, and Mexicans were
beginning to interpret the European battle between the communists and fascists,
especially the Spanish Civil War, through their unique revolutionary lens.
Whether Mexico would side with the United States was unclear during Lázaro
Cárdenas' rule, as he remained neutral. “Capitalists, businessmen,
Catholics, and middle-class Mexicans who opposed many of the reforms
implemented by the revolutionary government sided with the Spanish Falange”
i.e., the fascist movement. Nazi propagandist Arthur Dietrich and his team of
agents in Mexico successfully manipulated editorials and coverage of Europe by
paying hefty subsidies to Mexican newspapers, including the widely-read dailies
Excélsior and El Universal. The situation became even more worrisome for the
Allies when major oil companies boycotted Mexican oil following Lázaro
Cárdenas' nationalization of the oil industry and expropriation of all
corporate oil properties in 1938, which severed Mexico's access to its
traditional markets and led Mexico to sell its oil to Germany and Italy.
President Manuel Ávila Camacho. Manuel Ávila Camacho, Cárdenas's successor,
presided over a "bridge" between the revolutionary era and the era of machine
politics under PRI that lasted until 2000. Ávila, moving away from
nationalistic autarchy, proposed to create a favorable climate for
international investment, favored nearly two generations earlier by Madero.
Ávila's regime froze wages, repressed strikes, and persecuted dissidents with
a law prohibiting the "crime of social dissolution." During this period, the
PRI shifted to the right and abandoned much of the radical nationalism of the
early Cardenas era. Miguel Alemán Valdés, Ávila's successor, even had
Article 27 amended to protect elite landowners. Mexico in World War II. Mexico
played a minor role militarily in World War Two, but the heavy demand for its
exports created a degree of prosperity. In Mexico and throughout Latin America,
Franklin Roosevelt's “Good Neighbor Policy” was necessary at such a
delicate time. It led to the Douglas-Weichers Agreement in June 1941 that
secured Mexican oil only for the United States, and the Global Settlement in
November 1941 that ended oil company demands on generous terms for the
Mexicans, an example of the U.S. putting national security concerns over the
interests of American oil companies. Following losses of oil ships in the Gulf
(the "Potrero del Llano" and "Faja de Oro") to German submarines ("U-564" and
"U-106" respectively) the Mexican government declared war on the Axis powers on
22 May 1942. Perhaps the most famous fighting unit in the Mexican military was
the "Escuadrón 201", also known as the "Aztec Eagles." This group consisted of
more than 300 volunteers, who had trained in the United States to fight against
Japan. The "Escuadrón 201" was the first Mexican military unit trained for
overseas combat, and fought during the liberation of the Philippines, working
with the U.S. Fifth Air Force in the last year of the war. Although most
American countries eventually entered the war on the Allies' side, Mexico and
Brazil were the only Latin American nations that sent troops to fight overseas
during World War II. With so many draftees, the U.S. needed farm workers. The
Bracero Program gave the opportunity for 290,000 of Mexicans to work
temporarily on American farms, especially in Texas. The Mexican Economic
Miracle (1930–1970). During the next four decades, Mexico experienced
impressive economic growth (albeit from a low baseline), an achievement
historians call ""El Milagro Mexicano"", the Mexican Economic Miracle. Annual
economic growth during this period averaged 3–4 percent, with a modest 3-
percent annual rate of inflation. The miracle, moreover, was solidly rooted in
government policy: 1) an emphasis on primary education that tripled the
enrollment rate between 1929 and 1949; 2) high tariffs on imported domestic
goods; and 3) public investment in agriculture, energy, and transportation
infrastructure. Starting in the 1940s, immigration into the cities swelled the
country's urban population. The economic growth occurred in spite of falling
foreign investment during the Great Depression. The assumption of mineral
rights and subsequent nationalisation of the oil industry into Pemex during the
presidency of Lázaro Cárdenas del Río was a popular move. The economic
crisis (1970–1994). Although PRI administrations achieved economic growth and
relative prosperity for almost three decades after World War II, the party's
management of the economy led to several crises. Political unrest grew in the
late 1960s, culminating in the Tlatelolco massacre in 1968. Economic crises
swept the country in 1976 and 1982, leading to the nationalization of Mexico's
banks, which were blamed for the economic problems (La Década Perdida). On
both occasions, the Mexican peso was devalued, and, until 2000, it was normal
to expect a big devaluation and recession at the end of each presidential term.
The "December Mistake" crisis threw Mexico into economic turmoil—the worst
recession in over half a century. 1985 earthquake. On 19 September 1985, an
earthquake (8.1 on the Richter scale) struck Michoacán, inflicting severe
damage on Mexico City. Estimates of the number of dead range from 6,500 to
30,000. Public anger at the PRI's mishandling of relief efforts combined with
the ongoing economic crisis led to a substantial weakening of the PRI. As a
result, for the first time since the 1930s, the PRI began to face serious
electoral challenges. President Ernesto Zedillo (in office, 1994–2000). In
1995, President Ernesto Zedillo faced the "December Mistake" economic crisis,
triggered by a sudden devaluation of the peso. There were public demonstrations
in Mexico City and a constant military presence after the 1994 rising of the
Zapatista Army of National Liberation in Chiapas. The United States intervened
rapidly to stem the economic crisis, first by buying pesos in the open market,
and then by granting assistance in the form of $50 billion in loan guarantees.
The peso stabilized at 6 pesos per dollar. By 1996, the economy was growing,
and in 1997, Mexico repaid, ahead of schedule, all U.S. Treasury loans. Zedillo
oversaw political and electoral reforms that reduced the PRI's hold on power.
After the 1988 election, which was strongly disputed and arguably lost by the
government, the IFE (Instituto Federal Electoral – Federal Electoral
Institute) was created in the early 1990s. Run by ordinary citizens, the IFE
oversees elections with the aim of ensuring that they are conducted legally and
impartially. NAFTA and economic resurgence (1994–present). On 1 January 1994,
Mexico became a full member of the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA),
joining the United States and Canada. Mexico has a free market economy that
recently entered the trillion-dollar class. It contains a mixture of modern and
outmoded industry and agriculture, increasingly dominated by the private
sector. Recent administrations have expanded competition in sea ports,
railroads, telecommunications, electricity generation, natural gas
distribution, and airports. Per capita income is one-quarter that of the United
States; income distribution remains highly unequal. Trade with the United
States and Canada has tripled since the implementation of NAFTA. Mexico has
free-trade agreements with more than 40 countries, governing 90% of its foreign
commerce. The end of the PRI's rule. Accused many times of blatant fraud, the
PRI held almost all public offices until the end of the 20th century. Not until
the 1980s did the PRI lose its first state governorship, an event that marked
the beginning of the party's loss of hegemony. Contemporary Mexico. President
Vicente Fox Quesada (in office, 2000–2006). Emphasizing the need to upgrade
infrastructure, modernize the tax system and labor laws, integrate with the
U.S. economy, and allow private investment in the energy sector, Vicente Fox
Quesada, the candidate of the National Action Party (PAN), was elected the 69th
president of Mexico on 2 July 2000, ending PRI's 71-year-long control of the
office. Though Fox's victory was due in part to popular discontent with decades
of unchallenged PRI hegemony, also, Fox's opponent, president Zedillo, conceded
defeat on the night of the election—a first in Mexican history. A further
sign of the quickening of Mexican democracy was the fact that PAN failed to win
a majority in both chambers of Congress—a situation that prevented Fox from
implementing his reform pledges. Nonetheless, the transfer of power in 2000 was
quick and peaceful. President Felipe Calderón Hinojosa (incumbent president).
President Felipe Calderón Hinojosa (PAN) took office after one of the most
hotly contested in recent Mexican history; Calderón won by such a small margin
(.56% or 233,831 votes.) that the runner-up, Andrés Manuel López Obrador of
the leftist Party of the Democratic Revolution (PRD) contested the results. A
new struggle: The War against Drugs. Mexico is a major transit and drug-
producing nation: an estimated 90% of the cocaine smuggled into the United
States every year moves through Mexico. Fueled by the increasing demand for
drugs in the United States, the country has become a major supplier of heroin,
producer and distributor of ecstasy, and the largest foreign supplier of
marijuana and methamphetamine to the U.S.'s market. Major drug syndicates
control the majority of drug trafficking in the country, and Mexico is a
significant money-laundering center. After the Federal Assault Weapons Ban
expired on September 13, 2004 in the United States, the Mexican President
Calderon Hinojosa decided to use brute force to combat some drug lords and in
2007 started a major escalation on the Mexican Drug War. Mexican drug lords
found it easy to buy assault weapons in the United States. The result is that
drug cartels have now both more gun power, and more manpower due to the high
unemployment in Mexico. Drug cultivation has increased too: "Cultivation of
opium poppy" in 2007 rose to , yielding a potential production of 19.84 tons of
pure heroin or 55.12 tons of "black tar" heroin. Black tar is the dominant form
of Mexican heroin consumed in the western United States. "Marijuana
cultivation" increased to in 2007, yielding a potential production of 17,416.52
tons. The Mexican government conducts the largest independent illicit-crop
eradication program in the world, but Mexico continues to be the primary
transshipment point for U.S.-bound cocaine from South America.
