History of Turkey The history of Turkey begins with the migration of Oghuz
Turks into Anatolia in the context of the larger Turkic expansion, forming the
Seljuq Empire in the 11th century AD. After the Seljuq victory over forces of
the Byzantine Empire in 1071 at the Battle of Manzikert, the process was
accelerated and the country was referred to as 'Turchia' in the Europe as early
as the 12th century. The Seljuq dynasty controlled Turkey until the country was
invaded by the Mongols following the Battle of Kosedag. During the years when
the country was under Mongol rule, some small Turkish states were born. One of
these states was the Ottoman beylik which quickly controlled Western Anatolia
and conquered much of Rumelia. After finally conquering Istanbul, the Ottoman
state would become a large empire, called the Turkish Empire in Europe. Next,
the Empire expanded to Eastern Anatolia, the Caucasus, the Middle East, Central
Europe and North Africa. Although the Ottoman Empire's power and prestige
peaked in the 16th century; it did not fully reach the technological advance in
military capabilities of the Western powers in the 19th century. Nevertheless,
Turkey managed to maintain independence though some of its territories were
ceded to its neighbours and some small countries gained independence from it.
Following World War I in which Turkey was defeated, most of Anatolia and
Eastern Thrace was occupied by the Allied powers including the capital city
Istanbul. In order to resist the occupation, a cadre of young military officers
formed a government in Ankara. The elected leader of the Ankara Government,
Mustafa Kemal organized a successful war of independence against the Allied
powers. After the liberation of Anatolia and the Eastern Thrace, the Republic
of Turkey was established in 1923 with capital city Ankara. Turkic migration.
Before the Turkic settlement, the local population of Anatolia had reached an
estimated level of 12 to 14 million people during the late Roman Period. The
migration of Turks to the country of modern Turkey occurred during the main
Turkic migration across most of Central Asia and into Europe and the Middle
East which was between the 6th and 11th centuries. Mainly Turkic people living
in the Seljuk Empire arrived Turkey in the eleventh century. The Seljuks
proceeded to gradually conquer the Anatolian part of the Byzantine Empire. In
the following centuries, the local population began to be assimilated into the
Turkish people. More Turkic migrants began to intermingle with the local
inhabitants over years, thus the Turkish-speaking population was bolstered.
Seljuk dynasty. The "House of Seljuk" was a branch of the "Kınık" Oğuz Turks
who resided on the periphery of the Muslim world, north of the Caspian and Aral
Seas in the Yabghu Khaganate of the Oğuz confederacy in the 10th century. In
the 11th century, the Turkic people living in the Seljuk Empire started
migrating from their ancestral homelands towards the eastern regions of
Anatolia, which eventually became a new homeland of Oğuz Turkic tribes
following the Battle of Manzikert on August 26, 1071. The victory of the
Seljuks gave rise to the Seljuk Sultanate of Rum, a separate branch of the
larger Seljuk Empire and to some Turkish principalities (beyliks), mostly
situated towards the Eastern Anatolia which were vassals of or at war with
Seljuk Sultanate of Rum. Mongol rule. On June 26, 1243, the Seljuk armies were
defeated by the Mongols in the Battle of Kosedag, and the Seljuk Sultanate of
Rûm became a vassal of the Mongols. This caused the Seljuks to lose its power.
Hulegu Khan, grandson of Genghis Khan founded the Ilkhanate in the southwestern
part of the Mongol Empire. The Ilkhanate State ruled Anatolia by Mongol
military governors. The last Seljuk sultan Mesud II, died in 1308. The Mongol
invasion of Transoxiana, Iran, Azerbaijan and Anatolia caused Turkomens to move
to Western Anatolia. The Turkomens founded some Anatolian principalities
(beyliks) under the Mongol dominion in Turkey. The most powerful beyliks were
the Karamanids and the Germiyanids in the central area. Along the Aegean coast,
from north to south, stretched Karasids, Sarukhanids, Aydinids, Menteşe and
Teke principalities. The Jandarids (later called Isfendiyarids) controlled the
Black Sea region round Kastamonu and Sinop. The Beylik of Ottoman Dynasty was
situated in the northwest of Anatolia, around Söğüt, and it was a small and
insignificant state at that time. The Ottoman beylik would, however, evolve
into the Ottoman Empire over the next 200 years, expanding throughout the
Balkans, Anatolia. Ottoman dynasty. The Ottoman beylik's first capital was
located in Bursa in 1326. Edirne which was conquered in 1361 was the next
capital city. After largely expanding to Europe and Anatolia, in 1453, the
Ottomans nearly completed the conquest of the Byzantine Empire by capturing its
capital, Constantinople during the reign of Mehmed II. This city has become the
capital city of the Empire following Edirne. The Ottoman Empire would continue
to expand into the Eastern Anatolia, Central Europe, the Caucasus, North and
East Africa, the islands in the Mediterranean, Greater Syria, Mesopotamia, and
the Arabian peninsula in the 15th, 16th and 17th centuries. The Ottoman
Empire's power and prestige peaked in the 16th and 17th centuries, particularly
during the reign of Suleiman the Magnificent. The empire was often at odds with
the Holy Roman Empire in its steady advance towards Central Europe through the
Balkans and the southern part of the Polish-Lithuanian Commonwealth. In
addition, the Ottomans were often at war with Persia over territorial disputes.
At sea, the empire contended with the Holy Leagues, composed of Habsburg Spain,
the Republic of Venice and the Knights of St. John, for control of the
Mediterranean. In the Indian Ocean, the Ottoman navy frequently confronted
Portuguese fleets in order to defend its traditional monopoly over the maritime
trade routes between East Asia and Western Europe; these routes faced new
competition with the Portuguese discovery of the Cape of Good Hope in 1488. The
Treaty of Karlowitz in 1699 marked the beginning of the Ottoman decline; some
territories were lost by the treaty: Austria received all of Hungary and
Transylvania except the Banat; Venice obtained most of Dalmatia along with the
Morea (the Peloponnesus peninsula in southern Greece); Poland recovered
Podolia. Throughout the 19th and early 20th centuries, the Ottoman Empire
continued losing its territories, including Greece, Algeria, Tunisia, Libya and
the Balkans in the 1912–1913 Balkan Wars. Faced with territorial losses on
all sides the Ottoman Empire forged an alliance with Germany who supported it
with troops and equipment. The Ottoman Empire joined the World War I on the
side of the Central Powers, after granting two German warships as refugees. On
October 30, 1918, the Armistice of Mudros was signed, followed by the
imposition of Treaty of Sèvres on August 10, 1920 by Allied Powers, which was
never ratified. The Treaty of Sèvres would break up the Ottoman Empire and
force large concessions on territories of the Empire in favour of Greece,
Italy, Britain and France. Republican era. The occupation of some parts of the
country by the Allies in the aftermath of World War I prompted the
establishment of the Turkish national movement. Under the leadership of Mustafa
Kemal, a military commander who had distinguished himself during the Battle of
Gallipoli, the Turkish War of Independence was waged with the aim of revoking
the terms of the Treaty of Sèvres. By September 18, 1922, the occupying armies
were expelled. On November 1, the newly founded parliament formally abolished
the Sultanate, thus ending 623 years of Ottoman rule. The Treaty of Lausanne of
July 24, 1923, led to the international recognition of the sovereignty of the
newly formed "Republic of Turkey" as the successor state of the Ottoman Empire,
and the republic was officially proclaimed on October 29, 1923, in the new
capital of Ankara. Mustafa Kemal became the republic's first President of
Turkey and subsequently introduced many radical reforms with the aim of
founding a new secular republic from the remnants of its Ottoman past.
According to the Law on Family Names, the Turkish parliament presented Mustafa
Kemal with the honorific surname "Atatürk" ("Father of the Turks") in 1934.
Turkey remained neutral during most of World War II but entered on the side of
the Allies on February 23, 1945, as a ceremonial gesture and in 1945 became a
charter member of the United Nations. Difficulties faced by Greece after the
war in quelling a communist rebellion, along with demands by the Soviet Union
for military bases in the Turkish Straits, prompted the United States to
declare the Truman Doctrine in 1947. The doctrine enunciated American
intentions to guarantee the security of Turkey and Greece, and resulted in
large-scale U.S. military and economic support. After participating with the
United Nations forces in the Korean War, Turkey joined NATO in 1952, becoming a
bulwark against Soviet expansion into the Mediterranean. Following a decade of
intercommunal violence on the island of Cyprus and the Greek military coup of
July 1974, overthrowing President Makarios and installing Nikos Sampson as a
dictator, Turkey invaded the Republic of Cyprus in 1974. Nine years later the
Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus (TRNC) was established. Turkey is the only
country that recognises the TRNC The single-party period was followed by
multiparty democracy after 1945. The Turkish democracy was interrupted by
military coups d'état in 1960, 1971, 1980 and 1997. In 1984, the PKK began an
insurgency against the Turkish government; the conflict, which has claimed over
40,000 lives, continues today. Since the liberalization of the Turkish economy
during the 1980s, the country has enjoyed stronger economic growth and greater
political stability.
