History of the United States The history of the United States as covered in
American schools and universities typically begins with either Christopher
Columbus's 1492 voyage to the Americas or with the prehistory of the Native
peoples, with the latter approach having become increasingly common in recent
decades. The United States of America began as an independent nation with the
Declaration of Independence on July 4, 1776. European colonists reached the
Gulf and Pacific coasts, but the largest settlements were by the English on the
Atlantic coast, starting in 1607. By the 1770s, the Thirteen Colonies contained
two and a half million people. They were prosperous and growing rapidly, and
had developed their own political and legal systems. The Parliament asserted
its authority by imposing new taxes, which the American insisted were
unconstitutional because the colonists were not represented in Parliament. It
became a test of strength and neither side would back down, but the 13 colonies
began collaborating. Protests culminated in the Boston Tea Party in December
1773; Britain stripped Massachusetts of self-government and the colonists
started drilling their militia. All out war began in April 1775. After
expelling Royal officials and clamping down on Loyalists, the Patriots took
control. The July 1776, Declaration of Independence, written by Thomas
Jefferson proclaimed that all men are born equal and announced the formation of
a new nation, the United States of America. With major military and financial
support from France, and military leadership by General George Washington, the
Patriots won the American Revolutionary War and peace came in 1783. During and
after the war, the 13 states were united under a weak federal government
established by the Articles of Confederation. When these became unworkable, a
new Constitution was written in 1789; it remains the basis of the United States
federal government, and soon included a Bill of Rights. With Washington as the
first president and Alexander Hamilton his chief advisor, a strong national
government was created, the national debt was funded, and policies favorable to
merchants and financiers enacted. Jefferson became the opposition leader,
because of he feared pro-British and pro-business policies would undermine the
Republicanism in the United States that became the national credo. The result
was the formation of popularly based political parties--the first in the world-
- in the First Party System between Hamilton's Federalists and Jefferson's
republicans. The Jeffersonians took control in 1801, and purchased Louisiana,
ensuring ample farm lands for future growth, of monarchy, and fighting a second
war with Britain in 1812. U.S. territory expanded westward across the
continent, brushing aside Native Americans and Mexico, and rejecting the advice
of Whigs who wanted to deepen the economy rather than expand the geography.
Slavery of Africans was abolished in all the Northern states at the turn of the
19th century, but it flourished in the Southern states because of heavy
European demand for cotton. After 1820, a series of compromises postponed a
showdown on the issue of slavery, but in the late 1850s, the new Republican
power took political control of the North and promised to stop the expansion of
slavery, which implied its eventual death. The 1860 presidential election of
Republican Abraham Lincoln triggered a crisis as eleven slave states seceded to
found the Confederacy in 1861. The bloody American Civil War (1861–65)
redefined the nation and remains the central iconic event. The South was
eventually defeated and, in the Reconstruction era, the United States ended
slavery, extended rights to African Americans, and readmitted secessionist
states with loyal governments. The national government was much stronger, and
it now had the explicit duty to protect individual rights. Reconstruction ended
in 1877 and from the 1890s to the 1960s the system of Jim Crow (segregation)
kept blacks in political, social and economic inferiority. The entire South
remained poor until the late 20th century, while the North and West grew
rapidly and prospered. Thanks to an outburst of entrepreneurship in the North
and the arrival of millions of immigrant workers and farmers from Europe, the
United States became the leading industrialized power at the turn of the 20th
century. Disgust with corruption, waste, and traditional politics stimulated
the Progressive movement, 1890s–1920s, which pushed for reform in industry
and politics and put into the Constitution women's suffrage and Prohibition of
alcohol (the latter repealed in 1933). Initially neutral in World War I, the
U.S. declared war on Germany in 1917, and funded the Allied victory the
following year. The nation refused to follow President Woodrow Wilson's
leadership and never joined the League of Nations. After a prosperous decade in
the 1920s, the Wall Street Crash of 1929 marked the onset of the decade-long
world-wide Great Depression. A political realignment expelled the Republicans
from power and installed Democrat Franklin D. Roosevelt and his elaborate and
expensive New Deal programs for relief, recovery, and reform. Roosevelt's
Democratic coalition, comprising ethnics in the North, labor unions, big-city
machines, intellectuals, and the white South, dominated national politics into
the 1960s. After the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor on December 7, 1941, the
United States entered World War II alongside the Allies and helped defeat Nazi
Germany in Europe and, with the detonation of newly-invented atomic bombs,
Japan in the Far East. The United States and the Soviet Union emerged as
opposing superpowers after World War II and began the Cold War, confronting one
another indirectly in the arms race and Space Race. U.S. foreign policy during
the Cold War was built around containment of Communism. American programs to
revitalize the economies of Western Europe proved successful in the late 1940s,
and NATO was formed as a permanent military alliance with largely American
leadership. The United States participated in the wars in Korea and Vietnam to
contain Communist expansion. Liberalism won numerous victories in the days of
the New Deal and again in the mid-1960s, especially in the success of the civil
rights movement. Conservatism made its comeback in the 1980s under Ronald
Reagan. The Cold War ended when the Soviet Union dissolved in 1991, leaving the
United States the only superpower. The economy was in transition after 1970
from heavy industry (with strong labor unions) to a service economy based on
high technology. International conflict returned in 2001 following the
September 11 attacks and the death of Osama bin Laden. At the turn of the 21st
century, the worldwide Great Recession opened an era of stagnation or slow
growth. Pre-Columbian era. It is not definitively known how or when the Native
Americans first settled the Americas and the present-day United States. The
prevailing theory proposes that people migrated from Eurasia across Beringia, a
land bridge that connected Siberia to present-day Alaska, and then spread
southward throughout the Americas. This migration may have begun as early as
30,000 years ago and continued through to about 10,000 years ago, when the land
bridge became submerged by the rising sea level caused by the ending of the
last glacial period. These early inhabitants, called Paleoamericans, soon
diversified into many hundreds of culturally distinct nations and tribes. The
pre-Columbian era incorporates all period subdivisions in the history and
prehistory of the Americas before the appearance of significant European
influences on the American continents, spanning the time of the original
settlement in the Upper Paleolithic period to European colonization during the
Early Modern period. While technically referring to the era before Christopher
Columbus' voyages of 1492 to 1504, in practice the term usually includes the
history of American indigenous cultures until they were conquered or
significantly influenced by Europeans, even if this happened decades or even
centuries after Columbus' initial landing. Colonial period. After a period of
exploration by people from various European countries, Spanish, Dutch, English,
French, Swedish, Russian and Portuguese settlements were established. In the
16th century, Europeans brought horses, cats, cattle, and hogs to the Americas
and, in turn, took back to Europe maize, turkey, potatoes, tobacco, beans, and
squash. The disease environment was very unhealthy for explorers and early
settlers. The Native Americans became exposed to new diseases such as smallpox
and measles and died in very large numbers, usually before large-scale European
settlement began. Spanish, Dutch, and French colonization. Spanish explorers
were the first Europeans with Christopher Columbus' second expedition, which
reached Puerto Rico on November 19, 1493; others reached Florida in 1513.
Quickly Spanish expeditions reached the Appalachian Mountains, the Mississippi
River, the Grand Canyon and the Great Plains. In 1540, Hernando de Soto
undertook an extensive exploration of Southeast. Also in 1540 Francisco
Vázquez de Coronado explored from Arizona to central Kansas. The Spanish sent
some settlers, creating the first permanent European settlement in the
continental United States at St. Augustine, Florida in 1565, but it attracted
few permanent settlers. Much larger and more important Spanish settlements
included Santa Fe, Albuquerque, San Antonio, Tucson, San Diego, Los Angeles,
Santa Barbara and San Francisco. New Netherland was the 17th century Dutch
colony centered on New York City and the Hudson River Valley, where they traded
furs with the Native Americans to the north and were a barrier to Yankee
expansion from New England. The Dutch were Calvinists who built the Reformed
Church in America, but they were tolerant of other religions and cultures. The
colony was taken over by Britain in 1664. It left an enduring legacy on
American cultural and political life, including a secular broadmindedness and
mercantile pragmatism in the city, a rural traditionalism in the countryside
typified by the story of Rip Van Winkle, and politicians such as Martin Van
Buren, Theodore Roosevelt, Franklin D. Roosevelt and Eleanor Roosevelt. New
France was the area colonized by France from 1534 to 1763. There were few
permanent settlers outside Quebec and Acadia, but the Wabanaki Confederacy
became military allies of New France through the four French and Indian Wars
with the British colonies who were allied with the Iroquois Confederacy. During
the French and Indian War, New England fought successfully against Acadia and
the British removed Acadians from Acadia (Nova Scotia) and replaced them with
New England Planters. Eventually, some Acadians resettled in Louisiana, where
they developed a distinctive rural Cajun culture that still exists. They became
American citizens in 1803 with the Louisiana Purchase. Other French villages
along the Mississippi and Illinois rivers were absorbed when the Americans
started arriving after 1770. British colonization. The strip of land along the
eastern seacoast was settled primarily by English colonists in the 17th
century, along with much smaller numbers of Dutch and Swedes. Colonial America
was defined by a severe labor shortage that employed forms of unfree labor such
as slavery and indentured servitude, and by a British policy of benign neglect
(salutary neglect) that permitted the development of an American spirit
distinct from that of its European founders. Over half of all European
immigrants to Colonial America arrived as indentured servants. The first
successful English colony was established in 1607, on the James River at
Jamestown. It languished for decades until a new wave of settlers arrived in
the late 17th century and established commercial agriculture based on tobacco.
Between the late 1610s and the Revolution, the British shipped an estimated
50,000 convicts to their American colonies. A severe instance of conflict was
the 1622 Powhatan uprising in Virginia, in which Native Americans killed
hundreds of English settlers. The largest conflict between Native Americans and
English settlers in the 17th century was King Philip's War in New England. The
Yamasee War in South Carolina was as bloody. New England was initially settled
primarily by Puritans who established the Massachusetts Bay Colony in 1630,
although there was a small earlier settlement in 1620 by a similar group, the
Pilgrims, at Plymouth Colony. The Middle Colonies, consisting of the present-
day states of New York, New Jersey, Pennsylvania, and Delaware, were
characterized by a large degree of diversity. The first attempted English
settlement south of Virginia was the Province of Carolina, with Georgia Colony
the last of the Thirteen Colonies established in 1733. The colonies were
characterized by religious diversity, with many Congregationalists in New
England, German and Dutch Reformed in the Middle Colonies, Catholics in
Maryland, and Scotch Irish Presbyterians on the frontier. Many royal officials
and merchants were Anglicans. Religiosity expanded greatly after the First
Great Awakening, a religious revival in the 1740s led by preachers such as
Jonathan Edwards. American Evangelicals affected by the Awakening added a new
emphasis on divine outpourings of the Holy Spirit and conversions that
implanted within new believers an intense love for God. Revivals encapsulated
those hallmarks and forwarded the newly created evangelicalism into the early
republic, setting the stage for the Second Great Awakening beginning in the
late 1790s. Each of the 13 American colonies had a slightly different
governmental structure. Typically a colony was ruled by a governor appointed
from London who controlled the executive administration and relied upon a
locally elected legislature to vote taxes and make laws. By the 18th century,
the American colonies were growing very rapidly because of ample supplies of
land and food, and low death rates. They were richer than most parts of
Britain, and attracted a steady flow of immigrants, especially teenagers who
came as indentured servants. The tobacco and rice plantations imported black
slaves from the British colonies in the West Indies, and by the 1770s they
comprised a fifth of the American population. The question of independence from
Britain did not arise as long as the colonies needed British military support
against French and Spanish power; those threats were gone by 1765. London
regarded the American colonies as existing merely for the benefit of the mother
country, a policy known as mercantilism. Political integration and autonomy.
The French and Indian War (1754–1763) was a watershed event in the political
development of the colonies. The influence of the main rivals of the British
Crown in the colonies and Canada, the French and North American Indians, was
significantly reduced. Moreover, the war effort resulted in greater political
integration of the colonies, as reflected in the Albany Congress and symbolized
by Benjamin Franklin's call for the colonies to "Join or Die". Franklin was a
man of many inventions—and his greatest invention was the concept of a United
States of America, which emerged after 1765 and was realized in July 1776.
Following Britain's acquisition of French territory in North America, King
George III issued the Royal Proclamation of 1763 with the goal of organizing
the new North American empire and protecting the native Indians from colonial
expansion into western lands. In ensuing years, strains developed in the
relations between the colonists and the Crown. The British Parliament passed
the Stamp Act of 1765, imposing a tax on the colonies to help pay for troops
stationed in North America following the British victory in the Seven Years'
War. The British government imposed a series new taxes on the colonies without
going through the colonial legislatures. The issue was drawn: did Parliament
have this right to tax Americans who were not represented in it? Crying "No
taxation without representation," the colonists refused to pay the taxes as
tensions escalated in the late 1760s and early 1770s. The Boston Tea Party in
1773 was a direct action by activists in the town of Boston to protest against
the British taxes. Parliament quickly responded the next year with the Coercive
Acts, stripping Massachusetts of its historic right of self-government and
putting it under army rule. which sparked outrage and resistance in all
thirteen colonies. Patriots from all 13 colonies convened the First Continental
Congress to coordinate their resistance to the Coercive Acts. The Congress
called for a boycott of British trade, published a list of rights and
grievances, and petitioned the king for redress of those grievances. The appeal
to the Crown had no effect, and so the Second Continental Congress was convened
in 1775 to organize the defense of the colonies against the British Army. The
American Revolutionary War began at Concord and Lexington in April when the
British tried to seize ammunition supplies and arrest the Patriot leaders.
Formation of the United States (1776–1789). The Revolution. The Thirteen
Colonies began a rebellion against British rule in 1775 and proclaimed their
independence in 1776 as the United States of America. In the American
Revolutionary War (1775–1783) the American capture of the British invasion
army at Saratoga in 1777 secured the Northeast and encouraged the French to
make a military alliance with the United States. France brought in Spain and
the Netherlands, thus balancing the military and naval forces on each side as
Britain had no allies. General George Washington (1732–1799) proved an
excellent organizer and administrator, who worked successfully with Congress
and the state governors, selecting and mentoring his senior officers,
supporting and training his troops, and maintaining an idealistic Republican
Army. His biggest challenge was logistics, since neither Congress nor the
states had the funding to provide adequately for the equipment, munitions,
clothing, paychecks, or even the food supply of the soldiers. As a battlefield
tactician Washington was often outmaneuvered by his British counterparts. As a
strategist, however, he had a better idea of how to win the war than they did.
The British sent four invasion armies. Washington's strategy forced the first
army out of Boston in 1776, and was responsible for the surrender of the second
and third armies at Saratoga (1777) and Yorktown (1781). He limited the British
control to New York and a few places while keeping Patriot control of the great
majority of the population. The Loyalists, whom the British counted upon too
heavily, comprised about 20% of the population but never were well organized.
As the war ended, Washington watched proudly as the final British army quietly
sailed out of New York City in November 1783, taking the Loyalist leadership
with them. Washington astonished the world when, instead of seizing power for
himself, he retired quietly to his farm in Virginia. Political scientist
Seymour Martin Lipset observes, "The United States was the first major colony
successfully to revolt against colonial rule. In this sense, it was the first
'new nation'." On July 4, 1776, the Second Continental Congress, meeting in
Philadelphia, declared the independence of "the United States of America" in
the Declaration of Independence. July 4 is celebrated as the nation's birthday.
The new nation was founded on Enlightenment ideals of liberalism in what Thomas
Jefferson called the unalienable rights to "life, liberty and the pursuit of
happiness," and dedicated strongly to republican principles. Republicanism
emphasized the people are sovereign (not hereditary kings), demanded civic
duty, feared corruption, and rejected any aristocracy. Confederation and
Constitution. In the 1780s the national government was able to settle the issue
of the western territories, which were ceded by the states to Congress and
became territories; with the migration of settlers to the Northwest, soon they
became states. Nationalists worried that the new nation was too fragile to
withstand an international war, or even internal revolts such as the Shays'
Rebellion of 1786 in Massachusetts. Nationalists—most of them war
veterans—organized in every state and convinced Congress to call the
Philadelphia Convention in 1787. The delegates from every state wrote a new
Constitution that created a much more powerful and efficient central
government, one with a strong president, and powers of taxation. The new
government reflected the prevailing republican ideals of guarantees of
individual liberty and of constraining the power of government through a system
of separation of powers. The Congress was given authority to ban the
international slave trade after 20 years (which it did in 1807). The electoral
vote of the South was enhanced by counting three-fifths of the number of slaves
in each state's total population. As slavery expanded in the South during the
following decades, this provision increased the political power of southern
representatives in Congress. To assuage the Anti-Federalists who feared a too-
powerful national government, the nation adopted the United States Bill of
Rights in 1791. Comprising the first ten amendments of the Constitution, it
guaranteed individual liberties such as freedom of speech and religious
practice, jury trials, and stated that citizens and states had reserved rights
(which were not specified). Civil religion. The American Revolution was the
main source of the non-denominational American civil religion that has shaped
patriotism ever since. As historians have noted, the Revolution produced a
Moses-like leader (George Washington), prophets (Thomas Jefferson, Tom Paine)
and martyrs (Boston Massacre, Nathan Hale), as well as devils (Benedict
Arnold), sacred places (Valley Forge), rituals (raising the Liberty Tree),
flags (the Betsey Ross flag), sacred holidays (July 4) and a holy scripture
(The Declaration of Independence, the Constitution and the Bill of Rights).
Western frontier. The American colonies and the new nation grew very rapidly in
population and area, as pioneers pushed the frontier of settlement west. The
process finally ended around 1890-1910 as the last major farmlands and ranch
lands were settled. Native American tribes in some places resisted militarily,
but they were overwhelmed by settlers and the army and after 1830 were
relocated to Indian reservations in the west. The highly influential "Frontier
Thesis" argues that the frontier shaped the national character, with its
boldness, violence, innovation, individualism, and democracy. Recent historians
have emphasized the multicultural nature of the frontier. Enormous popular
attention in the media focuses on the "Wild West" of the second half of the
19th century. As defined by Hine and Faragher, "frontier history tells the
story of the creation and defense of communities, the use of the land, the
development of markets, and the formation of states". They explain, "It is a
tale of conquest, but also one of survival, persistence, and the merging of
peoples and cultures that gave birth and continuing life to America." Through
wars and treaties, establishment of law and order, building farms, ranches and
towns, marking trails and digging mines, and pulling in great migrations of
foreigners, the United States expanded from coast to coast fulfilling the
dreams of Manifest Destiny. As the American frontier passed into history, the
myths of the west in fiction and film took firm hold in the imagination of
Americans and foreigners alike. America is exceptional in choosing its iconic
self-image. "No other nation", says David Murdoch, "has taken a time and place
from its past and produced a construct of the imagination equal to America’s
creation of the West". Early national era (1789–1849). Washington established
a strong government. George Washington—a renowned hero of the American
Revolutionary War, commander-in-chief of the Continental Army, and president of
the Constitutional Convention—became the first President of the United States
under the new Constitution in 1789. The national capital moved from New York to
Philadelphia and finally settled in Washington DC in 1800. The major
accomplishments of the Washington Administration were creating a strong
national government that was recognized without question by all Americans. His
government, following the vigorous leadership of Treasury Secretary Alexander
Hamilton, assumed the debts of the states (the debt holders received federal
bonds), created the Bank of the United States to stabilize the financial
system, and set up a uniform system of tariffs (taxes on imports) and other
taxes to pay off the debt and provide a financial infrastructure. To support
his programs Hamilton created a new political party—the first in the world
based on voters—the Federalist Party. Thomas Jefferson and James Madison
formed an opposition Republican Party (usually called the Democratic-Republican
Party by political scientists). Hamilton and Washington presented the country
in 1794 with the Jay Treaty that reestablished good relations with Britain. The
Jeffersonians vehemently protested, and the voters aligned behind one party or
the other, thus setting up the First Party System. Federalists promoted
business, financial and commercial interests and wanted more trade with
Britain. Republicans accused the Federalists of plans to establish a monarchy,
turn the rich into a ruling class, and making the United States a pawn of the
British. The treaty passed, but politics became intensely heated. The Whiskey
Rebellion in 1794, when western settlers protested against a federal tax on
liquor, was the first serious test of the federal government. Washington called
out the state militia and personally led an army, as the insurgents melted away
and the power of the national government was firmly established. Washington
refused to serve more than two terms—setting a precedent—and in famous his
farewell address, he extolled the benefits of federal government and importance
of ethics and morality while warning against foreign alliances and the
formation of political parties. John Adams, a Federalist, defeated Jefferson in
the 1796 election. War loomed with France and the Federalists used the
opportunity to try to silence the Republicans with the Alien and Sedition Acts,
build up a large army with Hamilton at the head, and prepare for a French
invasion. However, the Federalists became divided after Adams sent a successful
peace mission to France that ended the Quasi-War of 1798. Slavery. During the
first two decades after the Revolutionary War, there were dramatic changes in
the status of slavery among the states and an increase in the number of freed
blacks. Inspired by revolutionary ideals of the equality of men and their
lesser economic reliance on it, northern states abolished slavery, although
some had gradual emancipation schemes. States of the Upper South made
manumission easier, resulting in an increase in the proportion of free blacks
in the Upper South from less than one percent in 1792 to more than 10 percent
by 1810. By that date, a total of 13.5 percent of all blacks in the United
States were free. After that date, with the demand for slaves on the rise with
the development of the Deep South for cotton cultivation, the rate of
manumissions declined sharply, and an internal slave trade became an important
source of wealth for many planters and traders. Jefferson. Thomas Jefferson
defeated Adams for the presidency in the 1800 election. Jefferson's major
achievement as president was the Louisiana Purchase in 1803, which provided
U.S. settlers with vast potential for expansion west of the Mississippi River.
Jefferson, a scientist himself, supported expeditions to explore and map the
new domain, most notably the Lewis and Clark Expedition. Jefferson believed
deeply in republicanism and argued it should be based on the independent yeoman
farmer and planter; he distrusted cities, factories and banks. He also
distrusted the federal government and judges, and tried to weaken the
judiciary. However he met his match in John Marshall, a Federalist from
Virginia who was his distant cousin. Although the Constitution included a
Supreme Court, its functions were vague until Marshall, the Chief Justice
(1801–35), defined them, especially the power to overturn acts of Congress
that violated the Constitution, first enunciated in 1803 in "Marbury v.
Madison". War of 1812. Americans were increasingly angry at the British
violation of American ships' neutral rights in order to hurt France, the
impressment (seizure) of 10,000 American sailors needed by the Royal Navy to
fight Napoleon, and British support for hostile Indians attacking American
settlers in the Midwest. Despite strong opposition from federalists in the
Northeast who did not want to disrupt trade with Britain, Congress declared war
in June 1812. The war was frustrating for both sides. American invasions of
Canada were repeatedly repulsed, as the American militia proved ineffective
because the soldiers were reluctant to leave home. The American high command
remained incompetent until the last year. The British blockade ruined American
commerce, bankrupted the Treasury, and further angered New Englanders, who
smuggled supplies to Britain. The Americans under General William Henry
Harrison finally gained naval control of Lake Erie and defeated the Indians
under Tecumseh in Canada, while Andrew Jackson ended the Indian threat in the
Southeast. The British raided and burned Washington, carrying away numerous
slaves, but were repelled at Baltimore in 1814. Also in 1814 a major British
invasion of New York State was turned back. In early 1815 Andrew Jackson
decisively defeated a major British invasion at the Battle of New Orleans,
making him the most famous war hero. With Napoleon (apparently) gone, the
causes of the war had evaporated and both sides agreed to a peace that left the
prewar boundaries intact. Americans celebrated a new spirit of national pride,
as the antiwar Federalist Party practically disappeared. The Indians were the
big losers; they never gained the independent nationhood Britain had promised
and no longer were a threat as settlers poured into the Midwest. Era of Good
Feelings. As strong opponents of the war, the Federalists held the Hartford
Convention in 1814 that hinted at disunion. National euphoria after the victory
at New Orleans ruined the prestige of the Federalists and they no longer played
a significant role. President Madison and most Republicans realized they were
foolish to let the Bank of the United States close down, for its absence
greatly hindered the financing of the war. So they chartered the Second Bank of
the United States in 1816. The Republicans also imposed tariffs designed to
protect the infant industries that had been created when Britain was blockading
the U.S. With the collapse of the Federalists as a party, the adoption of many
Federalist principles by the Republicans, and the systematic policy of
President James Monroe in his two terms (1817–25) to downplay partisanship,
the nation entered an Era of Good Feelings, with far less partisanship than
before (or after), and closed out the First Party System. The Monroe Doctrine,
expressed in 1823, proclaimed the United States' opinion that European powers
should no longer colonize or interfere in the Americas. This was a defining
moment in the foreign policy of the United States. The Monroe Doctrine was
adopted in response to American and British fears over Russian and French
expansion into the Western Hemisphere. Indian removal. In 1830, Congress passed
the Indian Removal Act, which authorized the president to negotiate treaties
that exchanged Native American tribal lands in the eastern states for lands
west of the Mississippi River. President Andrew Jackson was a proponent of the
forcible removal of native populations to the West; Whigs and religious leaders
opped the move as inhumane. The act resulted most notably in the Trail of
Tears, a forced migration of several native tribes to the West, with several
thousand people dying en route. Many of the Seminole Indians in Florida refused
to move west; they fought the Army for years in the Seminole Wars.
Abolitionism. After 1840 the growing abolitionist movement redefined itself as
a crusade against the sin of slave ownership. It mobilized support (especially
among religious women in the Northeast affected by the Second Great Awakening).
William Lloyd Garrison published the most influential of the many anti-slavery
newspapers, "The Liberator", while Frederick Douglass, an ex-slave, began
writing for that newspaper around 1840 and started his own abolitionist
newspaper "North Star" in 1847. The great majority of anti-slavery activists,
such as Abraham Lincoln, rejected Garrison's theology and held that slavery was
an unfortunate social evil, not a sin. Texas and California. The Republic of
Texas was annexed in 1845, which Mexico had warned meant war. The U.S. army,
using regulars and large numbers of volunteers, easily won the Mexican-American
War, 1846–48. Public sentiment in the U.S. was divided as Whigs and anti-
slavery elements opposed the war. The 1848 Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo ceded
California, New Mexico, Arizona, Nevada, and adjacent areas to the United
States, with the residents given full citizenship. Simultaneously gold was
discovered, pulling over 100,000 men to northern California in a matter of
months in the California Gold Rush. Civil War era (1849–1865). The central
issue after 1848 was the expansion of slavery, pitting the anti-slavery
elements that were a majority in the North, against the pro-slavery elements
that overwhelmingly dominated the white South. A small number of very active
Northerners were abolitionists who declared that ownership of slaves was a sin
(in terms of Protestant theology) and demanded its immediate abolition. Much
larger numbers were against the expansion of slavery, seeking to put it on the
path to extinction so that America would be committed to free land (as in low-
cost farms owned and cultivated by a family), free labor (no slaves), and free
speech (as opposed to censorship rampant in the South.) Southern whites
insisted that slavery was of economic social and cultural benefit to all whites
(and even to the slaves themselves), and denounced all antislavery spokesmen as
"abolitionists." Religious activists split on slavery, with the Methodists and
Baptists dividing into northern and southern denominations. In the North, the
Methodists, Congregationalists and Quakers included many abolitionists,
especially among women activists. The Catholic, Episcopal and Lutheran
denominations largely ignored the slavery issue. The issue of slavery in the
new territories was seemingly settled by the Compromise of 1850 brokered by
Whig Henry Clay and Democrat Stephen Douglas; the Compromise included admission
of California as a free state. The sore point was the Fugitive Slave Act to
make it easier for masters to reclaim runaway slaves. Abolitionists fastened on
the Act to attack slavery, as in "Uncle Tom's Cabin" by Harriet Beecher Stowe.
The Compromise of 1820 was repealed in 1854 with the Kansas-Nebraska Act,
promoted by Senator Douglas in the name of "popular sovereignty" and democracy.
It permitted settlers to decide on slavery in each territory, and allowed
Douglas to say he was neutral on the slavery issue. Antislavery forces rose in
anger and alarm, forming the new Republican Party. Pro and anti-forces rushed
to Kansas to vote slavery up or down, resulting in a mini civil war called
Bleeding Kansas. By the late 1850s the young Republican Party dominated nearly
all northern states and thus the electoral college, and insisted that slavery
would never be allowed to expand (and thus would slowly die out). The southern
slave societies had become wealthy based on their cotton and other commodity
production, and some particularly profited from the internal slave trade. They
were tied to northern cities such as Boston and New York by banking, shipping,
and manufacturing. By 1860, there were four million slaves in the South, nearly
eight times as many as the total slaves nationwide in 1790. The plantations
were highly profitable because of the heavy European demand for raw cotton;
most of the profits were invested in new lands and new slaves drawn from the
declining tobacco regions. For 50 of the nation's first 72 years a slaveholder
served as president of the United States and, during that period, only
slaveholding presidents were re-elected to second terms. In addition, southern
states benefited by their increased apportionment in Congress due to the
partial counting of slaves in their populations. Slave rebellions were planned
or actually took place —including by Gabriel Prosser (1800), Denmark Vesey
(1822), and Nat Turner (1831)—but they all failed. They led southern states
to establish tighter slave oversight as well as reducing rights of free blacks.
The Supreme Court's 1857 decision in "Dred Scott v. Sandford" took the Southern
position of making slavery legal everywhere, which outraged northerners. After
Abraham Lincoln won the 1860 election, seven Southern states seceded from the
union between late 1860 and 1861, establishing a new government, the
Confederate States of America, on February 8, 1861. When Lincoln called for
troops to suppress the Confederacy in April 1861, four more states seceded and
joined the Confederacy. Along with the northwestern portion of Virginia, which
became West Virginia, four of the five northernmost "slave states" did not
secede and became known as the Border States. Civil War. The Civil War began on
April 12, 1861, when Confederate forces attacked a U.S. military installation
at Fort Sumter in South Carolina. In response to the attack, on April 15,
Lincoln called on the states to send detachments totaling 75,000 troops to
recapture forts, protect the capital, and "preserve the Union", which in his
view still existed intact despite the actions of the seceding states. The two
armies had their first major clash at the First Battle of Bull Run, which ended
in a surprising Union defeat, but, more importantly, proved to both the Union
and Confederacy that the war was going to be much longer and bloodier than they
had originally anticipated. The war soon divided into two theaters: Eastern and
Western. In the western theater, the Union was quite successful, with major
battles, such as Perryville and Shiloh, producing strategic Union victories and
destroying major Confederate operations. Warfare in the Eastern theater started
poorly for the Union as the Confederates won at Manassas Junction (Bull Run),
just outside Washington. Major General George B. McClellan was put in charge of
the Union armies. After reorganizing the new Army of the Potomac, McClellan
failed to capture the Confederate capital of Richmond, Virginia in his
Peninsula Campaign and retreated after attacks from newly appointed Confederate
General Robert E. Lee. Feeling confident in his army after defeating the Union
at Second Bull Run, Lee embarked on an invasion of the north that was stopped
by McClellan at the bloody Battle of Antietam. Despite this, McClellan was
relieved from command for refusing to pursue Lee's crippled army. The next
commander, General Ambrose Burnside, suffered a humiliating defeat by Lee's
smaller army at the Battle of Fredericksburg late in 1862, causing yet another
change in commanders. Lee won again at the Battle of Chancellorsville in May
1863, while losing his top aide, Stonewall Jackson. But Lee pushed too hard and
ignored the Union threat in the west. Lee invaded Pennsylvania in search of
supplies and to cause war weariness in the North. In perhaps the turning point
of the war, Lee's army was badly beaten at the Battle of Gettysburg, July
1–3, 1863, and barely made it back to Virginia. Simultaneously on July 4,
1863, Union forces under the command of General Ulysses S. Grant gained control
of the Mississippi River at the Battle of Vicksburg, thereby splitting the
Confederacy. Lincoln made General Grant commander of all Union armies. The last
two years of the war was bloody for both sides, with Grant launching a war of
attrition against General Lee's Army of Northern Virginia. This war of
attrition was divided into three main campaigns. The first of these, the
Overland Campaign forced Lee to retreat into the city of Petersburg where Grant
launched his second major offensive, the Richmond-Petersburg Campaign in which
he sieged Petersburg. After a near ten-month siege, Petersburg surrendered.
However, the defense of Fort Gregg allowed Lee to move his army out of
Petersburg. Grant pursued and launched the final, Appomattox Campaign which
resulted in Lee surrendering his Army of Northern Virginia on April 9, 1865, at
Appomattox Court House. Other Confederate armies followed suit and the war
ended with no postwar insurgency as happened in Iraq in 2003. Based on 1860
census figures, about 8% of all white males aged 13 to 43 died in the war,
including 6% from the North and 18% from the South, establishing the American
Civil War as the deadliest war in American history. Its legacy includes ending
slavery in the United States, restoring the Union, and strengthening the role
of the federal government. Reconstruction and a rise in power (1865–1918).
Reconstruction. Reconstruction lasted from Lincoln's Emancipation Proclamation
of January 1, 1863 to the Compromise of 1877. The major issues faced by
Washington were the status of the ex-slaves (called "Freedmen"), the loyalty
and civil rights of ex-rebels, the status of the 11 ex-Confederate states, the
powers of the federal government needed to prevent a future civil war, and the
question of whether Congress or the President would make the major decisions.
The severe threats of starvation and displacement of the unemployed Freedmen
were met by the first major federal relief agency, the Freedman's Bureau,
operated by the Army. Three "Reconstruction Amendments" were passed to expand
civil rights for black Americans. the Thirteenth Amendment outlawed slavery;
the Fourteenth Amendment guaranteed equal rights for all, and citizenship for
blacks; the Fifteenth Amendment prevented race from being used to disfranchise
men. Although ex-Confederates remained in control of most Southern states for
over two years, that changed when the Radical Republicans gained effective
control of Congress in the 1866 elections. President Andrew Johnson, who sought
easy terms for reunions with ex-rebels, was virtually powerless; he escaped by
one vote removal through impeachment. Congress enfranchised black men and
stripped many ex-Confederate leasers of the right to hold office. New
Republican governments came to power based on a coalition of Freedmen,
Carpetbaggers (new arrivals from the North), and Scalawags (native white
Southerners). They were backed by the U.S. Army. Opponents said they were
corrupt and violated the rights of whites. State by state they lost power to a
conservative-Democratic coalition, which gained control of the entire South by
1877. In response to Radical Reconstruction, the Ku Klux Klan (KKK) emerged in
1867 as a white-supremacist organization opposed to black civil rights and
Republican rule. President Ulysses Grant's vigorous enforcement of the Ku Klux
Klan Act of 1870 shut down the Klan and it disbanded. However there were other
paramilitary groups, such as the White League and Red Shirts that worked to
regain white political power in states across the South during the 1870s.
Reconstruction ended after the disputed 1876 election between Republican
candidate Rutherford B. Hayes and Democratic candidate Samuel J. Tilden. With a
compromise Hayes won the election, the federal government withdrew its troops
from the South, and Southern Democrats re-entered the national political scene.
After 1890 southern states effectively disfranchised black voters. Blacks were
segregated in public and remained second class citizens until the successes of
the Civil Rights movement in 1964-65. Western expansion and Indian wars. The
latter half of the nineteenth century was marked by the United States'
development and settlement of the West, first by wagon trains and then aided by
the completion of the transcontinental railroad, and frequent Indian wars as
settlers encroached on traditional Native American lands. Gradually the US
purchased their lands and extinguished their claims, forcing most tribes onto
restricted reservations. According to the U.S. Bureau of the Census (1894),
Gilded Age. The "Gilded Age" was a term that Mark Twain used to describe the
period of the late 19th century when there had been a dramatic expansion of
American wealth and prosperity. Reform of the Age included the Civil Service
Act, which mandated a competitive examination for applicants for government
jobs. Other important legislation included the Interstate Commerce Act, which
ended railroads' discrimination against small shippers, and the Sherman
Antitrust Act, which outlawed monopolies in business. Twain believed that this
age was corrupted by such elements as land speculators, scandalous politics,
and unethical business practices. By 1890 American industrial production and
per capita income exceeded those of all other world nations. In response to
heavy debts and decreasing farm prices, wheat and cotton farmers joined the
Populist Party. An unprecedented wave of immigration from Europe served to both
provide the labor for American industry and create diverse communities in
previously undeveloped areas. From 1880 to 1914, peak years of immigration,
more than 22 million people migrated to the United States. The workers' demand
for control of their workplace led to the often-violent rise of the labor
movement in the cities and mining camps. Industrial leaders included John D.
Rockefeller in oil and Andrew Carnegie in steel; both became leaders of
philanthropy, giving away their fortunes to create the modern system of
hospitals, universities, libraries and foundations. A severe nationwide
depression broke out in 1893; it was called the Panic of 1893 and impacted
farmers, workers and businessmen who saw prices, wages and profits fall. Many
railroads went bankrupt and the political reaction saw the collapse of the
Democratic Party, whose leader President Grover Cleveland shouldered much of
the blame. Labor unrest involved numerous strikes, most notably the violent
Pullman Strike of 1894, which was shut down by federal troops under Cleveland's
orders. The Populist Party gained strength among cotton and wheat farmers, as
well as coal miners, but was overtaken by the even more popular Free Silver
movement, which demanded using silver to enlarge the money supply, leading to
inflation that the silverites promised would end the depression. The financial,
railroad and business communities fought back hard, arguing that only the gold
standard would save the economy. In the most intense election in the nation's
history, conservative Republican William McKinley defeated silverite William
Jennings Bryan, who ran on the Democratic, Populist and Silver Republican
tickets. Bryan swept the South and West, but McKinley ran up landslides among
the middle class, industrial workers, cities, and among upscale farmers in the
Midwest. Prosperity returned under McKinley, and the gold standard was enacted
and the tariff was raised. By 1900 the U.S. had the strongest economy on the
globe. Apart from two short recessions (in 1907 and 1920) the overall economy
remained prosperous and growing until 1929. Republicans, citing McKinley's
policies, took the credit. Progressive Era. Dissatisfaction on the part of the
growing middle class with the corruption and inefficiency of politics as usual,
and the failure to deal with increasingly important urban and industrial
problems, led to the dynamic Progressive Movement starting in the 1890s. In
every major city and state, and at the national level as well, and in
education, medicine, and industry, the progressives called for the
modernization and reform of decrepit institutions, the elimination of
corruption in politics, and the introduction of efficiency as a criterion for
change. Leading politicians from both parties, most notably Theodore Roosevelt,
Charles Evans Hughes, and Robert LaFollette on the Republican side, and William
Jennings Bryan on the Democratic side, took up the cause of progressive reform.
Women became especially involved in demands for woman suffrage, prohibition,
and better schools; their most prominent leader was Jane Addams of Chicago.
Progressives implemented anti-trust laws and regulated such industries of meat-
packing, drugs, and railroads. Four new constitutional amendments—the
Sixteenth through Nineteenth—resulted from progressive activism, bringing the
federal income tax, direct election of Senators, prohibition, and woman
suffrage. The Progressive Movement lasted through the 1920s; the most active
period was 1900–1918. Imperialism. The United States emerged as a world
economic and military power after 1890. The main episode was the
Spanish–American War, which began when Spain refused American demands to
reform its oppressive policies in Cuba. The "splendid little war", as one
official called it, involved a series of quick American victories on land and
at sea. At the Treaty of Paris peace conference the United States acquired the
Philippines, Puerto Rico, and Guam. Cuba became an independent country, under
close American tutelage. Although the war itself was widely popular, the peace
terms proved controversial. William Jennings Bryan led his Democratic Party in
opposition to control of the Philippines, which he denounced as imperialism
unbecoming to American democracy. President William McKinley defended the
acquisition, and was riding high as the nation had returned to prosperity and
felt triumphant in the war. McKinley easily defeated Bryan in a rematch in the
1900 presidential election. After defeating an insurrection by Filipino
nationalists, the United States engaged in a large-scale program to modernize
the economy of the Philippines, and dramatically upgrade the public health
facilities. By 1908, however, Americans lost interest in an empire, and turned
their international attention to the Caribbean, and especially the building of
the Panama Canal. The canal opened in 1914, and increased trade with Japan and
the rest of the Far East. A key innovation was the Open Door Policy, whereby
the imperial powers were given equal access to Chinese business, with no one of
them allowed to take control of China. World War I. As World War I raged in
Europe from 1914, President Woodrow Wilson took full control of foreign policy,
declaring neutrality but warning Germany that resumption of unrestricted
submarine warfare against American ships supplying goods to Allied nations
would mean war. Germany decided to take the risk and try to win by cutting off
supplies to Britain; the U.S. declared war in April 1917. American money, food
and munitions arrived quickly, but troops had to be drafted, trained; by summer
1918 American soldiers under General John J. Pershing arrived at the rate of
10,000 a day, while Germany was unable to replace its losses. The result was
Allied victory in November 1918. President Wilson demanded Germany depose the
Kaiser and accept his terms, the Fourteen Points. Wilson dominated the 1919
Paris Peace Conference but Germany was treated harshly by the Allies in the
Treaty of Versailles (1919) as Wilson put all his hopes in the new League of
Nations. Wilson refused to compromise with Senate Republicans over the issue of
Congressional power to declare war, and the Senate rejected the Treaty and the
League. Women's suffrage. The women's suffrage movement began with the 1848
Seneca Falls Convention, organized by Elizabeth Cady Stanton and Lucretia Mott,
and the Declaration of Sentiments demanding equal rights for women. Many of the
activists became politically aware during the abolitionist movement. The
women's rights campaign during "first-wave feminism" was led by Mott, Stanton,
Susan B. Anthony, among many others. The movement reorganized after the Civil
War, gaining experienced campaigners, many of whom had worked for prohibition
in the Women's Christian Temperance Union. By the end of the 19th century a few
western states had granted women full voting rights, though women had made
significant legal victories, gaining rights in areas such as property and child
custody. Around 1912 the feminist movement, which had grown sluggish, began to
reawaken, putting an emphasis on its demands for equality and arguing that the
corruption of American politics demanded purification by women, because men
could not do that job. Protests became increasingly common as suffragette Alice
Paul led parades through the capital and major cities. Paul split from the
large National American Woman Suffrage Association (NAWSA), which favored a
more moderate approach and supported the Democratic Party and Woodrow Wilson,
led by Carrie Chapman Catt, and formed the more militant National Woman's
Party. Suffragists were arrested during their "Silent Sentinels" pickets at the
White House, the first time such a tactic was used, and were taken as political
prisoners. The old anti-suffragist argument that only men could fight a war,
and therefore only men deserve the right to vote, was refuted by the
enthusiastic participation of tens of thousands of American women on the home
front in World War I. Across the world, grateful nations gave women the right
to vote. Furthermore, most of the Western states had already given the women
the right to vote in state and national elections, and the representatives from
those states, including the first woman Jeannette Rankin of Montana,
demonstrated that woman suffrage was a success. The main resistance came from
the south, where white leaders were worried about the threat of black women
voting. Congress passed the Nineteenth Amendment in 1919 and women could vote
in 1920. NAWSA became the League of Women Voters and the National Woman's Party
began lobbying for full equality and the Equal Rights Amendment which would
pass Congress during the second wave of the women's movement in 1972.
Politicians responded to the new electorate by emphasizing issues of special
interest to women, especially prohibition, child health, and world peace. The
main surge of women voting came in 1928, when the big-city machines realized
they needed the support of women to elect Al Smith, a Catholic from New York
City. Meanwhile Protestants mobilized women to support Prohibition and vote for
Republican Herbert Hoover. Roaring Twenties and the Great Depression. In the
1920s the U.S. grew steadily in stature as an economic and military world
power. The United States Senate did not ratify the Treaty of Versailles imposed
by its Allies on the defeated Central Powers; instead, the United States chose
to pursue unilateralism. The aftershock of Russia's October Revolution resulted
in real fears of communism in the United States, leading to a Red Scare and the
deportation of aliens considered subversive. While public health facilities
grew rapidly in the Progressive Era, and hospitals and medical schools were
modernized, the nation in 1918 lost 675,000 lives to the Spanish flu pandemic.
In 1920, the manufacture, sale, import and export of alcohol were prohibited by
the Eighteenth Amendment. Prohibition encouraged illegal breweries and dealers
to make substantial amounts of money selling alcohol illegally. The Prohibition
ended in 1933, a failure. Additionally, the KKK re-formed during that decade
and gathered nearly 4.5 million members by 1924, and the U.S. government passed
the Immigration Act of 1924 restricting foreign immigration. The 1920s were
also known as the Roaring Twenties, due to the great economic prosperity during
this period. Jazz became popular among the younger generation, and thus was
also called the Jazz Age. Great Depression and New Deal. The Great depression
(1929–39) and the New Deal (1933–36) were decisive moments in American
political, economic and social history that reshaped the nation. During the
1920s, the nation enjoyed widespread prosperity, albeit with a weakness in
agriculture. A financial bubble was fueled by an inflated stock market, which
later led to the Stock Market Crash on October 29, 1929. This, along with many
other economic factors, triggered a worldwide depression known as the Great
Depression. During this time, the United States experienced deflation as prices
fell, unemployment soared from 3% in 1929 to 25% in 1933, farm prices fell by
half, and manufacturing output plunged by one-third. In 1932, Democratic
presidential nominee Franklin D. Roosevelt promised "a New Deal for the
American people", coining the enduring label for his domestic policies. The
desperate economic situation, along with the substantial Democratic victories
in the 1932 elections, gave Roosevelt unusual influence over Congress in the
"First Hundred Days" of his administration. He used his leverage to win rapid
passage of a series of measures to create welfare programs and regulate the
banking system, stock market, industry and agriculture, along with many other
government efforts to end the Great Depression and reform the American economy.
The New Deal regulated much of the economy, especially the financial sector. It
provided relief to the unemployed through numerous programs, such as the Works
Progress Administration (WPA) and (for young men) the Civilian Conservation
Corps. Large scale spending projects designed to provide high paying jobs and
rebuild the infrastructure were under the purview of the Public Works
Administration. Roosevelt turned left in 1935–36, building up labor unions
through the Wagner Act. Unions became a powerful element of the merging New
Deal Coalition, which won reelection for FDR in 1936, 1940 and 1944 by
mobilizing union members, blue collar workers, relief recipients, big city
machines, ethnic groups (especially Catholics and Jews) and the white South,
along with blacks in the North (where they could vote). Some of the programs
were dropped in the 1940s when the conservatives regained power in Congress
through the Conservative Coalition. Of special importance is the Social
Security program, begun in 1935. World War II. In the Depression years the
United States remained focused on domestic concerns while democracy declined
across the world and many countries fell under the control of dictators.
Imperial Japan asserted dominance in East Asia and in the Pacific. Nazi Germany
and Fascist Italy militarized to and threatened conquests, while Britain and
France attempted appeasement to avert another war in Europe. U.S. legislation
in the Neutrality Acts sought to avoid foreign conflicts; however policy
clashed with increasing anti-Nazi feelings following the German invasion of
Poland in September 1939 that started World War II. Roosevelt positioned the
U.S. as the "Arsenal of Democracy" pledging full-scale financial and munitions
support for the Allies—but no soldiers. Japan tried to neutralize America's
power in the Pacific by attacking Pearl Harbor on December 7, 1941, which
catalyzed American support to enter the war and seek revenge. The main
contributions of the U.S. to the Allied war effort comprised money, industrial
output, food, petroleum, technological innovation, and (especially 1944–45),
soldiers. Much of the focus in Washington was maximizing the economic output of
the nation. The overall result was a dramatic increase in GDP, the export of
vast quantities of supplies to the Allies and to American forces overseas, the
end of unemployment, and a rise in civilian consumption even as 40% of the GDP
went to the war effort. This was achieved by tens of millions of workers moving
from low-productivity occupations to high efficiency jobs, improvements in
productivity through better technology and management, and the move into the
active labor force of students, retired people, housewives, and the unemployed,
and an increase in hours worked. It was exhausting; leisure activities declined
sharply. People tolerated the extra work because of patriotism, the pay, and
the confidence it was only "for the duration" and life would return to normal
as soon as the war was won. Most durable goods became unavailable, and meat,
clothing, and gasoline were tightly rationed. In industrial areas housing was
in short supply as people doubled up and lived in cramped quarters. Prices and
wages were controlled, and Americans saved a high portion of their incomes,
which led to renewed growth after the war instead of a return to depression.
The Allies—the U.S., Britain and the Soviet Union, as well as China, Canada
and other countries—fought the Axis powers of Germany, Italy, and Japan. The
Allies saw Germany as the main threat, and gave highest priority to Europe. The
U.S. dominated the war against Japan, and stopped Japanese expansion in the
Pacific in 1942. After losing to the Japanese Pearl Harbor and in the
Philippines, and drawing the Battle of the Coral Sea (May 1942), the American
Navy inflicted a decisive blow at Midway (June 1942). American ground forces
assisted in the North African Campaign that eventually concluded with the
collapse of Mussolini's fascist government in 1943, as Italy switched to the
Allied side. A more significant European front was opened on D-Day, June 6,
1944, in which American and Allied forces invaded Nazi-occupied France from
Britain. On the home front, mobilization of the U.S. economy was managed by
Roosevelt's War Production Board. The wartime production boom led to full
employment, wiping out this vestige of the Great Depression. Indeed, labor
shortages encouraged industry to look for new sources of workers, finding new
roles for women and blacks. However the fervor also inspired anti-Japanese
sentiment, which responded by removing everyone of Japanese descent from the
West Coast war zone. Research and development took flight as well, best seen in
the Manhattan Project, a secret effort to harness nuclear fission to produce
highly destructive atomic bombs. The Allied pushed the Germans out of France,
but faced an unexpected counterattack at the Battle of the Bulge in December.
The final German effort failed, and as 1945 opened Allied armies in East and
West were converging on Berlin, as the Nazis hurriedly tried to kill the last
remaining Jews. The western front stopped short, leaving Berlin to the Soviets
as the Nazi regime formally capitulated in May 1945, ending the war in Europe.
Over in the Pacific, the U.S. implemented an island hopping strategy toward
Tokyo, establishing airfields for bombing runs against mainland Japan from the
Mariana Islands and achieving hard-fought victories at Iwo Jima and Okinawa in
1945. Bloodied at Okinawa, the U.S. prepared to invade Japan's home islands
when B-29's dropped two atomic bombs on Japanese cities, forcing the empire's
surrender in a matter of days and thus ending World War II. The U.S. occupied
Japan (and part of Germany), sending Douglas MacArthur to restructure the
Japanese economy and political system along American lines. Though the nation
lost more than 400,000 soldiers, the mainland prospered untouched by the
devastation of war that inflicted a heavy toll on Europe and Asia.
Participation in postwar foreign affairs marked the end of predominant American
isolationism. The awesome threat of nuclear weapons inspired both optimism and
fear. Nuclear weapons were never used after 1945, as both sides drew back from
the brink and a "long peace" characterized the Cold War years, 1947–1991.
There were, however, regional wars in Korea and Vietnam. The Cold War begins
(1945–1964). Following World War II, the United States emerged as one of the
two dominant superpowers, the USSR being the other. The U.S. Senate on a
bipartisan vote approved U.S. participation in the United Nations (UN), which
marked a turn away from the traditional isolationism of the U.S. and toward
increased international involvement. The primary American goal of 1945–48 was
to rescue Europe from the devastation of World War II and to contain the
expansion of Communism, represented by the Soviet Union. The Truman Doctrine of
1947 provided military and economic aid to Greece and Turkey to counteract the
threat of Communist expansion in the Balkans. In 1948, the United States
replaced piecemeal financial aid programs with a comprehensive Marshall Plan,
which pumped money into the economy of Western Europe, and removed trade
barriers, while modernizing the managerial practices of businesses and
governments. The Plan's $13 billion budget was in the context of a U.S. GDP of
$258 billion in 1948, and was on top of $12 billion in American aid to Europe
between the end of the war and the start of the Marshall Plan. Soviet head of
state Joseph Stalin prevented his satellite states from participating, and from
that point on Eastern Europe, with inefficient centralized economies, fell
further and further behind Western Europe in terms of economic development and
prosperity. In 1949, the United States, rejecting the long-standing policy of
no military alliances in peacetime, formed the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization (NATO) alliance, which continues into the 21st century. In
response the Soviets formed the Warsaw Pact of communist states. In August 1949
the Soviets tested their first nuclear weapon, thereby escalating the risk of
warfare. Indeed, the threat of mutually assured destruction prevented both
powers from going too far, and resulted in proxy wars, especially in Korea and
Vietnam, in which the two sides did not directly confront each other. Within
the United States, the Cold War prompted concerns about Communist influence.
The unexpected leapfrogging of American technology by the Soviets in 1957 with
Sputnik, the first Earth satellite, began the Space Race, won by the Americans
as Apollo 11 landed astronauts on the moon in 1969. The angst about the
weaknesses of American education led to large-scale federal support for science
education and research. In the decades after World War II, the United States
became a global influence in economic, political, military, cultural, and
technological affairs. Beginning in the 1950s, middle-class culture became
obsessed with consumer goods. White Americans made up nearly 90% of the
population in 1950. In 1960, the charismatic politician John F. Kennedy was
elected as the first and—thus far—only Roman Catholic President of the
United States. The Kennedy family brought a new life and vigor to the
atmosphere of the White House. His time in office was marked by such notable
events as the acceleration of the United States' role in the Space Race;
escalation of the American role in the Vietnam War; the Cuban missile crisis;
the Bay of Pigs Invasion; the jailing of Martin Luther King, Jr. during the
Birmingham campaign; and the appointment of his brother Robert F. Kennedy to
his Cabinet as Attorney General. Kennedy was assassinated in Dallas, Texas, on
November 22, 1963, leaving the nation in profound shock. Climax of liberalism.
Johnson was rewarded with an electoral landslide in 1964 against conservative
Barry Goldwater, which broke the decades-long control of Congress by the
Conservative coalition. But the Republicans bounced back in 1966 and elected
Richard Nixon in 1968. Nixon largely continued the New Deal and Great Society
programs he inherited; conservative reaction would come with the election of
Ronald Reagan in 1980. Meanwhile, the American people completed a great
migration from farms into the cities and experienced a period of sustained
economic expansion. At the same time, institutionalized racism across the
United States, but especially in the South, was increasingly challenged by the
growing Civil Rights movement. The activism of African American leaders Rosa
Parks and Martin Luther King, Jr. led to the Montgomery Bus Boycott, which
launched the movement. For years African Americans would struggle with violence
against them, but would achieve great steps towards equality with Supreme Court
decisions, including "Brown v. Board of Education" and "Loving v. Virginia",
the Civil Rights Act of 1964, the Voting Rights Act of 1965, and the Fair
Housing Act of 1968, which ended the Jim Crow laws that legalized racial
segregation between Whites and Blacks. Martin Luther King, Jr., who had won the
Nobel Peace Prize for his efforts to achieve equality of the races, was
assassinated in 1968. Following his death others led the movement, most notably
King's widow, Coretta Scott King, who was also active, like her husband, in the
Opposition to the Vietnam War, and in the Women's Liberation Movement. Over the
first nine months of 1967, 128 American cities suffered 164 riots. The late
1960s and early 1970s saw the rise and fall of Black Power, however the decade
would ultimately bring about positive strides toward integration, especially in
government service, sports, and entertainment. Native Americans turned to the
courts to fight for their land rights. They held protests highlighting the
federal government's failure to honor treaties. One of the most outspoken
Native American groups was the American Indian Movement (AIM). In the 1960s,
Cesar Chavez began organizing poorly paid Mexican-American farm workers in
California. He led a five-year-long strike by grape pickers. Then Chavez formed
the nation's first successful union of farm workers. It later became the United
Farm Workers of America (UFW). The Women's Movement. A new consciousness of the
inequality of American women began sweeping the nation, starting with the 1963
publication of Betty Friedan's best-seller, "The Feminine Mystique", which
explained how many housewives felt trapped and unfulfilled, assaulted American
culture for its creation of the notion that women could only find fulfillment
through their roles as wives, mothers, and keepers of the home, and argued that
women were just as able as men to do every type of job. In 1966 Friedan and
others established the National Organization for Women, or NOW, to act for
women as the NAACP did for African Americans. Protests began, and the new
Women's Liberation Movement grew in size and power, gained much media
attention, and, by 1968, had replaced the Civil Rights Movement as the U.S.'s
main social revolution. Marches, parades, rallies, boycotts, and pickets
brought out thousands, sometimes millions; Friedan's Women's Strike for
Equality (1970) was a nation-wide success. The Movement was split into factions
by political ideology early on, however (with NOW on the left, the Women's
Equity Action League (WEAL) on the right, the National Women's Political Caucus
(NWPC) in the center, and more radical groups formed by younger women on the
far left). Along with Friedan, Gloria Steinem was an important feminist leader,
co-founding the NWPC, the Women's Action Alliance, and editing the Movement's
magazine, "Ms." The proposed Equal Rights Amendment to the Constitution, passed
by Congress in 1972 and favored by about seventy percent of the American
public, failed to be ratified in 1982, with only three more states needed to
make it law. The nation's conservative women, led by activist Phyllis Schlafly,
defeated the ERA by arguing that it degraded the position of the housewife, and
made young women susceptible to the military draft. However, many federal laws
(i.e. those equalizing pay, employment, education, employment opportunities,
credit, ending pregnancy discrimination, and requiring NASA, the Military
Academies, and other organizations to admit women), state laws (i.e. those
ending spousal abuse and marital rape), Supreme Court rulings (i.e. ruling the
equal protection clause of the Fourteenth Amendment applied to women), and
state ERAs established women's equal status under the law, and social custom
and consciousness began to change, accepting women's equality. The
controversial issue of abortion, deemed by the Supreme Court as a fundamental
right in "Roe v. Wade" (1973), is still a point of debate today. The
Counterculture Revolution and Cold War Détente (1964–1980). Amid the Cold
War, the United States entered the Vietnam War, whose growing unpopularity fed
already existing social movements, including those among women, minorities and
young people. President Lyndon B. Johnson's Great Society social programs and
numerous rulings by the Warren Court added to the wide range of social reform
during the 1960s and 1970s. Feminism and the environmental movement became
political forces, and progress continued toward civil rights for all Americans.
The Counterculture Revolution swept through the nation and much of the western
world in the late sixties and early seventies, further dividing Americans in a
"culture war" but also bringing forth more liberated social views. Johnson was
succeeded in 1969 by Republican Richard Nixon, who turned the war over to the
South Vietnamese forces and ended American combat roles; he negotiated a peace
treaty in 1973, secured the release of POWs and ended the draft. The war had
cost the lives of 58,000 American troops. Nixon manipulated the fierce distrust
between the Soviet Union and China to the advantage of the United States,
achieving "détente" (cooperation) with both parties. The Watergate scandal,
involving Nixon's cover-up of his operatives break-in into the Democratic
National Committee headquarters at the Watergate office complex destroyed his
political base, sent many aides to prison, and forced Nixon's resignation on
August 9, 1974. He was succeeded by Vice President Gerald Ford, who was
subsequently helpless to prevent the conquest of South Vietnam when North
Vietnam invaded in 1975. The OPEC oil embargo marked a long-term economic
transition, as for the first time energy prices skyrocketed and American
factories faced serious competition from foreign automobiles, clothing,
electronics and consumer goods. By the late 1970s the economy suffered an
energy crisis, slow economic growth, high unemployment, and very high inflation
coupled with high interest rates (the term stagflation was coined). While
economists agreed on the wisdom of deregulation, many of the New Deal era
regulations were ended, as in transportation, banking and telecommunications.
Jimmy Carter, running as someone who was not a part of the Washington political
establishment, was elected president in 1976. On the world stage, Carter
brokered the Camp David Accords between Israel and Egypt. In 1979, Iranian
students stormed the U.S. embassy in Tehran and took 66 Americans hostage,
resulting in the Iran hostage crisis. With the hostage crisis and continuing
stagflation, Carter lost the 1980 election to the Republican Ronald Reagan. On
January 20, 1981, minutes after Carter's term in office ended, the remaining
U.S. captives held at the U.S. embassy in Iran were released, ending the 444-
day hostage crisis. The end of the Cold War (1980–1991). Ronald Reagan
produced a major realignment with his 1980 and 1984 landslide elections.
Reagan's economic policies (dubbed "Reaganomics") and the implementation of the
Economic Recovery Tax Act of 1981 lowered income taxes from 70% to 28% over the
course of seven years. Reagan continued to downsize government taxation and
regulation. The U.S. experienced a recession in 1982 but the negative
indicators reversed, as the inflation rate decreased from 11% to 2%, the
unemployment rate decreased from 10.8% in December 1982 to 7.5% in November
1984, and the economic growth rate increased from 4.5% to 7.2%. Reagan ordered
a massive buildup of the U.S. military, incurring a costly budget deficit.
Reagan introduced a complicated missile defense system known as the Strategic
Defense Initiative (dubbed "Star Wars" by opponents) in which, theoretically,
the U.S. could shoot down missiles with laser systems in space. Though it was
never fully developed or deployed, the Soviets were genuinely concerned about
the possible effects of the program and became more willing to negotiate.
Reagan's rollback policy of weakening Communist states in critical regions
involved covert funding and assistance to anti-Communist resistance movements
worldwide. Reagan's interventions against Grenada and Libya were popular in the
U.S., though his backing of the Contra rebels was mired in the controversy over
the Iran–Contra affair that revealed Reagan's poor management style. Reagan
met four times with Soviet leader Mikhail Gorbachev, who ascended to power in
1985, and their summit conferences led to the signing of the Intermediate-Range
Nuclear Forces Treaty. Gorbachev tried to save Communism in the Soviet Union
first by ending the expensive arms race with America, then by shedding the East
European empire in 1989. The Soviet Union collapsed in 1991, ending the
U.S.–Soviet Cold War. World superpower (1991–present). The United States
emerged as the world's sole remaining superpower and continued to intervene in
international affairs during the 1990s, including the 1991 Gulf War against
Iraq. Following his election in 1992, President Bill Clinton oversaw one of the
longest periods of economic expansion and unprecedented gains in securities
values, a side effect of the digital revolution and new business opportunities
created by the Internet. He also worked with the Republican Congress to pass
the first balanced federal budget in 30 years. In 1998, Clinton was impeached
by the House of Representatives on charges of "high crimes and misdemeanors"
for lying about a sexual relationship with White House intern Monica Lewinsky,
but was later acquitted by the Senate. The failure of impeachment and the
Democratic gains in the 1998 election forced House Speaker Newt Gingrich, a
Republican, to resign from Congress. The presidential election in 2000 between
George W. Bush and Al Gore was one of the closest in U.S. history, and helped
lay the seeds for political polarization to come. The vote in the decisive
state of Florida was extremely close and produced a dramatic dispute over the
counting of votes. The U.S. Supreme Court in "Bush v. Gore" ended the recount
with a 5–4 vote. That meant Bush, then in the lead, carried Florida and the
election. 9/11 and the War on Terror. On September 11, 2001 (9/11), the United
States was struck by a terrorist attack when 19 al-Qaeda hijackers commandeered
four airliners and intentionally crashed into both twin towers of the World
Trade Center and into the Pentagon, killing nearly 3000 people, mostly
civilians. In response on September 20, President George W. Bush announced a
"War on Terror". On October 7, 2001, the United States and NATO then invaded
Afghanistan to oust the Taliban regime, which had provided safe haven to al-
Qaeda and its leader Osama bin Laden. The federal government established new
domestic efforts to prevent future attacks. The controversial USA PATRIOT Act
increased government's power to monitor communications and removed legal
restrictions on information sharing between federal law enforcement and
intelligence services. A cabinet-level agency called the Department of Homeland
Security was created to lead and coordinate federal counter-terrorism
activities. Some of these anti-terrorism efforts, particularly the U.S.
government's handling of detainees at the prison at Guantanamo Bay, led to
allegations toward the U.S. government of human rights violations. President
Obama forbade torture, but in general retained Bush's policy regarding the
Guantanamo detainees. In 2003, the United States launched an invasion of Iraq,
which led to the collapse of the Iraqi government and the eventual capture of
Iraqi dictator Saddam Hussein, with whom the U.S. had long-standing tense
relations. The reasons for the invasion cited by the Bush administration
included the spreading of democracy, the elimination of weapons of mass
destruction (a key demand of the UN as well, though later investigations found
parts of the intelligence reports to be inaccurate) and the liberation of the
Iraqi people. Despite some initial successes early in the invasion, the
continued Iraq War fueled international protests and gradually saw domestic
support decline as many people began to question whether or not the invasion
was worth the cost. In 2007, after years of violence by the Iraqi insurgency,
President Bush deployed more troops in a strategy dubbed "the surge". While the
death toll decreased, the political stability of Iraq remained in doubt. In
2008, the unpopularity of President Bush and the Iraq war, along with the 2008
financial crisis, led to the election of Barack Obama, the first African
American President of the United States. As president, Obama officially ended
combat operations in Iraq on August 31, 2010, but kept 50,000 in Iraq to assist
Iraqi forces, help protect withdrawing forces, and work on counter-terrorism.
In December 2011, the war was declared formally over and the last troops left
the country. At the same time, Obama increased American involvement in
Afghanistan, starting a surge strategy using an additional 30,000 troops, while
proposing to begin withdrawing troops at a later point. In May 2011, after
nearly a decade in hiding, the founder and leader of Al Qaeda Osama bin Laden
was killed in Pakistan in a raid conducted by U.S. naval special forces acting
under President Obama's direct orders. While Al Qaeda was near collapse in
Afghanistan, affiliated organizations continued to operate in Yemen and other
remote areas, as the CIA used drones to hunt down and remove its leadership.
Events since 2007. In December 2007, the United States, and most of Europe,
entered the longest post–World War II recession. Major problems included a
housing market crisis, a subprime mortgage crisis, soaring oil prices, an
automotive industry crisis, rising unemployment, and the worst financial crisis
since the Great Depression. The financial crisis hit a critical point in
September 2008 when Lehman Brothers and other important financial institutions
failed. Starting in October the federal government lent $245 billion to
financial institutions through the Troubled Asset Relief Program which was
signed into law under the Bush administration. Shortly after taking office,
President Obama signed into law a $787 billion economic stimulus package aimed
at helping the economy recover from the deepening recession. In addition to the
economic stimulus, the government took steps to rescue the auto industry and
prevent future economic meltdowns. These included a bailout of General Motors
and Chrysler, putting ownership temporarily in the hands of the government, and
the "cash for clunkers" program which temporarily boosted new car sales.
Congress enacted the Dodd–Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection
Act, a bill that makes sweeping changes to the financial regulatory system. In
June 2009, the recession officially ended and the U.S. economy began to expand
once again. The unemployment rate peaked at 10.1% in October, followed by a
slow economic recovery. The beginning of the 2010s saw the rise of new
political movements across the world, such as the conservative Tea Party
movement in the U.S., the international populist Occupy movement and the pro-
democratic Arab Spring movement in the Middle East. The 111th Congress saw the
passage of major legislation such as the Patient Protection and Affordable Care
Act, the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act and the
Don't Ask, Don't Tell Repeal Act, which were signed into law by President
Obama. In the 2010 midterm elections, the Republicans regained control of the
House and installed John Boehner as Speaker. The newly divided Congress
presided over a period of elevated gridlock and heated debates over whether or
not raise the debt ceiling, extending tax cuts for citizens making less than
$250,000 annually, and many other key issues. As a result of growing public
frustration with both parties in Congress, their approval rating fell to an all
time low of 11%. President Obama was reelected in November 2012 as the country
was recovering from record draught over the summer and the massive Hurricane
Sandy disrupted population centers in New York and New Jersey in late October.
Partisan debates centered on the economy, the near-8% unemployment rate,
economic inequality, deficit spending, the financial crisis in state
government, the role of public sector labor unions, health care, and abortion.
Some $6 billion was spent on the election, but there was no change in the White
House and little change in Congress, where the GOP controls the House and the
Democrats the Senate. Attention immediately turned to the "fiscal cliff":
starting January 1, 2013, current law calls for automatic spending cuts
("sequestration") and tax increases totalling nearly $900 billion in 2013. Most
analysts fear the impact on the economy will be severe unless Washington acts
quickly.
