History of Azerbaijan Azerbaijan or Azarbaijan () is a country in the Caucasus
region of Eurasia. It's bounded by Caspian Sea to the east, Russia's Daghestan
region to the north, Georgia to the northwest, Armenia and Turkey to the
southwest, and Iran to the south. Azerbaijan is a home to various ethnicities,
majority of which are Azerbaijani, a Turkic ethnic group which numbers close to
9 million in the independent Republic of Azerbaijan. During Median and Persian
rule, many Caucasian Albanians adopted Zoroastrianism and then switched to
Christianity prior to coming of Muslim Arabs and more importantly Muslim Turks.
The Turkic tribes are believed to have arrived as small bands of ghazis whose
conquests led to the Turkification of the population as largely native
Caucasian and Iranian tribes adopted the Turkic language of the Oghuz and
converted to Islam over a period of several hundred years. After more than 80
years of colonization under the Russian Empire in the Caucasus, the Azerbaijan
Democratic Republic was established in 1918. The state was invaded by Soviet
forces in 1920 and remained under Soviet rule until the collapse of the Soviet
Union in 1991. Prehistory. Paleolithic. The cave of Azykh in the territory of
the Fizuli district in the Republic of Azerbaijan is considered to be the site
of one of the most ancient proto-human habitations in Eurasia. Remnants of the
pre-Acheulean culture were found in the lowest layers of the Azykh cave. This
culture is one of the oldest, and in many ways similar to the Olduvai culture
in Tanzania, and Walloon culture in the southeast of France. The Paleolithic
(Homo Sapiens) period in what is now Azerbaijan is represented by finds at
Aveidag, Taglar, Damjily, Yatagery, Dash Salakhly and some other sites. Carved
drawings etched on rocks in Qobustan, south of Baku, demonstrate scenes of
hunting, fishing, labor and dancing, and are dated to the Mesolithic period.
Neolithic. The Neolithic period (ca. 6th – 4th millennia BC) was the period
of transition from the Stone Age to the Bronze Age. Many Neolithic settlements
have been discovered in Azerbaijan, and carbon-dated artifacts show that during
this period, people built homes, made copper weapons, and were familiar with
irrigated agriculture. Bronze to Iron Ages. The influence of ancient peoples
and civilizations including the Sumerians and Elamites came to a crossroads in
the territory of Azerbaijan. A variety of Caucasian peoples appear to be the
earliest inhabitants of the South Caucasus with the notable Caucasian Albanians
being their most prominently known representative. In the 8th century BC, the
semi-nomadic Cimmerians and Scythians settled in the territory of kingdom of
Mannai. The Assyrians also had a civilization that flourished to the west of
Lake Urmia in the centuries prior to creation of Media and Albania. Most of the
ancient documents and inscriptions used for historical analysis of the area
come from the Assyrians and from the kingdom of Urartu. In dealing with the
history of Azerbaijan, most western scholars refer to Greek, Arab, Roman, and
Persian sources. Caucasian Albanians are believed to be the earliest
inhabitants of Azerbaijan. Early invaders included the Scythians in the 9th
century BCE. The South Caucasus was eventually conquered by the Achaemenids
around 550 BCE. During this period, Zoroastrianism spread in Azerbaijan. The
Achaemenids in turn were defeated by Alexander the Great in 330 BCE. Following
the decline of the Seleucids in Persia in 247 BCE, an Armenian Kingdom
exercised control over parts of modern Azerbaijan between 190 BCE to 428 CE.
Caucasian Albanians established a kingdom in the 1st century BCE and largely
remained independent until the Sassanids made the kingdom a province in 252 CE.
Caucasian Albania's ruler, King Urnayr, officially adopted Christianity as the
state religion in the 4th century CE, and Albania would remain a Christian
state until the 8th century. Sassanid control ended with their defeat by Muslim
Arabs in 642 CE. The successive migration and settlement of Eurasian and
Central Asian nomads continued to be a familiar pattern in the history of the
Caucasus since ancient times, from the era of Sassanid-Persian empire to
emergence of Azerbaijani Turks by the 20th century CE. Among the Iranian nomads
who made incursion into and from Azerbaijan are the Scythians, Alans and
Cimmerians. Altaic Nomads such as Khazars and Huns made incursions during the
Hunnic and Khazar era. The walls and fortification of Darband were built during
the Sassanid era in order to block nomads coming from the caucus pass. However,
they did not make permanent settlements. Antiquity. Achaemenid and Seleucid
rule. Following the overthrow of the Median Empire, all of what is today
Azerbaijan was invaded by the Persian king Cyrus the Great in the 6th century
BCE. This earliest Persian Empire had a profound impact upon local population
as the religion of Zoroastrianism became ascendant as did various early Persian
cultural influences. Many of the local peoples of Caucasian Albania came to be
known as fire worshipers, which may be a sign of their Zoroastrian faith. This
empire lasted over 250 years and was conquered later by Alexander the Great and
led to the rise of Hellenistic culture throughout the former Persian Empire.
The Seleucid Greeks inherited the Caucasus following Alexander's death in 323
BCE, but were ultimately beset by pressures from Rome, secessionist Greeks in
Bactria, and most adversely the Parthians ("Parni"), another nomadic Iranian
tribe from Central Asia, which made serious inroads into the northern eastern
Seleucid domains from the late 4th century BCE to the 3rd century BCE and this
ultimately allowed local Caucasian tribes to establish an independent kingdom
for the first time since the Median invasion. Caucasian Albania, Roman-Parthian
rivalry, and Sassanian conquest. The Albanian kingdom coalesced around a native
Caucasian identity to forge a unique state in a region of vast empire-states.
However in the 2nd or 1st century B.C. the Armenians considerably curtailed the
Albanian territories to the south and conquered the territories of Karabakh and
Utik, populated by various Albanian tribes, such as Utians, Gargarians and
Caspians. During this time the border between Albania and Armenia was along the
river of Kura. As the region became an arena of wars when Romans and Parthians
began to expand their domains, most of Albania came under the domination of
Roman legions under Pompey and the south being controlled by the Parthians. A
rock carving of what is believed to be the eastern-most Roman inscription
survives just southwest of Baku at the site of Gobustan. It is inscribed by
Legio XII Fulminata at the time of emperor Domitian. After the division of
Armenia between Byzantium and Persia in 387 A.D. the Albanian kings regained
control over the provinces of Uti and Artsakh (lying south of the Kur), when
Sasanian kings rewarded Albanian Arsacid rulers for their royalty to Persia.
Medieval historians, such as Movses Khorenatsi and Movses Kaghankatvatsi, write
that Albanians converted to Christianity in the 4th century A.D. by the efforts
of Gregory the Illuminator of Armenia. Albanian king Urnayr accepted
Christianity and was baptized by Gregory the Illuminator. Urnayr also declared
Christianity as his kingdom's official religion. However Christianity spread in
Albania only gradually, and a large part of Albanians and Persians remained
Zoroastrian until the Islamic conquest. Middle Ages. Islamic conquest. Muslim
Arabs defeated the Sassanids and Byzantines as they marched into the Caucasus
region. The Arabs made Caucasian Albania a vassal state after the Christian
resistance, led by Prince Javanshir, surrendered in 667. Between the 9th and
10th centuries, Arab authors began to refer to the region between the Kura and
Aras rivers as "Arran". During this time, Arabs from Basra and Kufa came to
Azerbaijan and seized lands that the indigenous peoples had abandoned. Seljuqs
and successor states. The Seljuq period of Azerbaijan's history was possibly
even more pivotal than the Arab conquest as it helped shape the ethno-
linguistic nationality of the modern Azerbaijani Turks. After the decline of
the Abbasid Caliphate, the territory of Azerbaijan was under the sway of
numerous dynasties such as the Salarids, Sajids, Shaddadids, Rawadids and
Buyids. However at the beginning of the 11th century, the territory was
gradually seized by waves of Oghuz Turkic tribes emanating from Central Asia.
The first of these Turkic dynasties was the Ghaznavids from northern
Afghanistan, who took over part of Azerbaijan by 1030. They were followed by
the Seljuqs, a western branch of the Oghuz who conquered all of Iran and the
Caucasus and pressed on to Iraq where they overthrew the Buyids in Baghdad in
1055. The Seljuqs became the main rulers of a vast empire that included all of
Iran, Iraq, and Azerbaijan until the end of 12th century. During the Seljuq
period, the influential vizier of the Seljuq sultans, Nizam ul-Mulk (a noted
Persian scholar and administrator) is noted for having helped introduce
numerous educational and bureaucratic reforms. His death in 1092 marked the
beginning of the decline of the once well-organized Seljuq state that further
deteriorated following the death of Sultan Ahmad Sanjar in 1153. Locally,
Seljuq possessions were ruled by Atabegs, who were technically vassals of the
Seljuq sultans, but sometimes became de facto rulers themselves. The title of
"Atabeg" was common during the Seljuq rule of the Middle East starting in the
12th century. Under their rule from the end of 12th to early 13th centuries,
Azerbaijan emerged as an important cultural center of the Turkic people.
Palaces of the Atabeg "Eldegizids" (eldeniz) and the "Shirvanshahs" hosted
distinguished people of the time, many of whom were outstanding Muslim artisans
and scientists. The most famous of the Atabeg rulers was Shams al-din Eldeqiz
(Eldeniz). Under Seljuqs, great progress was achieved in different sciences and
philosophy by Iranians like Bahmanyar, Khatib Tabrizi, Shahab al-Din Suhrawardi
and others. Persian poets such as Nizami Ganjavi and Khaqani Shirvani, who
lived in this region, epitomize the highest point in refined medieval Persian
literature. In addition, the region experience a building boom and the unique
of architecture of the Seljuq period is epitomized by the fortress walls,
mosques, schools, mausoleums, and bridges of Baku, Ganja and Absheron which
were built during the 12th century. In 1225, Jalaleddin Kharazmshah of
Khwarezmid Empire put an end to the Atabeg rule. Mongols and Ilkhanid rule. The
Mongol invasion of the Middle East and Caucasus was a devastating event for
Azerbaijan and most of its neighbors. From 1220, Begin beg began to pay
tributes to the Mongols. Jebe and Subotai made the small state neutral. In
1231, the Mongols occupied most of Azerbaijan and killed the Khorezmshah
Jalaladdin, who had overthrown the Atabeg dynasty. In 1235 the Mongols
destroyed cities of Ganja, Shamkir, Tovuz, Shabran on their way to conquer
Kievan Russia. By the 1236, all of Transcaucasia was in the hands of Ogedei
khan. The end of Mongol rule and the Black Sheep-White Sheep rivalry. The last
Il-khanid ruler, Abu Sa'id, died without an heir which led to the Ilkhan
state's disintegration into small sultanates. The next state in the territory
of Azerbaijan, in the 1330s, was that of the "Jalayirids", who ruled Iraq,
western Persia, and most of Azerbaijan. The Jalayirid Sultanate lasted about
fifty years, until it was disrupted by Tamerlane's conquests and the revolts of
the Kara Koyunlu (Qara Qoyunlu) also known as 'Black Sheep Turks'. The first
Jalayirid ruler was Hasan Buzurg (d. 1356) who ascended the throne in Tabriz in
1337. His son Shaikh Uvais defeated his most serious potential rivals, the
"Chobanids" (descendants of Amir Coban (Chobanids)) to consolidate his rule. He
reigned over Azerbaijan from 1360 to 1374 during a period of peace and
stability. After the rule of the weak Sultan Husain, the Jalayirid state
declined. Tamerlane (Amir Timur) launched a devastating invasion of Azerbaijan
in 1380s, and temporarily incorporated Azerbaijan into his vast domain that
spanned much of Eurasia. The Shirvanshah state under Shirvanshah Ibrahim I were
also vassals of Timur and assisted Timur in his war with the Mongol ruler
Tokhtamysh of the Golden Horde. Azerbaijan experienced social unrest and
religious strife during this period due to sectarian conflict initiated by
Hurufi, Bektashi and other movements. Following Timur's death in 1405, his
fourth son Shah-Rukh came to power and reigned until 1446. To the west of Shah-
Rukh's domain two new rival Turkic states emerged – the "Kara Koyunlu" based
around Lake Van and the Ak Koyunlu (or "White Sheep Turks") centered around
Diyarbakır. Initially, it was the Kara Koyunlu who were ascendant when their
chief Kara Yusuf overcame Sultan Ahmad, the last of Jalayirids, and conquered
South of Azerbaijan in 1410, establishing his capital at Tabriz. Under Jahan-
Shah, the Kara Koyunlu expanded their territory into central Iran and as far
east as Khurasan. Later, however, the Ak Koyunlu came into greater prominence
under Uzun Hasan, overcoming Jahan-Shah and the Qara Qoyunlu in 1468. Uzun
Hasan ruled all of Iran, Azerbaijan and Iraq until his death in 1478. Both Ak
Koyunlu and Kara Koyunlu, continued the Timurid tradition of generous patrons
of literature, poetry and the arts as the renowned Islamic miniature paintings
of Tabriz illustrate. The Shirvanshahs. Shīrwān Shāh or Sharwān Shāh, was
the title in mediaeval Islamic times of a Persianized dynasty of Arabic origin.
The Shirvanshah established a native Azeri state and were rulers of Shirvan, a
historical region in present-day Azerbaijan. The Shirvanshahs established the
longest Islamic dynasty in the Islamic world. The role of the Shirvanshah state
was important in the national development of Azerbaijan. The Shirvanshahs
maintained a high degree of autonomy as local rulers and vassals from 861 until
1539, and provided a continuity that lasted longer than any other dynasty in
the Islamic world. There are two periods of an independent Shirvan state: first
in 12th century, under sultans Manuchehr and Axsitan who built the stronghold
of Baku, and second in 15th century under the Derbendid dynasty. Between the
13th and 14th centuries, the Shirvanshahs were vassals of the Mongol and
Timurid empires. The Shirvanshahs Khalilullah I and Farrukh Yassar presided
over a highly stable period in the history of the dynasty. The architectural
complex of the "Shirvanshah palace" in Baku (that was also a burial site of the
dynasty) and the Halwatiyya Sufi Khaneqa were built during the reign of these
two rulers in the mid-15th century. The Shirvanshah rulers were more or less
Orthodox Sunni, and thus opposed the heterodox Shi'a Islam of the Safavid Sufi
order. In 1462 Shaykh Junayd, the leader of Safavids was killed in battle
against Shirvanishans, near town of Gusar (he was buried in the village Hazra)
– an event that shaped subsequent Safavid actions leading to a new phase in
the history of Azerbaijan. Safavids and the rise of Shi'a Islam. The Safavid
(Safaviyeh) were a Sufi religious order formed in 1330s by Sheikh Safi Al-Din
(1252–1334), after whom it was eponymously named. This Sufi order openly
converted to the heterodox branch of twelver Shi'a Islam by the end of the 15th
century. Some Safavid followers, most notably the Qizilbash Turks, believed in
the mystical and esoteric nature of their rulers and their relationship to the
house of Ali, and thus, were zealously predisposed to fight for them. The
Safavid rulers claimed to be descended from Ali himself and his wife Fatimah,
daughter of the Prophet Muhammad, through the seventh Imam Musa al-Kazim.
Qizilbash numbers increased by the 16th century and their generals were able to
wage a successful war against the Ak Koyunlu state and capture Tabriz. The
Safavids, led by Ismail I, expanded their base, sacking Baku in 1501 and
persecuting the Shirvanshahs. During the reign of Ismail I and his son Tahmasp,
Shi'a Islam was imposed upon the formerly Sunni population of Iran and
Azerbaijan. Imposition of Shi'a Islam was especially harsh in Shirvan, where a
large Sunni population was massacred. Iran became a feudal theocracy during
this period and the Shah was held to be the divinely ordained head of state and
religion. During this period, the Qizilbashi chiefs were designated "wakils"
(or legal administrators) with offices in charge of provincial administration
and the class of Shia Islamic Ulema was created. The wars with the Sunni
Ottoman Empire continued during the reign of Shah Tahmasp. The important Azeri
cities of Shamakha, Ganja and Baku were occupied by Ottomans in the 1580s.
Under the reign of Shah Abbas I (1587–1630) the monarchy took on a distinctly
Persian national identity that merged with Shi'a Islam. Abbas I's reign
represented the high point of development of the state and he was able to repel
the Ottomans and re-capture Azerbaijan and Shirvan in 1603. Khanates of late
18th – early 19th centuries. While civil conflicts took hold in Iran, most of
Azerbaijan was occupied by the Ottomans (1726 to 1736). Meanwhile (from 1722
until 1735), during the reign of Peter the Great, the coastal strip along the
Caspian Sea comprising Derbent, Baku and Salyan came under Imperial Russian
rule. After the collapse of the Safavid empire, Nadir Shah Afshar (Nadir Guli
Bey), a former slave who had risen to military leadership within the Afshar
Turkoman tribe in Khorasan (a vassal state of the Safavids) came to power. He
wrested control over Iran from the Afghans in 1729 and proceeded to go on an
ambitious military spree, conquering as far as east as Delhi, but not
fortifying his Persian base and exhausted his army. Nadir had effective control
over Shah Tahmasp II and then ruled as the Regent of the infant Abbas III,
until 1736, when he had himself crowned as Shah. The coronation of Nadir Shah
took place in Mughan, in the present territory of Azerbaijan, where the Azeri
military and tribal aristocracy gathered. After Nadir Shah's assassination in
1747, the Persian Empire under Afsharids disintegrated.Several Muslim khanates,
described as Azerbaijani by some sources and as Iranian by others, became de
facto independent while remaining under nominal Persian suzerainty. Within
Azerbaijan emerged the khanates of Shirvan, Baku, Karabakh, Ganja, Quba, Shaki,
Talysh, Erivan, Nakhchivan and other small city-states. The khanates engaged in
constant warfare between themselves and with external threats. The most
powerful among the northern khans was Fat'h Ali Khan of Quba (died 1783), who
managed to unite most of the neighboring khanates under his rule and even
mounted an expedition to take Tabriz, fighting with Zand dynasty. Another
powerful khanate was that of Karabakh, which subdued neighboring Nakhchivan
khanate and parts of Erivan khanate. By 1796, Agha Muhammed Khan Qajar raided
and conquered Azerbaijan and Georgia. Some khanates made the fateful decision
to ask for Russian help, while other Azeris were content with Qajar rule.
However, the Russians, who by this time controlled Georgia, had already
subjugated most of the khanates in the Caucasus by 1806. The Qajars responded
to these events by declaring war, which continued until 1813 when Russians
invaded Tabriz. According to Prof. Tadeusz Swietochowski: According to the
"Cambridge History of Iran": Russian rule. Following their defeat by Russia,
Qajar Persia was forced to sign the Treaty of Gulistan in 1813, which
acknowledged the loss of the territory to Russia. Local khanates were either
abolished (like in Baku or Ganja) or accepted Russian patronage. Another Russo-
Persian war in 1826–28 resulted in another crushing defeat for the Iranian
army. The Russians dictated another final settlement as per the Treaty of
Turkmenchay, which resulted in the Qajars of Persia ceding Caucasian
territories in 1828. The treaty established the current borders of Azerbaijan
and Iran as the rule of local khans ended. In the Russian controlled
territories, two provinces were established that later constituted the bulk of
the modern Republic – Elisavetpol (Ganja) province in the west, and Shamakha
province in the east. At the beginning of Russian administration, the Tsars did
not significantly interfere with local affairs and the migration of the
Christian population into Azerbaijan was minimal. As a result of a catastrophic
earthquake in 1858, the capital of the eastern province was transferred from
Shamakha to Baku which attained greater importance over time. The discovery and
exploitation of petroleum in the 1870s led to a period of unprecedented
prosperity and growth in the years prior to World War I but also created huge
disparities in wealth between the largely European capitalists and the local
Muslim work force. By 1900, the population of Baku increased from 10,000 to
roughly 250,000 people as a result of worker migration from all over the
Russian Empire, Iran, and other places. The growth of Baku and the progression
of an exploitative economy resulted in the emergence of an Azeri nationalist
intelligencia that was educated and influenced by European and Ottoman ideas.
Influential thinkers like Hasan bey Zardabi, Mirza Fatali Akhundov and later,
Jalil Mammadguluzadeh, Mirza Alakbar Sabir, Nariman Narimanov and others
spurred a nationalist discourse and rallied against poverty, ignorance,
extremism and sought reforms in education and the emancipation of the
dispossessed classes, including women. The financial support of philanthropist
millionaires such as Haji Zeynalabdin Taghiyev also bolstered the rise of an
Azeri middle-class. Following the disastrous Russo-Japanese war, an economic
and political crisis erupted in Baku, starting with a general strike of oil
workers in 1904. In 1905, class and ethnic tensions resulted in Muslim-Armenian
ethnic rioting during the first Russian Revolution. The Tsarist governments
had, in fact, exploited ethnic and religious strife to maintain control in a
policy of divide and rule. The situation improved during 1906–1914, when a
limited parliamentary system was introduced in Russia and Muslim MPs from
Azerbaijan were actively promoting Azeri interests. In 1911, the pan Turkist
and pan Islamist Musavat Party, inspired by the left of center modernizing
ideology espoused by Mammed Amin Rasulzade, was formed. Founded clandestinely,
the party expanded rapidly in 1917, after the overthrow of the Tsarist regime
in Russia. The most essential components of the Musavat ideology were
secularism, nationalism, and federalism, or autonomy within a broader political
structure. However, the party's right- and left-wings differed on certain
issues, most notably land distribution. The leader of the party was the left-
leaning Mammed Amin Rasulzade. After Russia became involved in World War I,
social and economic tensions spiked again. The Russian Revolution of 1917
ultimately led to the granting of rights to the local population of Azerbaijan
and the granting of self-rule, but this autonomy also led to renewed ethnic
conflict between Azeris and Armenians. Azerbaijan Democratic Republic. At the
collapse of the Russian Empire in 1917, an independent republic was proclaimed
in Ganja on May 28, 1918 following an abortive attempt to establish a federal
Transcaucasian Republic with Armenia and Georgia. This was the first Democratic
Republic established in Islamic World. In Baku, however, a coalition of
Bolsheviks, Dashnaks and Mensheviks fought against a Turkish-Islamic army led
by Nuru Pasha. This coalition known as the "Baku Commune" also inspired or
tacitly condoned the massacres of local Muslims by well-armed Dashnak-Armenian
forces. This coalition, however, collapsed and was replaced by a British-
controlled government known as Central Caspian Dictatorship in July 1918.
British forces under General Dunsterville occupied Baku and helped the mainly
Dashnak-Armenian forces to defend the capital. However, Baku fell on September
15, 1918 and an Azeri-Ottoman army entered the capital, causing British forces
and much of the Armenian population to flee. The Ottoman Empire, however,
capitulated on October 30, 1918 and the British occupational force re-entered
Baku. Azerbaijan was proclaimed a secular republic and its first parliament
opened on December 5, 1918. British administration initially did not recognize
the Republic but tacitly cooperated with it. By mid-1919 the situation in
Azerbaijan had more or less stabilized, and British forces left in August 1919.
However by early 1920, advancing Bolshevik forces, victorious in Russian Civil
War, started to pose a great threat to young republic, which also engaged in a
conflict with Armenia over the Karabakh. Azerbaijan received "de facto"
recognition by the Allies as an independent nation in January 1920 at the
Versailles Paris Peace Conference. The republic was governed by five cabinets,
all formed by a coalition of the Musavat and other parties including the
Socialist Bloc, the Independents, the Liberals, the Social-Democratic Party
Hummat (or Endeavor) Party and the Conservative Ittihad (Union) Party. The
premier in the first three cabinets was Fatali Khan Khoyski; in the last two,
Nasib Yusifbeyli. The president of the parliament, Alimardan Topchubashev, was
recognized as the head of state. In this capacity he represented Azerbaijan at
the Versailles Paris Peace Conference in 1919. Aided by Azeri dissidents in the
Republican government, the Red Army invaded Azerbaijan on April 28, 1920. The
bulk of the newly formed Azerbaijani army was engaged in putting down an
Armenian revolt that had just broken out in Karabakh. The Azeris did not
surrender their brief independence of 1918–20 quickly or easily. As many as
20,000 died resisting what was effectively a Russian reconquest. However, it
has to be noticed that the installation of the Azerbaijan Soviet Socialist
Republic was made easier by the fact that there was a certain popular support
for Bolshevik ideology in Azerbaijan, in particular among the industrial
workers in Baku. The same day a Soviet government was formed under Nariman
Narimanov. Before the year was over, the same fate had befallen Armenia, and,
in March 1921, Georgia as well. Soviet Azerbaijan. After the peaceful surrender
of the national government to Bolshevik forces, Azerbaijan was proclaimed a
Soviet Socialist Republic on April 28, 1920. Shortly after the Congress of the
Peoples of the East was held in September 1920 in Baku. Although, formally an
independent state, the Azerbaijan SSR was dependent upon and controlled by the
government in Moscow. It was incorporated into the Transcaucasian SFSR along
with Armenia and Georgia in March 1922. By an agreement signed in December
1922, the TSFSR became one of the four original republics of the Soviet Union.
The TSFSR was dissolved in 1936 and its three regions became separate republics
within the USSR. Like other union republics, Azerbaijan, was affected by
Stalin's purges in the 1930s. During this period, sometimes referred to as the
"Red Terror", thousands of people were killed, including notable Azeri figures
such as Huseyn Javid, Mikail Mushvig, Ruhulla Akhundov, Ayna Sultanova and
others. Directing the purges in Azerbaijan was Mir Jafar Baghirov, the first
secretary of the Communist Party of Azerbaijan, who followed Stalin's orders
without question. His special target was the intelligentsia, but he also purged
Communist leaders who had sympathized with the opposition or who might have
once leaned toward Pan-Turkism or had contacts with revolutionary movements in
Iran or Turkey. During the 1940s, the Azerbaijan SSR supplied much of the
Soviet Union's gas and oil during the war with Nazi Germany and was thus a
strategically important region. The German invasion of the Soviet Union in June
1941 reached the Greater Caucasus in July 1942, but the Germans never crossed
into the territory of Azerbaijan. Many Azerbaijanis fought well in the ranks of
the Soviet Army (about 600–800,000) and Azeri Major-General Azi Aslanov was
awarded twice Hero of the Soviet Union. About 400,000 Azeris died in World War
II. The Germans also made fruitless efforts to enlist the cooperation of emigre
political figures, most notably Mammed Amin Rasulzade. Policies of de-
Stalinization and improvement after the 1950s led to better education and
welfare conditions for most of Azerbaijan. This also coincided with the period
of rapid urbanization and industrialization. During this period of change a new
wave of "" (reapprochment) policy was instituted in order to merge all the
peoples of the U.S.S.R. into a new monolithic Soviet nation. In the 1960s, the
signs of a structural crisis in the Soviet system began to emerge. Azerbaijan's
crucial oil industry lost its relative importance in the Soviet economy, partly
because of a shift of oil production to other regions of the Soviet Union and
partly because of the depletion of known oil resources on land, while offshore
production was not deemed cost effective. As a result, Azerbaijan had the
lowest rate of growth in productivity and economic output among the Soviet
republics, with the exception of Tajikistan. Ethnic tensions, particularly
between Armenians and Azerbaijanis began to grow, but violence was suppressed.
In an attempt to end the growing structural crisis, in 1969, the government in
Moscow appointed Heydar Aliyev as the first secretary of the Communist Party of
Azerbaijan. Aliyev temporarily improved economic conditions and promoted
alternative industries to the declining oil industry, such as cotton. He also
consolidated the republic's ruling elite, which now consisted almost entirely
of ethnic Azeris, thus reverting the previous trends at "reapprochment". In
1982 Aliyev was made a member of the Communist Party's Politburo in Moscow, the
highest position ever attained by an Azeri in the Soviet Union. In 1987, when
"Perestroika" started, he was forced to retire by the Soviet leader Mikhail
Gorbachev whose policies Aliyev opposed. The late 1980s, during the Gorbachev
era, were characterized by increasing unrest in the Caucasus, initially over
the Nagorno-Karabakh issue. A political awakening came in February 1988 with
the renewal of the ethnic conflict, which centered on Armenian demands for the
unification of Nagorno-Karabakh Autonomous Oblast of Azerbaijan SSR with
Armenian SSR. Armenians expelled hundreds of thousands of Azeris from Karabakh
and Armenia by March 1988, while pogroms of the Armenian population in Baku and
Sumgait took place. Russia forced enforced military rule on several occasions
but unrest continued to spread. The ethnic strife revealed the shortcomings of
the Communist Party as a champion of national interests, and, in the spirit of
"glasnost", independent publications and political organizations began to
emerge. Of these organizations, by far the most prominent was the Popular Front
of Azerbaijan (PFA), which by the fall of 1989 seemed poised to take power from
the Communist Party. The PFA soon experienced a split between a conservative-
Islamic wing and a moderate wing. The split was followed by an outbreak of
anti-Armenian violence in Baku and intervention by Soviet troops. Unrest
culminated in violent confrontation when Soviet troops killed 132 nationalist
demonstrators in Baku on January 20, 1990. Azerbaijan declared its independence
from the USSR on August 30, 1991, and became part of the Commonwealth of
Independent States. By the end of 1991 fighting in Nagorno-Karabakh had
escalated into a full scale war, which culminated into a tense cease-fire that
has persisted into the 21st century. Although a cease-fire was achieved, the
refusal to negotiate by both sides resulted in a stalemate as Armenian troops
retained their positions in Karabakh as well as corridors taken from Azerbaijan
that connect the enclave to Armenia. Independent Azerbaijan. Mutalibov
presidency (1991-1992). While during 1990–1991 Azerbaijan gave more
sacrifices in a struggle for independence from the USSR than any other Soviet
republic, the declaration of independence introduced by President Ayaz
Mutalibov on August 30, 1991 followed the 1991 Soviet coup d'état attempt.
Mütallibov becomes the only Soviet leader besides Zviad Gamsakhurdia to
endorse the Soviet coup attempt by issuing a statement from Tehran, while later
dissolving the Communist Party of Azerbaijan and proposing constitutional
changes for direct nationwide elections of president. On September 8, 1991, the
first nation-wide presidential elections, in which Mutalibov was the only
running candidate, were held in Azerbaijan. While the elections were neither
free nor fair by international standards, Mutalibov formally became the elected
president of Azerbaijan. The adoption of the Declaration of Independence by the
Supreme Soviet of Azerbaijan SSR on October 18, 1991 was followed by a
dissolution of the Azerbaijani Communist Party. However, its former members,
including President Ayaz Mutalibov, retained their political posts. In December
1991 in a nationwide referendum, Azerbaijani voters approved the Declaration of
Independence adopted by the Supreme Council; with the dissolution of the Soviet
Union, Azerbaijan is recognized as independent state at first by Turkey,
Israel, Romania and Pakistan. Meanwhile, the conflict over Nagorno Karabakh
continued despite the efforts to negotiate a settlement. Early in 1992,
Karabakh's Armenian leadership proclaimed an independent republic. In what was
now a full scale war between Armenia and Azerbaijan, the Armenians gained the
upper hand, with covert assistance from the Russian Army. Major atrocities were
committed by both sides, with the Khojaly massacre of Azeri civilians on
February 25, 1992 causing a social uproar over the government inaction.
Mütallibov was forced to submit his resignation to the National Assembly of
Azerbaijan on March 6, under pressure from the Azerbaijan Popular Front.
Mutalibov's failure to build up an adequate army, that he feared may not remain
under his control, brought about the downfall of his government. On May 6 the
last Azerbaijani-populated town in Nagorno-Karabakh, Shusha, falls under
Armenian control. On May 14 the Supreme Council of Azerbaijan hears the case on
the Khojaly Massacre, relieves Mütallibov of any responsibility, reverses his
prior resignation and restores him as the President of Azerbaijan, but the day
after, May 15, armed forces led by the Azerbaijan Popular Front take control of
the offices of the Parliament of Azerbaijan and Azerbaijani State Radio and
Television, thereby deposing Mütallibov, who leaves for Moscow; the Supreme
Council of Azerbaijan is dissolved passing the duties to the National Assembly
of Azerbaijan formed by equal representation of Azerbaijan Popular Front and
former communists. Two days later, while Armenian forces take control of
Lachin, Isa Gambar is elected as the new Chairman of the National Assembly of
Azerbaijan and takes on the temporary duties of President of Azerbaijan until
the national elections due on June 17, 1992. Elchibey presidency (1992-1993).
The former Communists failed to present a viable candidate at the 1992
elections and Abulfaz Elchibey, the leader of the Popular Front of Azerbaijan
(PFA) and former dissident and political prisoner, was elected president with
more than 60% of the vote. His program included opposition to Azerbaijan's
membership in the Commonwealth of Independent States, closer relations with
Turkey, and a desire for extended links with the Iranian Azerbaijanis. Heydar
Aliyev, who had been prevented from running for president by an age limit of
65, was doing well in Nakhichevan. He had to contend with an Armenian blockade
of Nakhichevan. In turn, Armenia suffered when Azerbaijan halted all rail
traffic into and out of Armenia, cutting most of its land links with the
outside world. The negative economic effects of the Armenian-Azerbaijani
conflict seemed to illustrate the interdependence of the Transcaucasian
nations. Within a year after his election, President Elchibey came to face the
same situation that had led to the downfall of Mutalibov. The fighting in and
around Nagorno Karabakh steadily turned in favor of the Armenians, who seized
around one fifth of Azerbaijan's territory, creating more than a million
internally displaced persons. A military rebellion against Abulfaz Elchibey
broke out in early June 1993 in Ganja under the leadership of Colonel Surat
Huseynov. The Popular Front of Azerbaijan leadership found itself without
political support as a result of the war's setbacks, a steadily deteriorating
economy, and opposition from groups led by Heydar Aliyev. In Baku, Aliyev
seized the reins of power and quickly consolidated his position. A confidence
referendum in August deprived Elchibey of his post. Heydar Aliyev presidency
(1993-2003). On 3 October 1993 a presidential election was held, and Aliyev won
overwhelmingly. By March 1994, Aliyev was able to get rid of some of his
opposition including Surat Huseynov, who was arrested along with other rivals.
In 1995, the former military police were accused of plotting a coup and
disbanded. Coup plotters were linked to right wing Turkish nationalists. Later,
in 1996 Rəsul Quliyev, former speaker of parliament went into self-imposed
exile. Thus, by end of 1996, position of Heydar Aliyev as an "absolute ruler"
in Azerbaijan was unquestionable. As a result of limited reforms and the
signing of the so-called "Contract of The Century" in October 1994 (over the
Azeri-Chirag-Guneshli giant oil field) that led to increased oil exports to
western markets, the economy began improving. However, extreme levels of
corruption and nepotism in the state system created by Aliyev prevented
Azerbaijan from more sustained development, especially in the non-oil sector.
In October 1998, Aliev was re-elected as president for a second term. Weakened
opposition accused him of voter fraud, but no widespread international
condemnation of the elections followed. His second term in office was
characterized by limited reforms, increasing oil production and the dominance
of British Petroleum as a main foreign oil company in Azerbaijan. In early
1999, a giant Shah Deniz gas field was discovered making Azerbaijan potentially
a major gas exporter. A gas export agreement was signed with Turkey by 2003.
Work on a long awaited Baku-Tbilisi-Ceyhan oil pipeline and Baku-Tbilisi-
Erzerum gas pipeline started in 2003. The oil pipeline was completed in 2005
and the gas pipeline in 2006. Azerbaijan is also a party to the proposed
Nabucco Pipeline. Heydar Aliyev fell ill and, in April 2003, collapsed on stage
and could not return to public life. By summer 2003 he was placed into
intensive care in the United States where he was pronounced dead on December
12, 2003. Ilham Aliyev presidency (2003). In yet another controversial
election, his son Ilham Aliyev was elected president the same year. The
election was characterized by mass violence and was criticised by foreign
observers. Presently, political opposition to the Aliyev administration
remained strong. Many were not satisfied with this new dynastical succession
and were pushing for a more democratic government. Ilham Aliyev was re-elected
in 2008 with 87% of the polls, while opposition parties boycotted the
elections. In a constitutional referendum in 2009, term limits for the
presidency were abolished and freedom of the press was restricted. The 2010
parliamentary elections produced a Parliament completely loyal to Aliyev: for
the first time in Azerbaijani history, not a single candidate from the main
opposition Azerbaijan Popular Front or Musavat parties was elected. "The
Economist" scored Azerbaijan as an authoritarian regime, placing it 135th out
of 167 countries, in its 2010 Democracy Index. Repeated protests were staged
against Aliyev's rule in 2011, calling for democratic reforms and the ouster of
the government. Aliyev has responded by ordering a security crackdown, using
force to crush attempts at revolt in Baku, and refusing to make concessions.
Well over 400 Azerbaijanis have been arrested since protests began in March
2011. Opposition leaders, including Musavat's Isa Gambar, have vowed to
continue demonstrating, although police have encountered little difficulty in
stopping protests almost as soon as they begin. On 24 October 2011 Azerbaijan
was elected as a non-permanent member to United Nations Security Council. The
term of office will begin on January 1, 2012.
