History of Bahrain Bahrain is an island country in the Persian Gulf. Although
Bahrain became an independent country in 1971, the history of these islands
starts from ancient times. Bahrain's strategic location in the Persian Gulf has
brought rule and influence from the Sumerians, Assyrians, Babylonians,
Persians, Portuguese, the Arabs, and the British. Ancient history. Bahrain has
been proposed as the possible site of Dilmun, a land mentioned by Mesopotamians
as a trade partner, source of raw material, copper, and entrepot of the
Mesopotamia and the Indus Valley Civilization trade route. The earliest
mentioning of Dilmun is Mesopotamian sources was in the Early Dynastic III
Period, when Ur-Nanshe (circa 2520 BC) proclaimed that; However, the exact
location of Dilmun is unclear, it might be associated with the islands of
Bahrain, Eastern Province of Saudi Arabia, Qatar and nearby Iranian coast in
the Persian Gulf. One of the early settlements discovered in Bahrain suggests
that Sennacherib, king of Assyria (707–681 BC) attacked northeast Arabia and
captured the Bahrain islands. From the 6th century BC to the 3rd century BC
Bahrain was included in the Persian Empire by the Achaemenids, an Iranian
dynasty. Bahrain was referred to by the Greeks as "Tylos", the centre of pearl
trading, when Nearchus discovered it while serving under Alexander the Great.
From the 3rd century BC to the arrival of Islam in the 7th century AD, Bahrain
was controlled by two other Iranian dynasties, the Parthians and the Sassanids.
By about 130 BC, the Parthian dynasty brought the Persian Gulf under their
control and extended their influence as far as Oman. Because they needed to
control the Persian Gulf trade route, the Parthians established garrisons along
the southern coast of the Persian Gulf. In the 3rd century AD, the Sassanids
succeeded the Parthians and held the area until the arrival of Islam four
centuries later. Ardashir, the first ruler of the Iranian Sassanid dynasty
marched to Oman and Bahrain and defeated Sanatruq (or Satiran), probably the
Parthian governor of Bahrain. He appointed his son Shapur I as governor of
Bahrain. Shapur constructed a new city there and named it Batan Ardashir after
his father. At this time, Bahrain incorporated the southern Sassanid province
covering the Persian Gulf's southern shore plus the archipelago of Bahrain. The
southern province of the Sassanids was subdivided into three districts; Haggar
(now al-Hafuf province, Saudi Arabia), Batan Ardashir (now al-Qatif province,
Saudi Arabia), and Mishmahig (now Bahrain Island) (In Middle-Persian/Pahlavi it
means "ewe-fish"). Islam. From the time when Islam emerged in the 7th century
until the early 16th century, the name "Bahrain" referred to the wider
historical region of Bahrain stretching from Basrah to the Strait of Hormuz
along the Persian Gulf coast. This was "Iqlīm al-Baḥrayn", i.e. the Province
of Bahrain, and the Arab inhabitants of the province were descendants of the
Arab tribe Bani Abd al-Qais. Bahrainis were amongst the first to embrace Islam.
The Prophet Mohammed ruled Bahrain through one of his representatives, Al-Ala'a
Al-Hadhrami. Bahrain embraced Islam in 629 (the seventh year of hijra). During
the time of Umar I the famous companion of the Prophet, Abu Hurayrah, was the
governor of Bahrain. Umar I also appointed Uthman bin Abi Al Aas as governor of
the area. Al Khamis Mosque, founded in 692, was one of the earliest mosques
built in Bahrain, in the era of Umayyad caliph Umar II. The expansion of Islam
did not affect Bahrain's reliance on trade, and its prosperity continued to be
dependent on markets in Mesopotamia. After Baghdad emerged as the seat of the
caliph in 750 and the main centre of Islamic civilization, Bahrain greatly
benefited from the city's increased demand for foreign goods especially from
China and South Asia. Bahrain became a principal centre of knowledge for
hundreds of years stretching from the early days of Islam in the 6th century to
the 18th century. Philosophers of Bahrain were highly esteemed, such as the
13th century mystic, Sheikh Maitham Al Bahrani (died in 1299). (The mosque of
Sheikh Maitham and his tomb can be visited in the outskirts of the capital,
Manama, near the district of Mahooz.). The Qarmatian Republic. In the end of
the 3rd Hijri century, Abu Sa'id al-Hasan al-Janaby led the Revolution of al-
Qaramita, a rebellion by a messianic Ismaili sect originating in Kufa in
present day Iraq. Al-Janaby took over the city of Hajr, Bahrain's capital at
that time, and al-Hasa, which he made the capital of his republic. Once in
control of the state he sought to create a utopian society. The Qarmatians'
goal was to build a society based on reason and equality. The state was
governed by a council of six with a chief who was a first among equals. All
property within the community was distributed evenly among all initiates. The
Qarmatians were organized as an esoteric society but not as a secret one; their
activities were public and openly propagated, but new members had to undergo an
initiation ceremony involving seven stages. The Qarmatian world view was one
where every phenomenon repeated itself in cycles, where every incident was
replayed over and over again. Even before taking over Bahrain, the Qarmatians
had instigated what some scholars have termed a 'century of terrorism' in Kufa.
From Bahrain they launched raids along the pilgrim routes crossing Arabia: in
906 they ambushed the pilgrim caravan returning from Mecca and massacred 20,000
pilgrims. Under Abu Tahir Al-Jannabi they came close to capturing Baghdad in
923 and sacked Mecca in 930. In the assault on Islam's holiest sites, the
Qarmatians desecrated the Well of Zamzam with corpses of Hajj pilgrims, and
took the Black Stone from Mecca to Bahrain. The sack of Mecca followed
millenarian excitement among the Qarmatians (and in Persia) over the
conjunction of Saturn and Jupiter in 928. Bahrain became the seat of the
Qarmatian Mahdi-Caliph from Isfahan who abolished Sharīa law. The new Mahdi
also changed the qibla of prayer from Mecca to that of fire, a specifically
Zoroastrian practice. Some scholars take the view that "they may not have been
Isamailis at all at the outset, and their conduct and customs gave plausibility
to the belief that they were not merely heretics but bitter enemies of Islam."
The Qarmatians were defeated in battle in 976 by the Abbasids, which encouraged
them to look inward to build their utilitarian society. Around 1058, a revolt
on the island of Bahrain led by two Shi'a members of the Abd al-Qays tribe,
Abul-Bahlul al-'Awwam and Abu'l-Walid Muslim, precipitated the waning of
Qarmatian power and eventually the ascendancy to power of the Uyunids, an Arab
dynasty belonging to the Abdul Qays tribe. Uyunid, Usfurid, and Jabrid
dynasties. The Uyunids ruled from 1076 to 1235, when the islands were briefly
occupied by the Turkic Salgharid Atabeg of Fars. Supported by the Seljuk rulers
of Iraq, the Uyunids relied on the power of the Banu 'Amir tribes such as the
Banu Uqayl. In 1253, the Bahrani dynasty of the Usfurids of Banu Uqayl —
named after its founder, Usfur ibn Rashid — gained control over eastern
Arabia, including the islands of Bahrain. The late Middle Ages were a time of
chronic instability with local disputes allowing various Persian-based Arab
Kingdoms based in Qais, Qishm and Hormuz to involve themselves in Bahrain's
affairs. In 1330, the islands became tributary to the rulers of Hormuz.
According to historian Juan Cole it was under Sunni rule that Twelver Shiaism
became established in Bahrain, as Shia Bahrainis gradually moved away from the
radical, egalitarian Ismaili Qarmatian sect to the more quietist Twelver or
Imami branch, a process which the Sunni rulers encouraged. But even in the 14th
century, the North African traveller Ibn Battuta visiting Qatif around 1331,
found it inhabited by Arabs whom he described as "extremist Shi'is" (rafidiyya
ghulat), which Cole presumes is how a 14th century Sunni would describe
Ismailis. Ibn Battuta also noted the great wealth of the area thanks to the
pearling industry. Until the late Middle Ages, "Bahrain" referred to the larger
historical region of Bahrain. Ibn Battuta's 14th century account contains an
early use of the term "Bahrain" to refer solely to the Awal islands. However,
the exact date at which the term "Bahrain" began to refer solely to the Awal
archipelago is unknown. In the mid-15th century, another branch of the Banu
Uqayl, led by Zamil ibn Jabir, wrested control of Bahrain, founding the dynasty
of the Bedouin Jabrids. Based in al-Ahsa, the Jarbids ruled most of eastern
Arabia and followed the Sunni Maliki rite, which they actively promoted within
their domain. Portuguese rule. Portuguese expansion into the Indian Ocean in
the early 16th century followed Vasco da Gama's voyages of exploration in which
the Portuguese battled the Ottomans up the coast of the Persian Gulf.
Reputedly, the first Portuguese traveller to visit Bahrain was Duarte Barbosa
in 1485. The Arab navigator, Ahmad Bin Majid, visited Bahrain in 1489 and gave
a contemporary account of the country that the first Portuguese would have
seen: "In Awal (Bahrain) there are 360 villages and fresh water can be found in
a number of places. A most wonderful al-Qasasir, where a man can dive into the
salt sea with a skin and can fill it with fresh water while he is submerged in
the salt water. Around Bahrain are pearl fisheries and a number of islands all
of which have pearl fisheries and connected with this trade are 1,000 ships".
In 1521, a Portuguese force led by commander António Correia invaded Bahrain
to take control of the wealth created by its pearl industry. The defeated King
Muqrin was beheaded after Correia defeated his forces near present day Karbabad
and took control of the fort "Qala'at Al-Bahrain". The bleeding head of King
Muqrin was later depicted on the Coat of Arms of António Correia. The
Portuguese ruled through force against the inhabitants for eighty years, until
they were driven out of the island in 1602, when an uprising was sparked by the
governor's order of the execution of the island's richest traders. The uprising
coincided with regional disputes between the Portuguese and rival European
powers. The power vacuum that resulted was almost immediately filled by the
Persian ruler, Shah Abbas I, who invaded the island and subsumed it within the
Safavid Empire. Safavid hegemony and the Beglarbegi of Kuhgilu. Under Persian
Safavid rule (1602–1717), Bahrain fell under the administrative jurisdiction
of the Beglarbegi of Kuhgilu centered at Behbahan in southern Iran. In fact,
the Safavids ruled Bahrain from a distance, seeking to control the islands not
by force, but through ideology and the manipulation of local rivalries. Safavid
rule was a period of intellectual flowering among the Shia theological elite,
with Bahrain's seminaries producing such theorists as Sheikh Yusuf Al Bahrani.
The Safavid's used the clergy to buttress their rule, hoping that by firmly
implanting Imami Shiaism they could secure the islands of Bahrain, with their
centrality to trade routes and pearl wealth. However, the Safavids' strategy
was in many ways too successful: the power and influence of the religious class
meant that they had a great deal of autonomy, and it was the subsequent tension
between Safavid state and the clergy that drove Bahrain's theological vitality.
Part of this flourishing was borne of the Bahraini clerics' adherence to
conservative Akhbari Shiaism, while the Safavids encouraged the more state-
centric, Usulism. Attempts by the Persians to reign in the Bahraini ulema were
often counterproductive, and ended up strengthening the clerics against their
local land-owning Bahraini rivals who challenged the clerics' control over the
lucrative pearl trade. Cleric-landowner conflict was usually contained within
very limited parameters given that the senior ulema were usually the sons of
the land-owning class. Omani invasion and subsequent instability. An Afghan
invasion of Iran at the beginning of the 18th century resulted in the near
collapse of the Safavid state. In the resultant power vacuum, Oman invade
Bahrain in 1717, ending over a hundred years of Persian hegemony. The Omani
invasion began a period of political instability and a quick succession of
outside rulers took power with consequent destruction. According to a
contemporary account by theologian, Sheikh Yusuf Al Bahrani, in an unsuccessful
attempt by the Persians and their Bedouin allies to take back Bahrain from the
Kharijite Omanis, much of the country was burnt to the ground. Bahrain was
eventually sold back to the Persians by the Omanis, but the weakness of the
Safavid empire saw Huwala tribes seize control. In 1730, the new Shah of
Persia, Nadir Shah, sought to re-assert Persian sovereignty in Bahrain, bring
the island back under central rule and to challenge Oman in the Persian Gulf.
He sought help from the British and Dutch, and he eventually recaptured Bahrain
in 1736. In 1753, Bahrain was occupied by the Arabs of Abu Shahr of the
Bushire-based Al Madhkur family, who ruled Bahrain in the name of Persia and
paid allegiance to Karim Khan Zand. The years of almost constant warfare and
instability in the period led to a demographic collapse – German geographer
Carsten Niebuhr found in 1763 that Bahrain's 360 towns and villages had,
through warfare and economic distress, been reduced to only 60. The influence
of Iran was further undermined at the end of the 18th century when the
ideological power struggle between the Akhbari-Usuli strands culminated in
victory for the Usulis in Bahrain. Al Khalifa and British Protectorate. In
1782, war broke out between the Zubarah-based Bani Utbah tribe and the army of
Nasr Al-Madhkur, Ruler of Bahrain and Bushire. The prosperity of Zubarah, which
is in modern Qatar, had brought it to the attention of the two main powers at
the time, Persia and Oman, which were presumably sympathetic to Sheikh Nasr's
ambitions. At the same time, Bahrain offered great potential wealth because of
the extensive pearls found in its waters. In 1783, after defeat in the battle
of Zubarah, Nasr Al-Madhkur lost the islands of Bahrain to the Bani Utbah
tribe. In 1797, fourteen years later after gaining the power of the Bani Utbah,
the Al Khalifa family moved to Bahrain and settled in Jaww, later moving to
Riffa. They were originally from Kuwait having left in 1766. Al-Sabah family
traditions relates that the ancestors of their tribe and those of the Al-
Khalifa tribe came to Kuwait after their expulsion from Umm Qasr upon Khor
Zubair by the Turks, an earlier base from which they preyed on the caravans of
Basra and pirated ships in the Shatt al-Arab waterway. The first ruler of the
Al Khalifa was Shaikh Ahmed Al-Fateh. In the early 19th century, Bahrain was
invaded by the Omanis and by the Al Sauds. In 1802 it was governed by a twelve-
year-old child, when the Omani ruler Sayyid Sultan installed his son, Salim, as
Governor in the Arad Fort. Treaties with Britain. In 1820, the Al Khalifa tribe
regained power in Bahrain and entered a treaty relationship with Great Britain,
by then the dominant military power in the Persian Gulf. This treaty recognised
the Al Khalifa as the rulers ("Al-Hakim" in Arabic) of Bahrain. It was the
first of several treaties including the 1861 Perpetual Truce of Peace and
Friendship, which was further revised in 1892 and 1951. After the Egyptian
ruler, Mohammad Ali Pasha took the Arabian Peninsula from the Wahhabis on
behalf of the Ottoman Empire in 1830, the Egyptian army demanded yearly
tributes from Sheikh Abdul Al Khalifa. He had earlier sought Persian and
British protection from the Egyptians. The Sheikh agreed to the terms of the
Egyptians. In 1860, the Government of Al Khalifa used the same tactic when the
British tried to overpower Bahrain. Sheikh Mohammad bin Khalifa Al Khalifa
wrote letters to both the Persian Prince-Governor of Fars and to the Ottoman
Wali of Baghdad, to place Bahrain in the protection of each respective state.
Both sides sent "wakils" (a person who is an authorised repesentative), who
offered the Sheikh their conditions, of which the Ottoman terms were more
beneficial and was accepted in March 1860. In another letter to the Iranian
Foreign Minister, Sheikh Mohammad demanded that the Government of Iran provide
direct guidance and protection from British pressure. Later on, under pressure
from Colonel Sir Lewis Pelly, Sheikh Mohammad requested military assistance
from Iran, but the Government of Iran at that time provided no aid to protect
Bahrain from British aggression. As a result the Government of British India
eventually overpowered Bahrain. Colonel Pelly signed an agreement with Sheikh
Mohammad in May 1861 and later with his brother Sheikh Ali that placed Bahrain
under British rule and protection. In 1868, following the Qatari–Bahraini
War, British representatives signed another agreement with the Al Khalifa
rulers, making Bahrain part of the British protectorate territories in the
Persian Gulf. It specified that the ruler could not dispose of any of his
territory except to the United Kingdom and could not enter into relationships
with any foreign government without British consent. In return the British
promised to protect Bahrain from all aggression by sea and to lend support in
case of land attack. More importantly the British promised to support the rule
of the Al Khalifa in Bahrain, securing its unstable position as rulers of the
country. Other agreements in 1880 and 1892 sealed the protectorate status of
Bahrain to the British. Economic and social developments. Palgrave's
description of Manama's coffee houses in the mid-19th century portrays them as
cosmopolitan venues in contrast to what he describes as the 'closely knit and
bigoted universe of central Arabia'. Palgrave describes a people with an open
– even urbane – outlook: "Of religious controversy I have never heard one
word. In short, instead of Zelators and fanatics, camel-drivers and Bedouins,
we have at Bahrain something like 'men of the world, who know the world like
men' a great relief to the mind; certainly it was so to mine." The great
trading families that emerged during this period have been compared to the
Borgias and Medicis and their great wealth – long before the oil wealth for
which the region would later be renowned – gave them extensive power, and
among the most prominent were the Persian Al Safar family, who held the
position of Native Agents of Britain in 19th Century. The Al Safar enjoyed an
'exceptionally close' relationship with the Al Khalifa clan from 1869, although
the al-Khalifa never intermarried with them – it has been speculated that
this could be related to political reasons (to limit the Safars' influence with
the ruling family) and possibly for religious reasons (because the Safars were
Shia). As a result of Bahrain's trade with India, the cultural influence of the
subcontinent grew dramatically, with styles of dress, cuisine, and education
showing a marked Indian influence. According to Exeter University's James Onley
"In these and countless other ways, eastern Arabia's ports and people were as
much a part of the Indian Ocean world as they were a part of the Arab world."
Early 20th century reforms. Unrest amongst the people of Bahrain began when
Britain officially established complete dominance over the territory in 1892.
The first revolt and widespread uprising took place in March 1895 against
Sheikh Issa bin Ali, then ruler of Bahrain. Sheikh Issa was the first of the Al
Khalifa to rule without Iranian relations. Sir Arnold Wilson, Britain's
representative in the Persian Gulf and author of "The Persian Gulf", arrived in
Bahrain from Mascat at this time. The uprising developed further with some
protesters killed by British forces. Bahrain underwent a period of major social
reform between 1926 and 1957, under the "de facto" rule of Charles Belgrave,
the British advisor to Shaikh Hamad ibn Isa Al-Khalifa (1872-1942). The
country's first modern school was established in 1919, with the opening of the
Al-Hiddaya Boys School, while the Persian Gulf's first girls school opened in
1928. The American Mission Hospital, established by the Dutch Reform Church,
began work in 1903. Other reforms include the abolition of slavery, while the
pearl diving industry developed at a rapid pace. These reforms were often
vigorously opposed by powerful groups within Bahrain including sections within
the ruling family, tribal forces, the religious authorities and merchants. In
order to counter conservatives, the British removed the Ruler, Isa ibn Ali Al
Khalifa in 1923 and replaced him with his son. Some Sunni tribes such as the al
Dossari left Bahrain to mainland Arabia, whilst clerical opponents of social
reforms were exiled to Saudi Arabia and Iran. The heads of some merchant and
notable families were likewise exiled. Britain's interest in Bahrain's
development was motivated by concerns over the ambitions of the Saudi-Wahabi
and the Iranians. Discovery of oil. The discovery of oil in 1932 by Bahrain
Petroleum Company brought rapid modernisation to Bahrain. Relations with the
United Kingdom became closer, as evidenced by the British Royal Navy moving its
entire Middle Eastern command from Bushehr in Iran to Bahrain in 1935. British
influence continued to grow as the country developed, culminating with the
appointment of Charles Belgrave as advisor. He went on to establish a modern
education system in Bahrain. Bahrain participated in the Second World War on
the Allied side, joining on the 10th of September 1939. On the 19th of October
1940, four Italian SM.82s bombers bombed Bahrain alongside Dhahran oilfields in
Saudi Arabia, targeting Allied-operated oil refineries. Although minimal damage
was caused in both locations, the attack forced the Allies to upgrade Bahrain's
defences which further stretched Allied military resources. After World War II,
increasing anti-British sentiment spread throughout the Arab World and led to
riots in Bahrain. The riots focused on the Jewish community, which included
distinguished writers, singers, accountants, engineers and middle managers
working for the oil company, textile merchants with business all over the
peninsula, and free professionals. The leftist movement. The National Union
Committee (NUC), a leftist nationalist movement associated with the labour
unions, was formed in 1954 calling for the end of British interference and
political reforms. Work sites were plagued with frequent strikes and occasional
riots (including several fatalities) during this period. Following riots in
support of Egypt defending itself against the tripartite invasion during 1956
Suez Crisis, the British decided to put an end to the NUC challenge to their
presence in Bahrain. The NUC and its offshoots were declared illegal. Its
leaders were arrested, tried and imprisoned. Some fled the country while others
were forcibly deported. Strikes and riots continued during the 1960s, now under
the leadership of underground cells of the NUC, namely the communist National
Liberation Front and the Popular Front for the Liberation of Bahrain, the
Bahraini section of the Arab Nationalist Movement. In March 1965, an uprising
broke out, called the March Intifada, against the British presence in Bahrain.
The spark of the riots was the laying off of hundreds of Bahraini workers at
the Bahrain Petroleum Company. Several people died in the sometimes violent
clashes between protesters and police. Independent Bahrain. After World War II,
Bahrain became the centre for British administration of the lower Persian Gulf.
In 1968, when the British Government announced its decision to end the treaty
relationships with the Persian Gulf sheikdoms, Bahrain joined with Qatar and
the seven Trucial States (which now form the United Arab Emirates) under
British protection in an effort to form a union of Arab emirates. By mid-1971,
however, the nine sheikhdoms still had not agreed on the terms of union.
Accordingly, Bahrain sought independence as a separate entity declaring
independence on 15 August 1971, and becoming formally independent as the State
of Bahrain on 16 December 1971. At independence, the permanent Royal Navy
presence in Bahrain ended and the United States Navy moved onto the 10 acres
(40,000 m2) previously occupied by British operations. The installation later
grew into Naval Support Activity Bahrain, headquarters for the United States
Fifth Fleet. The emirate emerged just as the price of oil skyrocketed after the
1973 Arab-Israeli war; while Bahrain's own reserves were being depleted the
high oil price meant there was massive capitalisation in the Kingdom's
neighbours. The Kingdom was able to exploit the situation thanks to another war
in the Levant in 1975: the Lebanese Civil War. Beirut had long been the
financial centre of the Arab world, but the outbreak of hostilities in the
country had an immediate impact on the banking industry. Bahrain offered a new
location at the centre of the booming Persian Gulf with a large educated
indigenous workforce and sound fiscal regulations. Realizing the opportunity to
become a financial centre resulted in growth in other industry in the country.
This bolstered the development of the middle class and gives Bahrain a very
different class structure from its tribal dominated neighbours. Although there
had long been a large Indian presence in Bahrain, it was at this time that mass
migration to the Kingdom began to take off with subsequent consequences for the
Kingdom's demographics, as large numbers of third world immigrants from
countries such as the Philippines, Pakistan, Egypt and Iran were attracted by
better salaries than at home. The constitutional experiment. Based on its new
constitution, Bahraini men elected its first National Assembly in 1973
(although Article 43 of the states that the Assembly is to be elected by
"universal suffrage", the conditional clause "in accordance with the provisions
of the electoral law" allowed the regime to prevent women from participating).
Although the Assembly and the then emir Isa ibn Salman al-Khalifa quarreled
over a number of issues: foreign policy; the U.S. naval presence, and the
budget, the biggest clash came over the State Security Law (SSL). The Assembly
refused to ratify the government-sponsored law, which allowed, among other
things, the arrest and detention of people for up to three years, (renewable)
without a trial. The legislative stalemate over this act created a public
crisis, and on 25 August 1975, the emir dissolved the Assembly. The emir then
ratified the State Security Law by decree, and suspended those articles in the
constitution dealing with the legislative powers of the Assembly. In that same
year, the emir established the State Security Court, whose judgments were not
subject to appeal. Iranian Revolution and social and political change. The tide
of political Islam that swept the Middle East in the 1970s culminating in the
Iranian Revolution in 1979 was to have profound implications for Bahrain's
social and political development. There were a number of factors that had
caused Bahrain to be more liberal than its neighbours, but these were
challenged by the zeitgeist of religious fundamentalism. Bahrain's pluralist
traditions were to a large extent a result of the complex confessional and
demographic make up of the state, which required Shias, Sunnis, Southern
Persians (i.e. Huwala and Ajams) and a plethora of minority faiths to live and
work together; this tolerance had been buttressed by the prominence of Arab
nationalism and Marxism as the main modes of dissent, both of which were
socially progressive and downplayed religious affiliations; while the country's
traditional dependence on trade further encouraged openness. Even before Iran's
revolution in 1979, there was a noticeable conservative trend growing, with the
traditional abaya being donned by women in preference to the then popular mini-
skirt. But it was the political earthquake represented by the Shah's fall that
changed the dynamics of Bahrain's politics. In 1981 an alleged Iranian front
organisation, the Islamic Front for the Liberation of Bahrain attempted a coup
d'état involving the assassination of Bahrain's leadership and an Islamist
uprising with the aim of installing a theocracy with a cleric as supreme
leader. The suspected coup and the outbreak of the Iran–Iraq War led to the
formation of the Gulf Cooperation Council, which Bahrain joined with Kuwait,
Oman, Qatar, Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates. The sense of regional
uncertainty was further heightened when Saddam Hussein's Iraq invaded Kuwait,
triggering the 1991 Persian Gulf War. 1990s. Years of political stasis, the
collapse of the price of oil, and growing frustration at the lack of democracy
exploded into an uprising in 1994. While previous advocacy of reforms had been
secular in character, the uprising was specifically Islamist, beginning with
the stoning of female competitors in a marathon race for wearing
'inappropriate' clothing. There was also a strong sense of grievance due to
perceived discrimination against the majority Shia population of Bahrain by the
Al Khalifa rulers. In the 1990s, a group consisting mainly of clerics and
businessmen led by Islamist leader Abdul Amir Al Jamri, drew up two petitions
that were then signed by Shia, Sunni and secular nationalist individuals. They
asked for reforms such as restoration of the National Assembly and the
constitution of 1975, and participation by the population in decision making.
To pre-empt the delivery of the petition to the emir, the regime arrested
several of the leading Shia clerics who were organising the petition, including
Ali Salman. The political impasse continued over the next few years during
which time the regime dealt with its opponents using severe repression. Bomb
attacks and police brutality marked this period in which over forty people were
killed in violence between the two sides. Although the violence was never
entirely stopped by the security measures, it was contained and continued as
low-level intermittent disturbances. In 1999 Shaykh Hamad bin Isa Al Khalifa
became Emir after the death of his father, Shaykh Isa bin Salman Al Khalifa,
and carried out some social and political reforms. 2000s. King Hamad tried to
end the political repression that had defined the 1990s by scrapping security
laws, releasing all political prisoners, instituting elections, giving women
the vote and promising a return to constitutional rule. The move brought an end
to political violence, but did not initially bring about a reconciliation
between the government and most of the opposition groups, because the changes
are seen as largely superficial and do not address the true issues facing
Bahrainis today. The country participated in military action against the
Taliban in October 2001 by deploying a frigate in the Arabian Sea for rescue
and humanitarian operations. As a result, in November of that year, George W.
Bush's administration designated Bahrain as a "major non-NATO ally". Bahrain
opposed the invasion of Iraq and had offered Saddam Hussein asylum in the days
prior to the invasion. Relations improved with neighbouring Qatar after the
border dispute over the Hawar Islands was resolved by the International Court
of Justice in The Hague in 2001. Following the political liberalization Bahrain
negotiated a free trade agreement with the United States in 2004. Qatar and
Bahrain have made plans to build the Qatar-Bahrain Friendship Bridge to link
the countries across the Persian Gulf, which would be the longest fixed-link
bridge in the world if completed. Bahraini uprising (2011–present). The
protests in Bahrain started on 14 February, and were initially aimed at
achieving greater political freedom and respect for human rights; they were not
intended to directly threaten the monarchy. Lingering frustration among the
Shiite majority with being ruled by the Sunni government was a major root
cause, but the protests in Tunisia and Egypt are cited as the inspiration for
the demonstrations. The protests were largely peaceful until a pre-dawn raid by
police on 17 February to clear protestors from Pearl Roundabout in Manama, in
which police killed four protesters. Following the raid, some protesters began
to expand their aims to a call for the end of the monarchy. On 18 February army
forces opened fire on protesters when they tried to reenter the roundabout,
fatally wounding one. The following day protesters reoccupied Pearl Roundabout
after the government ordered troops and police to withdraw. Subsequent days saw
large demonstrations; on 21 February a pro-government Gathering of National
Unity drew tens of thousands, whilst on 22 February the number of protestors at
the Pearl Roundabout peaked at over 150,000 after more than 100,000 protesters
marched there. On 14 March, Saudi-led GCC forces were requested by the
government and entered the country, which the opposition called an
"occupation". King Hamad bin Isa Al Khalifa declared a three-month state of
emergency on 15 March and asked the military to reassert its control as clashes
spread across the country. On 16 March, armed soldiers and riot police cleared
the protesters' camp in the Pearl Roundabout, in which 3 policemen and 3
protesters were reportedly killed. Later, on 18 March, the government tore down
Pearl Roundabout monument. After the lifting of emergency law on 1 June,
several large rallies were staged by the opposition parties. Smaller-scale
protests and clashes outside of the capital have continued to occur almost
daily. On 9 March 2012 over 100,000 protested in what the opposition called
"the biggest march in our history". The police response has been described as a
"brutal" crackdown on "peaceful and unarmed" protestors, including doctors and
bloggers. The police carried out midnight house raids in Shia neighbourhoods,
beatings at checkpoints, and denial of medical care in a "campaign of
intimidation". More than 2,929 people have been arrested, and at least five
people died due to torture while in police custody. On 23 November 2011 the
Bahrain Independent Commission of Inquiry released its report on its
investigation of the events, finding that the government had systematically
tortured prisoners and committed other human rights violations. It also
rejected the government's claims that the protests were instigated by Iran.
Although the report found that systematic torture had stopped, the Bahraini
government has refused entry to several international human rights groups and
news organizations, and delayed a visit by a UN inspector. More than 80 people
had died since the start of the uprising.
