History of Australia since 1945 The history of Australia since 1945 has seen
long periods of economic prosperity and the introduction of an expanded and
multi-ethnic immigration program, which has coincided with moves away from
Britain in political, social and cultural terms and towards increasing
engagement with the United States and Asia. End of the 1940s. In April 1945,
Prime Minister John Curtin despatched an Australian delegation which included
attorney-general and minister for external affairs H V Evatt to discuss
formation of the United Nations. Australia played a significant mediatory role
in these early years of the United Nations, successfully lobbying for an
increased role for smaller and middle-ranking nations and a stronger commitment
to employment rights into the U.N. Charter. Evatt was elected president of the
third session of the United Nations General Assembly (September 1948 to May
1949). With an increasingly uncertain economic outlook, after his attempt to
nationalise the banks and a strike by the Communist-dominated Miners
Federation, Chifley lost office at the 1949 federal election to Menzies newly
established Liberal Party, in coalition with the Country Party. Immigration and
the Post War Boom. After World War II, Australia launched a massive immigration
program, believing that having narrowly avoided a Japanese invasion, Australia
must "populate or perish." As Prime Minister Ben Chifley would later declare,
"a powerful enemy looked hungrily toward Australia. In tomorrow's gun flash
that threat could come again. We must populate Australia as rapidly as we can
before someone else decides to populate it for us." Hundreds of thousands of
displaced Europeans, including for the first time large numbers of Jews,
migrated to Australia. More than two million people immigrated to Australia
from Europe during the 20 years after the end of the war. From the outset, it
was intended that the bulk of these immigrants should be mainly from the
British Isles, and that the post-war immigration scheme would preserve the
British character of Australian society. Although Great Britain remained the
predominant source of immigrants, the pool of source countries was expanded to
include Continental European countries in order to meet Australia's ambitious
immigration targets. From the late 1940s onwards, Australia received
significant waves of people from countries such as Greece, Italy, Malta,
Germany, Yugoslavia and the Netherlands. Australia actively sought these
immigrants, with the government assisting many of them and they found work due
to an expanding economy and major infrastructure projects. The Australian
economy stood in sharp contrast to war-ravaged Europe, and newly arrived
migrants found employment in a booming manufacturing industry and government
assisted programs such as the Snowy Mountains Scheme. This hydroelectricity and
irrigation complex in south-east Australia consisted of sixteen major dams and
seven power stations constructed between 1949 and 1974. It remains the largest
engineering project undertaken in Australia. Necessitating the employment of
100,000 people from over 30 countries, to many it denotes the birth of
multicultural Australia. In 1949 the 1941‚Äì1949 Labor government (led by Ben
Chifley after John Curtin's death in 1945) was defeated by a Liberal-National
Party Coalition government headed by Menzies. Politically, Menzies Government
and the Liberal Party of Australia dominated much of the immediate post war
era, defeating the Chifley Government in 1949, in part over a Labor proposal to
nationalise banks and following a crippling coal strike influenced by the
Australian Communist Party. Menzies became the country's longest-serving Prime
Minister and the Liberal party, in coalition with the rural based Country
Party, won every federal until 1972. As in the United States in the early
1950s, allegations of communist influence in society saw tensions emerge in
politics. Refugees from Soviet dominated Eastern Europe immigrated to
Australia, while to Australia's north, Mao Zedong won the Chinese civil war in
1949 and in June 1950, Communist North Korea invaded South Korea. The Menzies
government responded to a United States led United Nations Security Council
request for military aid for South Korea and diverted forces from occupied
Japan to begin Australia's involvement in the Korean War. After fighting to a
bitter standstill, the UN and North Korean signed a ceasefire agreement in July
1953. Australian forces had participated in such major battles as Kapyong and
Maryang San. 17,000 Australians had served and casualties amounted to more than
1,500, of whom 339 were killed. During the course of the Korean War, the
Menzies Government attempted to ban the Communist Party of Australia, first by
legislation in 1950 and later by referendum, in 1951. While both attempts were
unsuccessful, further international events such as the defection of minor
Soviet Embassy official Vladimir Petrov, added to a sense of impending threat
that politically favoured Menzies‚Äô Liberal-CP government, as the Labor Party
pushed centralist economics and split over concerns about the influence of the
Communist Party over the Trade Union movement, resulting in the a bitter split
in 1955 and the emergence of the breakaway Democratic Labor Party(DLP). The DLP
remained an influential political force, often holding the balance of power in
the Senate, until 1974. Its preferences supported the Liberal and Country
Party. The Labor party was led by H.V. Evatt after Chifley‚Äôs death in 1951.
Evatt retired in 1960, and Arthur Calwell succeeded him as leader, with a young
Gough Whitlam as his deputy. Menzies presided over a period of sustained
economic boom and the beginnings of sweeping social change - with the arrivals
of rock and roll music and television in the 1950s. In 1956, Television in
Australia began broadcasting, Melbourne hosted the Olympics and, for the first
time, performing artist Barry Humphries performed the character of Edna Everage
as a parody of a house-proud housewife of staid 1950's Melbourne suburbia (the
character only later morphed into a critique of self-obsessed celebrity
culture). It was the first of many of his satirical stage and screen creations
based around quirky Australian characters. In 1958, Australian country music
singer Slim Dusty, who would become the musical embodiment of rural Australia,
had Australia's first international music chart hit with his bush ballad Pub
With No Beer, while rock and roller Johnny O'Keefe's "Wild One" became the
first local recording to reach the national charts, peaking at #20. Before
sleeping through the 1960s Australian cinema produced little of its own content
in the 1950s, but British and Hollywood studios produced a string of successful
epics from Australian literature, featuring home grown stars Chips Rafferty and
Peter Finch. Menzies remained a stanuch supporter of links to the monarchy and
British Commonwealth and formalised an alliance with the United States, but
also launched post-war trade with Japan, beginning a growth of Australian
exports of coal, iron ore and mineral resources that would steadily climb until
Japan became Australia's largest trading partner. In the early 1950s, the
Menzies government saw Australia as part of a ‚Äútriple alliance,‚Äù in concert
with both the US and traditional ally Britain. At first, ‚Äúthe Australian
leadership opted for a consistently pro-British line in diplomacy,‚Äù while at
the same time looking for opportunities to involve the US in South East Asia.
Thus, other than the Korean War, the government also committed military forces
to the Malayan Emergency and hosted British nuclear tests after 1952. Australia
was also the only Commonwealth country to offer support to the British during
the Suez Crisis. Menzies oversaw an effusive welcome to Queen Elizabeth II on
the first visit to Australia by a reigning monarch, in 1954. However, as
British influence declined in South East Asia, the US alliance came to have
greater significance for Australian leaders and the Australian economy. British
investment in Australia remained significant until the late 1970s, but trade
with Britain declined through the 1950s and 1960s. In the late 1950s the
Australian Army began to re-equip using US military equipment. In 1962, the US
established a naval communications station at North West Cape, the first of
several built over the next decade. Most significantly, in 1962, Australian
Army advisors were sent to help train South Vietnamese forces, in a developing
conflict the British had no part in. The ANZUS security treaty, which had been
signed in 1951, had its origins in Australia‚Äôs and New Zealand‚Äôs fears of a
rearmed Japan, but found new impetus through anti-communism. Its obligations on
the US, Australia and New Zealand are vague, but its influence on Australian
foreign policy thinking, at times significant. The SEATO treaty, signed only
three years later, clearly demonstrated Australia‚Äôs position as a US ally in
the emerging cold war. On 26 November 1967, Australia became the seventh nation
to put a satellite into Earth orbit, launching WRESAT from Woomera. When
Menzies retired in 1965, he was replaced as Liberal leader and Prime Minister
by Harold Holt.The Holt Government increased Australian commitment to the
growing War in Vietnam; oversaw conversion to decimal currency and faced
Britain's withdrawal from Asia by visiting and hosting many Asian leaders and
by expanding ties to the United States, hosting the first visit to Australia by
an American President, his friend Lyndon Johnson. Significantly, Holt's
government introduced the "Migration Act 1966", which effectively dismantled
the vestigial mechanisms of the White Australia Policy and increased access to
non-European migrants, including refugees fleeing the Vietnam War. Holt also
called the 1967 Referendum which removed the discriminatory clause in the
Australian Constitution which excluded Aboriginal Australians from being
counted in the census - the referendum was one of the few to be overwhelmingly
endorsed by the Australian electorate (over 90% voted 'yes'). Holt won the 1967
election with the largest parliamentary majority in 65 years, but Holt drowned
while swimming at a surf beach in December 1967 and was replaced by John Gorton
(1968‚Äì1971). The Gorton Government began winding down Australia's commitment
to Vietnam, increased funding for the arts, standardised rates of pay between
the men and women and continued moving Australian trade closer to Asia. The
Liberals suffered a decline in voter support at the 1969 election and internal
party division saw Gorton replaced by William McMahon (1971‚Äì1972) and, facing
a reinvigorated Australian Labor Party led by Gough Whitlam, the Liberals
entered their final stretch in office of a record 23 straight years period.
1960s and 1970s: The "Australian New Wave". From the mid 1960s, evidence of a
new and more independent sense of national pride and identity began to emerge
in Australia. In the early 1960s, the National Trust of Australia began to be
active in preserving Australia‚Äôs natural, cultural and historic heritage.
Australian TV, while always dependent on US and British imports, saw locally
made dramas and comedies appear, and programs such as Homicide developed strong
local loyalty while Skippy the Bush Kangaroo became a global phenomenon.
Liberal Prime Minister John Gorton, a battle scarred former fighter pilot,
described himself as "Australian to the bootheels" and his Gorton Government
established the Australian Council for the Arts, the Australian Film
Development Corporation and the National Film and Television Training School.
The late 1960s and early 1970s are often associated with a flowering of
Australian culture. Indigenous Australians achieved greater rights, immigration
restrictions and censorship laws were swept aside, theatre and opera companies
were established across the country, and Australian rock music blossomed. The
1971 Springbok rugby tour was influential in raising awareness of Aboriginal
injustice in Australia and also led Australia to become the first Western
nation to cut sporting ties with South Africa. In a significant move against
South Africa's apartheid regime, many Australians (including Wallabies)
demonstrated against tours by the racially selected South African team. The
Australian media tycoon Kerry Packer altered the traditionalist ethos of the
game of cricket in the 1970s, inventing World Series Cricket from which have
evolved many aspects of the various modern international forms of the game. The
iconic Sydney Opera House finally opened in 1973 after numerous delays. In the
same year, Patrick White became the first Australian to win a Nobel Prize for
Literature. Australian History had begun to appear on school curriculums by the
1970s and from the early 1970s, the Australian cinema began to produce the
Australian New Wave of feature films based on uniquely Australian themes. Film
funding began under the Gorton government, but it was the South Australian Film
Corporation that took the lead in supporting filmmaking and among their great
successes were quintessential Australian films Sunday Too Far Away(1974) Picnic
at Hanging Rock (1975), Breaker Morant (1980) and Gallipoli (1981). The
national funding body, the Australian Film Commission, was established in 1975.
Significant changes also occurred to Australia‚Äôs censorship laws after the
new Liberal Minister for Customs and Excise, Don Chipp, was appointed in 1969.
In 1968, Barry Humphries and Nicholas Garland‚Äôs cartoon book featuring the
larrikin character Barry McKenzie was banned. Yet only a few years later, the
book had been made as a film, partly with the support of government funding.
Anne Pender suggests that the Barry Mckenzie character both celebrated and
parodied Australian nationalism. Historian Richard White also argues that
‚Äúwhile many of the plays, novels and films produced in the 1970s were
intensely critical of aspects of Australian life, they were absorbed by the
‚Äònew nationalism‚Äô and applauded for their Australianness.‚Äù Australia and
the Vietnam War. The Menzies Government despatched the first small contingent
of Australian military training personnel to aid South Vietnam in 1962, so
beginning Australia's decade long involvemt in the Vietnam War. Ngo Dinh Diem,
the leader of the government in South Vietnam, had requested security
assistance from the US and its allies. The Australian government supported the
commitment as part of global effort to stem the spread of communism in Europe
and Asia. Initially popular, Australia's participation in Vietnam, and
particularly the use of conscription, later became politically contentious and
saw massive protests, though they were for the most part peaceful. The United
States launched a major escalation of the war in 1965 and the Holt Government
which succeeded Menzies, increased Australia's military commitment to the
conflict. Holt won a massive majority in the 1967 Election. By 1969 however,
anti-war protests were gathering momentum and opposition to conscription was
growing, with more people believing the war could not be won. The Gorton
Government (returned with a reduced majority at the 1969 Election) ceased to
replace Australian personnel from 1970. There were large Moratorium marches in
1970 and 1971 and Australia's troop commitment continued to wind down through
1971 with the last battalion leaving Nui Dat in November. The election of the
Whitlam Government in 1972 brought Australia's small remaining involvement in
the war to an official close in June 1973 with the withdrawal of the last
platoon guarding the Australian Embassy in Saigon. Australian forces were
largely based at Nui Dat, Phuoc Tuy province and participated in such notable
battles as the Battle of Long Tan against the Viet Cong in 1966 and defending
against the 1968 Tet Offensive. Almost 60,000 Australians had served in Vietnam
and 521 had died as a result of the war. As the war became unpopular,
protestors and conscienscious objectors became prominent and soldiers often met
a hostile reception on their return home in the later stages of the conflict.
In early 1975 the communists launched a major offensive resulting in the fall
of Saigon on 30 April. The Royal Australian Airforce assisted in final
humanitarian evacuations. In the aftermath of the communist victory, Australia
assisted in re-settlement of Vietnamese refugees, with thousands making their
way to Australian through the 1970s and 1980s. Papua New Guinea and Nauru
Independence. Australia had administered Papua New Guinea and Nauru for much of
the 20th century. British New Guinea (Papua) had passed to Australia in 1906.
German New Guinea was captured by Australia during the First World War,
becoming a League of Nations Mandate after the war. Following the bitter New
Guinea Campaign of World War II which saw occupation of half the island by
Imperial Japan, the Territory of Papua and New Guinea was established by an
administrative union between the Australian-administered Territory of Papua and
Territory of New Guinea in 1949. Under Liberal Minister for External
Territories Andrew Peacock, Papua and New Guinea adopted self-government in
1972 and on 15 September 1975, during the term of the Whitlam Government in
Australia, the Territory became the independent nation of Papua New Guinea.
Australia had captured the island of Nauru from the German Empire in 1914.
After Japanese occupation during World War II, it became a UN Trust Territory
under Australia and remained so until achieving independence in 1968. In 1989
Nauru sued Australia in the International Court of Justice in The Hague for
damages caused by mining. Australia settled the case out of court agreeing to a
lump sum settlement of A$107 million and an annual stipend of the equivalent of
A$2.5 million toward environmental rehabilitation. Whitlam, Fraser and
constitutional crisis. Elected in December 1972 after 23 years in opposition,
Labor won office under Gough Whitlam and introduced a significant program of
social change and reform. Whitlam said before the election: ‚Äúour program has
three great aims. They are ‚Äì to promote equality; to involve the people of
Australia in ‚Ä¶ decision making‚Ä¶; and to liberate the talents and uplift the
horizons of the Australian people.‚Äù Whitlam‚Äôs actions were immediate and
dramatic. Within a few weeks the last military advisors in Vietnam were
recalled, and national service ended. The People‚Äôs Republic of China was
recognised (Whitlam had visited China while Opposition Leader in 1971) and the
embassy in Taiwan closed. Over the next few years, university fees were
abolished and a national health care scheme established. Significant changes
were made to school funding, something Whitlam regarded as ‚Äúthe most enduring
single achievement‚Äù of his government. Divorce and family law was
liberalised. Whitlam's radical and imperious style eventually alienated many
voters, and some of the state governments were openly hostile to his
government. As it did not control the senate, much of its legislation was
rejected or amended. The Queensland Country Party government of Joh Bjelke-
Petersen had particularly bad relations with the Federal government. Even after
it was re-elected at elections in May 1974, the Senate remained an obstacle to
its political agenda. At the only joint sitting of parliament, in August 1974,
six keys pieces of legislation were passed. In 1974, Whitlam selected John
Kerr, a former member of the Labor Party and presiding Chief Justice of New
South Wales to serve as Governor General. The Whitlam Government was re-elected
with a decreased majority in the lower house in the 1974 Election. In 1974‚Äì75
the government thought about borrowing US$4 billion in foreign loans. Minister
Rex Connor conducted secret discussions with a loan broker from Pakistan, and
the Treasurer, Jim Cairns, misled parliament over the issue. Arguing the
government was incompetent following the Loans Affair, the opposition Liberal-
Country Party Coalition delayed passage of the government‚Äôs money bills in
the Senate, until the government would promise a new election. Whitlam refused,
Malcolm Fraser, leader of the Opposition insisted. The deadlock came to an end
when the Whitlam government was dismissed by the Governor General, John Kerr on
11 November 1975 and Fraser was installed as caretaker Prime Minister, pending
an election. The "reserve powers" granted to the Governor General by the
Australian Constitution, had allowed an elected government to be dismissed
without warning by a representative of the Monarch. At elections held in late
1975, Malcolm Fraser and the Coalition were elected in a landslide victory. The
Fraser Government won two subsequent elections. Fraser maintained some of the
social reforms of the Whitlam era, while seeking increased fiscal restraint.
His government included the first Aboriginal federal parliamentarian, Neville
Bonner, and in in 1976, Parliament passed the Aboriginal Land Rights Act 1976,
which, while limited to the Northern Territory, affirmed "inalienable" freehold
title to some traditional lands. Fraser established the multicultural
broadcaster SBS, welcomed Vietnamese boat people refugees, opposed minority
white rule in Apartheid South Africa and Rhodesia and opposed Soviet
expansionism. A significant program of economic reform however was not pursued
and, by 1983, the Australian economy was in recession, amidst the effects of a
severe drought. Fraser had promoted "states‚Äô rights" and his government
refused to use Commonwealth powers to stop the construction of the Franklin Dam
in Tasmania in 1982. A Liberal minister, Don Chipp had split off from the party
to form a new social liberal party, the Australian Democrats in 1977 and the
Franklin Dam proposal contributed to the emergence of an influential
Environmental movement in Australia, with branches including the Australian
Greens, a political party which later emerged out of Tasmania to pursue
environmentalism as well as left-wing social and economic policies. 1980s and
1990s. Bob Hawke, a less polarising Labor leader than Whitlam, defeated Fraser
at the 1983 Election. The new government stopped the Franklin Dam project via
the High Court of Australia. The 1980s saw severe concerns about Australia's
future economic health take hold, with severe current account deficits and high
unemployment at times. Hawke, together with treasurer Paul Keating undertook
micro-economic and industrial relations reform designed to increase efficiency
and competitiveness. After the initial failure of the Whitlam model and partial
dismantling under Fraser, Hawke re-established a new, universal system of
health insurance called Medicare. Hawke and Keating abandoned traditional Labor
support for tariffs to protect industry and jobs. They moved to deregulate
Australia‚Äôs financial system and ‚Äòfloated‚Äô the Australian dollar. An
agreement was reached with trade unions to moderate wage demands and accept
more flexible working condition arrangements by accepting tax cuts in return.
Ultimately, many of the reforms, continued by successive governments, appear to
have been successful in pushing the economy along. The Australian Bicentenary
was celebrated in 1988 along with the opening of a new Parliament House in
Canberra. The following year the Australian Capital Territory achieved self-
government and Jervis Bay became a separate territory administered by the
Minister for Territories. A supporter of the US alliance, Hawke committed
Australian naval forces to the Gulf War, following the 1990 invasion of Kuwait
by Iraq. After four successful elections, but amid a deterioring Australian
economy and rising unemployment, the intense rivalry between Hawke and Keating
led the Labor Party to replace Hawke as leader and Paul Keating became Prime
Minister in 1991. Unemployment reached 11.4% in 1992 - the highest since the
Great Depression. The Liberal-National Opposition had proposed an ambitious
plan of economic reform to take to the 1993 Election, including the
introduction of a Goods and Services Tax. Keating shuffled treasurers and
campaigned strongly against the tax and won the 1993 Election. During his time
in office, Keating emphasised links to the Asia Pacific region, co-operating
closely with the Indonesian President, Suharto, and campaigned to increase the
role of APEC as a major forum for economic co-operation. Keating was active in
indigenous affairs and the High Court of Australia's historic Mabo decision in
1992 required a legislative response to recognition of Indigenous title to
land, culminating in the Native Title Act 1993 and the Land Fund Act 1994. In
1993, Keating established a Republic Advisory Committee, to examine options for
Australia becoming a republic. With foreign debt, interest rates and
unemployment still high, and after a series of ministerial resignations,
Keating lost the 1996 Election to the Liberals' John Howard. Indigenous
Australia. Campaigns for indigenous rights in Australia have a long history. In
the modern era, 1938 was an important year. With the participation of leading
indigenous activists like Douglas Nicholls, the "Australian Aborigines
Advancement League" organised a protest "Day of Mourning" to mark the 150th
anniversary of the arrival of the First Fleet of British in Australia and
launched its campaign for full citizenship rights for all Aborigines. In the
1940s, the conditions of life for Aborigines could be very poor. A permit
system restricted movement and work opportunities for many Aboriginal people.
In the 1950s, the government pursued a policy of "assimilation" which sought to
achieve full citizenship rights for Aborigines but also wanted them to adopt
the mode of life of other Australians (which very often was assumed to require
suppression of cultural identity). From the 1950s onwards, Australians began to
rethink their attitudes towards racial issues. An Aboriginal rights movement
was founded and supported by many liberal white Australians and a campaign
against the White Australia policy was also launched. The 1967 referendum was
held and overwhelmingly approved to amend the Constitution, removing
discriminatory references and giving the national parliament the power to
legislate specifically for Indigenous Australians. Contrary to frequently
repeated mythology, this referendum did not cover citizenship on Aboriginal
people, nor did it give them the vote: they already had both. However,
transferring this power away from the State parliaments did bring an end to the
system of Indigenous Australian reserves which existed in each state, which
allowed Indigenous people to move more freely, and exercise many of their
citizenship rights for the first time. From the late 1960s a movement for
Indigenous land rights also developed. Various groups and individuals were
active in the pursuit of equality and social justice from the 1960s. In the mid
1960s, one of the earliest Aboriginal graduates from the University of Sydney,
Charles Perkins, helped organise freedom rides into parts of Australia to
expose discrimination and inequality. In 1966, the Gurindji people of Wave Hill
station (owned by the Vestey Group) commenced strike action led by Vincent
Lingiari in a quest for equal pay and recognition of land rights. Indigenous
Australians began to take up representation in Australian parliaments during
the 1970s. In 1971 Neville Bonner of the Liberal Party was appointed by the
Queensland Parliament to replace a retiring senator, becoming the first
Aborigine in Federal Parliament. Bonner was returned as a Senator at the 1972
election and remained until 1983. Hyacinth Tungutalum of the Country Liberal
Party in the Northern Territory and Eric Deeral of the National Party of
Queensland, became the first Indigenous people elected to territory and state
legislatures in 1974. In 1976, Sir Douglas Nicholls was appointed Governor of
South Australia, becoming the first Aborigine to hold vice-regal office in
Australia. Aiden Ridgway of the Australian Democrats served as a senator during
the 1990s, but No indigenous person was elected to the House of
Representatives, until West Australian Liberal Ken Wyatt, in August 2010. In
1984, a group of Pintupi people who were living a traditional hunter-gatherer
desert-dwelling life were tracked down in the Gibson Desert in Western
Australia and brought in to a settlement. They are believed to be the last
uncontacted tribe in Australia. In 1985, the Hawke Government returned
ownership of Uluru (formerly known as Ayers Rock) to the local Pitjantjatjara
Aboriginal people. In 1992, the High Court of Australia handed down its
decision in the Mabo Case, declaring the previous legal concept of "terra
nullius" to be invalid. That same year, Prime Minister Paul Keating said in his
Redfern Park Speech that European settlers were responsible for the
difficulties Australian Aboriginal communities continued to face: ‚ÄòWe
committed the murders. We took the children from their mothers. We practiced
discrimination and exclusion. It was our ignorance and our prejudice‚Äô. In
1999 Parliament passed a Motion of Reconciliation drafted by Prime Minister
John Howard and Aboriginal Senator Aden Ridgeway naming mistreatment of
Indigenous Australians as the most "blemished chapter in our national history".
A great many indigenous Australians have been prominent in sport and the arts.
Several styles of Aboriginal art have developed in modern times, including the
watercolour paintings of Albert Namatjira's Hermannsburg School, and the
acrylic Papunya Tula "dot art" movement. The Western Desert Art Movement became
a globally renowned 20th century art movement. Oodgeroo Noonuccal (1920‚Äì1995)
was a famous Aboriginal poet, writer and rights activist credited with
publishing the first Aboriginal book of verse: "We Are Going" (1964). Sally
Morgan's novel "My Place" was considered a breakthrough memoir in terms of
bringing indigenous stories to wider notice. Leading Aboriginal intellectuals
Marcia Langton (First Australians, 2008) and Noel Pearson ("Up From the
Mission", 2009) are active contemporary contributors to Australian literature.
1955's "Jedda", was the first Australian feature film to star Aboriginal actors
in lead roles and the first to be entered at the Cannes Film Festival. 1976's
The Chant of Jimmie Blacksmith directed by Fred Schepisi was an award winning
historical drama from a book by Thomas Keneally about the tragic story of an
Aboriginal Bushranger. The canon of films related to Indigenous Australians
also increased over the period of the 1990s and early 21st Century. In 2006,
Rolf de Heer's "Ten Canoes" became the first major feature film to be shot in
an indigenous language and the film was recognised at Cannes and elsewhere. In
sport Evonne Goolagong Cawley became the world number-one ranked tennis player
in 1971 and won 14 Grand Slam titles during her career. In 1973 Arthur Beetson
became the first Indigenous Australian to captain his country in any sport when
he first led the Australian National Rugby League team, the Kangaroos. In 1982,
Mark Ella became Captain of the Australian National Rugby Union Team, the
Wallabies. Olympic gold medalist Cathy Freeman lit the Olympic flame at the
2000 Summer Olympics opening ceremony in Sydney. In the early 21st century,
much of indigenous Australia continued to suffer lower standards of health and
education than non-indigenous Australia. In 2007, the "Close the Gap campaign"
was launched by Olympic champions Cathy Freeman and Ian Thorpe with the aim of
achieving Indigenous health equality within 25 years. In 2007, Prime Minister
John Howard and Indigenous Affairs Minister Mal Brough launched the Northern
Territory National Emergency Response. In response to the Little Children are
Sacred Report into allegations of child abuse among indigenous communities in
the Territory, the government banned alcohol in prescribed communities in the
Northern Territory; quarantined a percentage of welfare payments for essential
goods purchasing; despatched additional police and medical personnel to the
region; and suspended the permit system for access to indigenous communities.
During much of the twentieth century, Australian governments had removed many
aboriginal children from their families. This practice did great damage to the
Aboriginal people, culturally and emotionally, giving rise to the term stolen
generation to describe these families. Since the publication in 1997 of a
federal government report, "Bringing Them Home" all state governments have
followed the recommendation of the report in issuing formal apologies for their
past practices to the Aboriginal people, as have many local governments. The
Howard government refused to make such an apology on behalf of the federal
government, despite pleas from the Aboriginal people and from many sections of
the wider community, saying that it implied intergenerational guilt on modern
non-indigenous Australia. However, the new government under Kevin Rudd led a
formal bi-partisan apology on 13 February 2008. Republicanism. In the early
21st century, Australia remains a constitutional monarchy under the Australian
Constitution adopted in 1901, with the duties of the monarch performed by a
Governor General selected by the Australian Government. Australian
republicanism which had been a feature of the 1890s faded away during the First
World War. Support for the Monarchy in Australia peaked during the Menzies
years with the wildly successful 1954 tour by Queen Elizabeth II. Prince
Charles attended school in Australia during the 1960s. The issue of a republic
did not arise again until the 1970s. In the 1990s it was bought to the
forefront of national debate by Prime Minister Paul Keating, who promised in
1993 to introduce an "Australian federal republic" by the centenary of
Federation in 2001. The Howard Government called a Constitutional Convention to
examine the issue in 1998. Delegates included appointees and elected
representatives representing republicans, monarchists and neutral parties. The
Convention proposed a republican model and a referendum was called for the
approval of the Australian electorate. The referendum held on 6 November 1999
failed to achieve the support of either a majority of voters or a majority of
states. The national vote of the electors in favour of Australia becoming a
republic was 45.13%, with 54.87% against. The Australian Labor Party advocated
for the republic, while the Liberals permitted members to campaign for either
side. Notable campaigners for the republic included all the living former Labor
Prime Ministers and former Liberal Prime Minister Malcolm Fraser and incumbent
Treasurer Peter Costello. Notable Monarchists included Prime Minister John
Howard, Justice Michael Kirby of the High Court of Australia, former Labor
opposition leader Bill Hayden and Liberal Aboriginal elder Neville Bonner.
Future leaders of the Liberal Party Malcolm Turnbull who led the Australian
Republican Movement and Tony Abbott who supported Australians for
Constitutional Monarchy took opposing views. Justice Michael Kirby (a
monarchist and leading figure in progressive Australian jurisprudence) ascribed
the failure of the republic referendum to ten factors: lack of bi-partisanship;
undue haste; a perception that the republic was supported by big city elites; a
"denigration" of monarchists as "unpatriotic" by republicans; the adoption of
an inflexible republican model by the Convention; concerns about the specific
model proposed (chiefly the ease with which a Prime Minister could dismiss a
president); a republican strategy of using big "names" attached to the Whitlam
era to promote their cause; strong opposition to the proposal in the smaller
states; a counter-productive pro-republican bias in the media; and an
instinctive caution among the Australian electorate regarding Constitutional
change. Some republicans blamed the conservative and monarchist Prime Minister
John Howard (elected in 1996), whose leadership certainly did not aid the
republican cause. But there were other significant factors, including a split
between "minimalist" republicans who wanted an Australian president to be
chosen by the federal Parliament (as happens in, for example, Germany), and
more "radical" republicans who wanted a directly elected President, as in the
Irish Republic. Public opinion suggested that a republic would only be
acceptable if a president was directly elected. Since the referendum proposal
was for an indirectly elected president, many radicals opposed it. The Gillard
Labor Government which took power in a hung parliament following the 2010
Australian Election has indicated an intention not to revisit the issue of a
vote for an Australian republic during the reign of Queen Elizabeth II, while
the Opposition Liberal-National Coalition is led by Tony Abbott, a supporter of
the constitutional monarchy. Cultural interest in the Royal Family endures,
with 7 million Australians (one third of the population) tuning in to watch the
Wedding of Prince William and Catherine Middleton in April 2011. In 2011,
Australian public support for a republic fell to its lowest level since March
1994. Support for a republic outright was 41%, with support rising to 48 per
cent of respondents in a scenario with Charles on the throne and his wife,
Camilla, as princess consort. Military engagements in the late twentieth
century. Following the Vietnam War, Australian military forces were largely
kept at home through the rest of the 1970s and 1980s, other than service in
United Nations peacekeeping missions. RAAF helicopters operated in the Sinai;
and Australian forces assisted in a British Commonwealth operation when
Zimbabwe won its independence; as well as a similar operation in Namibia. Bob
Hawke was Prime Minister at the time of the Fall of the Berlin Wall and end of
the Cold War which ushered in a new era of international relations. Royal
Australian Navy warships were deployed to the Gulf War by the Hawke Government
in 1991 and remained in the region to enforce UN-imposed sanctions against
Iraq. Peacekeeping. Australian forces were very active in UN peacekeeping
through the 1990s. In 1993, Foreign Minister Gareth Evans was active in the
search for a settlement to ongoing troubles in Cambodia in the aftermath of the
genocidal 1970s Pol Pot regime. Australia contributed the force commander and
the operation's communications component to the UN operation. In the ultimately
unsuccessful Somalia intervention, a battalion-level Australian contingent was
employed to aid in the delivery of humanitarian aid in the Baidoa area. In
1994, Australia deployed medical staff to the UN force in Rwanda sent to deal
with the aftermath of the Rwandan genocide. A UN Peacekeeping engagement in
Bougainville began in 1997, to aid in resolving the long-running conflict
between the Papua New Guinea government Bougainville separatists. There have
been a number of other peacekeeping and stabilisation operations: notably in
Bougainville, including Operation Bel Isi (1998‚Äì2003); as well as Operation
Helpem Fren and the Australian led Regional Assistance Mission to Solomon
Islands (RAMSI) in the early 2000s; and the 2006 East Timorese crisis East
Timor. Australia led an important international military mission to East Timor
in 1999. Indonesia invaded East Timor in 1975 and annexed the former Portuguese
colony. Successive Australian governments, concerned to maintain good relations
with Indonesia, had accepted Indonesia control of the territory, however the
fall of Indonesian President Suharto and a shift in Australian policy by the
Howard Government in 1998 precipitated a proposal for a referendum on the
question of independence. New Indonesian President B. J. Habibie was prepared
to consider a change of status for East Timor. In late 1998, Australian Prime
Minister John Howard with Foreign Minister Alexander Downer drafted a letter
Indonesia setting out a major change in Australian policy, suggesting that the
East Timor be given a chance to vote on independence within a decade. The
letter upset President BJ Habibie, who saw it as implying Indonesia was a
"colonial power" and he decided in response to announce a snap referendum. A UN
sponsored referendum held in August 1999 showed overwhelming approval for
independence. After the result was announced, violent clashes, instigated by a
suspected anti-independence militia, sparked a humanitarian and security crisis
in the region. John Howard consulted UN Secretary General Kofi Annan and
lobbied U. S. President Bill Clinton to support an Australian led peace keeper
force to end the violence. Australia, who contributed 5,500 personnel and the
force commander, Major General Peter Cosgrove, to the UN-backed International
Force for East Timor and began deploying on 20 September 1999 and successfully
restored order. The operation had been politically and militarily tense.
Australia re-deployed frontline combat aircraft northward and detected an
Indonesian submarine within the vicinity of Dili Harbour as INTERFET forces
approached. While the intervention was ultimately successful, Australian-
Indonesian relations would take several years to recover. Al Qaeda. In 1998, a
wealthy dissident Saudi Islamist, Osama Bin Laden, declared a fatwa calling for
the killing of "Americans and their allies -- civilians and military... in any
country in which it is possible to do it" in order to bring to an end the
ongoing enforcement of the blockade against Iraq and presence of US troops in
the Arabian Peninsula, thus bringing Australians into the line of fire in what
would latterly grow to be defined as the War on Terror. Following the 11
September terrorist attacks by Al Qaeda in 2001, Australia invoked the ANZUS
Treaty and offered support to the United States. In the aftermath of this
event, the Howard Government committed troops to the Afghanistan War (with bi-
partisan support) and the Iraq War (meeting with the disapproval of other
political parties). SAS troops formed the most high-profile part of Operation
Slipper, Australia's contribution to the invading force in the 2001 United
States war in Afghanistan. A small number of Australians, including David
Hicks, were captured in and around the Afghan Theatre having spent time
training or fighting with Al Qaeda aligned Islamist paramilitaries. Islamists
following the Al Qaeda modus operandi bombed a nightclub in Bali in 2002 and
killed 88 Australian civilians. The following year, the Iraq War was launched
by a U.S.-British led Coalition to overthrow the Saddam Hussein government of
Iraq for its non-compliance with the 1991 Gulf War Peace Treaty. Australian
contribution to the 2003 invasion of Iraq lasted until 2009 and was highly
controversial. Following the death of Al Qaeda leader Osama Bin Laden at the
hands of US forces in May 2011, Prime Minister Julia Gillard announced that
Australian forces would remain in Afghanistan and said that Bin Laden's death
offered a "small measure of justice" to the families of the 105 Australians who
been killed in Al Qaeda attacks in New York, Bali, London and Mumbai since the
commencement of the conflict. As of May 2011, a further 24 Australian military
personnel had been killed while serving in the Afghanistan conflict (including
one with the British Armed Forces). Turn of the century. John Howard served as
Prime Minister from 1996 until 2007, the second-longest prime ministerial term
after Robert Menzies. One of the first programs instigated by the Howard
government was a nationwide gun control scheme, following a mass shooting at
Port Arthur. The government sought to reduce Australia's government deficit and
introduced industrial relations reforms, particularly as regards efficiency on
the waterfront. After the 1996 election, Howard and treasurer Peter Costello
proposed a Goods and Services Tax (GST) which they successfully took to the
electorate in 1998. In 1999, Australia led a United Nations force into East
Timor to help establish democracy and independence for that nation, following
political violence. The government also accelerated the pace of privatisation,
beginning with the government-owned telecommunications corporation, Telstra.
Howard's government continued some elements of the foreign policy of its
predecessors, based on relations with four key countries: the United States,
Japan, China, and Indonesia. The Howard administration strongly supported US
engagement in the Asia-Pacific region. Sydney played host to other important
world events over the decade including the 2003 Rugby World Cup, the APEC
Leaders conference of 2007 and Catholic World Youth Day 2008. Melbourne hosted
the 2006 Commonwealth Games. In 2001, Australia celebrated its Centenary of
Federation, with a program of events, including the creation of the Centenary
Medal to honour people who have made a contribution to Australian society or
government. The Howard government expanded immigration overall but instituted
often controversial tough immigration laws to discourage unauthorised arrivals
of boat people. While Howard was a strong supporter of traditional links to the
Commonwealth and to the United States alliance, trade with Asia, particularly
China, continued to increase dramatically, and Australia endured an extended
period of prosperity. Howard's term in office coincided with the 2001 11
September attacks. In the aftermath of this event, the government committed
troops to the Afghanistan War (with bi-partisan support) and the Iraq War
(meeting with the disapproval of other political parties). Southern Australia
was affected by a very severe drought, through much of the first decade of the
21st century. By late 2006 water storage throughout southern Australia were at
record low levels. Severe restrictions on urban water usage were put in place
in every state capital city (except Hobart and Darwin) in 2005-06, and
irrigation in the Murray-Darling Basin was heavily curtailed. Consequently,
issues relating to fresh water supply became an important topic for political
discussion, though the economic impact of the drought was felt most keenly only
in Australia's sparsely populated agricultural areas. Howard lost his
substantial majority at the 1998 Federal election, improved on it at the 2001
Federal election and at the 2004 election against Labor's Mark Latham. The
government however resoundingly lost the 2007 Federal election to the Labor
Party led by Kevin Rudd with a wave of support for change and a slogan for "new
leadership" for the country. Kevin Rudd held the office until June 2010, when
he was replaced following internal Labor Party coup by his colleague and deputy
Julia Gillard. Rudd used his term in office to symbolically ratify the Kyoto
Protocol and lead an historic parliamentary apology to the "Stolen Generation"
(those Indigenous Australians who had been removed from their parents by the
state during the early 20th century to the 1960s). The mandarin Chinese
speaking former diplomat also pursued energetic foreign policy and initially
sought to instigate a "price on carbon" in the Australian economy to combat
Global Warming. His prime ministership coincided with the initial phases of the
Financial crisis of 2007‚Äì2010, to which his government responded through a
large package of economic stimulus - the management of which later proved to be
controversial. The Black Saturday bushfires struck Victoria on and around
Saturday 7¬ February 2009. The fires occurred during extreme bushfire-weather
conditions, and resulted in Australia's highest ever loss of life from a
bushfire; 173 people died and 414 were injured as a result of the fires. Amidst
increasing controversy on management of stimulus spending over policy
directions on taxation, immigration and climate change, the Labor Party
replaced Rudd with Julia Gillard, who became the first woman Prime Minister of
Australia and narrowly retained office against the Liberal-National Coalition
led by Tony Abbott, at the 2010 Federal election by securing the support of
independent members of the first hung parliament in Australia since the 1940
election. The drought was broken difinitively by severe flooding associated
with the la ni√±a weather effect in the summer of 2010-2011. Queensland in
particular suffered dramatic flooding which swept through parts of the capital
city of Brisbane and caused some deaths and serious financial loss. Soon after
tropicla cyclone Yasi struck the already belaguered coast. Following two and
half decades of economic reform and amidst booming trade with Asia, Australia -
in stark contrast to most other Western nations - avoided recession following
the 2008 collapse of financial markets and Global Economic Crisis. Following
the 2010 election, the Gillard Government entered an alliance with the
Australian Greens and was destabilized by breaking an election promise not to
introduce a carbon tax, by leadership rivalry and by lacking the numbers to
push some controversial legislation through the Parliament. Nevertheless, the
cross-bench alliance continued to operate and though facing declining poll
support and firm opposition from the Liberal-National Coalition, in October the
government successfully passed its Clean Energy Bill 2011 aimed to restructure
the Australian economy in order to reduce greenhouse gas emissions associated
with Climate Change by increasing costs to industry for carbon emissions.
