History of China Chinese civilization originated in various regional centers
along both the Yellow River and the Yangtze River valleys in the Neolithic era,
but the Yellow River is said to be the cradle of Chinese civilization. With
thousands of years of continuous history, China is one of the world's oldest
civilizations. The written history of China can be found as early as the Shang
Dynasty (c. 1700‚Äì1046 BC), although ancient historical texts such as the
"Records of the Grand Historian" (ca. 100 BC) and "Bamboo Annals" assert the
existence of a Xia Dynasty before the Shang. Much of Chinese culture,
literature and philosophy further developed during the Zhou Dynasty (1045‚Äì256
BC). The Zhou Dynasty began to bow to external and internal pressures in the
8th century BC, and the kingdom eventually broke apart into smaller states,
beginning in the Spring and Autumn Period and reaching full expression in the
Warring States period. This is one of multiple periods of failed statehood in
Chinese history (the most recent of which was the Chinese Civil War). In
between eras of multiple kingdoms and warlordism, Chinese dynasties have ruled
parts or all of China; in some eras, including the present, control has
stretched as far as Xinjiang and/or Tibet. This practice began with the Qin
Dynasty: in 221 BC, Qin Shi Huang united the various warring kingdoms and
created the first Chinese empire. Successive dynasties in Chinese history
developed bureaucratic systems that enabled the Emperor of China to directly
control vast territories. The conventional view of Chinese history is that of
alternating periods of political unity and disunity, with China occasionally
being dominated by steppe peoples, most of whom were in turn assimilated into
the Han Chinese population. Cultural and political influences from many parts
of Asia, carried by successive waves of immigration, expansion, and cultural
assimilation, are part of the modern culture of China. Prehistory. Paleolithic.
What is now China was inhabited by "Homo erectus" more than a million years
ago. Recent study shows that the stone tools found at Xiaochangliang site are
magnetostratigraphically dated to 1.36 million years ago. The archaeological
site of Xihoudu in Shanxi Province is the earliest recorded use of fire by
"Homo erectus", which is dated 1.27 million years ago. The excavations at
Yuanmou and later Lantian show early habitation. Perhaps the most famous
specimen of "Homo erectus" found in China is the so-called Peking Man
discovered in 1923-27. Neolithic. The Neolithic age in China can be traced back
to between 12,000 and 10,000 BC. Early evidence for proto-Chinese millet
agriculture is radiocarbon-dated to about 7000 BC. Farming gave rise to the
Jiahu culture (7000 to 5800 BC). At Damaidi in Ningxia, 3,172 cliff carvings
dating to 6000-5000 BC have been discovered, "featuring 8,453 individual
characters such as the sun, moon, stars, gods and scenes of hunting or
grazing." These pictographs are reputed to be similar to the earliest
characters confirmed to be written Chinese. Excavation of a Peiligang culture
site in Xinzheng county, Henan, found a community that flourished in 5,500-
4,900 BC, with evidence of agriculture, constructed buildings, pottery, and
burial of the dead. With agriculture came increased population, the ability to
store and redistribute crops, and the potential to support specialist craftsmen
and administrators. In late Neolithic times, the Yellow River valley began to
establish itself as a center of Yangshao culture (5000 BC to 3000 BC), and the
first villages were founded; the most archaeologically significant of these was
found at Banpo, Xi'an. Later, Yangshao culture was superseded by the Longshan
culture, which was also centered on the Yellow River from about 3000 BC to 2000
BC. The early history of China is obscured by the lack of written documents
from this period, coupled with the existence of later accounts that attempted
to describe events that had occurred several centuries previously. In a sense,
the problem stems from centuries of introspection on the part of the Chinese
people, which has blurred the distinction between fact and fiction in regards
to this early history. Ancient era. Xia Dynasty (c. 2100 ‚Äì c. 1600 BC).
"Major site(s): possibly Erlitou" The Xia Dynasty of China (from c. 2100 to c.
1600 BC) is the first dynasty to be described in ancient historical records
such as Sima Qian's "Records of the Grand Historian" and "Bamboo Annals".
Although there is disagreement as to whether the dynasty actually existed,
there is some archaeological evidence pointing to its possible existence. Sima
Qian, writing in the late 2nd century BC, dated the founding of the Xia Dynasty
to around 2200 BC, but this date has not been corroborated. Most archaeologists
now connect the Xia to excavations at Erlitou in central Henan province, where
a bronze smelter from around 2000 BC was unearthed. Early markings from this
period found on pottery and shells are thought to be ancestral to modern
Chinese characters. With few clear records matching the Shang oracle bones or
the Zhou bronze vessel writings, the Xia era remains poorly understood.
According to mythology, the dynasty ended around 1600 BC as a consequence of
the Battle of Mingtiao. Shang Dynasty (c. 1700‚Äì1046 BC). "Capital: Yinxu,
near Anyang (Yin Dynasty period)" Archaeological findings providing evidence
for the existence of the Shang Dynasty, c. 1600‚Äì1046 BC, are divided into two
sets. The first set ‚Äì from the earlier Shang period ‚Äì comes from sources at
Erligang, Zhengzhou, and Shangcheng. The second set ‚Äì from the later Shang or
Yin (ÊÆ∑) period ‚Äì is at Anyang, in modern-day Henan, which has been
confirmed as the last of the Shang's nine capitals (c. 1300‚Äì1046 BC). The
findings at Anyang include the earliest written record of Chinese past so far
discovered: inscriptions of divination records in ancient Chinese writing on
the bones or shells of animals ‚Äì the so-called "oracle bones", dating from
around 1200 BC. The Shang Dynasty featured 31 kings, from Tang of Shang to King
Zhou of Shang. In this period, the Chinese worshipped many different gods ‚Äî
weather gods and sky gods ‚Äî and also a supreme god, named Shangdi, who ruled
over the other gods. Those who lived during the Shang Dynasty also believed
that their ancestors ‚Äî their parents and grandparents ‚Äî became like gods
when they died, and that their ancestors wanted to be worshipped, too, like
gods. Each family worshipped its own ancestors. The "Records of the Grand
Historian" states that the Shang Dynasty moved its capital six times. The final
(and most important) move to Yin in 1350 BC led to the dynasty's golden age.
The term Yin Dynasty has been synonymous with the Shang dynasty in history,
although it has lately been used to specifically refer to the latter half of
the Shang Dynasty. Chinese historians living in later periods were accustomed
to the notion of one dynasty succeeding another, but the actual political
situation in early China is known to have been much more complicated. Hence, as
some scholars of China suggest, the Xia and the Shang can possibly refer to
political entities that existed concurrently, just as the early Zhou is known
to have existed at the same time as the Shang. Although written records found
at Anyang confirm the existence of the Shang dynasty, Western scholars are
often hesitant to associate settlements that are contemporaneous with the
Anyang settlement with the Shang dynasty. For example, archaeological findings
at Sanxingdui suggest a technologically advanced civilization culturally unlike
Anyang. The evidence is inconclusive in proving how far the Shang realm
extended from Anyang. The leading hypothesis is that Anyang, ruled by the same
Shang in the official history, coexisted and traded with numerous other
culturally diverse settlements in the area that is now referred to as China
proper. Zhou Dynasty (1046‚Äì256 BC). "Capitals: Xi'an and Luoyang" The Zhou
Dynasty was the longest-lasting dynasty in Chinese history, from 1066 BC to
approximately 256 BC. By the end of the 2nd millennium BC, the Zhou Dynasty
began to emerge in the Yellow River valley, overrunning the territory of the
Shang. The Zhou appeared to have begun their rule under a semi-feudal system.
The Zhou lived west of the Shang, and the Zhou leader had been appointed
"Western Protector" by the Shang. The ruler of the Zhou, King Wu, with the
assistance of his brother, the Duke of Zhou, as regent, managed to defeat the
Shang at the Battle of Muye. The king of Zhou at this time invoked the concept
of the Mandate of Heaven to legitimize his rule, a concept that would be
influential for almost every succeeding dynasty. Like Shangdi, Heaven ("tian")
ruled over all the other gods, and it decided who would rule China. It was
believed that a ruler had lost the Mandate of Heaven when natural disasters
occurred in great number, and when, more realistically, the sovereign had
apparently lost his concern for the people. In response, the royal house would
be overthrown, and a new house would rule, having been granted the Mandate of
Heaven. The Zhou initially moved their capital west to an area near modern
Xi'an, on the Wei River, a tributary of the Yellow River, but they would
preside over a series of expansions into the Yangtze River valley. This would
be the first of many population migrations from north to south in Chinese
history. Spring and Autumn Period (722‚Äì476 BC). "Capitals: of the State of
Yan, Beijing; of the State of Qin, Xi'an" In the 8th century BC, power became
decentralized during the Spring and Autumn Period, named after the influential
Spring and Autumn Annals. In this period, local military leaders used by the
Zhou began to assert their power and vie for hegemony. The situation was
aggravated by the invasion of other peoples from the northwest, such as the
Qin, forcing the Zhou to move their capital east to Luoyang. This marks the
second major phase of the Zhou dynasty: the Eastern Zhou. The Spring and Autumn
Period is marked by a falling apart of the central Zhou power. In each of the
hundreds of states that eventually arose, local strongmen held most of the
political power and continued their subservience to the Zhou kings in name
only. Some local leaders even started using royal titles for themselves. China
now consisted of hundreds of states, some of them only as large as a village
with a fort. The Hundred Schools of Thought of Chinese philosophy blossomed
during this period, and such influential intellectual movements as
Confucianism, Taoism, Legalism and Mohism were founded, partly in response to
the changing political world. Warring States Period (476‚Äì221 BC). "Several
capitals, due to there being multiple states" After further political
consolidation, seven prominent states remained by the end of 5th century BC,
and the years in which these few states battled each other are known as the
Warring States Period. Though there remained a nominal Zhou king until 256 BC,
he was largely a figurehead and held little real power. As neighboring
territories of these warring states, including areas of modern Sichuan and
Liaoning, were annexed, they were governed under the new local administrative
system of commandery and prefecture (ÈÉ°Á∏£/ÈÉ°Âéø). This system had been in
use since the Spring and Autumn Period, and parts can still be seen in the
modern system of Sheng & Xian (province and county, ÁúÅÁ∏£/ÁúÅÂéø). The final
expansion in this period began during the reign of Ying Zheng, the king of Qin.
His unification of the other six powers, and further annexations in the modern
regions of Zhejiang, Fujian, Guangdong and Guangxi in 214 BC, enabled him to
proclaim himself the First Emperor (Qin Shi Huang). Imperial era. Qin Dynasty
(221‚Äì206 BC). "Capital: Xianyang" Historians often refer to the period from
Qin Dynasty to the end of Qing Dynasty as Imperial China. Though the unified
reign of the First Qin Emperor lasted only 12 years, he managed to subdue great
parts of what constitutes the core of the Han Chinese homeland and to unite
them under a tightly centralized Legalist government seated at Xianyang (close
to modern Xi'an). The doctrine of Legalism that guided the Qin emphasized
strict adherence to a legal code and the absolute power of the emperor. This
philosophy, while effective for expanding the empire in a military fashion,
proved unworkable for governing it in peacetime. The Qin Emperor presided over
the brutal silencing of political opposition, including the event known as the
burning of books and burying of scholars. This would be the impetus behind the
later Han synthesis incorporating the more moderate schools of political
governance. The Qin Dynasty is well known for beginning the Great Wall of
China, which was later augmented and enhanced during the Ming Dynasty. The
other major contributions of the Qin include the concept of a centralized
government, the unification of the legal code, development of the written
language, measurement, and currency of China after the tribulations of the
Spring and Autumn and Warring States Periods. Even something as basic as the
length of axles for carts had to be made uniform to ensure a viable trading
system throughout the empire. Han Dynasty (202 BC‚ÄìAD 220). "Capitals:
Chang'an, Luoyang, Liyang, Xuchang" Western Han. The Han Dynasty (202 BC ‚Äì AD
220) emerged in 206 BC, with its founder Liu Bang proclaimed emperor in 202 BC.
It was the first dynasty to embrace the philosophy of Confucianism, which
became the ideological underpinning of all regimes until the end of imperial
China. Under the Han Dynasty, China made great advances in many areas of the
arts and sciences. Emperor Wu consolidated and extended the Chinese empire by
pushing back the Xiongnu into the steppes of modern Inner Mongolia, wresting
from them the modern areas of Gansu, Ningxia and Qinghai. This enabled the
first opening of trading connections between China and the West, along the Silk
Road. Han Dynasty general Ban Chao expanded his conquests across the Pamirs to
the shores of the Caspian Sea. The first of several Roman embassies to China is
recorded in Chinese sources, coming from the sea route in AD 166, and a second
one in AD 284. Xin Dynasty. Nevertheless, land acquisitions by elite families
gradually drained the tax base. In AD 9, the usurper Wang Mang claimed that the
Mandate of Heaven called for the end of the Han dynasty and the rise of his
own, and he founded the short-lived Xin ("New") Dynasty. Wang Mang started an
extensive program of land and other economic reforms, including the outlawing
of slavery and land nationalization and redistribution. These programs,
however, were never supported by the landholding families, because they favored
the peasants. The instability of power brought about chaos, uprisings, and loss
of territories. This was compounded by mass flooding of the Yellow River; silt
buildup caused it to split into two channels and displaced large numbers of
farmers. Wang Mang was eventually killed in Weiyang Palace by an enraged
peasant mob in AD 23. Eastern Han. Emperor Guangwu reinstated the Han Dynasty
with the support of landholding and merchant families at Luoyang, east of
Xi'an. This new era would be termed the Eastern Han Dynasty. Han power declined
again amidst land acquisitions, invasions, and feuding between consort clans
and eunuchs. The Yellow Turban Rebellion broke out in AD 184, ushering in an
era of warlords. In the ensuing turmoil, three states tried to gain
predominance in the period of the Three Kingdoms. This time period has been
greatly romanticized in works such as "Romance of the Three Kingdoms". Wei and
Jin Period (AD 265‚Äì420). "Capitals: of Cao Wei and Western Jin, Luoyang; of
Shu Han, Chengdu; of Eastern Wu and Eastern Jin, Jiankang; of Western Jin,
Chang'an" After Cao Cao reunified the north in 208, his son proclaimed the Wei
dynasty in 220. Soon, Wei's rivals Shu and Wu proclaimed their independence,
leading China into the Three Kingdoms Period. This period was characterized by
a gradual decentralization of the state that had existed during the Qin and Han
dynasties, and an increase in the power of great families. Although the Three
Kingdoms were reunified by the Jin Dynasty in 280, this structure was
essentially the same until the Wu Hu uprising. Wu Hu Period (AD 304‚Äì439).
"Several capitals, due to there being several states and warring" Taking
advantage of civil war in the Jin Dynasty, the contemporary non-Han Chinese (Wu
Hu) ethnic groups controlled much of the country in the early 4th century and
provoked large-scale Han Chinese migrations to south of the Yangtze River. In
303 the Di people rebelled and later captured Chengdu, establishing the state
of Cheng Han. Under Liu Yuan, the Xiongnu rebelled near today's Linfen County
and established the state of Han Zhao. Liu Yuan's successor Liu Cong captured
and executed the last two Western Jin emperors. Sixteen kingdoms were a
plethora of short-lived non-Chinese dynasties that came to rule the whole or
parts of northern China in the 4th and 5th centuries. Many ethnic groups were
involved, including ancestors of the Turks, Mongols, and Tibetans. Most of
these nomadic peoples had, to some extent, been "sinicized" long before their
ascent to power. In fact, some of them, notably the Qiang and the Xiongnu, had
already been allowed to live in the frontier regions within the Great Wall
since late Han times. Southern and Northern Dynasties (AD 420‚Äì589).
"Capitals: of the Northern Dynasties: Ye, Chang'an, of the Southern Dynasties:
Jiankang" Signaled by the collapse of East Jin Dynasty in 420, China entered
the era of the Southern and Northern Dynasties. The Han people managed to
survive the military attacks from the nomadic tribes of the north, such as the
Xianbei, and their civilization continued to thrive. In southern China, fierce
debates about whether Buddhism should be allowed to exist were held frequently
by the royal court and nobles. Finally, near the end of the Southern and
Northern Dynasties era, both Buddhist and Taoist followers compromised and
became more tolerant of each other. In 589, Sui annexed the last Southern
Dynasty, Chen, through military force, and put an end to the era of Southern
and Northern Dynasties. Sui Dynasty (AD 589‚Äì618). "Official capital: Daxing;
secondary capital: Dongdu" The Sui Dynasty, which managed to reunite the
country in 589 after nearly four centuries of political fragmentation, played a
role more important than its length of existence would suggest. The Sui brought
China together again and set up many institutions that were to be adopted by
their successors, the Tang. These included the government system of Three
Departments and Six Ministries, standard coinage, improved defense and
expansion of the Great Wall, and official support for Buddhism. Like the Qin,
however, the Sui overused their resources and collapsed. Also similar to the
Qin, traditional history has judged the Sui somewhat unfairly, as it has
stressed the harshness of the Sui regime and the arrogance of its second
emperor, giving little credit for the Dynasty's many positive achievements.
Tang Dynasty (AD 618‚Äì907). "Capitals: Chang'an and Luoyang" Tang Dynasty was
founded by Emperor Gaozu on June 18, 618. It was a golden age of Chinese
civilization with significant developments in art, literature, particularly
poetry, and technology. Buddhism became the predominant religion for common
people. Chang'an (modern Xi'an), the national capital, was the largest city in
the world of its time. Started by the second emperor, Taizong, military
campaigns were launched to dissolve threats from nomadic tribes, extend the
border, and submit neighboring states into a tributary system. Military
victories in the Tarim Basin kept the Silk Road open, connecting Chang'an to
Central Asia and areas far to the west. In the south, lucrative maritime trade
routes began from port cities such as Guangzhou. There was extensive trade with
distant foreign countries, and many foreign merchants settled in China,
boosting a vibrant cosmopolitan culture. The Tang culture and social systems
were admired and adapted by neighboring countries like Japan. Internally, the
Grand Canal linked the political heartland in Chang'an to the economic and
agricultural centers in the eastern and southern parts of the empire.
Underlying the prosperity of the early Tang Dynasty was a strong centralized
bureaucracy with efficient policies. The government was organized as "Three
Departments and Six Ministries" to separately draft, review, and implement
policies. These departments were run by royal family members as well as scholar
officials who were selected from imperial examinations. These practices, which
matured in the Tang Dynasty, were to be inherited by the later dynasties with
some modifications. The Tang land policy ‚Äì the "Equal-field system" ‚Äì
claimed all lands as imperially owned, and were granted evenly to people
according to the size of the households. The associated military policy ‚Äì the
"Fubing system" ‚Äì conscripted all men in the nation for a fixed duty period
each year in exchange for their land rights. These policies stimulated rapid
growth of productivity, while boosting the army without much burden on the
state treasury. However, lands gradually fell into the hands of private land
owners, and standing armies were to replace conscription towards the middle
period of the dynasty. The dynasty continued to flourish under Empress Wu
Zetian, the only empress regnant in Chinese history, and reached its zenith
during the reign of Emperor Xuanzong, who oversaw an empire that stretched from
the Pacific to the Aral Sea with at least 50 million people. At the zenith of
prosperity of the empire, the An Lushan Rebellion was a watershed event that
devastated the population and drastically weakened the central imperial
government. Regional military governors, known as Jiedushi, gained increasingly
autonomous status while formerly submissive states raided the empire.
Nevertheless, after the An Lushan Rebellion, the Tang civil society recovered
and thrived amidst the weakened imperial bureaucracy. From about 860, the Tang
Dynasty declined due to a series of rebellions within China itself and in the
former subject Kingdom of Nanzhao to the south. One warlord, Huang Chao,
captured Guangzhou in 879, killing most of the 200,000 inhabitants, including
most of the large colony of foreign merchant families there. In late 880,
Luoyang surrendered to Huang Chao, and on 5 January 881 he conquered Chang'an.
The emperor Xizong fled to Chengdu, and Huang established a new temporary
regime which was eventually destroyed by Tang forces. Another time of political
chaos followed. Five Dynasties and Ten Kingdoms (AD 907‚Äì960). "Several
capitals" The period of political disunity between the Tang and the Song, known
as the Five Dynasties and Ten Kingdoms Period, lasted little more than half a
century, from 907 to 960. During this brief era, when China was in all respects
a multi-state system, five regimes rapidly succeeded one another in control of
the old Imperial heartland in northern China. During this same time, sections
of southern and western China were occupied by ten, more stable, regimes so the
period is also referred to as the Ten Kingdoms. Song, Liao, Jin, and Western
Xia Dynasties (AD 960‚Äì1234). "Capitals: of the Song Dynasty, Kaifeng and
Lin'an; of the Liao Dynasty, Shangjing, Nanjing, and Tokmok; of the Jin
Dynasty, Shangjing, Zhongdu, and Kaifeng; of the Western Xia Dynasty, Yinchuan"
In 960, the Song Dynasty gained power over most of China and established its
capital in Kaifeng (later known as Bianjing), starting a period of economic
prosperity, while the Khitan Liao Dynasty ruled over Manchuria, present-day
Mongolia, and parts of Northern China. In 1115, the Jurchen Jin Dynasty emerged
to prominence, annihilating the Liao Dynasty in 10 years. Meanwhile, in what
are now the northwestern Chinese provinces of Gansu, Shaanxi, and Ningxia,
there emerged a Western Xia Dynasty from 1032 to 1227, established by Tangut
tribes. The Jin Dynasty took power over northern China and Kaifeng from the
Song Dynasty, which moved its capital to Hangzhou (Êù≠Â∑û). The Southern Song
Dynasty also suffered the humiliation of having to acknowledge the Jin Dynasty
as formal overlords. In the ensuing years, China was divided between the Song
Dynasty, the Jin Dynasty and the Tangut Western Xia. Southern Song experienced
a period of great technological development which can be explained in part by
the military pressure that it felt from the north. This included the use of
gunpowder weapons, which played a large role in the Song Dynasty naval
victories against the Jin in the Battle of Tangdao and Battle of Caishi on the
Yangtze River in 1161. Furthermore, China's first permanent standing navy was
assembled and provided an admiral's office at Dinghai in 1132, under the reign
of Emperor Renzong of Song. The Song Dynasty is considered by many to be
classical China's high point in science and technology, with innovative
scholar-officials such as Su Song (1020‚Äì1101) and Shen Kuo (1031‚Äì1095).
There was court intrigue between the political rivals of the Reformers and
Conservatives, led by the chancellors Wang Anshi and Sima Guang, respectively.
By the mid-to-late 13th century, the Chinese had adopted the dogma of Neo-
Confucian philosophy formulated by Zhu Xi. Enormous literary works were
compiled during the Song Dynasty, such as the historical work of the "Zizhi
Tongjian" ("Comprehensive Mirror to Aid in Government"). Culture and the arts
flourished, with grandiose artworks such as "Along the River During the
Qingming Festival" and "Eighteen Songs of a Nomad Flute", along with great
Buddhist painters like the prolific Lin Tinggui. Yuan Dynasty (AD 1271‚Äì1368).
"Capitals: Xanadu and Dadu" The Jurchen-founded Jin Dynasty was defeated by the
Mongols, who then proceeded to defeat the Southern Song in a long and bloody
war, the first war in which firearms played an important role. During the era
after the war, later called the "Pax Mongolica", adventurous Westerners such as
Marco Polo travelled all the way to China and brought the first reports of its
wonders to Europe. In the Yuan Dynasty, the Mongols were divided between those
who wanted to remain based in the steppes and those who wished to adopt the
customs of the Chinese. Kublai Khan, grandson of Genghis Khan, wanting to adopt
the customs of China, established the Yuan Dynasty. This was the first dynasty
to rule the whole of China from Beijing as the capital. Beijing had been ceded
to Liao in AD 938 with the Sixteen Prefectures of Yan Yun. Before that, it had
been the capital of the Jin, who did not rule all of China. Before the Mongol
invasion, Chinese dynasties reportedly had approximately 120 million
inhabitants; after the conquest was completed in 1279, the 1300 census reported
roughly 60 million people. While it is tempting to attribute this major decline
solely to Mongol ferocity, scholars today have mixed sentiments regarding this
subject. Scholars such as Frederick W. Mote argue that the wide drop in numbers
reflects an administrative failure to record rather than an actual decrease;
others such as Timothy Brook argue that the Mongols created a system of
enserfment among a huge portion of the Chinese populace, causing many to
disappear from the census altogether; other historians like William McNeill and
David Morgan argue that the Bubonic Plague was the main factor behind the
demographic decline during this period. In the 14th century, China suffered
additional depredations from epidemics of plague. The Black Death is estimated
to have killed 25 million people or 30% of the population of China. Ming
Dynasty (AD 1368‚Äì1644). "Capitals: Nanjing, Beijing, Fuzhou, and Zhaoqing"
Throughout the Yuan Dynasty, which lasted less than a century, there was
relatively strong sentiment among the populace against the Mongol rule. The
frequent natural disasters since the 1340s finally led to peasant revolts. The
Yuan Dynasty was eventually overthrown by the Ming Dynasty in 1368.
Urbanization increased as the population grew and as the division of labor grew
more complex. Large urban centers, such as Nanjing and Beijing, also
contributed to the growth of private industry. In particular, small-scale
industries grew up, often specializing in paper, silk, cotton, and porcelain
goods. For the most part, however, relatively small urban centers with markets
proliferated around the country. Town markets mainly traded food, with some
necessary manufactures such as pins or oil. Despite the xenophobia and
intellectual introspection characteristic of the increasingly popular new
school of neo-Confucianism, China under the early Ming Dynasty was not
isolated. Foreign trade and other contacts with the outside world, particularly
Japan, increased considerably. Chinese merchants explored all of the Indian
Ocean, reaching East Africa with the voyages of Zheng He. Zhu Yuanzhang or
Hong-wu, the founder of the dynasty, laid the foundations for a state
interested less in commerce and more in extracting revenues from the
agricultural sector. Perhaps because of the Emperor's background as a peasant,
the Ming economic system emphasized agriculture, unlike that of the Song and
the Mongolian Dynasties, which relied on traders and merchants for revenue.
Neo-feudal landholdings of the Song and Mongol periods were expropriated by the
Ming rulers. Land estates were confiscated by the government, fragmented, and
rented out. Private slavery was forbidden. Consequently, after the death of
Emperor Yong-le, independent peasant landholders predominated in Chinese
agriculture. These laws might have paved the way to removing the worst of the
poverty during the previous regimes. The dynasty had a strong and complex
central government that unified and controlled the empire. The emperor's role
became more autocratic, although Zhu Yuanzhang necessarily continued to use
what he called the "Grand Secretaries" (ÂÜÖÈòÅ) to assist with the immense
paperwork of the bureaucracy, including memorials (petitions and
recommendations to the throne), imperial edicts in reply, reports of various
kinds, and tax records. It was this same bureaucracy that later prevented the
Ming government from being able to adapt to changes in society, and eventually
led to its decline. Emperor Yong-le strenuously tried to extend China's
influence beyond its borders by demanding other rulers send ambassadors to
China to present tribute. A large navy was built, including four-masted ships
displacing 1,500¬ tons. A standing army of 1 million troops (some estimate as
many as 1.9 million ) was created. The Chinese armies conquered Vietnam for
around 20 years, while the Chinese fleet sailed the China seas and the Indian
Ocean, cruising as far as the east coast of Africa. The Chinese gained
influence in eastern Moghulistan. Several maritime Asian nations sent envoys
with tribute for the Chinese emperor. Domestically, the Grand Canal was
expanded and proved to be a stimulus to domestic trade. Over 100,000¬ tons of
iron per year were produced. Many books were printed using movable type. The
imperial palace in Beijing's Forbidden City reached its current splendor. It
was also during these centuries that the potential of south China came to be
fully exploited. New crops were widely cultivated and industries such as those
producing porcelain and textiles flourished. In 1449 Esen Tayisi led an Oirat
Mongol invasion of northern China which culminated in the capture of the
Zhengtong Emperor at Tumu. In 1542 the Mongol leader Altan Khan began to harass
China along the northern border. In 1550 he even reached the suburbs of
Beijing. The empire also had to deal with Japanese pirates attacking the
southeastern coastline; General Qi Jiguang was instrumental in defeating these
pirates. The deadliest earthquake of all times, the Shaanxi earthquake of 1556
that killed approximately 830,000 people, occurred during the Jiajing Emperor's
reign. During the Ming dynasty the last construction on the Great Wall was
undertaken to protect China from foreign invasions. While the Great Wall had
been built in earlier times, most of what is seen today was either built or
repaired by the Ming. The brick and granite work was enlarged, the watch towers
were redesigned, and cannons were placed along its length. Qing Dynasty (AD
1644‚Äì1911). "Capitals: Shenyang and Beijing" The Qing Dynasty (1644‚Äì1911)
was the last imperial dynasty in China. Founded by the Manchus, it was the
second non-Han Chinese dynasty. The Manchus were formerly known as "Jurchen",
residing in the northeastern part of the Ming territory outside the Great Wall.
They emerged as the major threat to the late Ming Dynasty after Nurhaci united
all Jurchen tribes and established an independent state. However, the Ming
Dynasty would be overthrown by Li Zicheng's peasants rebellion, with Beijing
captured in 1644 and the last Ming Emperor Chongzhen committing suicide. The
Manchu allied with the Ming Dynasty general Wu Sangui to seize Beijing, which
was made the capital of the Qing dynasty, and then proceeded to subdue the
remaining Ming's resistance in the south. The decades of Manchu conquest caused
enormous loss of lives and the economic scale of China shrank drastically.
Nevertheless, the Manchus adopted the Confucian norms of traditional Chinese
government in their rule and were considered a Chinese dynasty. The Manchus
enforced a 'queue order,' forcing the Han Chinese to adopt the Manchu queue
hairstyle and Manchu-style clothing. The traditional Han clothing, or "Hanfu",
was also replaced by Manchu-style clothing "Qipao" (bannermen dress and
"Tangzhuang"). Emperor Kangxi ordered the creation of Kangxi Dictionary, the
most complete dictionary of Chinese characters ever put together at the time.
The Qing dynasty set up the "Eight Banners" system that provided the basic
framework for the Qing military organization. The bannermen were prohibited
from participating in trade and manual labour unless they petitioned to be
removed from banner status. They were considered a form of nobility and were
given preferential treatment in terms of annual pensions, land and allotments
of cloth. Over the next half-century, all areas previously under the Ming
Dynasty were consolidated under the Qing. Xinjiang, Tibet, and Mongolia were
also formally incorporated into Chinese territory. Between 1673 and 1681, the
Emperor Kangxi suppressed an uprising of three generals in Southern China who
had been denied hereditary rule to large fiefdoms granted by the previous
emperor; he also put down a Ming restorationist invasion from Taiwan, called
the Revolt of the Three Feudatories. In 1683, the Qing staged an amphibious
assault on southern Taiwan, bringing down the rebel Grand Duchy of Tungning,
which was founded by the Ming loyalist Koxinga in 1662 after the fall of the
Southern Ming, and had served as a base for continued Ming resistance in
Southern China. By the end of Qianlong Emperor's long reign, the Qing Empire
was at its zenith. China ruled more than one-third of the world's population,
and had the largest economy in the world. By area of extent, it was one of the
largest empires ever in history. In the 19th century, the empire was internally
stagnated and externally threatened by imperialism. The defeat by the British
Empire in the First Opium War (1840) led to the Treaty of Nanjing (1842), under
which Hong Kong was ceded and opium import was legitimized. Subsequent military
defeats and unequal treaties with other imperial powers would continue even
after the fall of the Qing Dynasty. Internally, the Taiping Rebellion
(1851‚Äì1864), a quasi-Christian religious movement led by the "Heavenly King"
Hong Xiuquan, would raid roughly a third of Chinese territory for over a decade
until they were finally crushed in the Third Battle of Nanking in 1864.
Arguably one of the largest warfares in the 19th century in terms of troops
involvement, there were massive lost of lives, with a death toll of about 20
millions. A string of rebellions would follow, which included Punti-Hakka Clan
Wars, Nien Rebellion, Muslim Rebellion, and Panthay Rebellion. Although all
rebellions were eventually put down at enormous cost and casualties, the
central imperial authority was seriously weakened. In response to calamities
within the empire and threats from imperialism, the Self-Strengthening Movement
was an institutional reform in the second half of the 1800s. The aim was to
modernize the empire, with prime emphasis on strengthening the military.
However, the reform was undermined by corrupt officials, cynicism, and quarrels
within the imperial family. As a result, the "Beiyang Navy" were soundly
defeated in the Sino-Japanese War (1894-1895). Guangxu Emperor and the
reformists then launched a more comprehensive reform effort, the Hundred Day's
Reform (1898), but it was shortly overturned by the conservatives under Empress
Dowager Cixi in a military coup. At the turn of the 20th century, a
conservative anti-imperialist movement, the Boxer Rebellion, violently revolted
against foreign suppression over vast areas in Northern China. The Empress
Dowager, probably seeking to ensure her continual grip on power, sided with the
Boxers as they advanced on Beijing. In response, a relief expedition of the
Eight-Nation Alliance invaded China to rescue the besieged foreign missions.
Consisting of British, Japanese, Russian, Italian, German, French, US and
Austrian troops, the alliance defeated the Boxers and demanded further
concessions from the Qing government. The early 1900s saw increasing civil
disorder, despite reform talk by Cixi and the Qing government. Slavery in China
was abolished in 1910. The 1911 revolution overthrew the Qing's imperial rule.
Modern era. Republic of China (1912‚Äì1949). "Capitals: Nanjing, Beijing,
Chongqing, and several short-lived wartime capitals; Taipei after 1949"
Frustrated by the Qing court's resistance to reform and by China's weakness,
young officials, military officers, and students began to advocate the
overthrow of the Qing Dynasty and the creation of a republic. They were
inspired by the revolutionary ideas of Sun Yat-sen. When Sun Yat-sen was asked
by one of the leading revolutionary generals to what he ascribed the success,
he said, "To Christianity more than to any other single cause. Along with its
ideals of religious freedom, and along with these it inculcates everywhere a
doctrine of universal love and peace. These ideals appeal to the Chinese; they
largely caused the Revolution, and they largely determined its peaceful
character." A revolutionary military uprising, the Wuchang Uprising, began on
10 October 1911, in Wuhan. The provisional government of the Republic of China
was formed in Nanjing on 12 March 1912. Sun Yat-sen was declared as President,
but Sun was forced to turn power over to Yuan Shikai, who commanded the New
Army and was Prime Minister under the Qing government, as part of the agreement
to let the last Qing monarch abdicate (a decision Sun would later regret). Over
the next few years, Yuan proceeded to abolish the national and provincial
assemblies, and declared himself emperor in late 1915. Yuan's imperial
ambitions were fiercely opposed by his subordinates; faced with the prospect of
rebellion, he abdicated in March 1916, and died in June of that year. Yuan
death in 1916 left a power vacuum in China; the republican government was all
but shattered. This ushered in the warlord era, during which much of the
country was ruled by shifting coalitions of competing provincial military
leaders. In 1919, the May Fourth Movement began as a response to the terms
imposed on China by the Treaty of Versailles ending World War I, but quickly
became a protest movement about the domestic situation in China. The
discrediting of liberal Western philosophy amongst Chinese intellectuals was
followed by the adoption of more radical lines of thought. This in turn planted
the seeds for the irreconcilable conflict between the left and right in China
that would dominate Chinese history for the rest of the century. In the 1920s,
Sun Yat-Sen established a revolutionary base in south China, and set out to
unite the fragmented nation. With assistance from the Soviet Union (themselves
fresh from a socialist uprising), he entered into an alliance with the
fledgling Communist Party of China. After Sun's death from cancer in 1925, one
of his prot√©g√©s, Chiang Kai-shek, seized control of the "Kuomintang"
(Nationalist Party or KMT) and succeeded in bringing most of south and central
China under its rule in a military campaign known as the Northern Expedition
(1926‚Äì1927). Having defeated the warlords in south and central China by
military force, Chiang was able to secure the nominal allegiance of the
warlords in the North. In 1927, Chiang turned on the CPC and relentlessly
chased the CPC armies and its leaders from their bases in southern and eastern
China. In 1934, driven from their mountain bases such as the Chinese Soviet
Republic, the CPC forces embarked on the Long March across China's most
desolate terrain to the northwest, where they established a guerrilla base at
Yan'an in Shaanxi Province. During the Long March, the communists reorganized
under a new leader, Mao Zedong (Mao Tse-tung). The bitter struggle between the
KMT and the CPC continued, openly or clandestinely, through the 14-year long
Japanese occupation of various parts of the country (1931‚Äì1945). The two
Chinese parties nominally formed a united front to oppose the Japanese in 1937,
during the Sino-Japanese War (1937-1945), which became a part of World War II.
Following the defeat of Japan in 1945, the war between the KMT and the CPC
resumed, after failed attempts at reconciliation and a negotiated settlement.
By 1949, the CPC had established control over most of the country "(see Chinese
Civil War)". When Chiang was defeated by CPC forces in mainland China in 1949,
he retreated to Taiwan with his government and his most disciplined troops,
along with most of the KMT leadership and a large number of their supporters;
Chiang Kai-shek had taken effective control of Taiwan at the end of WWII as
part of the overall Japanese surrender, when Japanese troops in Taiwan
surrendered to Republic of China troops. 1949 to present. Major combat in the
Chinese Civil War ended in 1949 with Kuomintang (KMT) pulling out of the
mainland, with the government relocating to Taipei and maintaining control only
over a few islands. The Communist Party of China was left in control of
mainland China. On 1 October 1949, Mao Zedong proclaimed the People's Republic
of China. "Communist China" and "Red China" were two common names for the PRC.
The PRC was shaped by a series of campaigns and five-year plans, with mixed
success. The economic and social plan known as the Great Leap Forward resulted
in an estimated 45¬ million deaths. In 1966, Mao and his allies launched the
Cultural Revolution, which would last until Mao's death a decade later. The
Cultural Revolution, motivated by power struggles within the Party and a fear
of the Soviet Union, led to a major upheaval in Chinese society. In 1972, at
the peak of the Sino-Soviet split, Mao and Zhou Enlai met Richard Nixon in
Beijing to establish relations with the United States. In the same year, the
PRC was admitted to the United Nations in place of the Republic of China for
China's membership of the United Nations, and permanent membership of the
Security Council. A power struggle followed Mao's death in 1976. The Gang of
Four were arrested and blamed for the excesses of the Cultural Revolution,
marking the end of a turbulent political era in China. Deng Xiaoping
outmaneuvered Mao's anointed successor chairman Hua Guofeng, and gradually
emerged as the "de facto" leader over the next few years. Deng Xiaoping was the
Paramount Leader of China from 1978 to 1992, although he never became the head
of the party or state, and his influence within the Party led the country to
significant economic reforms. The Communist Party subsequently loosened
governmental control over citizens' personal lives and the communes were
disbanded with many peasants receiving multiple land leases, which greatly
increased incentives and agricultural production. This turn of events marked
China's transition from a planned economy to a mixed economy with an
increasingly open market environment, a system termed by some as "market
socialism", and officially by the Communist Party of China as "Socialism with
Chinese characteristics". The PRC adopted its current constitution on 4
December 1982. In 1989, the death of former general secretary Hu Yaobang helped
to spark the Tiananmen Square protests of 1989, during which students and
others campaigned for several months, speaking out against corruption and in
favour of greater political reform, including democratic rights and freedom of
speech. However, they were eventually put down on 4 June when PLA troops and
vehicles entered and forcibly cleared the square, resulting in numerous
casualties. This event was widely reported and brought worldwide condemnation
and sanctions against the government. The "Tank Man" incident in particular
became famous. CPC General Secretary and PRC President Jiang Zemin and PRC
Premier Zhu Rongji, both former mayors of Shanghai, led post-Tiananmen PRC in
the 1990s. Under Jiang and Zhu's ten years of administration, the PRC's
economic performance pulled an estimated 150¬ million peasants out of poverty
and sustained an average annual gross domestic product growth rate of 11.2%.
The country formally joined the World Trade Organization in 2001. Although the
PRC needs economic growth to spur its development, the government has begun to
worry that rapid economic growth has negatively impacted the country's
resources and environment. Another concern is that certain sectors of society
are not sufficiently benefiting from the PRC's economic development; one
example of this is the wide gap between urban and rural areas. As a result,
under current CPC General Secretary and President Hu Jintao and Premier Wen
Jiabao, the PRC has initiated policies to address these issues of equitable
distribution of resources, but the outcome remains to be seen. More than
40¬ million farmers have been displaced from their land, usually for economic
development, contributing to 87,000 demonstrations and riots across China in
2005. For much of the PRC's population, living standards have seen extremely
large improvements and freedom continues to expand, but political controls
remain tight and rural areas poor.
