History of Mozambique Mozambique was a Portuguese colony, overseas province and
later a member state of Portugal. It gained independence from Portugal in 1975.
Pre-colonial history. Stone age Mozambique. In 2007 Julio Mercader, of the
University of Calgary, recovered dozens of 100,000 year old stone tools from a
deep limestone cave near Lake Niassa in Mozambique showing that wild sorghum,
the ancestor of the chief cereal consumed today in sub-Saharan Africa for
flours, breads, porridges and alcoholic beverages, was being consumed by Homo
sapiens along with African wine palm, the false banana, pigeon peas, wild
oranges and the African "potato." This is the earliest direct evidence of
humans using pre-domesticated cereals anywhere in the world. Ancient history.
The first inhabitants of what is now Mozambique were the San hunters and
gatherers, ancestors of the Khoisani peoples. Between the 1st and 5th centuries
AD, waves of Bantu-speaking peoples migrated from the north through the Zambezi
River valley and then gradually into the plateau and coastal areas. The Bantu
were farmers and ironworkers. When Vasco da Gama, exploring for Portugal,
reached the coast of Mozambique in 1498, Arab trading settlements had existed
along the coast and outlying islands for several centuries, and political
control of the coast was in the hands of a string of local sultans. Muslims had
actually lived in the region for quite some time; the famous Arab historian and
geographer, Al-Masudi, reported Muslims amongst Africans in the land of Sofa in
947 (modern day Mozambique, itself a derivative of the name of the Arab Shiekh
who ruled the area at the time when the Portuguese arrived, Musa bin Ba'ik).
Most of the local people had embraced Islam. The region lay at the southernmost
end of a traditional trading world that encompassed the Red Sea, the Hadhramaut
coast of Arabia and the Indian coast, described in the 1st-century coasting
guide that is called the Periplus of the Erythraean Sea. Colonial history. From
about 1500, Portuguese trading posts and forts became regular ports of call on
the new route to the east. "Mozambique" first described a small coral island at
the mouth of Mossuril Bay, then the fort and town on that island, São
Sebastião de Moçambique, and later extended to the whole of the Portuguese
colonies on the east coast of Africa. The square fort at the northern extremity
of the island was built in 1510 entirely of ballast stone brought from
Portugal. With the decline of Portuguese power, especially during the period
when the crown of Portugal was combined with the crown of Spain (1580–1640),
the Portuguese coastal settlements were ignored and fell into a ruinous
condition. Afterwards, investment lagged while Lisbon devoted itself to the
more lucrative trade with India and the Far East and to the colonization of
Brazil. Into the 19th century, a system prevailed of dividing the land into
"prazos" (large agricultural estates) which the natives cultivated for the
benefit of the European leaseholders, who were also tax-collector for each
district and claimed the tax either in labour or produce, a system that kept
the sharecropping farmers in a state of serfdom. Direct Portuguese influence
was limited. On the coast between several native ports of call and Madagascar a
large surreptitious trade in slaves was carried on until 1877, supplying slaves
for Arabia and the Ottomans. European traders and prospectors barely penetrated
the interior regions, until the Transvaal gold rush. The commercial and
political importance of Mozambique was eclipsed by Lourenço Marques. In 1891
the Portuguese shifted the administration of much of the country to a large
private company, under a charter granting sovereign rights for 50 years to the
Mozambique Company, which, though it had its headquarters at Beira, was
controlled and financed mostly by the British. The 'Mozambique Company' issued
postage stamps and established railroad lines to neighboring countries. It
supplied cheap – and often forced – African labor to the goldmines and
plantations of the nearby British colonies and South Africa. Because policies
were designed to benefit white settlers and the Portuguese homeland, little
attention was paid to the integration of Mozambique's indigenous population,
its economic infrastructure, or the skills of its indigenous rural population.
Under Salazar, Portugal instituted another form of cash crop creation called
the concession system. The cotton concessionary system was government run.
Prices were fixed at extremely low prices, regulations were set upon the native
Africans, and inhabitants were forced to work up to 150 days a year on their
fields (1 hectacre per male, 1/2 hectare per female). Africans could only sell
their cotton for African (low) prices, while Europeans had special high selling
prices. Mozambicans knew cotton as the "mother of all poverty" during this
time, and intense periods of poverty and starvation were fairly common.
Independence. After World War II, while many European nations were granting
independence to their colonies, Portugal's Estado Novo regime headed by
António de Oliveira Salazar issued a decree officially renaming Mozambique and
other Portuguese possessions as overseas provinces of the mother country, and
emigration to the colonies soared (Mozambique's ethnic Portuguese resident
population was about 300,000 in 1973, which excludes the Portuguese military
sent from the mainland and mulatto population). The drive for Mozambican
independence developed apace, and in 1962 several anti-colonial political
groups formed the Front for the Liberation of Mozambique (FRELIMO), which
initiated an armed campaign against Portuguese colonial rule in September 1964.
This conflict, along with the two others already initiated in the other
Portuguese colonies of Angola and Portuguese Guinea, became part of the so-
called Portuguese Colonial War. Mozambique became independent after ten years
of sporadic warfare in Mozambique and Portugal's return to democracy through a
leftist military coup in Lisbon on 25 April 1974 (partially as a result of the
expenses from the wars in the overseas territories in Africa). FRELIMO took
complete control of the territory after a transition period, as agreed in the
Lusaka Accord which recognized Mozambique's right to independence and the terms
of the transfer of power. Within a year of the Portuguese coup, almost all
Portuguese population had left the African territory – some expelled by the
new government of independent Mozambique, some fleeing in fear. Mozambique
became independent from Portugal on June 25, 1975. Portuguese population's
rapid exodus left the Mozambican economy in disarray. In addition, after the
independence day on June 25, 1975, the eruption of the Mozambican Civil War
(1977–1992) destroyed the remaining wealth and left the former Portuguese
Overseas Province in a state of absolute disrepair. In any event, as late as
2001, the economic outcome could still be seen in cities like Beira. Once a
thriving vacation city on the coast, it is still the second largest city in
Mozambique, with a population of 300,000. Many of these people live as
squatters in unfinished 1970s era luxury hotels facing the Indian Ocean.
FRELIMO responded to their lack of resources and the Cold War politics of the
mid-1970s by moving into alignment with the Soviet Union and its allies.
FRELIMO established a one-party Socialist state, and quickly received
substantial international aid from Cuba and the Eastern Bloc nations. Civil
War. Formed in 1975, the RENAMO (Mozambican National Resistance), an anti-
communist group sponsored by the Rhodesian Intelligence Service, and sponsored
by the apartheid government in South Africa as well as the United States after
Zimbabwe's independence, launched a series of attacks on transport routes,
schools and health clinics, and the country descended into civil war. In 1984,
Mozambique negotiated the Nkomati Accord with P. W. Botha and the South African
government, in which Mozambique was to expel the African National Congress in
exchange for South Africa stopping support of Renamo. At first both sides
complied but it soon became evident that infringements were taking place on
both sides and the war continued. In 1986, Mozambican President Samora Machel
died in an air crash in South African territory. Although unproven, many
suspect the South African government of responsibility for his death. Machel
was replaced by Joaquim Chissano as president. In 1990, with apartheid
crumbling in South Africa, and support for RENAMO drying up in South Africa and
in the United States, the first direct talks between the FRELIMO government and
Renamo were held. In November 1990 a new constitution was adopted. Mozambique
was now a multiparty state, with periodic elections, and guaranteed democratic
rights. On 4 October 1992, the Rome General Peace Accords, negotiated by the
Community of Sant'Egidio with the support of the United Nations, were signed in
Rome between President Chissano and RENAMO leader Afonso Dhlakama, which
formally took effect on the October 15, 1992. A UN Peacekeeping Force (ONUMOZ)
oversaw a two-year transition to democracy. The last ONUMOZ contingents
departed in early 1995. Democracy. Mozambique held elections in 1994, which
were accepted by most parties as free and fair while still contested by many
nationals and observers alike. FRELIMO won, under Joaquim Chissano, while
RENAMO, led by Afonso Dhlakama, ran as the official opposition. In 1995,
Mozambique joined the Commonwealth of Nations, becoming, at the time, the only
member nation that had never been part of the British Empire. By mid-1995, over
1.7 million refugees who had sought asylum in neighboring countries had
returned to Mozambique, part of the largest repatriation witnessed in sub-
Saharan Africa. An additional four million internally displaced persons had
returned to their homes. In December 1999, Mozambique held elections for a
second time since the civil war, which were again won by FRELIMO. RENAMO
accused FRELIMO of fraud, and threatened to return to civil war, but backed
down after taking the matter to the Supreme Court and losing. Indicating in
2001 that he would not run for a third term, Chissano criticized leaders who
stayed on longer than he had, which was generally seen as a reference to
Zambian president Frederick Chiluba, who at the time was considering a third
term, and Zimbabwean president Robert Mugabe, then in his fourth term.
Presidential and National Assembly elections took place on December 1–2,
2004. FRELIMO candidate Armando Guebuza won with 64% of the popular vote. His
opponent, Afonso Dhlakama of RENAMO, received 32% of the popular vote. FRELIMO
won 160 seats in Parliament. A coalition of RENAMO and several small parties
won the 90 remaining seats. Armando Guebuza was inaugurated as the President of
Mozambique on February 2, 2005. In early 2000 a cyclone caused widespread
flooding in the country, killing hundreds and devastating the already
precarious infrastructure. There were widespread suspicions that foreign aid
resources have been diverted by powerful leaders of FRELIMO. Carlos Cardoso, a
journalist investigating these allegations, was murdered but his death was not
satisfactorily explained. Much of the economic recovery which has followed the
end of the Mozambican Civil War (1977–1992) is being led by investors and
tourists from neighbour South Africa and from East Asia. A number of returning
Portuguese nationals have also invested in the country as well as some Italian
organizations. However, the country remains as one of the poorest in the world.
