History of the United States (1945–1964) For the United States of America,
1945 to 1964 was an era of economic growth and prosperity which saw the
victorious powers of World War II confronting each other in the Cold War and
the triumph of the Civil Rights Movement that ended Jim Crow segregation in the
South. The period saw an active foreign policy designed to rescue Europe and
Asia from the devastation of World War II and to contain the expansion of
Communism, represented by the Soviet Union and China. A race began to overawe
the other side with more powerful nuclear weapons. The Soviets formed the
Warsaw Pact of communist states to oppose the American-led North Atlantic
Treaty Organization (NATO) alliance. The U.S. fought a bloody, inconclusive war
in Korea and was escalating the war in Vietnam as the period ended. On the
domestic front, after a short transition, the economy grew rapidly, with
widespread prosperity, rising wages, and the movement of most of the remaining
farmers to the towns and cities. Politically, the era was dominated by
presidents, Democrats Harry Truman (1945–53), John F. Kennedy (1961–63) and
Lyndon Johnson (1963–69), and Republican Dwight D. Eisenhower (1953–61).
For most of the period, the Democrats controlled Congress; however, they were
usually unable to pass as much liberal legislation as they had hoped because of
the power of the Conservative Coalition. The Liberal coalition came to power
after Kennedy's assassination in 1963, and launched the Great Society. Cold
War. Origins. When the war ended in Europe on May 8, 1945, Soviet and Western
(U.S., British, and French) troops were located along a line through the center
of Germany. Aside from a few minor adjustments, this would be the "Iron
Curtain" of the Cold War. With the onset of the Cold War in Europe in 1947, the
East-West lines stabilized (except that Yugoslavia broke with the Soviets and
gained American support). In Asia, however, there was much more movement as the
Communists took over China in 1949 and attempted to take over all of Korea
(1950) and Vietnam (1954). Communist hegemony covered one third of the world's
land while the United States emerged as the world's more influential
superpower, and formed a worldwide network of military alliances. There were
fundamental contrasts between the visions of the United States and the Soviet
Union, between capitalism with liberal democracy and totalitarian communism.
The United States envisioned the new United Nations as a Wilsonian tool to
resolve future troubles, but it failed in that purpose. The U.S. rejected
totalitarianism and colonialism, in line with the principles laid down by the
Atlantic Charter of 1941: self-determination, equal economic access, and a
rebuilt capitalist, democratic Europe that could again serve as a hub in world
affairs. The only major industrial power in the world whose economy emerged
intact—and even greatly strengthened—was the United States. Although
President Franklin D. Roosevelt thought his personal relationship with Joseph
Stalin could dissolve future difficulties, President Truman was much more
skeptical. The Soviets, too, saw their vital interests in the containment or
roll-back of capitalism near their borders. Joseph Stalin was determined to
absorb the Baltics, neutralize Finland and Austria, and set up pro-Moscow
regimes in Poland, Romania, Czechoslovakia, Hungary, East Germany, and
Bulgaria. He at first collaborated with Josip Broz Tito in Yugoslavia, but then
they became enemies. Stalin ignored his promises at Yalta (Feb. 1945) when he
had promised that "free elections" would go ahead in Eastern Europe. Former
British Prime Minister Winston Churchill in 1946 condemned Stalin for cordoning
off a new Russian empire with an "iron curtain". Indeed the British government,
under the Labour Party, was at first more anti-Communist than the U.S. Its
economy was in bad shape, however, and it could no longer afford anti-Communist
activity in Greece. It asked the U.S. to intervene there; Truman agreed with
the Truman Doctrine in 1947. After making large ad-hoc loans and gifts to the
Europeans in 1945-47, the U.S. reorganized its foreign aid program in the
Marshall Plan, 1948–51, which gave $12 billion in gifts (and some loans) to
help rebuild and modernize the West European economies. The Cold War had begun
and Stalin refused to allow his satellites to accept American aid. Both sides
mobilized military alliances, with NATO in the west and the Warsaw Pact in the
east in operation by 1949. Containment. For NATO, containment of the expansion
of Soviet influence became foreign policy doctrine; the expectation was that
eventually the inefficient Soviet system would collapse of internal weakness,
and no "hot" war (that is, one with large-scale combat) would be necessary.
Containment was supported by Democrats and internationalist Republicans (led by
Senator Arthur Vandenberg of Michigan, Governor Thomas Dewey of New York, and
general Dwight D. Eisenhower), but was opposed by the isolationists led by
Senator Robert A. Taft of Ohio. 1949-53. In 1949, the communist leader Mao
Zedong won control of mainland China in a civil war, proclaimed the People's
Republic of China, then traveled to Moscow where he negotiated the Sino-Soviet
Treaty of Friendship. China had thus moved from a close ally of the U.S. to a
bitter enemy, and the two fought each other starting in late 1950 in Korea. The
Truman administration responded with a secret 1950 plan, NSC-68, designed to
confront the Communists with large-scale defense spending. The Russians had
built an atomic bomb by 1950—much sooner than expected; Truman ordered the
development of the Hydrogen bomb. Two of the spies who gave atomic secrets to
Russia were tried and executed. France was hard-pressed by Communist insurgents
in the First Indochina War. The U.S. in 1950 started to fund the French effort
on the proviso that the Vietnamese be given more autonomy. Korean War. Stalin
approved a North Korean plan to invade U.S.-supported South Korea in June 1950.
President Truman immediately and unexpectedly implemented the containment
policy by a full-scale commitment of American and UN forces to Korea. He did
not consult or gain approval of Congress but did gain the approval of the
United Nations (UN) to drive back the North Koreans and re-unite that country
in terms of a rollback strategy After a few weeks of retreat, General Douglas
MacArthur's success at the Battle of Inchon turned the war around; UN forces
invaded North Korea. This advantage was lost when hundreds of thousands of
Chinese entered an undeclared war against the United States and pushed the US/
UN/Korean forces back to the original starting line, the 38th parallel. The war
became a stalemate, with over 33,000 American dead and 100,000 wounded but
nothing to show for it except a resolve to continue the containment policy.
Truman fired MacArthur but was unable to end the war. Dwight D. Eisenhower in
1952 campaigned against Truman's failures of "Korea, Communism and Corruption,"
promising to go to Korea himself and end the war. By threatening to use nuclear
weapons in 1953, Eisenhower ended the war with a truce that is still in effect.
Anti-Communism and McCarthyism: 1947-54. In 1947, well before McCarthy became
active, the Conservative Coalition in Congress passed the Taft Hartley Act,
designed to balance the rights of management and unions, and delegitimizing
Communist union leaders. The challenge of rooting out Communists from labor
unions and the Democratic party was successfully undertaken by liberals, such
as Walter Reuther of the autoworkers union and Ronald Reagan of the Screen
Actors Guild (Reagan was a liberal Democrat at the time). Many of the purged
leftists joined the presidential campaign in 1948 of FDR's Vice President Henry
A. Wallace. The House Un-American Activities Committee, with young Congressman
Richard M. Nixon playing a central role, accused Alger Hiss, a top Roosevelt
aide, of being a Communist spy, using testimony and documents provided by
Whittaker Chambers. Hiss was convicted and sent to prison, with the anti-
Communists gaining a powerful political weapon. It launched Nixon's meteoric
rise to the Senate (1950) and the vice presidenncy (1952). With anxiety over
Communism in Korea and China reaching fever pitched in 1950, a previously
obscure Senator, Joe McCarthy of Wisconsin, launched Congressional
investigations into the cover-up of spies in the government. McCarthy dominated
the media, and used reckless allegations and tactics that allowed his opponents
to effectively counterattack. Irish Catholics (including conservative
wunderkind William F. Buckley, Jr. and the Kennedy Family) were intensely anti-
Communist and defended McCarthy (a fellow Irish Catholic). Paterfamilias Joseph
Kennedy (1888–1969), a very active conservative Democrat, was McCarthy's most
ardent supporter and got his son Robert F. Kennedy a job with McCarthy.
McCarthy had talked of "twenty years of treason" (i.e. since Roosevelt's
election in 1932). When he in 1953 he started talking of "21 years of treason"
and launched a major attack on the Army for promoting a Communist dentist in
the medical corps, his recklessness was too much for Eisenhower, who encouraged
Republicans to censure McCarthy formally in 1954. The Senator's power collapsed
overnight. Senator John F. Kennedy did not vote for censure. Buckley went on to
found the "National Review" in 1955 as a weekly magazine that helped define the
conservative position on public issues. "McCarthyism" was expanded to include
attacks on supposed Communist influence in Hollywood, which resulted in a
black-list whereby artists who refused to testify about possible Communist
connections could not get work. Some famous celebrities (such as Charlie
Chaplin) left the U.S.; other worked under pseudonyms (such as Dalton Trumbo).
McCarthyism included investigations into academics and teachers as well.
Eisenhower and Kennedy administrations. In 1953, Stalin died, and after new
1952 presidential election, President Dwight D. Eisenhower used the opportunity
to end the Korean War, while continuing Cold War policies. Secretary of State
John Foster Dulles was the dominant figure in the nation's foreign policy in
the 1950s. Dulles denounced the "containment" of the Truman administration and
espoused an active program of "liberation", which would lead to a "rollback" of
communism. The most prominent of those doctrines was the policy of "massive
retaliation", which Dulles announced early in 1954, eschewing the costly,
conventional ground forces characteristic of the Truman administration in favor
of wielding the vast superiority of the U.S. nuclear arsenal and covert
intelligence. Dulles defined this approach as "brinkmanship". A dramatic and
unexpected shock to Americans' self-confidence and its technological
superiority came in 1957, when the Soviets beat the United States into outer
space by launching Sputnik, the first earth satellite. The space race began,
and by the early 1960s the United States had forged ahead, with President
Kennedy promising to land a man on the moon by the end of the 1960s—the
landing indeed took place on July 20, 1969. Trouble close to home appeared when
the Soviets formed an alliance with Cuba after Fidel Castro's successful
revolution in 1959. East Germany was the weak point in the Soviet empire, with
refugees leaving for the West by the thousands every week. The Soviet solution
came in 1961, with the Berlin Wall to stop East Germans from fleeing communism.
This was a major propaganda setback for the USSR, but it did allow them to keep
control of East Berlin. The Communist world split in half, as China turned
against the Soviet Union; Mao denounced Khrushchev for going soft on
capitalism. However, the US failed to take advantage of this split until
President Richard Nixon saw the opportunity in 1969. In 1958, the U.S. sent
troops into Lebanon for nine months to stabilize a country on the verge of
civil war. Between 1954 and 1961, Eisenhower dispatched large sums of economic
and military aid and 695 military advisers to South Vietnam to stabilize the
pro-western government under attack by insurgents. Eisenhower supported CIA
efforts to undermine anti-American governments, which proved most successful in
Iran and Guatemala. The first major strain among the NATO alliance occurred in
1956 when Eisenhower forced Britain and France to retreat from their invasion
of Egypt (with Israel) which was intended to get back their ownership of the
Suez Canal. Instead of supporting the claims of its NATO partners, the
Eisenhower administration stated that it opposed French and British imperial
adventurism in the region by sheer prudence, fearing that Egyptian leader Gamal
Abdel Nasser's standoff with the region's old colonial powers would bolster
Soviet power in the region. The Cold War reached its most dangerous point
during the Kennedy administration in the Cuban Missile Crisis, a tense
confrontation between the Soviet Union and the United States over the Soviet
deployment of nuclear missiles in Cuba. The crisis began on October 16, 1962,
and lasted for thirteen days. It was the moment when the Cold War was closest
to exploding into a devastating nuclear exchange between the two superpower
nations. Kennedy decided not to invade or bomb Cuba but to institute a naval
blockade of the island. The crisis ended in a compromise, with the Soviets
removing their missiles publicly, and the United States secretly removing its
nuclear missiles in Turkey. In Moscow, Communist leaders removed Nikita
Khrushchev because of his reckless behavior. The Affluent Society. The
immediate years unfolding after World War II were generally ones of stability
and prosperity for Americans. The nation reconverted its war machine back into
a consumer culture almost overnight and found jobs for 12 million returning
veterans. Increasing numbers enjoyed high wages, larger houses, better schools,
more cars and home comforts like vacuum cleaners, washing machines—which were
all made for labor-saving and to make housework easier. Inventions familiar in
the early 21st century made their first appearance during this era. The live-in
maid and cook, common features of middle-class homes at the beginning of the
century, were virtually unheard of in the 1950s; only the very rich had
servants. Householders enjoyed centrally heated homes with running hot water.
New style furniture was bright, cheap, and light, and easy to move around. The
American economy grew dramatically in the post-war period, expanding at a rate
of 3.5% per annum between 1945 and 1970. During this period of prosperity, many
incomes doubled in a generation, described by economist Frank Levy as “upward
mobility on a rocket ship.” The substantial increase in average family income
within a generation resulted in millions of office and factory workers being
lifted into a growing middle class, enabling them to sustain a standard of
living once considered to be reserved for the wealthy. As noted by Deone Zell,
assembly line work paid well, while unionized factory jobs served as
“stepping-stones to the middle class.” By the end of the Fifties, 87% of
all American families owned at least one T.V., 75% owned cars, and 60% owned
their homes. By 1960, blue-collar workers had become the biggest buyers of many
luxury goods and services. In addition, by the early Seventies, post-World War
II American consumers enjoyed higher levels of disposable income than those in
any other country. The great majority of American workers who had stable jobs
were well off financially, while even non-union jobs were associated with
rising paychecks, benefits, and obtained many of the advantages that
characterized union work. An upscale working class came into being, as American
blue-collar workers came to enjoy the benefits of home ownership, while high
wages provided blue-collar workers with the ability to pay for new cars,
household appliances, and regular vacations. By the 1960s, a blue-collar worker
earned more than a manager did in the Forties, despite the fact that his
relative position within the income distribution had not changed. "In the
postwar period, the majority of Americans were affluent in the sense that they
were in a position to spend money on many things they wanted, desired, or chose
to have, rather than on necessities alone.” "By the mid-1960’s, the
majority of America’s organized working class who were not victims of the
second Red Scare embraced, or at least tolerated, anti-communism because it was
an integral part of the New American Dream to which they had committed their
lives. Theirs was not an unobtainable dream; nor were their lives empty because
of it. Indeed, for at least a quarter of century, the material promises of
consumer-oriented Americanism were fulfilled in improvements in everyday life
that made them the most affluent working class in American history.” More
than 21 million housing units were constructed between 1946 and 1960, and in
the latter year 52% of consumer units in the metropolitan areas owned their own
homes. In 1957, out of all the wired homes throughout the country, 96% had a
refrigerator, 87% an electric washer, 81% a television, 67% a vacuum cleaner,
18% a freezer, 12% an electric or gas dryer, and 8% air conditioning. Car
ownership also soared, with 72% of consumer units owning an automobile by 1960.
“To strike a balance with the Soviet Union, it would be easy to say that all
but the very poorest Americans were better off than the Russians, that
education was better but the health service worse, but that above all the
Americans had freedom of expression and democratic institutions.” In regards
to social welfare, the postwar era saw a considerable improvement in insurance
for workers and their dependents against the risks of illness, as private
insurance programs like Blue Cross and Blue Shield expanded. With the exception
of farm and domestic workers, virtually all members of the labor force were
covered by Social Security. In 1959 that about two-thirds of the factory
workers and three-fourths of the office workers were provided with supplemental
private pension plans. In addition 86% of factory workers and 83% of office had
jobs that covered for hospital insurance while 59% and 61% had additional
insurance for doctors. By 1969, the average white family income had risen to
$10,953, while average black family income lagged behind at $7,255, revealing a
continued racial disparity in income amongst various segments of the American
population. At the center of middle-class culture in the 1950s was a growing
demand for consumer goods; a result of the postwar prosperity, the increase in
variety and availability of consumer products, and television advertising.
America generated a steadily growing demand for better automobiles, clothing,
appliances, family vacations and higher education. Suburbia. With Detroit
turning out automobiles as fast as possible, city dwellers gave up cramped
apartments for a suburban life style centered around children and housewives,
with the male breadwinner commuting to work. Suburbia encompassed a third of
the nation's population by 1960. The growth of suburbs was not only a result of
postwar prosperity, but innovations of the single-family housing market with
low interest rates on 20 and 30 year mortgages, and low down payments,
especially for veterans. William Levitt began a national trend with his use of
mass-production techniques to construct a large "Levittown" housing development
on Long Island. Meanwhile, the suburban population swelled because of the baby
boom. Suburbs provided larger homes for larger families, security from urban
living, privacy, and space for consumer goods. Poverty and inequality in the
postwar era. The new prosperity did not extend to everyone. Many Americans
continued to live in poverty throughout the 1950s, especially older people and
blacks, the latter of whom continued to earn far less than whites on average in
the two decades following the end of the Second World War. In 1947, 60% of
black families lived below the poverty level (defined in one study as below
$3000 in 1968 dollars), compared with 23% of white families. In 1968, 23% of
black families lived below the poverty level, compared with 9% of white
families. In 1947, 11% of white families were affluent (defined as above
$10,000 in 1968 dollars), compared with 3% of black families. In 1968, 42% of
white families were defined as affluent, compared with 21% of black families.
In 1947, 8% of black families received $7000 or more (in 1968 dollars) compared
with 26% of white families. In 1968, 39% of black families received $7,000 or
more, compared with 66% of white families. In 1960, the median for a married
man of blue-collar income was $3,993 for blacks and $5,877 for whites. In 1969,
the equivalent figures were $5,746 and $7,452, respectively. As Socialist
leader Michael Harrington emphasized, there was still The Other America.
Poverty declined sharply in the Sixties as the New Frontier and Great Society
especially helped older people. The proportion below the poverty line fell
almost in half from 22% in 1960 to 12% in 1970 and then leveled off. Rural
life. The farm population shrank steadily as families moved to urban areas,
where on average they were more productive and earned a higher standard of
living. Friedberger argues that the postwar period saw an accelerating
mechanization of agriculture, combined with new and better fertilizers and
genetic manipulation of hybrid corn. It made for greater specialization and
greater economic risks for the farmer. With rising land prices many sold their
land and moved to town, the old farm becoming part of a neighbor's enlarged
operation. Mechanization meant less need for hired labor; farmers could operate
more acres even though they were older. The result was a decline in rural-farm
population, with gains in service centers that provided the new technology. The
rural non-farm population grew as factories were attracted by access to good
transportation without the high land costs, taxes, unionization and congestion
of city factory districts. Once remote rural areas such as the Missouri Ozarks
and the North Woods of the upper Midwest, with a rustic life style and many
good fishing spots, have attracted retirees and vacationers. Civil Rights
Movement. Following the end of Reconstruction, many states adopted restrictive
Jim Crow laws which enforced segregation of the races and the second-class
status of African Americans. The Supreme Court in "Plessy v. Ferguson" 1896
accepted segregation as constitutional. Voting rights discrimination remained
widespread in the South through the 1950s. Fewer than 10% voted in the Deep
South, although a larger proportion voted in the border states, and the blacks
were being organized into Democratic machines in the northern cities. Although
both parties pledged progress in 1948, the only major development before 1954
was the integration of the military. "Brown v. Board of Education" and "massive
resistance". In the early days of the civil rights movement, litigation and
lobbying were the focus of integration efforts. The U.S. Supreme Court
decisions in "Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka" (1954); "Powell v.
Alabama" (1932); "Smith v. Allwright" (1944); "Shelley v. Kraemer" (1948);
"Sweatt v. Painter" (1950); and "McLaurin v. Oklahoma State Regents" (1950) led
to a shift in tactics, and from 1955 to 1965, "direct action" was the
strategy—primarily bus boycotts, sit-ins, freedom rides, and social
movements. "Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka" was a landmark case of the
United States Supreme Court which explicitly outlawed segregated public
education facilities for blacks and whites, ruling so on the grounds that the
doctrine of "separate but equal" public education could never truly provide
black Americans with facilities of the same standards available to white
Americans. One hundred and one members of the United States House of
Representatives and 19 Senators signed "The Southern Manifesto" condemning the
Supreme Court decision as unconstitutional. Governor Orval Eugene Faubus of
Arkansas used the Arkansas National Guard to prevent school integration at
Little Rock Central High School in 1957. President Eisenhower nationalized
state forces and sent in the US Army to enforce federal court orders. Governors
Ross Barnett of Mississippi and George Wallace of Alabama physically blocked
school doorways at their respective states' universities. Birmingham's public
safety commissioner Eugene T. "Bull" Connor advocated violence against freedom
riders and ordered fire hoses and police dogs turned on demonstrators. Sheriff
Jim Clark of Dallas County, Alabama, loosed his deputies on "Bloody Sunday"
marchers and personally menaced other protesters. Police all across the South
arrested civil rights activists on trumped-up charges. Civil rights
organizations. Although they had white supporters and sympathizers, the modern
civil rights movement was designed, led, organized, and manned by African
Americans, who placed themselves and their families on the front lines in the
struggle for freedom. Their heroism was brought home to every American through
newspaper, and later, television reports as their peaceful marches and
demonstrations were violently attacked by law enforcement. Officers used
batons, bullwhips, fire hoses, police dogs, and mass arrests to intimidate the
protesters. The second characteristic of the movement is that it was not
monolithic, led by one or two men. Rather it was a dispersed, grass-roots
campaign that attacked segregation in many different places using many
different tactics. While some groups and individuals within the civil rights
movement—such as Malcolm X—advocated Black Power, black separatism, or even
armed resistance, the majority of participants remained committed to the
principles of nonviolence, a deliberate decision by an oppressed minority to
abstain from violence for political gain. Using nonviolent strategies, civil
rights activists took advantage of emerging national network-news reporting,
especially television, to capture national attention. The leadership role of
black churches in the movement was a natural extension of their structure and
function. They offered members an opportunity to exercise roles denied them in
society. Throughout history, the black church served as a place of worship and
also as a base for powerful ministers, such as Congressman Adam Clayton Powell
in New York City. The most prominent clergyman in the civil rights movement was
Martin Luther King, Jr. "Time" magazine's 1963 "Man of the Year" showed
tireless personal commitment to black freedom and his strong leadership won him
worldwide acclaim and the Nobel Peace Prize. Students and seminarians in both
the South and the North played key roles in every phase of the civil rights
movement. Church and student-led movements developed their own organizational
and sustaining structures. The Southern Christian Leadership Conference (SCLC),
founded in 1957, coordinated and raised funds, mostly from northern sources,
for local protests and for the training of black leaders. The Student
Nonviolent Coordinating Committee, or SNCC, founded in 1957, developed the
"jail-no-bail" strategy. SNCC's role was to develop and link sit-in campaigns
and to help organize freedom rides, voter registration drives, and other
protest activities. These three new groups often joined forces with existing
organizations such as the National Association for the Advancement of Colored
People (NAACP), founded in 1909, the Congress of Racial Equality (CORE),
founded in 1942, and the National Urban League. The NAACP and its Director, Roy
Wilkins, provided legal counsel for jailed demonstrators, helped raise bail,
and continued to test segregation and discrimination in the courts as it had
been doing for half a century. CORE initiated the 1961 Freedom Rides which
involved many SNCC members, and CORE's leader James Farmer later became
executive secretary of SNCC. The administration of President John F. Kennedy
supported enforcement of desegregation in schools and public facilities.
Attorney General Robert Kennedy brought more than 50 lawsuits in four states to
secure black Americans' right to vote. However, FBI director J. Edgar Hoover,
concerned about possible communist influence in the civil rights movement and
personally antagonistic to King, used the FBI to discredit King and other civil
rights leaders. Presidential administrations. Truman: 1945-53. Truman, a self-
educated farm boy from Missouri, stood in sharp contrast to the urbane and
imperious Roosevelt who kept personal control of all major decisions. Truman
was a folksy, unassuming president who relied on his cabinet, remarking "The
buck stops here" and "If you can't stand the heat, you better get out of the
kitchen." Truman faced many challenges in domestic affairs. His poll ratings
were sky high when he took office in April 1945 after Roosevelt's sudden death,
then plunged to low levels for most of his eight years in office. The
disorderly postwar reconversion of the economy of the United States was marked
by severe shortages of housing, meat, appliance, automobiles and other rationed
goods. The country was hit by long strikes in major industries in 1946. The
Republicans took control of Congress in a landslide in 1946 and passed the
Taft–Hartley Act over his veto. He confounded all predictions to win election
in 1948, helped by his famous Whistle Stop Tour of small town America. He used
executive orders to end racial discrimination in the armed forces and created
loyalty checks that dismissed thousands of communist fellow travelers from
office. Truman's presidency was also eventful in foreign affairs, with the
defeat of Nazi Germany and his decision to use nuclear weapons against Japan,
the founding of the United Nations, the Marshall Plan to rebuild Europe, the
Truman Doctrine to contain communism, the beginning of the Cold War, the Berlin
Airlift, and the creation of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO). The
defeat of America's wartime ally in the Chinese Civil War brought a hostile
Communist regime to East Asia, and the US became bogged down fighting China in
the Korean War, 1950-53. Corruption in Truman's administration, which was
linked to cabinet level appointees and senior White House staff, was a central
issue in the 1952 presidential campaign. Truman was forced to end his third
term hopes by a poor showing in the 1952 primaries. drop out of his reelection.
Republican Dwight D. Eisenhower, the famous wartime general, won a landslide in
the 1952 presidential election by crusading against Truman's failures in terms
of "Communism, Korea and Corruption." Eisenhower: 1953-61. Eisenhower was
elected in 1952 as a moderate Republican, bringing along a Republican Congress.
He ended the Korean war, maintained the peace in Asia and the Middle East, and
worked smoothly with NATO allies in Europe while drawing keeping the policy of
containing Communism rather than trying to roll it back. While frugal in budget
matters he expanded Social Security and did not try to repeal the remaining New
Deal programs. He launched the interstate highway system (using a tax on
gasoline) that dramatically improved the nation's transportation
infrastructure. The economy was generally healthy, apart from a sharp economic
recession in 1958. Ike remained popular and largely avoided partisan politics;
he was easily reelected by a landslide in 1956. In both foreign and domestic
policy Eisenhower remained on friendly terms with the Democrats, who regained
Congress in 1954 and made large gains in 1958. His farewell address to the
nation warned of the dangers of a growing "military industrial complex."
Kennedy in 1960. The very close 1960 election pitted Republican Vice President
Richard Nixon against the Democrat John F. Kennedy. Historians have explained
Kennedy's victory in terms of an economic recession, the numerical dominance of
17 million more registered Democrats than Republicans, the votes that Kennedy
gained among Catholics practically matched the votes Nixon gained among
Protestants, Kennedy's better organization, and Kennedy's superior campaigning
skills. Nixon's emphasis on his experience carried little weight, and he wasted
energy by campaigning in all 50 states instead of concentrating on the swing
states. Kennedy used his large, well-funded campaign organization to win the
nomination, secure endorsements, and with the aid of the last of the big-city
bosses to get out the vote in the big cities. He relied on Johnson to hold the
South and used television effectively. Kennedy was the first Catholic to run
for president since Al Smith's ill-fated campaign in 1928. Voters were
polarized on religious grounds, but Kennedy's election was a transforming event
for Catholics, who finally realized they were accepted in America, and it
marked the virtual end of anti-Catholicism as a political force. The Kennedy
Family had long been leaders of the Irish Catholic wing of the Democratic
Party; JFK was middle-of-the-road or liberal on domestic issues and
conservative on foreign policy, sending military forces into Cuba and Vietnam.
The Kennedy style called for youth, dynamism, vigor and an intellectual
approach to aggressive new policies in foreign affairs. The downside was his
inexperience in foreign affairs, standing in stark contrast to the vast
experience of the president he replaced. He is best known for his call to civic
virtue: "And so, my fellow Americans: ask not what your country can do for you
- ask what you can do for your country." In Congress the Conservative Coalition
blocked nearly all of Kennedy's domestic programs, so there were few changes in
domestic policy, even as the civil rights movement gained momentum. President
Kennedy was assassinated in Dallas, Texas, on November 22, 1963 by Lee Harvey
Oswald. The event proved to be one of the greatest psychological shocks to the
American people in the 20th century and led to Kennedy being revered as a
martyr and hero. Johnson, 1963-69. After Kennedy's assassination, vice
president Lyndon Baines Johnson served out the remainder of the term, using
appeals to finish the job that Kennedy had started to pass a remarkable package
of liberal legislation that he called the Great Society Johnson used the full
powers of the presidency to ensure passage the Civil Rights Act of 1964. These
actions helped Johnson to win a historic landslide in the 1964 presidential
election over conservative champion Senator Barry Goldwater. Johnson's big
victory brought an overwhelming liberal majority in Congress.
