History of Afghanistan The written history of Afghanistan can be traced back to
around 500 BC when the area was under the Achaemenid Empire, although evidence
indicates that an advanced degree of urbanized culture has existed in the land
since between 3000 and 2000 BC. Alexander the Great and his Macedonian army
arrived to what is now Afghanistan in 330 BC after conquering Persia during the
Battle of Gaugamela. Many powerful kingdoms have established their capitals
inside the modern state of Afghanistan, including the Greco-Bactrians, Mauryas,
Kushans, Kabul Shahi, Saffarids, Samanids, Ghaznavids, Ghurids, Timurids,
Mughals, Hotakis, Durranis and others. Afghanistan (meaning "land of the
Afghans") has been a strategic important location throughout the history. The
land served as "a gateway to India, impinging on the ancient Silk Road, which
carried trade from the Mediterranean to China". Sitting on many trade and
migration routes, Afghanistan may be called the 'Central Asian roundabout'
since routes converge from the Middle East, from the Indus Valley through the
passes over the Hindu Kush, from the Far East via the Tarim Basin, and from the
adjacent Eurasian Steppe. A people called the Aryans from Central Asia arrived
to Afghanistan after the 20th century BC, who left their languages that
survived in the form of Pashto and Dari. The Arab invasions influenced the
culture of Afghanistan, as its Zoroastrian, Macedonian and Buddhist past has
long vanished. Local empire-builders such as the Ghaznavids, Ghurids and
Timurids made Afghanistan a major medieval power as well as a learning center
that produced the likes of Avicenna, Al-Biruni, and Rumi, among many other
academic or iconic figures. Mirwais Hotak followed by Ahmad Shah Durrani
unified Afghan tribes and founded the last Afghan Empire in the early 18th
century. Afghanistan's sovereignty has been held during the Anglo-Afghan Wars,
the 1980s Soviet war, and the 2001-present war by the country's many and
diverse people: the Pashtuns, Tajiks, Hazaras, Uzbeks, Turkmen, Aimak, Baloch,
and others. The Pashtuns form the largest group, claiming to be descendants of
ancient Israelites or Qais Abdur Rashid but scholars believe that they are a
confederation of various peoples from the past who united under Pashtunwali.
Prehistory. Excavations of prehistoric sites by Louis Dupree and others suggest
that early humans were living in what is now Afghanistan at least 50,000 years
ago, and that farming communities in Afghanistan were among the earliest in the
world. Urbanization may have begun as early as 3000 BC. Zoroastrianism
predominated as the religion in the area, even the modern Afghan solar calendar
shows the influence of Zoroastrianism in the names of the months. Other
religions such as Buddhism and Hinduism arrived later to the region. Gandhara
is the name of an ancient Hindu kingdom from the Vedic period and its capital
city located between the Hindukush and Sulaiman Mountains (mountains of
Solomon), although Kandahar in modern times and the ancient Gandhara are not
geographically identical. Early inhabitants, around 3000 BC were likely to have
been connected through culture and trade to neighboring civilizations like
Jiroft and Tappeh Sialk and more distantly to the Indus Valley Civilization.
Urban civilization may have begun as early as 3000 BC, and it is possible that
the early city of Mundigak (near Kandahar) was a colony of the nearby Indus
Valley Civilization. The first known people were Indo-Iranians, but their date
of arrival has been estimated widely from as early as about 3000 BC to 1500 BC.
(For further detail see Indo-Aryan migration.) Bactria-Margiana. The Bactria-
Margiana Archaeological Complex became prominent in the southwest region
between 2200 and 1700 BC (approximately). The city of Balkh (Bactra) was
founded about this time (c. 2000‚Äì1500 BC). It's possible that the BMAC may
have been an Indo-European culture, perhaps the Proto-Indo-Aryans. But the
standard model holds the arrival of Indo-Aryans to have been in the Late
Harappan which gave rise to the Vedic civilization of the Early Iron Age.
Ancient history (700 BC‚Äì565 CE). Medes. Different opinions have been
expressed about the extent of the Median kingdom. For instance, according to
Ernst Herzfeld, it was a powerful empire, which stretched from north
Mesopotamia to Bactria and India. On the other side, Heleen Sancisi-Weerdenburg
insists that there is no real evidence about the very existence of the Median
empire and that it was an unstable state formation. Achaemenid Empire.
Afghanistan became part of the Achaemenid Empire, after it was conquered by
Darius I of Persia. The area was divided into several provinces called
satrapies, which were each ruled by a governor, or satrap. These ancient
satrapies included: Aria (Herat); Arachosia (Kandahar, Lashkar Gah, and
Quetta); Bactriana (Balkh); Sattagydia (Ghazni); and Gandhara (Kabul,
Jalalabad, Peshawar). Alexander and the Seleucids. Alexander the Great arrived
in the area of Afghanistan in 330 BC after defeating Darius III of Persia a
year earlier at the Battle of Gaugamela. His army faced very strong resistance
in the Afghan tribal areas where he is said to have commented that Afghanistan
is "easy to march into, hard to march out of." Although his expedition through
Afghanistan was brief, Alexander left behind a Hellenic cultural influence that
lasted several centuries. Several great cities were built in the region named
"Alexandria," including: Alexandria-of-the-Arians (modern-day Herat);
Alexandria-on-the-Tarnak (near Kandahar); Alexandria-ad-Caucasum (near Begram,
at Bordj-i-Abdullah); and finally, Alexandria-Eschate (near Kojend), in the
north. After Alexander's death, his loosely connected empire was divided.
Seleucus, a Macedonian officer during Alexander's campaign, declared himself
ruler of his own Seleucid Empire, encompassing Persia and Afghanistan. Greco-
Bactrian Kingdom. The Greco-Bactrian Kingdom was founded when Diodotus I, the
satrap of Bactria (and probably the surrounding provinces) seceded from the
Seleucid Empire around 250 BC. Greco-Bactria continued until c. 130 BC, when
Eucratides' son, King Heliocles I, was defeated and driven out of Bactria by
the Yuezhi tribes. It is thought that his dynasty continued to rule in Kabul
and Alexandria of the Caucasus until 70 BC when King Hermaeus was defeated by
the Yuezhi. One of Demetrius' successors, Menander I, brought the Indo-Greek
Kingdom to its height between 165‚Äì130 BC, expanding the kingdom in India to
even larger proportions than Demetrius. After Menander's death, the Indo-Greeks
steadily declined and the last Indo-Greek king was defeated in c. 10 CE.
Mauryan Empire. Modern day Afghanistan was conquered by the Maurya Empire,
which was led by Chandragupta Maurya from Magadha (modern day Bihar in India).
They were Indians who practiced Hinduism and Buddhism and were focusing on
taking over Central Asia. Seleucus is said to have reach a peace treaty with
Chandragupta by given control of the territory south of the Hindu Kush to the
Mauryas upon intermarriage and 500 elephants. Having consolidated power in the
northwest, Chandragupta pushed east towards the Nanda Empire. Afghanistan's
significant ancient tangible and intangible Buddhist heritage is recorded
through wide-ranging archeological finds, including religious and artistic
remnants. Buddhist doctrines are reported to have reached as far as Balkh even
during the life of the Buddha (563 BC to 483 BC), as recorded by Husang Tsang.
Hephthalites (White Huns). The Hephthalite Empire in Afghanistan extended from
Chinese Sinkiang to Sassanid Iran, from Sogdiana to the Punjab. Their chief
antagonists were the Sassanids. Consequently there was relatively little peace
during this time. At about 565 AD, the Hephthalite Empire was overthrown by a
combined force consisting of western Turks and Sassanids. Middle Ages
(565‚Äì1504 AD). From the Middle Ages to around 1750 part of today's
Afghanistan was recognized as Khorasan. Two of the four main capitals of
Khorasan (Balkh and Herat) are now located in modern Afghanistan. The country
of Kandahar, Ghazni and Kabul formed the frontier region between Khorasan and
Hindustan. The land inhabited by the Afghan tribes (i.e. ancestors of Pashtuns)
was called Afghanistan, which loosely covered a wide area between the Hindu
Kush and the Indus River, principally around the Sulaiman Mountains. The
earliest record of the name ""Afghan"" (""Abg√¢n"") being mentioned is by
Shapur I of the Sassanid Empire during the 3rd century CE which is later
recorded in the form of ""AvagƒÅnƒÅ"" by the Indian astronomer VarƒÅha Mihira
in his 6th century CE Brihat-samhita. It was used to refer to a common
legendary ancestor known as ""Afghana"", grandson of King Saul of Israel.<
Hiven Tsiang, a Chinese pilgrim, visiting the Afghanistan area several times
between 630 to 644 CE also speaks about them. Ancestors of many of today's
Turkic-speaking Afghans settled in the Hindu Kush area and began to assimilate
much of the culture and language of the Pashtun tribes already present there.
Among these were the Khalaj people which are known today as Ghilzai. Palas. The
PƒÅla's were a Buddhist and Vaishnav Hindu Bengali dynasty of India, which
lasted for four centuries (750-1120¬ AD). Dharmapala extended the empire into
the northern parts of the Indian Subcontinent. This triggered once again the
power struggle for the control of the subcontinent. Devapala, successor of
Dharmapala, expanded the empire to cover much of South Asia and beyond. His
empire stretched from Assam and Utkala in the east, and modern day Afghanistan
in the north-west and Deccan in the south. According to Pala copperplate
inscription Devapala exterminated the Utkalas, conquered the Pragjyotisha
(Assam), shattered the pride of the Huna, and humbled the lords of Pratiharas,
Gurjara and the Dravidas. The Pala Empire eventually disintegrated in the 12th
century under the attack of the Sena dynasty. Islamic conquest. In 642 CE,
Arabs had conquered most of Persia and from the western city of Herat
introduced the religion of Islam as they entered new cities. Afghanistan at
that period had a number of different independent rulers, depending on the
area. The early Arab forces did not fully explore Afghanistan due to attacks by
the mountain tribes. Much of the eastern parts of the country remained
independent, as part of the Turk Shahi kingdoms of Kabul and Gandhara, which
lasted that way until the forces of the Muslim Saffarid dynasty followed by the
Ghaznavids conquered them. The Shahi or Shahiya dynasties ruled portions of the
Kabul Valley (in eastern Afghanistan) and the old province of Gandhara
(northern Pakistan and Kashmir) from the decline of the Kushan Empire up to the
early 9th century. The Shahis continued to rule eastern Afghanistan until the
late 9th century until the Ghaznavid invasions. Janjau Rajput Empire
(900‚Äì1050 AD). Jaypala was the most powerful ruler of this empire rule over
Pakistan and Jammu & Kasmir. He was eventually defeated by Ghazni and lost his
empire. Ghaznavids. Mahmud of Ghazni consolidated the conquests of his
predecessors and turned the city of Ghazni into a great cultural center as well
as a base for frequent forays into the Indian subcontinent. Ghorids. The
Ghaznavid dynasty was defeated in 1148 by the Ghurids from Ghor, but the
Ghaznavid Sultans continued to live in Ghazni as the 'Nasher' until the early
20th century. They did not regain their once vast power until about 500 years
later when the Ghilzai Hotakis rose to power. Various princes and Seljuk rulers
attempted to rule parts of the country until the Shah Muhammad II of the
Khwarezmid Empire conquered all of Persia in 1205. By 1219, the empire had
fallen to the Mongols, led by Genghis Khan. Mongol invasion. The Mongols
resulted in massive destruction of many cities, including Bamiyan, Herat, and
Balkh, and the despoliation of fertile agricultural areas. Large number of the
inhabitant were also slaughtered. All the major cities and towns became part of
the massive Mongol Empire, Timurids. Timur (Tamerlane), incorporated what is
today Afghanistan into his own vast Timurid Empire. The city of Herat became
one of the capitals of his empire, and his grandson Pir Muhammad held the seat
of Kandahar. Timur rebuilt most of Afghanistan's infrastructure which was
destroyed by his early ancestor. The area was progressing under his rule.
Timurid rule began declining in the early 16th century with the rise of a new
ruler in Kabul, Babur. Taimur, a descendent of Genghis Khan, created a vast new
empire across Russia and Persia which he ruled from his capital in Samarkland
in modern day Uzbekistan. Taimur captured Herat in 1381 and his son, Shah Rudkh
moved the capital of the Timurid empire to Herat in 1405. The Timurks, a Turkic
people, brought the Turkic nomadic culture of Central Asia within the orbit of
Persian civilisation, establishing Herat on of the most cultured and refined
cities in the world. This fusion of Central Asian and Persian culture was a
major legacy for the future Afghanistan. A century later, the emperor Babur, a
descendent of Taimur, visited Herat and wrote, "the whole habitable world had
not such a town as Herat." For the next 300 years the eastern Afghan tribes
periodically invaded India creating vast Indo-Afghan empires. In 1500 Taimur's
descendent, Babur was driven out of his home in the Ferghana valley. By the
16th century western Afghanistan again revereted to Persian rule under the
Safavid dynasty. Modern era (1504‚Äì1973). Mughals and Safavids. In 1504 Babur,
a descendant of Timur, arrived from what is now Uzbekistan and to the city of
Kabul. He began exploring new territories in the region, with Kabul serving as
his military headquarters. Instead of looking towards Persia, Babur was more
focused on the Indian subcontinent, which included the region known as
Kabulistan. In 1526, he left with his army to capture the seat of the Delhi
Sultanate, which at that point was possessed by the Afghan Lodi dynasty of
India. After defeating Ibrahim Lodi and his army, Babur turned Delhi into the
capital of his newly established Mughal Empire. From the 16th century to the
early 18th century, Afghanistan was divided in to three major areas. The north
was ruled by the Khanate of Bukhara, the west was under the rule of the Shi'a
Safavids, and the east belonged to the Sunni Mughals of India. The Kandahar
region in the south served as a buffer zone between the powerful Mughals and
Safavids, and the native Afghans often switched support from one side to the
other. Babur explored most cities of Afghanistan before his campaign into
India. In the city of Kandahar his personal epigraphy can be found in the
Chilzina rock mountain. Hotaki dynasty. In 1704, the Safavid Shah Husayn
appointed George XI ("Gurgƒ´n KhƒÅn"), a ruthless Georgian, to govern the
Greater Kandahar region of Afghanistan. Gurgƒ´n began imprisoning and executing
many of the native Afghans, especially those suspected of organizing a
rebellion. One of those arrested and imprisoned was Mirwais Hotak who belonged
to an influential family in Kandahar. Mirwais was sent as a prisoner to the
Persian court in Isfahan but the charges against him were dismissed by the
king, so he was sent back to his native land as a free man. In April 1709,
Mirwais along with his tribal army revolted against Gurgƒ´n and the Safavids in
Kandahar City. The uprising began when Gurgƒ´n and his escort were killed after
a picnic and a banquet that were prepared by Mirwais at his farmhouse outside
the city. " Around four days later, an army of well-trained Georgian troops
arrived to the town after hearing of Gurgƒ´n's death but Mirwais and his Afghan
forces successfully held off the town. From 1710 to 1713, the Afghan forces
defeated several large and powerful Persian armies that were dispatched from
Isfahan (capital of the Safavids), which included Qizilbash and Georgian
troops. The Persian armies were completely defeated and southern Afghanistan
was made into an independent local Pashtun kingdom. Refusing the title of a
king, Mirwais was called "Prince of Qandah√°r and General of the national
troops" by his Afghan countrymen. He died of a natural cause in November 1715
and was succeeded by his brother Abdul Aziz Hotak. Aziz was killed about two
years later by Mirwais' son Mahmud Hotaki, allegedly for planning to give
Kandahar's sovereignty back to Persia. Mahmud led an Afghan army into Persia in
1722 and defeated the Persian army at the Battle of Gulnabad. The Afghans
captured Isfahan (Safavid capital) and Mahmud became the new Persian Shah,
known after that as Shah Mahmud. Mahmud began a reign of terror against his
Persian subjects and was eventually murdered in 1725 by his cousin, Ashraf
Hotaki. Some sources say he died of madness. Ashraf became the new Afghan Shah
of Persia soon after Mahmud's death, while the home region of Afghanistan was
ruled by Mahmud's younger brother Shah Hussain Hotaki. Ashraf was able to
secure peace with the Ottoman Empire in 1727, but the Russian Empire took
advantage of the political unrest in Persia to seize land for themselves,
limiting the amount of territory under Shah Mahmud's control. The Hotaki
dynasty was a troubled and violent one as internecine conflict made it
difficult to establish permanent control. The dynasty lived under great turmoil
due to bloody succession feuds that made their hold on power tenuous, and after
the massacre of thousands of civilians in Isfahan; including more than three
thousand religious scholars, nobles, and members of the Safavid family. The
majority Persians rejected the Afghan regime as usurping. For the next 7 years
the Hotakis became the de facto rulers of Persia, but their rule continued in
the region of Afghanistan until 1738 when Shah Hussain was defeated. The
Ghilzai Hotakis were eventually removed from power in what is now Iran by 1730.
They were defeated by Nader Shah, head of the Afsharids, in the October 1729
Battle of Damghan and pushed from what is now Iran to the southern Afghan
region. The last ruler of the Hotaki dynasty, Shah Hussain, ruled southern
Afghanistan until 1738 when the Afsharids and the Abdali Pashtuns defeated him
at Kandahar. Durrani Empire. Nader Shah and his Afsharid army arrived to the
town of Kandahar in 1738 and defeated Hussain Hotaki. The young teenager Ahmad
Khan, who would Kabul, Peshawar, and Lahore. They reached all the way to Delhi
and sacked the city, taking the Koh-i-Noor diamond and many other treasures
with them to Greater Khorasan. Nadir Shah was assassinated on June 19, 1747, by
several of his Persian officers, and the Asharid kingdom fell to pieces. While
the Persians were contesting each other in Iran, the 25-year-old Ahmad Khan was
busy in Afghanistan calling for a loya jirga ("grand assembly") to select a
leader among his people. The Afghans gathered near Kandahar in October 1747 and
chose Ahmad Shah among the challengers, making him their new head of state.
After the inauguration or coronation, he became known as Ahmad Shah Durrani. He
adopted the title "padshah durr-i dawran" ('King, "pearl of the age") and the
Abdali tribe became known as the Durrani tribe after this. Ahmad Shah not only
represented the Durranis but he also united all the Pashtun tribes. By 1751,
Ahmad Shah Durrani and his Afghan army conquered the entire present-day
Afghanistan, Pakistan, Khorasan and Kohistan provinces of Iran, along with
Delhi in India. He defeated the Maratha Empire in 1761 at the Battle of
Panipat. In October 1772, Ahmad Shah retired to his home in Kandahar where he
died peacefully and was buried at a site that is now adjacent to the Shrine of
the Cloak. He was succeeded by his son, Timur Shah Durrani, who transferred the
capital of their Afghan Empire from Kandahar to Kabul. Timur died in 1793 and
his son Zaman Shah Durrani took over the reign. Zaman Shah and his brothers had
a weak hold on the legacy left to them by their famous ancestor. They sorted
out their differences through a "round robin of expulsions, blindings and
executions," which resulted in the deterioration of the Afghan hold over far-
flung territories, such as Attock and Kashmir. Durrani's other grandson, Shuja
Shah Durrani, fled the wrath of his brother and sought refuge with the Sikhs.
Not only had Durrani invaded the Punjab region many times, but had destroyed
the holiest shrine of the Sikhs ‚Äì the Harmandir Sahib in Amritsar, defiling
its "sarowar" with the blood of cows and decapitating Baba Deep Singh in 1757.
The Sikhs, under Ranjit Singh, eventually wrested a large part of the Kingdom
of Kabul (present day Pakistan, but not including Sindh) from the Afghans. In
1837, the Afghan army descended through the Khyber Pass on Sikh forces at
Jamrud. The Sikhs were supported by the East India Company until they were
defeated later by the British forces during the First and Second Anglo-Sikh
Wars . Barakzai dynasty and British influence. Dost Mohammed Khan gained
control in Kabul. Collision between the expanding British and Russian Empires
significantly influenced Afghanistan during the 19th century in what was termed
"The Great Game". British concern over Russian advances in Central Asia and
growing influence in Persia culminated in two Anglo-Afghan wars and "The Siege
of Herat" 1837‚Äì1838, in which the Persians, trying to retake Afghanistan and
throw out the British and Russians, sent armies into the country and fought the
British mostly around and in the city of Herat. The first Anglo-Afghan War
(1839‚Äì1842) resulted in the destruction of a British army; it is remembered
as an example of the ferocity of Afghan resistance to foreign rule. The Second
Anglo-Afghan War (1878‚Äì1880) was sparked by Amir Shir Ali's refusal to accept
a British mission in Kabul. This conflict brought Amir Abdur Rahman, known by
some as the "Iron Amir", to the Afghan throne. During his reign (1880‚Äì1901),
the British and Russians officially established the boundaries of what would
become modern Afghanistan. The British retained effective control over Kabul's
foreign affairs. Abdur Rahman's reforms of the army, legal system and structure
of government were able to give Afghanistan a degree of unity and stability
which it had not before known. This, however, came at the cost of strong
centralisation, harsh punishments for crime and corruption, and a certain
degree of international isolation. Afghanistan remained neutral during World
War I, despite German encouragement of anti-British feelings and Afghan
rebellion along the borders of British India. The Afghan king's policy of
neutrality was not universally popular within the country, however. Habibullah,
Abdur Rahman's son and successor, was assassinated in 1919, possibly by family
members opposed to British influence. His third son, Amanullah, regained
control of Afghanistan's foreign policy after launching the Third Anglo-Afghan
war with an attack on India in the same year. During the ensuing conflict, the
war-weary British relinquished their control over Afghan foreign affairs by
signing the Treaty of Rawalpindi in August 1919. In commemoration of this
event, Afghans celebrate August 19 as their Independence Day. Reforms of
Amanullah Khan and civil war. King Amanullah Khan moved to end his country's
traditional isolation in the years following the Third Anglo-Afghan war. He
established diplomatic relations with most major countries and, following a
1927 tour of Europe and Turkey (during which he noted the modernization and
secularization advanced by Atat√ºrk), introduced several reforms intended to
modernize Afghanistan. A key force behind these reforms was Mahmud Tarzi,
Amanullah Khan's Foreign Minister and father-in-law¬ ‚Äî and an ardent
supporter of the education of women. He fought for Article 68 of Afghanistan's
first constitution (declared through a Loya Jirga), which made elementary
education compulsory. Some of the reforms that were actually put in place, such
as the abolition of the traditional Muslim veil for women and the opening of a
number of co-educational schools, quickly alienated many tribal and religious
leaders. Faced with overwhelming armed opposition, Amanullah was forced to
abdicate in January 1929 after Kabul fell to forces led by Habibullah Kalakani.
Reigns of Nadir Shah and Zahir Shah. Prince Mohammed Nadir Khan, cousin of
Amanullah Khan, in turn defeated and executed Habibullah Kalakani in early
November 1929. He was soon declared King Nadir Khan. He began consolidating
power and regenerating the country. He abandoned the reforms of Amanullah Khan
in favour of a more gradual approach to modernisation. In 1933, however, he was
assassinated in a revenge killing by a student from Kabul. Mohammad Zahir Shah,
Nadir Khan's 19-year-old son, succeeded to the throne and reigned from 1933 to
1973. Until 1946 Zahir Shah ruled with the assistance of his uncle Sardar
Mohammad Hashim Khan, who held the post of Prime Minister and continued the
policies of Nadir Shah. In 1946, another of Zahir Shah's uncles, Sardar Shah
Mahmud Khan, became Prime Minister and began an experiment allowing greater
political freedom, but reversed the policy when it went further than he
expected. In 1953, he was replaced as Prime Minister by Mohammed Daoud Khan,
the king's cousin and brother-in-law. Daoud sought a closer relationship with
the Soviet Union and a more distant one towards Pakistan. However, disputes
with Pakistan led to an economic crisis and he was asked to resign in 1963.
From 1963 until 1973, Zahir Shah took a more active role. In 1964, King Zahir
Shah promulgated a liberal constitution providing for a bicameral legislature
to which the king appointed one-third of the deputies. The people elected
another third, and the remainder were selected indirectly by provincial
assemblies. Although Zahir's "experiment in democracy" produced few lasting
reforms, it permitted the growth of unofficial extremist parties on both the
left and the right. These included the communist People's Democratic Party of
Afghanistan (PDPA), which had close ideological ties to the Soviet Union. In
1967, the PDPA split into two major rival factions: the Khalq (Masses) was
headed by Nur Muhammad Taraki and Hafizullah Amin who were supported by
elements within the military, and the Parcham (Banner) led by Babrak Karmal.
Contemporary era (1973‚Äìpresent). Republic of Afghanistan and the end of
monarchy. Amid charges of corruption and malfeasance against the royal family
and poor economic conditions created by the severe 1971‚Äì72 drought, former
Prime Minister Mohammad Sardar Daoud Khan seized power in a non-violent coup on
July 17, 1973, while Zahir Shah was receiving treatment for eye problems and
therapy for lumbago in Italy. Daoud abolished the monarchy, abrogated the 1964
constitution, and declared Afghanistan a republic with himself as its first
President and Prime Minister. His attempts to carry out badly needed economic
and social reforms met with little success, and the new constitution
promulgated in February 1977 failed to quell chronic political instability. As
disillusionment set in, in 1978 a prominent member of the People's Democratic
Party of Afghanistan (PDPA), Mir Akbar Khyber (or "Kaibar"), was killed by the
government. The leaders of PDPA apparently feared that Daoud was planning to
exterminate them all, especially since most of them were arrested by the
government shortly after. Nonetheless, Hafizullah Amin and a number of military
wing officers of the PDPA's Khalq faction managed to remain at large and
organize a military coup. Democratic Republic and Soviet war. On 27 April 1978,
the PDPA, led by Nur Mohammad Taraki, Babrak Karmal and Amin Taha overthrew the
government of Mohammad Daoud, who was assassinated along with all his family
members in a bloody military coup. The coup became known as the Saur
Revolution. On 1 May, Taraki became President, Prime Minister and General
Secretary of the PDPA. The country was then renamed the Democratic Republic of
Afghanistan (DRA), and the PDPA regime lasted, in some form or another, until
April 1992. In March 1979, Hafizullah Amin took over as prime minister,
retaining the position of field marshal and becoming vice-president of the
Supreme Defence Council. Taraki remained President and in control of the Army.
On 14 September, Amin overthrew Taraki, who was killed. Amin stated that "the
Afghans recognize only crude force." Afghanistan expert Amin Saikal writes: "As
his powers grew, so apparently did his gravings for personal dictatorship ...
and his vision of the revolutionary process based on terror." Once in power,
the PDPA implemented a liberal and Marxist-Leninist agenda. It moved to replace
religious and traditional laws with secular and Marxist-Leninist ones. Men were
obliged to cut their beards, women could not wear a chador, and mosques were
placed off limits. The PDPA made a number of reforms on women's rights, banning
forced marriages, giving state recognition of women's right to vote, and
introducing women to political life. A prominent example was Anahita Ratebzad,
who was a major Marxist leader and a member of the Revolutionary Council.
Ratebzad wrote the famous "New Kabul Times" editorial (May 28, 1978) which
declared: "Privileges which women, by right, must have are equal education, job
security, health services, and free time to rear a healthy generation for
building the future of the country ... Educating and enlightening women is now
the subject of close government attention." The PDPA also carried out socialist
land reforms. It moved to promote state atheism, and carried out an ill-
conceived land reform, which was misunderstood by virtually all Afghans. They
also prohibited usury and took a number of measures in favor of women's rights,
by declaring equality of the sexes and introducing women to political life. The
PDPA invited the Soviet Union to assist in modernizing its economic
infrastructure (predominantly its exploration and mining of rare minerals and
natural gas). The USSR also sent contractors to build roads, hospitals and
schools and to drill water wells; they also trained and equipped the Afghan
army. Upon the PDPA's ascension to power, and the establishment of the DRA, the
Soviet Union promised monetary aid amounting to at least $1.262 billion. At the
same time, the PDPA imprisoned, tortured or murdered thousands of members of
the traditional elite, the religious establishment, and the intelligentsia.
Human Rights Watch estimates that as many as 100,000 people may have been
killed in the countryside alone by government troops. Members of the academia
and ethnic minorities were killed, tortured or imprisoned. In December 1978 the
PDPA leadership signed an agreement with the Soviet Union which would allow
military support for the PDPA in Afghanistan if needed. The majority of people
in the cities including Kabul either welcomed or were ambivalent to these
policies. However, the Marxist-Leninist and secular nature of the government as
well as its heavy dependence on the Soviet Union made it unpopular with a
majority of the Afghan population. Repressions plunged large parts of the
country, especially the rural areas, into open revolt against the new Marxist-
Leninist government. By spring 1979 unrests had reached 24 out of 28 Afghan
provinces including major urban areas. Over half of the Afghan army would
either desert or join the insurrection. Most of the government's new policies
clashed directly with the traditional Afghan understanding of Islam, making
religion one of the only forces capable of unifying the tribally and ethnically
divided population against the unpopular new government, and ushering in the
advent of Islamist participation in Afghan politics. In the wake of the Iranian
Revolution, the US sought rapprochement with the Afghan government‚Äîa prospect
that the USSR found unacceptable due to weakening Soviet leverage over the
regime. According to Cyrus Vance's close aide Marshall Shulman "the State
Department worked hard to dissuade the Soviets from invading." In February
1979, U.S. Ambassador Adolph "Spike" Dubs was murdered in Kabul after Afghan
security forces burst in on his kidnappers. The U.S. then reduced bilateral
assistance and terminated a small military training program. All remaining
assistance agreements were ended after the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan.
Following the Soviet invasion, the United States supported diplomatic efforts
to achieve a Soviet withdrawal. In addition, generous U.S. contributions to the
refugee program in Pakistan played a major part in efforts to assist Afghan
refugees. US National Security Advisor Zbigniew Brzezinski, known for his
hardline policies on the Soviet Union, initiated in 1979 a campaign supporting
mujaheddin in Pakistan and Afghanistan, which was run by Pakistani security
services with financial support from the Central Intelligence Agency and
Britain's MI6. This policy had the explicit aim of promoting radical Islamist
and anti-Communist forces. Bob Gates, in his book "Out Of The Shadows", wrote
that Pakistan had been pressuring the United States for arms to aid the rebels
for years, but that the Carter administration refused in the hope of finding a
diplomatic solution to avoid war. Brzezinski seems to have been in favor of the
provision of arms to the rebels, while Cyrus Vance's State Department, seeking
a peaceful settlement, publicly accused Brzezinski of seeking to "revive" the
Cold War. Brzezinski has stated that the United States provided communications
equipment and limited financial aid to the mujahideen prior to the "formal"
invasion, but only in response to the Soviet deployment of forces to
Afghanistan and the 1978 coup, and with the intention of preventing further
Soviet encroachment in the region. Full Text of Interview To bolster the
Parcham faction, the Soviet Union decided to intervene on December 24, 1979,
when the Red Army invaded its southern neighbor. Over 100,000 Soviet troops
took part in the invasion, which was backed by another one hundred thousand
Afghan military men and supporters of the Parcham faction. In the meantime,
Hafizullah Amin was killed and replaced by Babrak Karmal. In response to the
Soviet occupation of Afghanistan, the Reagan administration in the U.S.
increased arming and funding of the Mujahideen thanks in large part to the
efforts of Charlie Wilson and CIA officer Gust Avrakotos. Early reports
estimated that $6‚Äì20 billion had been spent by the U.S. and Saudi Arabia but
more recent reports state that the U.S. and Saudi Arabia provided as much as up
to $40 billion in cash and weapons, which included over two thousand FIM-92
Stinger surface-to-air missiles, for building up Islamic groups against the
Soviet Union. The U.S. handled most of its support through Pakistan's ISI.
Saudi Arabia was also providing financial support. Leaders such as Ahmad Shah
Massoud received only minor aid compared to Hekmatyar and some of the other
parties, although Massoud was named the "Afghan who won the cold war" by the
"Wall Street Journal". The 10-year Soviet occupation resulted in the killings
of between 600,000 and two million Afghans, mostly civilians. About 6million
fled as Afghan refugees to Pakistan and Iran, and from there over 38,000 made
it to the United States and many more to the European Union. Faced with
mounting international pressure and great number of casualties on both sides,
the Soviets withdrew in 1989. Their withdrawal from Afghanistan was seen as an
ideological victory in America, which had backed some Mujahideen factions
through three U.S. presidential administrations to counter Soviet influence in
the vicinity of the oil-rich Persian Gulf. The USSR continued to support
President Mohammad Najibullah (former head of the Afghan secret service,
"KHAD") until 1992. Foreign interference and civil war. 1992-1996 Meanwhile
southern Afghanistan was neither under the control of foreign-backed militias
nor the interim government in Kabul, which had no hands in the affairs of
southern Afghanistan during that time. Southern Afghanistan was ruled by Gul
Agha Sherzai. The southern city of Kandahar was a centre of lawlessness, crime
and atrocities fuelled by complex Pashtun tribal rivalries. In 1994, the
Taliban (a movement originating from Jamiat Ulema-e-Islam-run religious schools
for Afghan refugees in Pakistan) also developed in Afghanistan as a politico-
religious force, reportedly in opposition to the tyranny of the local governor.
Mullah Omar started his movement with fewer than 50 armed madrassah students in
his hometown of Kandahar. As Gulbuddin Hekmatyar remained unsuccessful in
conquering Kabul, Pakistan started its support to the Taliban. Many analyst
like Amin Saikal describe the Taliban as developing into a proxy force for
Pakistan's regional interests which the Taliban decline. In 1994 the Taliban
took power in several provinces in southern and central Afghanistan. In 1995
the Hezb-i Islami of Gulbuddin Hekmatyar, the Iranian-backed Hezb-i Wahdat as
well as Rashid Dostum's Junbish forces were defeated militarily in the capital
Kabul by forces of the interim government under Massoud who subsequently tried
to initiate a nationwide political process with the goal of national
consolidation and democratic elections, also inviting the Taliban to join the
process. The Taliban declined. Taliban and the United Front. 1996-2001 After
the fall of Kabul to the Taliban on September 27, 1996, Ahmad Shah Massoud and
Abdul Rashid Dostum, two former archnemesis, created the United Front (Northern
Alliance) against the Taliban that were preparing offensives against the
remaining areas under the control of Massoud and those under the control of
Dostum. see video The United Front included beside the dominantly Tajik forces
of Massoud and the Uzbek forces of Dostum, Hazara factions and Pashtun forces
under the leadership of commanders such as Abdul Haq, Haji Abdul Qadir, Qari
Baba or diplomat Abdul Rahim Ghafoorzai. From the Taliban conquest in 1996
until November 2001 the United Front controlled roughly 30% of Afghanistan's
population in provinces such as Badakhshan, Kapisa, Takhar and parts of Parwan,
Kunar, Nuristan, Laghman, Samangan, Kunduz, Gh≈çr and Bamyan. According to a
55-page report by the United Nations, the Taliban, while trying to consolidate
control over northern and western Afghanistan, committed systematic massacres
against civilians. UN officials stated that there had been "15 massacres"
between 1996 and 2001. They also said, that "have been highly systematic and
they all lead back to the [Taliban Ministry of Defense or to Mullah Omar
himself." The Taliban especially targeted people of Shia religious or Hazara
ethnic background. Upon taking Mazar-i-Sharif in 1998, about 4,000 civilians
were executed by the Taliban and many more reported tortured. Among those
killed in Mazari Sharif were several Iranian diplomats. Others were kidnapped
by the Taliban, touching off a hostage crisis that nearly escalated to a full
scale war, with 150,000 Iranian soldiers massed on the Afghan border at one
time. It was later admitted that the diplomats were killed by the Taliban, and
their bodies were returned to Iran. The documents also reveal the role of Arab
and Pakistani support troops in these killings. Bin Laden's so-called 055
Brigade was responsible for mass-killings of Afghan civilians. The report by
the United Nations quotes eyewitnesses in many villages describing Arab
fighters carrying long knives used for slitting throats and skinning people.
Pakistani President Pervez Musharraf - then as Chief of Army Staff - was
responsible for sending thousands of Pakistanis to fight alongside the Taliban
and Bin Laden against the forces of Massoud. In total there were believed to be
28,000 Pakistani nationals fighting inside Afghanistan. 20,000 were regular
Pakistani soldiers either from the Frontier Corps or army and an estimated
8,000 were militants recruited in madrassas filling regular Taliban ranks. The
estimated 25,000 Taliban regular force thus comprised more than 8,000 Pakistani
nationals. A 1998 document by the U.S. State Department confirms that "20-40
percent of Taliban soldiers are Pakistani." The document further states that
the parents of those Pakistani nationals "know nothing regarding their child's
military involvement with the Taliban until their bodies are brought back to
Pakistan." A further 3,000 fighter of the regular Taliban army were Arab and
Central Asian militants. From 1996 to 2001 the Al Qaeda of Osama Bin Laden and
Ayman al-Zawahiri became a state within the Taliban state. Bin Laden sent Arab
recruits to join the fight against the United Front. Of roughly 45,000
Pakistani, Taliban and Al Qaeda soldiers fighting against the forces of Massoud
only 14,000 were Afghan. According to Human Rights Watch in 1997 Taliban
soldiers were summarily executed in and around Mazar-i Sharif by Dostum's
Junbish forces. Dostum was defeated by the Taliban in 1998 with the fall of
Mazar-i-Sharif. Massoud remained the only leader of the United Front in
Afghanistan. In early 2001 Massoud addressed the European Parliament in
Brussels asking the international community to provide humanitarian help to the
people of Afghanistan. He stated that the Taliban and Al Qaeda had introduced
"a very wrong perception of Islam" and that without the support of Pakistan the
Taliban would not be able to sustain their military campaign for up to a year.
On this visit to Europe he also warned that his intelligence had gathered
information about a large-scale attack on U.S. soil being imminent. NATO
presence and the Karzai administration. On 9 September 2001, Ahmad Shah Massoud
was assassinated by two Arab suicide attackers inside Afghanistan and two days
later about 3,000 people became victims of the September 11, 2001 attacks in
the United States. Then US President George W. Bush accused Osama bin Laden and
Khalid Sheikh Mohammed as the faces behind the attacks. When the Taliban
refused to hand over bin Laden to US authorities and to disband al-Qaeda bases
in Afghanistan, Operation Enduring Freedom was launched in which teams of
American and British special forces worked with commanders of the United Front
(Northern Alliance) against the Taliban. At the same time the US-led forces
were bombing Taliban and al-Qaeda targets everywhere inside Afghanistan with
cruise missiles. These actions led to the fall of Mazar-i-Sharif in the north
followed by all the other cities, as the Taliban and al-Qaeda crossed over the
porous Durand Line border into Pakistan. In December 2001, after the Taliban
government was toppled and the new Afghan government under Hamid Karzai was
formed, the International Security Assistance Force (ISAF) was established by
the UN Security Council to help assist the Karzai administration and provide
basic security to the Afghan people. While the Taliban began regrouping inside
Pakistan, more coalition troops entered the escalating US-led war. Meanwhile,
the rebuilding of war-torn Afghanistan kicked off in 2002. The Afghan nation
was able to build democratic structures over the years, and some progress was
made in key areas such as governance, economy, health, education, transport,
and agriculture. NATO is training the Afghan armed forces as well its national
police. ISAF and Afghan troops led many offensives against the Taliban but
failed to fully defeat them. By 2009, a Taliban-led shadow government began to
form in many parts of the country complete with their own version of mediation
court. After U.S. President Barack Obama announced the deployment of another
30,000 soldiers in 2010 for a period of two years, Der Spiegel published images
of the US soldiers who killed unarmed Afghan civilians. In FY 2009, the United
States resettled just 328 refugees from Afghanistan. By contrast, the U.S.
admitted more than 100,000 Vietnamese refugees for resettlement during the
Vietnam War. On the other hand, over five million Afghan refugees were
repatriated in the last decade, including many who were forcefully deported
from NATO countries. This large return of Afghans may have helped the nation's
economy but the country still remains one of the poorest in the world due to
the decades of war, lack of foreign investment, ongoing government corruption
and the Pakistani-backed Taliban insurgency. The United States also accuses
neighboring Iran of providing small level of support to the Taliban insurgents.
According to a report by the United Nations, the Taliban and other militants
were responsible for 76% of civilian casualties in 2009, 75% in 2010 and 80% in
2011. Afghan President Hamid Karzai told world leaders during the London
conference that he intends to reach out to the top echelons of the Taliban
within a few weeks with a peace initiative. Karzai set the framework for
dialogue with Taliban leaders when he called on the group's leadership to take
part in a "loya jirga" ‚Äì or large assembly of elders ‚Äì to initiate peace
talks. Karzai also asked for creation of a new peacemaking organization, to be
called the National Council for Peace, Reconciliation and Reintegration.
Karzai's top adviser on the reconciliation process with the insurgents said
that the country must learn to forgive the Taliban. In March 2010, the Karzai
government held preliminary talks with Hezb-i-Islami, who presented a plan
which included the withdrawal of all foreign troops by the end of 2010. The
Taliban declined to participate, saying "The Islamic Emirate has a clear
position. We have said this many, many times. There will be no talks when there
are foreign troops on Afghanistan's soil killing innocent Afghans on daily
basis." In June 2010 the Afghan Peace Jirga 2010 took place. In September 2010
General David Petraeus commented on the progress of peace talks to date,
stating, "The prospect for reconciliation with senior Taliban leaders certainly
looms out there...and there have been approaches at (a) very senior level that
hold some promise." After the May 2011 death of Osama bin Laden in Pakistan,
many prominent Afghan figures began being assassinated, including Mohammed Daud
Daud, Ahmad Wali Karzai, Jan Mohammad Khan, Ghulam Haider Hamidi, Burhanuddin
Rabbani and others. Also in the same year, the Pakistani-Afghan border
skirmishes intensified and many large scale attacks by the Pakistani-based
Haqqani network took place across Afghanistan. This led to the United States
warning Pakistan of a possible military action against the Haqqanis in the
Federally Administered Tribal Areas. The U.S. blamed Pakistan's government,
mainly Pakistani Army and its ISI spy network as the masterminds behind all of
this. U.S. Ambassador to Pakistan, Cameron Munter, told Radio Pakistan that
"The attack that took place in Kabul a few days ago, that was the work of the
Haqqani network. There is evidence linking the Haqqani Network to the Pakistan
government. This is something that must stop." Other top U.S. officials such as
Hillary Clinton and Leon Panetta made similar statements. On October 16, 2011,
"Operation Knife Edge" was launched by NATO and Afghan forces against the
Haqqani network in south-eastern Afghanistan. Afghan Defense Minister, Abdul
Rahim Wardak, explained that the operation will "help eliminate the insurgents
before they struck in areas along the troubled frontier". In November 2011,
NATO forces killed 24 Pakistani Army soldiers around the border region with
Pakistan.
