History of Latvia The History of Latvia began when the area which is today
Latvia was settled following the end of the last glacial period, around 9000
BC. Ancient Baltic peoples appeared during the second millennium BC and four
distinct tribal realms in Latvia's territories were identifiable towards the
end of the first millennium AD. Latvia's principal river, the Daugava River,
was at the head of an important mainland route from the Baltic region through
Russia into southern Europe and the Middle East used by the Vikings and later
Nordic and German traders. In the early medieval period, the region's peoples
resisted Christianisation and became subject to attack in the Northern
Crusades. Today's capital, Riga, founded in 1201 by Teutonic colonists at the
mouth of the Daugava, became a strategic base in a papally-sanctioned conquest
of the area by the Livonian Brothers of the Sword. It was to be the first major
city of the southern Baltic and, after 1282, a principal trading centre in the
Hanseatic League. By the 16th century Germanic dominance in the region was
increasingly challenged by other powers. Due to Latvia's strategic location and
prosperous city, its territories were a frequent focal point for conflict and
conquest between at least four major powers, the State of the Teutonic Order
(later Germany), the Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth, Sweden and Russia. The
longest period of external hegemony in the modern period began in 1710 when
control over Riga switched from Sweden to Russia during the Great Northern War.
Under Russian control, Latvia was in the vanguard of industrialisation and the
abolition of serfdom so that by the end of the 19th century it had become one
of the most developed parts of the Russian Empire. The increasing social
problems and rising discontent which this brought meant that Riga also played a
leading role in the 1905 Russian Revolution. A rising sense of Latvian
nationalism from the 1850s onwards bore fruit after World War I when, after two
years of struggle in the Russian Civil War, Latvia finally won sovereign
independence recognised by Russia in 1920 and by the international community in
1921. Latvia's independent status was interrupted at the outset of World War II
when in 1940 the country was forcibly incorporated into the Soviet Union,
invaded and occupied by Nazi Germany in 1941, then retaken by the Soviets in
1944 after Germany surrendered. From the mid-1940s the country was subject to
Soviet economic control and saw considerable Russification of its peoples, but
Latvian culture and infrastructures survived such that, during the period of
Soviet liberalisation under Mikhail Gorbachev, Latvia once again took a path
towards independence which eventually succeeded in August 1991 and was
recognised by Russia the following month. Since then, under restored
independence, Latvia has become a member of the United Nations, entered NATO
and joined the European Union. Prehistory. The proto-Baltic forefathers of the
Latvian people have lived on the eastern coast of the Baltic Sea since the
third millennium BCE. At the beginning of this era the territory known today as
Latvia became famous as a trading crossroads. The famous "route from the
Vikings to the Greeks" mentioned in ancient chronicles stretched from
Scandinavia through Latvian territory via the Daugava River to the ancient Rus
and Byzantine Empire. The ancient Balts of this time actively participated in
the trading network. Across the European continent, Latvia's coast was known as
a place for obtaining amber. Up to and into the Middle Ages amber was more
valuable than gold in many places. Latvian amber was known in places as far
away as Ancient Greece and the Roman Empire and the Amber Road was intensively
used for the transfer of amber to the south of Europe. In the 10th century, the
ancient Balts started to form specific tribal realms. Gradually, five
individual Baltic tribal cultures developed: Curonians, Livonians, Latgalians,
Selonians, Semigallians (). The largest of them was the Latgallian tribe, which
was the most advanced in its socio-political development. The main Latgallian
principality was Jersika, ruled by the Greek Orthodox princes from Latgallian-
Polotsk branch of Rurik dynasty. The last ruler of Jersika, mentioned in the
Chronicle of Henry of Livonia was prince Visvaldis ("Vissewalde, rex de
Gercike"). During dividing of his realm in 1211 part of the country was called
"Latvia" ("terra, quae Lettia dicitur"), probably the first time this name is
mentioned in written sources. In contrast, the Couronians maintained a
lifestyle of intensive invasions that included looting and pillaging. On the
west coast of the Baltic Sea, they became known as the "Baltic Vikings". But
Selonians and Semgallians, closely related to Aukštaitians and Samogitians,
were known as peace-loving and prosperous farmers. Livonians lived along the
shores of the Gulf of Riga and were fishers and traders. German period (1207-
1561). Because of its strategic geographic location, Latvian territory has
always been invaded by other larger nations, and this situation has defined the
fate of Latvia and its people. At the end of the 12th century, Latvia was more
often visited by traders from Western Europe who set out on trading journeys
along Latvia's longest river, the Daugava, to Russia. At the very end of the
12th century, German traders arrived and with them came preachers of the
Christian faith who attempted to convert the pagan Baltic and Finno-Ugric
tribes to the Christian faith. The Livs did not willingly convert to the new
and different beliefs and practices, and particularly opposed the ritual of
baptism. News of this reached the Pope in Rome and it was decided that
Crusaders would be sent into Latvia to influence the situation. The Germans
founded Riga in 1201, and gradually it became the largest city in the Southern
part of the Baltic Sea. Order of the Sword Brothers was founded in 1202 to
subjugate the local people. The Livs were conquered by 1207 and the most of
Latgalians by 1214. But the Sword Brothers were defeated in Battle of Saule
(1236) and its remnants accepted incorporation into the Teutonic Order. By the
end of 13th century also the Curonians and Semigallians were subjugated and the
development of separate tribal realms of the ancient Latvians came to an end.
In the 13th century, an ecclesiastical state Terra Mariana or Livonia was
established under the Germanic authorities consisting of Latvia and Estonia. In
1282, Riga and later Cēsis, Limbaži, Koknese and Valmiera were included in
the Northern German Trading Organisation, or the Hanseatic League (Hansa). From
this time, Riga became an important point in west-east trading. Riga, being the
centre of the Eastern Baltic region, formed close cultural contacts with
Western Europe. The reformation reached Livonia in 1521. It was supported in
particular in the cities and by the middle of 15th century the majority of the
population had already converted to Lutheranism. In the 15-16th century the
hereditary landed class gradually evolved from vassals of the Order and the
bishops. In the time their descendants came to own vast estates over which they
exercised absolute rights. The titled landowners wielded immense economic power
and for all that they had a duty to care for the peasants dependent of them, in
pactice the latter sank into serfdom. Lithuanian-Polish and Swedish period
(1561-1795). Livonian War 1558-1583. In September 1557 Livonian Confederation
and Polish–Lithuanian union signed the Treaty of Pozvol, which created a
mutual defensive and offensive alliance. The tsar of Russia Ivan the Terrible
regarded this as "casus belli" and in January 1558 reacted with the invasion of
Livonia. On 2 August 1560 forces of Ivan the Terrible defeated the united
forces of the Livonian Order and Archibishop of Riga at the Battle of Ērģeme.
The same year, the prince-bishop of Ösel-Wiek and Courland Johannes V von
Münchhausen sold his lands to king Frederick II of Denmark for 30,000 thalers.
To avoid hereditary partition of his lands, King Frederick II gave that
territory to his younger brother Magnus on condition that he renounced his
rights to succession in the duchies of Schleswig and Holstein. The chances for
success of Magnus and his supporters looked particularly good in 1560 (and
1570). In the former case he had been recognised as their sovereign by The
Bishopric of Ösel-Wiek and The Bishopric of Courland, and as their prospective
ruler by the authorities of The Bishopric of Dorpat; The Bishopric of Reval
with the Harrien-Wierland gentry were on his side; Livonian Order conditionally
recognised his right of ownership of Principality of Estonia. Then along with
Archbishop Wilhelm von Brandenburg of The Archbishopric of Riga and his
Coadjutor Christoph von Mecklenburg, Kettler gave to Magnus the portions of The
Kingdom of Livonia, which he had taken possession of, but they refused to give
him any more land. Once Eric XIV of Sweden became king he took quick actions to
get involved in the war. He negotiated a continued peace with Russia and spoke
to the burghers of Reval city. He offered them goods to submit to him as well
as threatening them. By June 6, 1561 they submitted to him contrary to the
persuasions of Kettler to the burghers. The King's brother Johan married the
Polish princess Catherine Jagiellon. Wanting to obtain his own land in Livonia,
he loaned Poland money and then claimed the castles they had pawned as his own
instead of using them to pressure Poland. After Johan returned to Finland, Erik
XIV forbade him to deal with any foreign countries without his consent. Shortly
after that Erik XIV started acting quickly lost any allies he was about to
obtain, either from Magnus or the Archbishop of Riga. Magnus was upset he had
been tricked out of his inheritance of Holstein. After Sweden occupied Reval,
Frederick II of Denmark made a treaty with Erik XIV of Sweden in August 1561.
The brothers were in great disagreement and Frederick II negotiated a treaty
with Ivan IV on August 7, 1562 in order to help his brother obtain more land
and stall further Swedish advance. Erik XIV did not like this and The Northern
Seven Years' War between The Free City of Lübeck, Denmark, Poland, and Sweden
broke out. In 1561 the weakened Livonian Order was dissolved by the Treaty of
Vilnius. Its lands were secularised as the Duchy of Livonia and assigned to the
Grand Duchy of Lithuania as a part of it and the Duchy of Courland and
Semigallia as a vassal state. The last Master of the order Gotthard Kettler
became the first Duke of Courland, in doing so converting to Lutheranism. While
only losing land and trade, Frederick II and Magnus were not faring well. But
in 1568 Erik XIV became insane and his brother Johan III took his place. Johan
III ascended to the throne of Sweden and due to his friendship with Poland he
began a policy against Russia. He would try to obtain more land in Livonia and
exercise strength over Denmark. After all parties had been financially drained,
Frederick II let his ally, King Sigismund II Augustus of Polish–Lithuanian
Commonwealth, know that he was ready for peace. On December 15, 1570, the
Treaty of Stettin was concluded. It is, however, more difficult to estimate the
scope and magnitude of the support Magnus received in Livonian cities. Compared
to the Harrien-Wierland gentry, the Reval city council, and hence probably the
majority of citizens, demonstrated a much more reserved attitude towards
Denmark and King Magnus of Livonia. Nevertheless, there is no reason to speak
about any strong pro-Swedish sentiments among the residents of Reval. The
citizens who had fled to The Bishopric of Dorpat or had been deported to
Muscovy hailed Magnus as their saviour until 1571. The analysis indicates that
during the Livonian War a pro-independence wing emerged among the Livonian
gentry and townspeople, forming the so-called "Peace Party". Dismissing
hostilities, these forces perceived an agreement with Muscovy as a chance to
escape the atrocities of war and avoid the division of Livonia. That is why
Magnus, who represented Denmark and later struck a deal with Ivan the Terrible,
proved a suitable figurehead for this faction. The Peace Party, however, had
its own armed forces – scattered bands of household troops ("Hofleute") under
diverse command, which only united in action in 1565 (Battle of Pärnu, 1565
and Siege of Reval, 1565), in 1570–1571 (Siege of Reval, 1570-1571; 30
weeks), and in 1574–1576 (first on Sweden’s side, then came the sale of
Wiek to the Danish Crown, and the loss of the territory to the Tsardom of
Russia. In 1575 after Russians attacked Danish claims in Livonia, Frederick II
dropped out of the competition as well as the Holy Roman Emperor. After this
Johan III held off on his pursuit for more land due to Russia obtaining lands
that Sweden controlled. He used the next two years of truce to get in a better
position. In 1578, he resumed the fight for not only Livonia, but also
everywhere due to an understanding he made with Rzeczpospolita. In 1578 Magnus
retired to Rzeczpospolita and his brother all but gave up the land in Livonia.
Kingdom of Livonia 1570-1578. On June 10, 1570 the Danish Duke Magnus of
Holstein arrived in Moscow where he was crowned King of Livonia. Magnus took
the oath of allegiance to Ivan the Terrible as his overlord and received from
the corresponding charter for the vassal kingdom of Livonia in what Ivan termed
his patrimony. The armies of Ivan the Terrible were initially successful,
taking Polotsk (1563) and Parnawa (1575) and overrunning much of Grand Duchy of
Lithuania up to Vilnius. Eventually, Grand Duchy of Lithuania and Kingdom of
Poland formed Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth in 1569 under the Union of
Lublin. Eric XIV of Sweden did not like this and The Northern Seven Years' War
between Free City of Lübeck, Denmark, Poland, and Sweden broke out. While only
losing land and trade, Frederick II of Denmark and Magnus von Lyffland of
Œsel-Wiek were not faring well. But in 1569 Erik XIV became insane and his
brother John III of Sweden took his place. After all parties had been
financially drained, Frederick II let his ally, King Zygmunt II August, know
that he was ready for peace. On December 15, 1570, the Treaty of Stettin was
concluded. In the next phase of the conflict, in 1577 Ivan IV took opportunity
of the Commonwealth internal strife (called the war against Gdańsk in Polish
historiography), and during the reign of Stefan Batory in Poland invaded
Livonia, quickly taking almost the entire territory, with the exception of Riga
and Rewel. In 1578 Magnus of Livonia recognized the sovereignty of
Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth (not ratified by the Sejm of Poland-Lithuania,
or recognized by Denmark). The Kingdom of Livonia was beaten back by Muscovy on
all fronts. In 1578 Magnus of Livonia retired to The Bishopric of Courland and
his brother all but gave up the land in Livonia. Duchy of Livonia 1561-1621. In
1561 during the Livonian War, The Livonian Confederation subjected itself to
the Grand Duchy of Lithuania with vassal dependency of it and became
secularized under the Union of Wilno. Eight years later, in 1569, when the
Grand Duchy of Lithuania and Kingdom of Poland formed Polish–Lithuanian
Commonwealth, Livonia became a joint domain administered directly by the king
and grand duke. Duchy of Courland and Semigallia 1562-1795. In the 17th
century, the Duchy of Courland and Semigallia, once a part of Livonia,
experienced a notable economic boom. During the reign of the duke Jacob Kettler
new copper and iron foundries, gunpowder mills and shipyards were opened. In
Ventspils alone 120 ships were built, of which over 40 were warships. The duchy
owned large fleet and established two colonies — St. Andrews Island in the
estuary of Gambia River (in Africa) and Tobago Island (in the Caribbean Sea).
Names from this period still survive today in these places. Swedish Livonia
1629-1721. During the Polish–Swedish War (1600–1629) Riga and the largest
part of Duchy of Livonia came under Swedish rule in 1621. During the Swedish
rule Vidzeme was known as the "Swedish Bread Basket" because it supplied the
larger part of the Swedish Kingdom with wheat. The rest of Latvia stayed Polish
until the second partition of Poland in 1793, when it became Russian. In 1632
the Swedish king Gustavus Adolphus founded Dorpat University which became the
intellectual focus for population of Livonia. The translation of the whole
Bible into Latvian in 1685 by Johann Ernst Glück was subsidized by the Swedish
government. Also the schools for Latvian speaking peasantry were set up in the
country parishes. Riga was the second largest city in the Swedish Empire at the
time. Together with other Baltic Sea dominions, Livonia served to secure the
Swedish "Dominium maris baltici". In contrast to Swedish Estonia, which had
submitted to Swedish rule voluntarily in 1561 and where traditional local laws
remained largely untouched, the uniformity policy was applied in Swedish
Livonia under Karl XI of Sweden: serfdom was abolished in the estates owned by
the Swedish crown, peasants were offered education and military, administrative
or ecclesiastical careers, and nobles had to transfer domains to the king in
the Great Reduction. These reforms were subsequently reversed by Peter I of
Russia when he conquered Livonia. Inflanty Voivodeship 1629-1772. After the
Polish–Swedish War (1600–1629) only the Southeastern part of the Duchy of
Livonia ramained under Polish-Lithuanian rule. The Catholicism became the
dominant religion in this territory known as Inflanty or Latgale as a result of
Counter-Reformation. Russian period (1721-1918). In 1700, the Great Northern
War broke out. The course of this war was directly linked with today's Latvian
territory and the territorial claims of the Russian Empire. One of its goals
was to secure the famous and rich town of Riga. In 1710, the Russian Tsar,
Peter I, managed to secure Vidzeme. Through Vidzeme to Riga, Russia obtained a
clear passage to Europe. By the end of the 18th century, due to the Partitions
of Poland, all of Latvia's territory was under Russian rule. In 1812 Napoleon's
troops invaded Russia and the Prussian units under the leadership of the field
marshal Yorck occupied Courland and approached Riga. The governor-general of
Riga Ivan Essen set the wooden houses of the Riga suburbs on fire to deflect
the invaders and thousands of city residents were left homeless. However York
did not attack Riga and in December the Napoleon's army retreated. Serfdom was
abolished in Courland Governorate in 1818 and Governorate of Livonia in 1819.
However all the land stayed in the hands of nobility. Only in 1849, a law
granted a legal basis for the creation of peasant-owned farms. Reforms were
slower in Latgale which was part of Vitebsk Governorate, where serfdom was only
abolished in 1861 after emancipation reform. In the middle of 19th century
industry developed quickly and the number of the inhabitants grew. Courland and
Vidzeme became one of Russia's most developed provinces. In the 19th century,
the first Latvian National Awakening began among ethnic Latvian intellectuals,
a movement that partly reflected similar nationalist trends elsewhere in
Europe. This revival was led by the "Young Latvians" (in Latvian:
"jaunlatvieši") from the 1850s to the 1880s. Primarily a literary and cultural
movement with significant political implications, the Young Latvians soon came
into severe conflict with the Baltic Germans. In the 1880s and 1890s the
russification policy began by Alexander III was aimed at reducing the autonomy
of Baltic provinces and the introduction of the Russian language in
administration, court and education replacing German or Latvian (in regard to
schools). With increasing pauperization in rural areas and growing
urbanization, a loose but broad leftist movement called the "New Current" arose
in the late 1880s. Led by Rainis and Pēteris Stučka, editors of the newspaper
"Dienas Lapa", this movement was soon influenced by Marxism and led to the
creation of the Latvian Social Democratic Labour Party. Latvia in the 20th
century saw an explosion of popular discontent in the 1905 Revolution. 1905
Revolution. Following the shooting of demonstrators in St. Petersburg on
January 9 a wide-scale general strike began in Riga. On January 13 Russian army
troops opened fire on demonstrators in Riga killing 73 and injuring 200 people.
During the summer 1905 main revolutionary events moved to the countryside. 470
new parish administrative bodies were elected in 94% of the parishes in Latvia.
The Congress of Parish Representatives was held in Riga in November. Mass
meetings and demonstrations took place including violent attacks against Baltic
German nobles, burning estate buildings and seizure of estate property
including weapons. In the autumn 1905 armed conflict between the German
nobility and the Latvian peasants begun in the rural areas of Vidzeme and
Courland. In Courland, the peasants seized or surrounded several towns. In
Livland the fighters controlled the Rūjiena-Pärnu railway line. Altogether, a
thousand armed clashes were registered in Latvia in 1905. Martial law was
declared in Courland in August 1905 and in Livland in late November. Special
punitive expeditions were dispatched in mid-December to suppress the movement.
They executed 1170 people without trial or investigation and burned 300 peasant
homes. Thousands were exiled to Siberia. In 1906 the revolutionary movement
gradually subsided. German occupation World War I. On August 1, 1914 Germany
declared war on Russia and by 1915, the conflict reached Latvia. On May 7 the
Germans captured Liepāja and on May 18, Talsi, Tukums and Ventspils. On June
29 Russian Supreme Command ordered to evacuate whole population from Kurzeme
and around 400,000 refugees fled to the east. Some of them settled in Vidzeme
but most continued their way to Russia. On July 19 Russian War Minister ordered
to evacuate the factories of Riga together with their workers. In the summer of
1915, 30,000 railway wagons loaded with machines and equipment from factories
were taken away. In August the formation of Latvian battalions known as Latvian
Riflemen started. From 1915 to 1917, the Riflemen fought in the Russian army
against the Germans in positions along Daugava River. In December 1916 and
January 1917, they suffered heavy casualties in month-long Christmas Battles.
In February 1917 Revolution broke out in Russia and in the summer the Russian
army collapsed. The German offensive was successful and on 3 September 1917
they entered Riga. In November 1917, the Communist Bolsheviks took power in
Russia. The Bolshevik government tried to end the war and in March 1918, the
Treaty of Brest-Litovsk was signed which gave Kurzeme and Vidzeme to the
Germans. By February the Germans had occupied all of Latvia. However after the
German Revolution, on 11 November the armistice treaty between the Allies and
Germany was signed thus ending World War I. Great Britain declared its "de
facto" recognition of Latvia in writing on that day as well, confirming a prior
verbal communication of 23 October to Meierowitz by the British Minister for
Foreign Affairs, A. J. Balfour. Independence. The idea of an independent Latvia
became a reality at the beginning of the 20th century. The course of World War
I activated the idea of independence. World War I directly involved Latvians
and Latvian territory. Latvian riflemen ("latviešu strēlnieki") fought on the
Russian side during this war, and earned recognition for their bravery far into
Europe. During the Russian Civil War (1917–1922), Latvians fought on both
sides with a significant group (known as Latvian red riflemen) supporting the
Bolsheviks. In the autumn of 1919 the red Latvian division participated in a
major battle against the "white" anti-bolshevik army headed by the Russian
general Anton Denikin. Latvia was ostensibly included within the proposed
Baltic German-led United Baltic Duchy, but this attempt collapsed after the
defeat of the German Empire in November 1918. The post-war confusion was a
suitable opportunity for the development of an independent nation. Latvia
proclaimed independence shortly after the end of World War I – on November
18, 1918 which is now the "Independence Day" in Latvia. A series of conflicts
within the territory of Latvia during 1918–1920 is commonly known as the
Latvian War of Independence. In December 1918 Soviet Russia invaded the new
republic and rapidly conquered almost all the territory of Latvia, Riga itself
was captured by the Soviet Army on 4 April 1919, with the exception of a small
territory near Liepāja. The Latvian Socialist Soviet Republic was proclaimed
on 17 December 1918 with the political, economic, and military backing of the
Bolshevik government of Soviet Russia. On March 3, 1919 German and Latvian
forces commenced a counterattack against the forces of Soviet Latvia. On 22 May
1919 Riga was recaptured. In June 1919 collisions started between the
"Baltische Landeswehr" on one side and the Estonian 3rd division on the other.
The 3rd division defeated the German forces in the Battle of Wenden on June 23.
An armistice was signed at Strazdumuiža, under the terms of which the Germans
had to leave Latvia. However the German forces instead of leaving, were
incorporated into the West Russian Volunteer Army. On October 5 it commenced an
offensive on Riga taking the west bank of the Daugava River but on November 11
was defeated by Latvian forces and by the end of the month, driven from Latvia.
On January 3, 1920 the united Latvian and Polish forces launched an attack on
the Soviet army in Latgalia and took Daugavpils. By the end of January they
reached the etnographic border of Latvia. On August 11, 1920 according to the
Latvian–Soviet Peace Treaty ("Treaty of Riga") Soviet Russia relinquished
authority over the Latvian nation and claims to Latvian territory "once and for
all times". The international community (United Kingdom, France, Belgium, Italy
and Japan) recognized Latvia's independence on January 26, 1921, and the
recognition from many other countries followed soon. In this year Latvia also
became a member of the League of Nations (September 22, 1921). In April 1920
elections to the Constituent assembly were held. In May 1922 the Constitution
of Latvia and in June the new Law on Elections were passed, opening the way to
electing the parliament- Saeima. At Constituent Assembly, the law on the land
reform was passed, which expropriated the manor lands. Landowners were left
with 50 hectares each and their land was distributed to the landless peasants
without cost. In 1897, 61.2% of the rural population had been landless; by
1936, that percentage had been reduced to 18%. The extent of cultivated land
surpassed the pre-war level already in 1923. Because of the world economic
crisis there was a growing dissatisfaction among the population at the
beginning of the 1930s. In Riga on May 15, 1934, Prime Minister Kārlis
Ulmanis, one of the fathers of Latvian independence, took power by a bloodless
coup d'état: the activities of the parliament (the Saeima) and all the
political parties were suspended. Rapid economic growth took place in the
second half of 1930s, due to which Latvia reached one of the highest living
standards in Europe. Because of improving living standards in Latvian society,
there was no serious opposition to the authoritarian rule of the Prime Minister
Kārlis Ulmanis and no possibility of it arising. World War II. Soviet
Occupation. The Soviet Union guaranteed its interests in the Baltics with the
signing of the Molotov–Ribbentrop Pact between the Soviet Union and Nazi
Germany on August 23, 1939. Under threat of invasion, Latvia (along with
Estonia and Lithuania) signed a mutual assistance pact with Soviet Union,
providing for the stationing of up to 25,000 Soviet troops on Latvian soil.
Following the initiative from Nazi Germany, Latvia on October 30, 1939
concluded an agreement to repatriate ethnic Germans in the wake of the impeding
Soviet takeover. Seven months later, the Soviet foreign minister Vyacheslav
Molotov accused the Baltic states of conspiracy against the Soviet Union. On
June 16, 1940, threatening an invasion, Soviet Union issued an ultimatum
demanding that the government be replaced and that an unlimited number of
Soviet troops be admitted. Knowing that the Red Army had entered Lithuania a
day before, that its troops were massed along the eastern border and mindful of
the Soviet military bases in Western Latvia, the government acceded to the
demands, and Soviet troops occupied the country on June 17. Staged elections
were held July 14–15, 1940, whose results were announced in Moscow 12 hours
before the polls closed; Soviet documents show the election results were
forged. The newly elected "People's Assembly" declared Latvia a Socialist
Soviet Republic and applied for admission into the Soviet Union on July 21.
Latvia was incorporated into the Soviet Union on August 5, 1940. The overthrown
Latvian government continued to function in exile while the republic was under
the Soviet control. In the spring of 1941, the Soviet central government began
planning the mass deportation of anti-Soviet elements from the occupied Baltic
states. In preparation, General Ivan Serov, Deputy People's Commissar of Public
Security of the Soviet Union, signed the Serov Instructions, "Regarding the
Procedure for Carrying out the Deportation of Anti-Soviet Elements from
Lithuania, Latvia, and Estonia." During the night of 13–14 June 1941, 15,424
inhabitants of Latvia — including 1,771 Jews and 742 ethnic Russians — were
deported to camps and special settlements, mostly in Siberia. 35,000 people
were deported in the first year of Soviet occupation (131,500 across the
Baltics). Occupation of Latvia by Nazi Germany. The Nazi invasion, launched a
week later, cut short immediate plans to deport several hundred thousand more
from the Baltics. Nazi troops occupied Riga on July 1, 1941. Immediately after
the installment of German authority, a process of eliminating the Jewish and
Gypsy population began, with many killings taking place in Rumbula. The
killings were committed by the Einsatzgruppe A, the Wehrmacht and Marines (in
Liepāja), as well as by Latvian collaborators, including the 500-1,500 members
of the infamous Arajs Commando (which alone killed around 26,000 Jews) and the
2,000 or more Latvian members of the SD. By the end of 1941 almost the entire
Jewish population was killed or placed in the concentration camps. In addition,
some 25,000 Jews were brought from Germany, Austria and the present-day Czech
Republic, of whom around 20,000 were killed. The Holocaust claimed
approximately 85,000 lives in Latvia, the vast majority of whom were Jews. A
large number of Latvians resisted the German occupation. The resistance
movement was divided between the pro-independence units under the Latvian
Central Council and the pro-Soviet units under the Latvian Partisan Movement
Headquarters (Латвийский штаб партизанского
движения) in Moscow. Their Latvian commander was Arturs Sproģis. The
Nazis planned to Germanise the Baltics after the war. In 1943 and 1944 two
divisions of Waffen-SS were formed from Latvian conscripts and volunteers to
help Germany against the Red Army. Soviet era. In 1944, when the Soviet
military advances reached the area heavy fighting took place in Latvia between
German and Soviet troops, which ended with another German defeat. Riga was re-
captured by the Soviet Red Army on 13 October 1944. During the course of the
war, both occupying forces conscripted Latvians into their armies, in this way
increasing the loss of the nation's "live resources". In 1944, part of the
Latvian territory once more came under Soviet control and Latvian national
partisans began their fight against another occupier – the Soviet Union.
160,000 Latvian inhabitants took refuge from the Soviet army by fleeing to the
Germany and Sweden. The first post-war years were marked by particularly dismal
and sombre events in the fate of the Latvian nation. On March 25, 1949, 43,000
rural residents ("kulaks") and Latvian patriots ("nationalists") were deported
to Siberia in a sweeping repressive Operation Priboi in all three Baltic
States, which was carefully planned and approved in Moscow already on January
29, 1949. All together 120,000 Latvian inhabitants were imprisoned or deported
to Soviet concentration camps (the Gulag). Some managed to escape arrest and
joined the partisans. In the post-war period, Latvia was forced to adopt Soviet
farming methods and the economic infrastructure developed in the 1920s and
1930s was eradicated. Rural areas were forced into collectivisation. The
massive influx of labourers, administrators, military personnel and their
dependents from Russia and other Soviet republics started. By 1959 about
400,000 persons arrived from other Soviet republics and the ethnic Latvian
population had fallen to 62%. An extensive programme to impose bilingualism was
initiated in Latvia, limiting the use of Latvian language in favor of Russian.
All of the minority schools (Jewish, Polish, Belarusian, Estonian, Lithuanian)
were closed down leaving only two languages of instructions in the schools-
Latvian and Russian. The Russian language were taught notably, as well as
Russian literature, music and history of Soviet Union (actually- history of
Russia). On 5 March 1953 Joseph Stalin died and his successor became Nikita
Khrushchev. The period known as the Khrushchev Thaw began but attempts by the
national communists led by Eduards Berklavs to gain a degree of autonomy for
the republic and protect the rapidly deteriorating position of the Latvian
language were not successful. In 1959 after Krushchev's visit in Latvia
national communists were stripped of their posts and Berklavs was deported to
Russia. Because Latvia had still maintained a well-developed infrastructure and
educated specialists it was decided in Moscow that some of the Soviet Union's
most advanced manufacturing factories were to be based in Latvia. New industry
was created in Latvia, including a major machinery factory RAF in Jelgava,
electrotechnical factories in Riga, chemical factories in Daugavpils, Valmiera
and Olaine, as well as food and oil processing plants. However, there were not
enough people to operate the newly built factories. In order to expand
industrial production, more immigrants from other Soviet republics were
transferred into the country, noticeably decreasing the proportion of ethnic
Latvians. By 1989, the ethnic Latvians comprised about 52% of the population
(1,387,757), compared to a pre-war proportion of 77% (1,467,035). In 2005 there
were 1,357,099 ethnic Latvians, showing a real decrease in the titular
population. Proportionately, however, the titular nation already comprises
approximately 60% of the total population of Latvia (2,375,000). Restoration of
independence. Liberalization in the communist regime began in the mid 1980s in
the USSR with the perestroika and glasnost instituted by Mikhail Gorbachev. In
Latvia, several mass political organizations were constituted that made use of
this opportunity – Popular Front of Latvia (Tautas Fronte), Latvian National
Independence Movement (Latvijas Nacionālās Neatkarības Kustība) and
Citizens' Congress (Pilsoņu kongress). These groups began to agitate for the
restoration of national independence. On the 50th anniversary of the Molotov-
Ribbentrop pact (August 23, 1989) to the fate of the Baltic nations, Latvians,
Lithuanians and Estonians joined hands in a human chain, the Baltic Way, that
stretched 600 kilometers from Tallinn, to Riga, to Vilnius. It symbolically
represented the united wish of the Baltic States for independence. Subsequent
steps towards full independence were taken on May 4, 1990. The Latvian SSR
Supreme Council, elected in the first democratic elections since the 1930s,
adopted a declaration restoring independence that included a transition period
between autonomy within the Soviet Union and full independence. In January
1991, however, pro-communist political forces attempted to restore Soviet power
with the use of force. Latvian demonstrators managed to stop the Soviet troops
from re-occupying strategic positions (January 1991 events in Latvia). On
August 21, after unsuccessful attempt at a coup d'état in Moscow, parliament
voted for an end to the transition period, thus restoring Latvia's pre-war
independence. On September 6, 1991 Latvian independence was once again
recognised by the Soviet Union. Modern history. Soon after reinstating
independence, Latvia, which had been a member of the League of Nations prior to
World War II, became a member of the United Nations. In 1992, Latvia became
eligible for the International Monetary Fund and in 1994 took part in the NATO
"Partnership for Peace" program in addition to signing the free trade agreement
with the European Union. Latvia became a member of the European Council as well
as a candidate for the membership in the European Union and NATO. Latvia was
the first of the three Baltic nations to be accepted into the World Trade
Organization. At the end of 1999 in Helsinki, the heads of the European Union
governments invited Latvia to begin negotiations regarding accession to the
European Union. In 2004, Latvia's most important foreign policy goals,
membership of the European Union and NATO, were fulfilled. On April 2, Latvia
became a member of NATO and on May 1, Latvia, along with the other two Baltic
States, became a member of the European Union. Around 67% had voted in favor of
EU membership in a September 2003 referendum with turnout at 72.5 percent.
