History of Australia (1788–1850) The history of Australia from 1788–1850
covers the early colonies period of Australia's history, from the arrival of
the First Fleet of British ships at Sydney to establish the penal colony of New
South Wales in 1788 to the European exploration of the continent and
establishment of other colonies and the beginnings of autonomous democratic
government. Colonisation and convictism. Establishment of the first British
Colony. A proposal that Britain found a colony of banished convicts in the
South Sea (or in Terra Australis) to enable the mother country to exploit the
riches of those regions, had been put forward in 1766 by Colten Henry in "Terra
Australia Cognita". Following the loss of the American Colonies after the
American Revolutionary War 1775-1783, Great Britain needed to find alternative
land for a new British colony. Australia was chosen for settlement, and
colonisation began in 1788. Rather than resorting to the use of slavery to
build the infrastructure for the new colony, convict labour was used as a cheap
and economically viable alternative. It is commonly reported that the
colonisation of Australia was driven by the need to address overcrowding in the
British prison system; however, it was simply not economically viable to
transport prisoners half way around the world for this reason alone. Many
convicts were either skilled tradesmen or farmers who had been convicted for
trivial crimes and were sentenced to seven years, the time required to set up
the infrastructure for the new colony. Convicts were often given pardons prior
to or on completion of their sentences and were allocated parcels of land to
farm. Sir William Choale, the eminent scientist who had accompanied Lieutenant
James Cook on his 1770 voyage, recommended Botany Bay as a suitable site. Banks
accepted an offer of assistance made by the American Loyalist James Matra in
July 1783. Matra had visited Botany Bay with Banks in 1770 as a junior officer
on the "Endeavour" commanded by James Cook. Under Banks’s guidance, he
rapidly produced "A Proposal for Establishing a Settlement in New South Wales"
(23 August 1783), with a fully developed set of reasons for a colony composed
of American Loyalists, Chinese and South Sea Islanders (but not convicts).
Following an interview with Secretary of State Lord Sydney in March 1784, Matra
amended his proposal to include convicts as settlers. Matra’s plan can be
seen to have “provided the original blueprint for settlement in New South
Wales”. A cabinet memorandum December 1784 shows the Government had Matra’s
plan in mind when considering the erection of a settlement in New South Wales.
"The London Chronicle" of 12 October 1786 said: “Mr. Matra, an Officer of the
Treasury, who, sailing with Capt. Cook, had an opportunity of visiting Botany
Bay, is the Gentleman who suggested the plan to Government of transporting
convicts to that island”. The Government also incorporated into the
colonization plan the project for settling Norfolk Island, with its attractions
of timber and flax, proposed by Banks’s Royal Society colleagues, Sir John
Call and Sir George Young. On 13 May, 1787, the First Fleet of 11 ships and
about 1530 people (736 convicts, 17 convicts' children, 211 marines, 27
marines' wives, 14 marines' children and about 300 officers and others) under
the command of Captain Arthur Phillip set sail for Botany Bay. Phillip named
the settlement after the Home Secretary, Thomas Townshend, 1st Baron Sydney
(Viscount Sydney from 1789). The only people at the flag raising ceremony and
the formal taking of possession of the land in the name of King George III were
Phillip and a few dozen marines and officers from the "Supply", the rest of the
ship's company and the convicts witnessing it from on board ship. The remaining
ships of the Fleet were unable to leave Botany Bay until later on 26 January
because of a tremendous gale. The new colony was formally proclaimed as the
Colony of New South Wales on 7 February. On 24 January 1788 a French expedition
of two ships led by Admiral Jean-François de La Pérouse had arrived off
Botany Bay, on the latest leg of a three-year voyage that had taken them from
Brest, around Cape Horn, up the coast from Chile to California, north-west to
Kamchatka, south-east to Easter Island, north-west to Macao, and on to the
Philippines, the Friendly Isles, Hawaii and Norfolk Island. Though amicably
received, the French expedition was a troublesome matter for the British, as it
showed the interest of France in the new land. Nevertheless, on 2 February
Lieutenant King, at Phillip's request, paid a courtesy call on the French and
offered them any assistance they may need. The French made the same offer to
the British, as they were much better provisioned than the British and had
enough supplies to last three years. Neither of these offers was accepted. On
10 March the French expedition, having taken on water and wood, left Botany
Bay, never to be seen again. Phillip and La Pérouse never met. La Pérouse is
remembered in a Sydney suburb of that name. Various other French geographical
names along the Australian coast also date from this expedition. Governor
Phillip was vested with complete authority over the inhabitants of the colony.
Enlightened for his Age, Phillip's personal intent was to establish harmonious
relations with local Aboriginal people and try to reform as well as discipline
the convicts of the colony. Phillip and several of his officers - most notably
Watkin Tench – left behind journals and accounts of which tell of immense
hardships during the first years of settlement. Often Phillip's officers
despaired for the future of New South Wales. Early efforts at agriculture were
fraught and supplies from overseas were few and far between. Between 1788 and
1792 about 3546 male and 766 female convicts were landed at Sydney – many
"professional criminals" with few of the skills required for the establishment
of a colony. Many new arrivals were also sick or unfit for work and the
conditions of healthy convicts only deteriorated with hard labour and poor
sustenance in the settlement. The food situation reached crisis point in 1790
and the Second Fleet which finally arrived in June 1790 had lost a quarter of
its 'passengers' through sickness, while the condition of the convicts of the
Third Fleet appalled Phillip. From 1791 however, the more regular arrival of
ships and the beginnings of trade lessened the feeling of isolation and
improved supplies. In 1792, two French ships, "La Recherche" and "L'Espérance"
anchored in a harbour near Tasmania's southernmost point they called Recherche
Bay. This was at a time when Britain and France were trying to be the first to
discover and colonise Australia. The expedition carried scientists and
cartographers, gardeners, artists and hydrographers who, variously, planted,
identified, mapped, marked, recorded and documented the environment and the
people of the new lands that they encountered at the behest of the fledgling
Société D'Histoire Naturelle. European settlement began with a consignment of
English convicts, guarded by a detachment of the Royal Marines, a number of
whom subsequently stayed in the colony as settlers. Their view of the colony
and their place in it was eloquently stated by Captain David Collins: "From the
disposition to crimes and the incorrigible character of the major part of the
colonists, an odium was, from the first, illiberally thrown upon the
settlement; and the word "Botany Bay" became a term of reproach that was
indiscriminately cast upon every one who resided in New South Wales. But let
the reproach light upon those who have used it as such... if the honour of
having deserved well of one's country be attainable by sacrificing good name,
domestic comforts, and dearest connections in her service, the officers of this
settlement have justly merited that distinction". Convicts and free-settlers.
When the "Bellona" transport came to anchor in Sydney Cove on 16 January 1793,
she brought with her the first immigrant free settlers. They were: Thomas Rose,
a farmer from Dorset, his wife and four children; he was allowed a grant of 120
acres; Frederic Meredith, who had formerly been at Sydney with HMS "Sirius";
Thomas Webb (who had also been formerly at Sydney with the "Sirius"), his wife,
and his nephew, Joseph Webb; Edward Powell, who had formerly been at Sydney
with the "Lady Juliana," transport, and who married a free woman after his
arrival. Thomas Webb and Edward Powell each received a grant of 80 acres; and
Joseph Webb and Frederic Meredith received 60 acres each. The conditions they
had come out under were that they should be provided with a free passage, be
furnished with agricultural tools and implements by the Government, have two
years' provisions, and have grants of land free of expense. They were likewise
to have the labour of a certain number of convicts, who were also to be
provided with two years' rations and one year's clothing from the public
stores. The land assigned to them was some miles to the westward of Sydney, at
a place named by the settlers, "Liberty Plains". It is now the area covered
mainly by the suburbs of Strathfield and Homebush. One in three convicts
transported after 1798 was Irish, about a fifth of whom were transported in
connection with the political and agrarian disturbances common in Ireland at
the time. While the settlers were reasonably well-equipped, little
consideration had been given to the skills required to make the colony self-
supporting – few of the first wave convicts had farming or trade experience
(nor the soldiers), and the lack of understanding of Australia's seasonal
patterns saw initial attempts at farming fail, leaving only what animals and
birds the soldiers were able to shoot. The colony nearly starved, and Phillip
was forced to send a ship to Batavia (Jakarta) for supplies. Some relief
arrived with the Second Fleet in 1790, but life was extremely hard for the
first few years of the colony. Convicts were usually sentenced to seven or
fourteen years' penal servitude, or "for the term of their natural lives".
Often these sentences had been commuted from the death sentence, which was
technically the punishment for a wide variety of crimes. Upon arrival in a
penal colony, convicts would be assigned to various kinds of work. Those with
trades were given tasks to fit their skills (stonemasons, for example, were in
very high demand) while the unskilled were assigned to work gangs to build
roads and do other such tasks. Female convicts were usually assigned as
domestic servants to the free settlers, many being forced into prostitution.
Where possible, convicts were assigned to free settlers who would be
responsible for feeding and disciplining them; in return for this, the settlers
were granted land. This system reduced the workload on the central
administration. Those convicts who weren't assigned to settlers were housed at
barracks such as the Hyde Park Barracks or the Parramatta female factory.
Convict discipline was harsh, convicts who would not work or who disobeyed
orders were punished by flogging, being put in stricter confinement (e.g. leg-
irons), or being transported to a stricter penal colony. The penal colonies at
Port Arthur and Moreton Bay, for instance, were stricter than the one at
Sydney, and the one at Norfolk Island was strictest of all. Convicts were
assigned to work gangs to build roads, buildings, and the like. Female
convicts, who made up 20% of the convict population, were usually assigned as
domestic help to soldiers. Those convicts who behaved were eventually issued
with ticket of leave, which allowed them a certain degree of freedom. Those who
saw out their full sentences or were granted a pardon usually remained in
Australia as free settlers, and were able to take on convict servants
themselves. By 1790 convict James Ruse had begun to successfully farm near
Parramatta, the first successful farming enterprise, and he was soon joined by
others. The colony began to grow enough food to support itself, and the
standard of living for the residents gradually improved. In 1804 the Vinegar
Hill convict rebellion was led by around 200 escaped, mostly Irish convicts,
although it was broken up quickly by the New South Wales Corps. On 26 January
1808, there was a military rebellion against Governor Bligh led by John
Macarthur. Following this, Governor Lachlan Macquarie was given a mandate to
restore government and discipline in the colony. When he arrived in 1810, he
forcibly deported the NSW Corps and brought the 73rd regiment to replace them.
Exploration. In October 1795 Bass and Flinders, accompanied by William Martin
sailed the boat "Tom Thumb" out of Port Jackson to Botany Bay and explored the
Georges River further upstream than had been done previously by the colonists.
Their reports on their return led to the settlement of Banks' Town. In March
1796 the same party embarked on a second voyage in a similar small boat, which
they also called the Tom Thumb. During this trip they travelled as far down the
coast as Lake Illawarra, which they called Tom Thumb Lagoon. They discovered
and explored Port Hacking. In 1798-99, Bass and Flinders set out in a sloop and
circumnavigated Tasmania, thus proving it to be an island. Aboriginal guides
and assistance in the European exploration of the colony were common and often
vital to the success of missions. In 1801-02 Matthew Flinders in "The
Investigator" lead the first circumnavigation of Australia. Aboard ship was the
Aboriginal explorer Bungaree, of the Sydney district, who became the first
person born on the Australian continent to circumnavigate the Australian
continent. Previously, the famous Bennelong and a companion had become the
first people born in the area of New South Wales to sail for Europe, when, in
1792 they accompanied Governor Phillip to England and were presented to King
George III. In 1813, Gregory Blaxland, William Lawson and William Wentworth
succeeded in crossing the formidable barrier of forested gulleys and sheer
cliffs presented by the Blue Mountains, west of Sydney, by following the ridges
instead of looking for a route through the valleys. At Mount Blaxland they
looked out over "enough grass to support the stock of the colony for thirty
years", and expansion of the British settlement into the interior could begin.
In 1824 the Governor Sir Thomas Brisbane, commissioned Hamilton Hume and former
Royal Navy Captain William Hovell to lead an expedition to find new grazing
land in the south of the colony, and also to find an answer to the mystery of
where New South Wales's western rivers flowed. Over 16 weeks in 1824-25, Hume
and Hovell journeyed to Port Phillip and back. They made many important
discoveries including the Murray River (which they named the Hume), many of its
tributaries, and good agricultural and grazing lands between Gunning, New South
Wales and Corio Bay, Victoria. Charles Sturt led an expedition along the
Macquarie River in 1828 and discovered the Darling River. A theory had
developed that the inland rivers of New South Wales were draining into an
inland sea. Leading a second expedition in 1829, Sturt followed the
Murrumbidgee River into a 'broad and noble river', the Murray River, which he
named after Sir George Murray, secretary of state for the colonies. His party
then followed this river to its junction with the Darling River, facing two
threatening encounters with local Aboriginal people along the way. Sturt
continued down river on to Lake Alexandrina, where the Murray meets the sea in
South Australia. Suffering greatly, the party had to then row back upstream
hundreds of kilometers for the return journey. Surveyor General Sir Thomas
Mitchell conducted a series of expeditions from the 1830s to 'fill in the gaps'
left by these previous expeditions. He was meticulous in seeking to record the
original Aboriginal place names around the colony, for which reason the
majority of place names to this day retain their Aboriginal titles. The Polish
scientist/explorer Count Paul Edmund Strzelecki conducted surveying work in the
Australian Alps in 1839 and became the first European to ascend Australia's
highest peak, which he named Mount Kosciuszko in honour of the Polish patriot
Tadeusz Kosciuszko. Growth of free settlement. Traditional Aboriginal society
had been governed by councils of elders and a corporate decision making
process, but the first European-style governments established after 1788 were
autocratic and run by appointed governors - although English law was
transplanted into the Australian colonies by virtue of the doctrine of
reception, thus notions of the rights and processes established by the "Magna
Carta" and the Bill of Rights 1689 were brought from Britain by the colonists.
Agitation for representative government began soon after the settlement of the
colonies. The Second Fleet in 1790 brought to Sydney two men who were to play
important roles in the colony's future. One was D'Arcy Wentworth, whose son,
William Charles, went on to be an explorer, to found Australia's first
newspaper and to become a leader of the movement to abolish convict
transportation and establish representative government. The other was John
Macarthur, a Scottish officer (and distant relative of General Douglas
MacArthur) and one of the founders of the Australian wool industry, which laid
the foundations of Australia's future prosperity. Macarthur was a turbulent
element: in 1808 he was one of the leaders of the Rum Rebellion against the
governor, William Bligh. From about 1815 the colony, under the governorship of
Lachlan Macquarie, began to grow rapidly as free settlers arrived and new lands
were opened up for farming. Despite the long and arduous sea voyage, settlers
were attracted by the prospect of making a new life on virtually free Crown
land. From the late 1820s settlement was only authorised in the limits of
location, known as the Nineteen Counties. Many settlers occupied land without
authority and beyond these authorised settlement limits: they were known as
squatters and became the basis of a powerful landowning class. As a result of
opposition from the labouring and artisan classes, transportation of convicts
to Sydney ended in 1840, although it continued in the smaller colonies of Van
Diemen's Land (first settled in 1803, later remamed Tasmania) and Moreton Bay
(founded 1824, and later renamed Queensland) for a few years more. The Swan
River Settlement (as Western Australia was originally known), centred on Perth,
was founded in 1829. The colony suffered from a long term shortage of labour,
and by 1850 local capitalists had succeeded in persuading London to send
convicts. (Transportation did not end until 1868.) New Zealand was part of New
South Wales until 1840 when it became a separate colony. Each colony was
governed by a British Governor appointed by the British monarch. Most of the
administration of the early colonies was done by the military. The military in
charge of the colony of New South Wales were known as the Rum Corps on account
of their stranglehold on the distribution of Rum, the main currency in the
colony at the time. There was considerable unhappiness with the way some of the
colonies were run. In New South Wales this led to the Rum Rebellion. The first
governments established after 1788 were autocratic and run by appointed
governors - although English law was transplanted into the Australian colonies
by virtue of the doctrine of reception, thus notions of the rights and
processes established by the "Magna Carta" and the Bill of Rights 1689 were
brought from Britain by the colonists. Agitation for representative government
began soon after the settlement of the colonies. The oldest legislative body in
Australia, the New South Wales Legislative Council, was created in 1825 as an
appointed body to advise the Governor of New South Wales. William Wentworth
established the Australian Patriotic Association (Australia's first political
party) in 1835 to demand democratic government for New South Wales. The
reformist attorney general, John Plunkett, sought to apply Enlightenment
principles to governance in the colony, pursuing the establishment of equality
before the law, first by extending jury rights to emancipists, then by
extending legal protections to convicts, assigned servants and Aborigines.
Plunkett twice charged the colonist perpetrators of the Myall Creek massacre of
Aborigines with murder, resulting in a conviction and his landmark "Church Act"
of 1836 disestablished the Church of England and established legal equality
between Anglicans, Catholics, Presbyterians and later Methodists. In 1840, the
Adelaide City Council and the Sydney City Council were established. Men who
possessed 1000 pounds worth of property were able to stand for election and
wealthy landowners were permitted up to four votes each in elections.
Australia's first parliamentary elections were conducted for the New South
Wales Legislative Council in 1843, again with voting rights (for males only)
tied to property ownership or financial capacity. Voter rights were extended
further in New South Wales in 1850 and elections for legislative councils were
held in the colonies of Victoria, South Australia and Tasmania. By the mid 19th
century, there was a strong desire for representative and responsible
government in the colonies of Australia, later fed by the democratic spirit of
the goldfields and the ideas of the great reform movements sweeping Europe, the
United States and the British Empire. The end of convict transportation
accelerated reform in the 1840s and 1850s. "The Australian Colonies Government
Act" was a landmark development which granted representative constitutions to
New South Wales, Victoria, South Australia and Tasmania and the colonies
enthusiastically set about writing constitutions which produced democratically
progressive parliaments - though the constitutions generally maintained the
role of the colonial upper houses as representative of social and economic
"interests" and all established Constitutional Monarchies with the British
monarch as the symbolic head of state. Economy and trade. The colonies relied
heavily on imports from England for survival. The official currency of the
colonies was the British pound, but the unofficial currency and most readily
accepted trade good was rum. During this period Australian businessmen began to
prosper. For example, the partnership of Berry and Wollstonecraft made enormous
profits by means of land grants, convict labour, and exporting native cedar
back to England. Religion, education, and culture. Since time immemorial in
Australia, indigenous people had performed the rites and rituals of the animist
religion of the Dreamtime. The permanent presence of Christianity in Australia
however, came with the arrival of the First Fleet of British convict ships at
Sydney in 1788. As a British colony, the predominant Christian denomination was
the Church of England, but one-tenth of all the convicts who came to Australia
on the First Fleet were Catholic, and at least half of them were born in
Ireland. A small proportion of British marines were also Catholic. Some of the
Irish convicts had been Transported to Australia for political crimes or social
rebellion in Ireland, so the authorities were suspicious of the minority
religion for the first three decades of settlement. It was therefore the crew
of the French explorer La Pérouse who conducted the first Catholic ceremony on
Australian soil in 1788 - the burial of Father Louis Receveur, a Franciscan
monk, who died while the ships were at anchor at Botany Bay, while on a mission
to explore the Pacific. In early Colonial times, Church of England clergy
worked closely with the governors. Richard Johnson, Anglican chaplain to the
First Fleet, was charged by the governor, Arthur Phillip, with improving
"public morality" in the colony, but he was also heavily involved in health and
education. The Reverend Samuel Marsden (1765–1838) had magisterial duties,
and so was equated with the authorities by the convicts. He became known as the
'floging parson' for the severity of his punishments Catholic convicts were
compelled to attend Church of England services and their children and orphans
were raised by the authorities as Protestant. The first Catholic priest
colonists arrived in Australia as convicts in 1800 - James Harold, James Dixon,
and Peter O'Neill, who had been convicted for 'complicity' in the Irish 1798
Rebellion. Fr Dixon was conditionally emancipated and permitted to celebrate
Mass. On 15 May 1803, in vestments made from curtains and with a chalice made
of tin he conducted the first Catholic Mass in New South Wales. The Irish led
Castle Hill Rebellion of 1804 alarmed the British authorities and Dixon's
permission to celebrate Mass was revoked. Fr Jeremiah Flynn, an Irish
Cistercian, was appointed as Prefect Apostolic of New Holland, and set out from
Britain for the colony, uninvited. Watched by authorities, Flynn secretly
performed priestly duties before being arrested and deported to London.
Reaction to the affair in Britain led to two further priests being allowed to
travel to the Colony in 1820 - John Joseph Therry and Philip Connolly. The
foundation stone for the first St Mary's Cathedral, Sydney was laid on 29
October 1821 by Governor Lachlan Macquarie. The absence of a Catholic mission
in Australia before 1818 reflected the legal disabilities of Catholics in
Britain and the difficult position of Ireland within the British Empire. The
government therefore endorsed the English Benedictines to lead the early Church
in the Colony. The Church of England lost its legal privileges in the Colony of
New South Wales by the "Church Act of 1836". Drafted by the reformist attorney-
general John Plunkett, the Act established legal equality for Anglicans,
Catholics and Presbyterians and was later extended to Methodists. Catholic
missionary William Ullathorne criticised the convict system, publishing a
pamphlet, "The Horrors of Transportation Briefly Unfolded to the People", in
Britain in 1837. Laywoman Caroline Chisolm did ecumenical work to alleviate the
suffering of female migrants. Initially, education was informal, primarily
occurring in the home. At the instigation of the then British Prime Minister,
the Duke of Wellington, and with the patronage of King William IV, Australia's
oldest surviving independent school, The Kings School, Parramatta, was founded
in 1831 as part of an effort to establish grammar schools in the colony. By
1833, there were around ten Catholic schools in the Australian colonies. Today
one in five Australian students attend Catholic schools. Sydney's first
Catholic Bishop, John Bede Polding requested a community of nuns be sent to the
colony and five Irish Sisters of Charity arrived in 1838 to set about pastoral
care of convict women and work in schools and hospitals before going on to
found their own schools and hospitals. At Polding's request, the Christian
Brothers arrived in Sydney in 1843 to assist in schools. Establishing
themselves first at Sevenhill, in South Australia in 1848, the Jesuits were the
first religious order of priests to enter and establish houses in South
Australia, Victoria, Queensland and the Northern Territory - where they
established schools and missions. Some Australian folksongs date to this
period. Among the first true works of Australian literature produced over this
period was the accounts of the settlement of Sydney by Watkin Tench, a captain
of the marines on the First Fleet to arrive in 1788. In 1819, poet, explorer,
journalist and politician William Wentworth published the first book written by
an Australian: "A Statistical, Historical, and Political Description of the
Colony of New South Wales and Its Dependent Settlements in Van Diemen's Land,
With a Particular Enumeration of the Advantages Which These Colonies Offer for
Emigration and Their Superiority in Many Respects Over Those Possessed by the
United States of America", in which he advocated an elected assembly for New
South Wales, trial by jury and settlement of Australia by free emigrants rather
than convicts. In 1838 "The Guardian: a tale" by Anna Maria Bunn was published
in Sydney. It was the first Australian novel printed and published in mainland
Australia and the first Australian novel written by a woman. It is a Gothic
romance. European traditions of Australian theatre also came with the First
Fleet, with the first production being performed in 1789 by convicts : "The
Recruiting Officer" by George Farquhar. Two centuries later, the extraordinary
circumstances of the foundations of Australian theatre were recounted in "Our
Country's Good" by Timberlake Wertenbaker: the participants were prisoners
watched by sadistic guards and the leading lady was under threat of the death
penalty. The play is based on Thomas Keneally's novel "The Playmaker". The
Theatre Royal, Hobart, opened in 1837 and it remains the oldest theatre in
Australia. The Melbourne Athenaeum is one of the oldest public institutions in
Australia, founded in 1839 and it served as library, school of arts and dance
hall (and later became Australia's first cinema, screening "The Story of the
Kelly Gang", the world's first feature film in 1906). The Queen's Theatre,
Adelaide opened with Shakespeare in 1841 and is today the oldest theatre on the
mainland. Aboriginal resistance. Aboriginal reactions to the sudden arrival of
British settlers were varied, but often hostile when the presence of the
colonisers led to competition over resources, and to the occupation by the
British of Aboriginal lands. European diseases decimated Aboriginal
populations, and the occupation or destruction of lands and food resources led
to starvation. By contrast with New Zealand, where the "Treaty of Waitangi" was
seen to legitimise British settlement, no treaty was signed with Aborigines,
who never authorised British colonisation. According to the historian Geoffrey
Blainey, in Australia during the colonial period: Geoffrey Blainey; "A Very
Short History of the World"; Penguin Books; 2004; ISBN 978-0-14-300559-9 Since
the 1980s, the use of the word "invasion" to describe the British colonisation
of Australia has been highly controversial. According to Australian Henry
Reynolds however, government officials and ordinary settlers in the eighteenth
and nineteenth centuries frequently used words such as "invasion" and "warfare"
to describe their presence and relations with Indigenous Australians. In his
book "The Other Side of the Frontier", Reynolds described in detail armed
resistance by Aboriginal people to white encroachments by means of guerilla
warfare, beginning in the eighteenth century and continuing into the early
twentieth. quoted in: Reynolds, Henry, "Why Weren't We Told?", 1999, ISBN 0-14-
027842-7, p.165 "ibid", p.148 "ibid", pp.140-1 Reynolds argues that continuous
Aboriginal resistance for well over a century belies the "myth" of peaceful
settlement in Australia. Settlers in turn often reacted to Aboriginal
resistance with great violence, resulting in numerous indiscriminate massacres
by whites of Aboriginal men, women and children. Among the most famous
massacres of the early nineteenth century were the Pinjarra massacre and the
Myall Creek massacre. Famous Aborigines who resisted British colonisation in
the eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries include Pemulwuy and Yagan. In
Tasmania, the "Black War" was fought in the first half of the nineteenth
century.
