History of Anguilla Anguilla was first settled in pre-history by Amerindian
tribes who migrated from South America. The date of European discovery is
uncertain: some sources claim that Columbus sighted the island in 1493, while
others state that the island was first discovered by the French in 1564 or
1565. The name Anguilla derives from the word for "eel" in any of various
European (Romance) languages (Latin Anguilla, modern Spanish: "anguila";
French: "anguille"; Italian: "anguilla"), probably chosen because of the
island's eel-like shape. Anguilla was first colonised by English settlers from
Saint Kitts, beginning in 1650. The island was administered by Britain until
the early 19th century, when – against the wishes of the inhabitants – it
was incorporated into a single British dependency along with Saint Kitts and
Nevis. After a brief period as a self-declared independent republic in 1969 it
became a separate British dependency (now termed a British overseas territory)
in 1980. Pre-colonial history. The earliest inhabitants of Anguilla were
Amerindian tribes from South America, commonly (if imprecisely) referred to as
Arawaks, who travelled to the island on rafts and in dugout canoes, settling in
fishing, hunting and farming groups. The Amerindian name for the island was
"Malliouhana". The earliest Amerindian artefacts found on Anguilla have been
dated to around 1300 BC, and remains of settlements dating from 600 AD. have
been uncovered. Religious artefacts and remnants of ceremonies found at
locations such as Big Springs and Fountain Cavern suggest that the pre-European
inhabitants were extremely religious in nature. The Arawaks are popularly said
to have been later displaced by fiercer Carib tribes, but this version of
events is disputed by some [http://net.ai/precolumbian.html]. Colonial period.
The European discovery and naming of Anguilla is often credited to French
explorer Pierre Laudonnaire who visited the island in 1565, though according to
some it had been sighted and named by Columbus in 1493. The Dutch claimed to
have built a fort on the island in 1631, but no remains have been found and the
location of the site is unknown. The first English colonists arrived from Saint
Kitts in 1650, and began growing both tobacco and corn crops. The early
colonisation was precarious: in 1656 Carib Indians invaded and destroyed the
settlements, and in 1666 the island was captured by French forces. However, the
English regained control of the island from the French in 1667 under the Treaty
of Breda, and despite hardships caused by poor crop yields, drought and famine,
the settlers hung on. In 1744 Anguillans invaded the French half of the
neighbouring island of Saint Martin, holding it until the Treaty of Aix-la-
Chapelle (1748). During continuing struggles between the British and the French
for control in the Caribbean, the French made further attempts to invade
Anguilla in 1745 and 1796 but these failed. Attempts were made to develop
Anguilla into a plantation-based economy employing slaves transported from
Africa, but the island's soil and climate were unfavourable and the plantations
were largely unsuccessful. Slaves were permitted to leave the plantations and
pursue their own interests, and, with the British abolition of slavery in the
1830s, many plantation owners returned to Europe, leaving Anguilla's community
consisting largely of subsistence farmers and fishermen of African descent. At
this time Anguilla's population is estimated to have fallen from a peak of
around 10,000 to just 2,000. Since the early days of colonisation, Anguilla had
been administered by the British through Antigua, with Anguilla also having its
own local council. In 1824 the British government placed Anguilla under the
administrative control of Saint Kitts, later to become part of the colony of
Saint Christopher-Nevis-Anguilla (Saint Christopher being an earlier name for
Saint Kitts), itself a member of the Federal Colony of the Leeward Islands.
Anguillans protested strongly at this arrangement, perceiving a lack of
interest in their affairs on the part of the Saint Kitts administration, and
several requests were made for the island to be ruled directly from Britain.
These requests went unheeded however, and the Anguillans' discontent continued
to simmer until finally brought to a head in the 1960s. Recent history. On 27
February 1967, Britain granted the territory of Saint Christopher-Nevis-
Anguilla the status of "associated state", with its own constitution and a
considerable degree of self-government. Many Anguillans strenuously objected to
the continuing political subservience to Saint Kitts, and on 30 May (known as
Anguilla Day), the Saint Kitts police were evicted from the island. The
provisional government requested United States administration, which was
declined. On 11 July 1967 a referendum on Anguilla's secession from the
fledgling state was held. The results were 1,813 votes for secession and 5
against. A separate legislative council was immediately declared. Peter Adams
served as the first Chairman of the Anguilla Island Council. After eight days
of negotiation on Barbados, on July 31, Adams agreed to return Anguilla to the
Anguilla-St. Kitts-Nevis federation, in exchange for granting Anguilla limited
self-rule similar to that enjoyed by Nevis. Adams agreed to support this pact
in principle, but the Council rejected it, replacing Adams as Chairman with
Ronald Webster. In December 1967, two members of Britain's Parliament worked
out an interim agreement by which for one year a British official would
exercise basic administrative authority along with the Anguilla Council. Tony
Lee took the position in January 1968, but by the end of the term no agreement
have been reached on the long-term future of the island's government. On
February 7, 1969 Anguilla held a second referendum resulting in a vote of 1,739
to 4 against returning to association with Saint Kitts. At this point Anguilla
declared itself an independent republic, with Webster again serving as
Chairman. A new British envoy, William Whitlock, arrived on 11 March 1969 with
a proposal for a new interim British administration. He was quickly expelled.
On 19 March a contingent of 2nd Battalion, The Parachute Regiment plus 40
Metropolitan Police officers, peacefully landed on the island, ostensibly to
"restore order". That autumn the troops left and Army engineers were brought in
to improve the public works. Tony Lee returned as Commissioner and in 1971
worked out another "interim agreement" with the islanders. Effectively Anguilla
was allowed to secede from Saint Kitts and Nevis; however it was not until 19
December 1980 that Anguilla formally disassociated itself from Saint Kitts to
become a separate British dependency. While Saint Kitts and Nevis went on to
gain full independence from Britain in 1983, Anguilla still remains a British
overseas territory. In recent years Anguilla has become an up-market tourist
destination, and tourism is one of the mainstays of the economy. Fishing is
another important economic activity, and a financial services sector is also
being developed. The modern population of Anguilla is largely of African
descent, with a minority having European (mainly English) ancestry. References.
2. "Out of the Crowded Vagueness" by Brian Dyde, Macmillian Education 2005,
ISBN 0-333-97598-7 3. "Anguilla: Where There's a Will There's A Way" by
Colville Petty 1984, copyright Colville Petty
