History of the Åland Islands The Åland Islands occupy a position of great
strategic importance, commanding as they do both one of the entrances to the
port of Stockholm and the approaches to the Gulf of Bothnia, in addition to
being situated proximate to the Gulf of Finland. Prehistory. Orrdalsklint and
Långbergen in Saltvik, Åland Islands' highest peaks, started rising from the
Baltic sea (then Yoldia Sea) about 10000 years ago. The oldest archeological
finds to denote the presence of humans on the isles represent the Comb Ceramic
culture and date from around 4000 BC. Around 2500 BC, Pitted Ware starts to
appear in Åland. From about 1800 BC, finds from the Kiukainen culture (:fi:
Kiukaisten kulttuuri) start emerging. Middle Ages. During the period 1300 to
1600 Kastelholm Castle was a focal point for a number of battles and raids.
Between 1714 and 1721 Åland was attacked and devastated by Peter the Great's
forces; most of the population fled at that time to Sweden. The Åland Islands
belonged to the provinces Sweden ceded to Russia, which became the semi-
autonomous Grand duchy of Finland. When, by the treaty of Fredrikshamn in
September 1809, the islands were ceded to Russia, the Swedes were unable to
secure a provision that the islands should not be fortified. The question was,
however, a vital one not only for Sweden but for Britain, whose trade in the
Baltic was threatened. Demilitarised. During the Crimean War, an Anglo-French
force attacked and destroyed the fortress of Bomarsund in 1854, against the
erection of which the British prime minister Palmerston had protested without
effect some twenty years previously. By the Åland Convention, concluded
between United Kingdom, France and Russia on March 30, 1856, it was stipulated
that "the Åland Islands shall not be fortified, and that no military or naval
establishments shall be maintained or created on them." By the 33rd article of
the Treaty of Paris 1856 this convention, annexed to the final act, was given
"the same force and validity as if it formed part thereof", Palmerston
declaring in the House of Commons on May 6 that it had "placed a barrier
between Russia and the north of Europe." Some attention was attracted to this
arrangement when in 1906 it was asserted that Russia, under pretext of stopping
the smuggling of arms into Finland, was massing considerable naval and military
forces at the islands. The question of the Åland Islands created some
discussion in 1907 and 1908 in connection with the new North Sea agreements,
and undoubtedly Russia considered the convention of 1856 as rather humiliating.
But it was plainly shown by other powers that they did not propose to regard it
as modified or open to question, and the point was not definitely and
officially raised. The islands were remilitarised by Russia in 1916 and used,
among others, as a submarine base during World War I. In March 1918 the islands
were occupied by Germans. In 1921, the Aland Convention re-established the
dimilitarised status of the islands. The Anglo-French attack on Åland and
Suomenlinna has been made into a Finnish song called "Oolannin sota".
