History of Greece The history of Greece encompasses the history of the
territory of the modern state of Greece, as well as that of the Greek people
and the areas they ruled historically. The scope of Greek habitation and rule
has varied much through the ages, and, as a result, the history of Greece is
similarly elastic in what it includes. Each era has its own related sphere of
interest. The first (proto-) Greek-speaking tribes, known later as Mycenaeans,
are generally thought to have arrived in the Greek mainland between the late
3rd and the first half of the 2nd millennium BC – probably between 1900 and
1600 BC. When the Mycenaeans invaded, the area was inhabited by various non-
Greek-speaking, indigenous pre-Greek people, who practiced agriculture as they
had done since the 7th millennium BC. At its geographical peak, Greek
civilization spread from Greece to Egypt and to the Hindu Kush mountains in
Afghanistan. Since then, Greek minorities have remained in former Greek
territories (e.g., Turkey, Albania, Italy, and Libya, Levant, Armenia, Georgia,
etc.), and Greek emigrants have assimilated into differing societies across the
globe (e.g., North America, Australia, Northern Europe, South Africa, etc.).
Nowadays most Greeks live in the modern state of Greece (independent since
1821) and Cyprus. Prehistoric Greece. Neolithic. The Neolithic Revolution
reached Europe by way of Greece and the Balkans, beginning in the 7th
millennium BC. Some Neolithic communities in southeastern Europe, such as
Sesklo in Greece, were living in heavily fortified settlements of 3,000-4,000
people. The Greek Neolithic era ended with the arrival of the Bronze Age from
Anatolia and the Near East, by the end of the 28th century BC (early Helladic
period). In about 1900 BC, Proto-Indo-Europeans overran the Greek peninsula
from the north and east. These Indo-Europeans, known as Mycenaeans, introduced
the Greek language to present-day Greece. Bronze Age. Cycladic and Minoan
civilization. One of the earliest civilizations to appear around Greece was the
Minoan civilization in Crete, which lasted from about 2700 (Early Minoan) BC to
1450 BC, and the Early Helladic period on the Greek mainland from ca. 2800 BC
to 2100 BC. Little specific information is known about the Minoans (even the
name is a modern appellation, from Minos, the legendary king of Crete). They
have been characterized as a pre-Indo-European people, apparently the
linguistic ancestors of the Eteo-Cretan speakers of Classical Antiquity, their
language being encoded in the undeciphered Linear A script. They were primarily
a mercantile people engaged in overseas trade, taking advantage of their land's
rich natural resources. Timber was then an abundant natural resource that was
commercially exploited and exported to nearby lands such as Cyprus, Syria,
Egypt and the Aegean Islands. During the Early Bronze Age (3300 BC through 2100
BC), the Minoan Civilization on the island of Crete held great promise for the
future. The Mycenaean Greeks invaded Crete and adopted much of the Minoan
culture they found on Crete. The Minoan civilization which preceded the
Mycenaean civilization on Crete was revealed to the modern world by Sir Arthur
Evans in 1900, when he purchased and then began excavating a site at Knossus.
Mycenaean civilization. The Proto-Greeks are assumed to have arrived in the
Greek peninsula during the late 3rd to early 2nd millennium BC. The migration
of the Ionians and Aeolians resulted in Mycenaean Greece by the 16th century
BC. The transition from pre-Greek to Greek culture appears to have been rather
gradual. Some archaeologists have pointed to evidence that there was a
significant amount of continuity of prehistoric economic, architectural, and
social structures, suggesting that the transition between the Neolithic,
Helladic and early Greek cultures may have continued without major rifts in
social texture. On Crete, however, the Mycenean invasion of around 1400 BC
spelled the end of the Minoan civilization. Mycenaean Greece is the Late
Helladic Bronze Age civilization of Ancient Greece. It lasted from the arrival
of the Greeks in the Aegean around 1600 BC to the collapse of their Bronze Age
civilization around 1100 BC. It is the historical setting of the epics of Homer
and of most Greek mythology. The Mycenaean period takes its name from the
archaeological site Mycenae in the northeastern Argolid, in the Peloponnesos of
southern Greece. Athens, Pylos, Thebes, and Tiryns are also important Mycenaean
sites. Mycenaean civilization was dominated by a warrior aristocracy. Around
1400 BC the Mycenaeans extended their control to Crete, center of the Minoan
civilization, and adopted a form of the Minoan script called Linear A to write
their early form of Greek. The Mycenaean era script is called Linear B. The
Mycenaeans buried their nobles in beehive tombs ("tholoi"), large circular
burial chambers with a high vaulted roof and straight entry passage lined with
stone. They often buried daggers or some other form of military equipment with
the deceased. The nobility were often buried with gold masks, tiaras, armour,
and jeweled weapons. Mycenaeans were buried in a sitting position, and some of
the nobility underwent mummification. Around 1100 BC the Mycenaean civilization
collapsed. Numerous cities were sacked and the region entered what historians
see as a dark age. During this period Greece experienced a decline in
population and literacy. The Greeks themselves have traditionally blamed this
decline on an invasion by another wave of Greek people, the Dorians, although
there is scant archaeological evidence for this view. Early Iron Age. The
"Greek Dark Ages" (ca. 1100 BC–800 BC) refers to the period of Greek history
from the presumed Dorian invasion and end of the Mycenaean civilization in the
11th century BC to the rise of the first Greek city-states in the 9th century
BC and the epics of Homer and earliest writings in alphabetic Greek in the 8th
century BC. The collapse of the Mycenaean coincided with the fall of several
other large empires in the near east, most notably the Hittite and the
Egyptian. The cause may be attributed to an invasion of the sea people wielding
iron weapons. When the Dorians came down into Greece they also were equipped
with superior iron weapons, easily dispersing the already weakened Mycenaeans.
The period that follows these events is collectively known as the Greek Dark
Ages. Kings ruled throughout this period until eventually they were replaced
with an aristocracy, then still later, in some areas, an aristocracy within an
aristocracy—an elite of the elite. Warfare shifted from a focus on cavalry to
a great emphasis on infantry. Due to its cheapness of production and local
availability, iron replaced bronze as the metal of choice in the manufacturing
of tools and weapons. Slowly equality grew among the different sects of people,
leading to the dethronement of the various Kings and the rise of the family. At
the end of this period of stagnation, the Greek civilization was engulfed in a
renaissance that spread the Greek world as far as the Black Sea and Spain.
Writing was relearned from the Phoenicians, eventually spreading north into
Italy and the Gauls. Ancient Greece. There are no fixed or universally agreed
dates for the beginning or the end of the Ancient/Classical Greek period. In
common usage it refers to all Greek history before the Roman Empire, but
historians use the term more precisely. Some writers include the periods of the
Minoan and Mycenaean civilizations, while others argue that these civilizations
were so different from later Greek cultures that they should be classed
separately. Traditionally, the Ancient Greek period was taken to begin with the
date of the first Olympic Games in 776 BC, but most historians now extend the
term back to about 1000 BC. The traditional date for the end of the Ancient
Greek period is the death of Alexander the Great in 323 BC. The period that
follows is classed as Hellenistic. Not everyone treats the Ancient and Hellenic
periods as distinct, however, and some writers treat the Ancient Greek
civilization as a continuum running until the advent of Christianity in the 3rd
century AD. Ancient Greece is considered by most historians to be the
foundational culture of Western Civilization. Greek culture was a powerful
influence in the Roman Empire, which carried a version of it to many parts of
Europe. Ancient Greek civilization has been immensely influential on the
language, politics, educational systems, philosophy, art and architecture of
the modern world, particularly during the Renaissance in Western Europe and
again during various neo-Classical revivals in 18th and 19th century Europe and
the Americas. Archaic Greece. In the 8th century BC, Greece began to emerge
from the Dark Ages which followed the fall of the Mycenaean civilization.
Literacy had been lost and Mycenaean script forgotten, but the Greeks adopted
the Phoenician alphabet, modifying it to create the Greek alphabet. From about
the 9th century BC, written records begin to appear. Greece was divided into
many small self-governing communities, a pattern largely dictated by Greek
geography, where every island, valley and plain is cut off from its neighbours
by the sea or mountain ranges. The Archaic period can be understood as the
Orientalizing period, when Greece was at the fringe, but not under the sway, of
the budding Neo-Assyrian Empire. Greece adopted significant amounts of cultural
elements from the Orient, in art as well as in religion and mythology.
Archaeologically, Archaic Greece is marked by Geometric pottery. Classical
Greece. The basic unit of politics in Ancient Greece was the polis, sometimes
translated as city-state. "Politics" literally means "the things of the polis".
Each city was independent, at least in theory. Some cities might be subordinate
to others (a colony traditionally deferred to its mother city), some might have
had governments wholly dependent upon others (the Thirty Tyrants in Athens was
imposed by Sparta following the Peloponnesian War), but the titularly supreme
power in each city was located within that city. This meant that when Greece
went to war (e.g., against the Persian Empire), it took the form of an alliance
going to war. It also gave ample opportunity for wars within Greece between
different cities. Two major wars shaped the Classical Greek world. The Persian
Wars (500–448 BC) are recounted in Herodotus's "Histories". Ionian Greek
cities revolted from the Persian Empire and were supported by some of the
mainland cities, eventually led by Athens. The notable battles of this war
include Marathon, Thermopylae, Salamis, and Plataea.) To prosecute the war and
then to defend Greece from further Persian attack, Athens founded the Delian
League in 477 BC. Initially, each city in the League would contribute ships and
soldiers to a common army, but in time Athens allowed (and then compelled) the
smaller cities to contribute funds so that it could supply their quota of
ships. Secession from the League could be punished. Following military
reversals against the Persians, the treasury was moved from Delos to Athens,
further strengthening the latter's control over the League. The Delian League
was eventually referred to pejoratively as the Athenian Empire. In 458 BC,
while the Persian Wars were still ongoing, war broke out between the Delian
League and the Peloponnesian League, comprising Sparta and its allies. After
some inconclusive fighting, the two sides signed a peace in 447 BC. That peace,
it was stipulated, was to last thirty years: instead it held only until 431 BC,
with the onset of the Peloponnesian War. Our main sources concerning this war
are Thucydides's "History of the Peloponnesian War" and Xenophon's "Hellenica".
The war began over a dispute between Corcyra and Epidamnus; the latter was a
minor enough city that Thucydides has to tell his reader where it is. Corinth
intervened on the Epidamnian side. Fearful lest Corinth capture the Corcyran
navy (second only to the Athenian in size), Athens intervened. It prevented
Corinth from landing on Corcyra at the Battle of Sybota, laid siege to
Potidaea, and forbade all commerce with Corinth's closely situated ally, Megara
(the Megarian decree). There was disagreement among the Greeks as to which
party violated the treaty between the Delian and Peloponnesian Leagues, as
Athens was technically defending a new ally. The Corinthians turned to Sparta
for aid. Fearing the growing might of Athens, and witnessing Athens'
willingness to use it against the Megarians (the embargo would have ruined
them), Sparta declared the treaty to have been violated and the Peloponnesian
War began in earnest. The first stage of the war (known as the Archidamian War
for the Spartan king, Archidamus II) lasted until 421 BC with the signing of
the Peace of Nicias. The Athenian general Pericles recommended that his city
fight a defensive war, avoiding battle against the superior land forces led by
Sparta, and importing everything needful by maintaining its powerful navy.
Athens would simply outlast Sparta, whose citizens feared to be out of their
city for long lest the helots revolt. This strategy required that Athens endure
regular sieges, and in 430 BC it was visited with an awful plague that killed
about a quarter of its people, including Pericles. With Pericles gone, less
conservative elements gained power in the city and Athens went on the
offensive. It captured 300–400 Spartan hoplites at the Battle of Pylos. This
represented a significant fraction of the Spartan fighting force which the
latter decided it could not afford to lose. Meanwhile, Athens had suffered
humiliating defeats at Delium and Amphipolis. The Peace of Nicias concluded
with Sparta recovering its hostages and Athens recovering the city of
Amphipolis. Those who signed the Peace of Nicias in 421 BC swore to uphold it
for fifty years. The second stage of the Peloponnesian War began in 415 BC when
Athens embarked on the Sicilian Expedition to support an ally (Segesta)
attacked by Syracuse and to conquer Sicily. Initially, Sparta was reluctant,
but Alcibiades, the Athenian general who had argued for the Sicilian
Expedition, defected to the Spartan cause upon being accused of grossly impious
acts and convinced them that they could not allow Athens to subjugate Syracuse.
The campaign ended in disaster for the Athenians. Athens' Ionian possessions
rebelled with the support of Sparta, as advised by Alcibiades. In 411 BC, an
oligarchical revolt in Athens held out the chance for peace, but the Athenian
navy, which remained committed to the democracy, refused to accept the change
and continued fighting in Athens' name. The navy recalled Alcibiades (who had
been forced to abandon the Spartan cause after reputedly seducing the wife of
Agis II, a Spartan king) and made him its head. The oligarchy in Athens
collapsed and Alcibiades reconquered what had been lost. In 407 BC, Alcibiades
was replaced following a minor naval defeat at the Battle of Notium. The
Spartan general Lysander, having fortified his city's naval power, won victory
after victory. Following the Battle of Arginusae, which Athens won but was
prevented by bad weather from rescuing some of its sailors, Athens executed or
exiled eight of its top naval commanders. Lysander followed with a crushing
blow at the Battle of Aegospotami in 405 BC which almost destroyed the Athenian
fleet. Athens surrendered one year later, ending the Peloponnesian War. The war
had left devastation in its wake. Discontent with the Spartan hegemony that
followed (including the fact that it ceded Ionia and Cyprus to the Persian
Empire at the conclusion of the Corinthian War (395–387 BC); see Treaty of
Antalcidas) induced the Thebans to attack. Their general, Epaminondas, crushed
Sparta at the Battle of Leuctra in 371 BC, inaugurating a period of Theban
dominance in Greece. In 346 BC, unable to prevail in its ten-year war with
Phocis, Thebes called upon Philip II of Macedon for aid. Macedon quickly forced
the city states into being united by the League of Corinth which led to the
conquering of the Persian Empire and the Hellenistic Age had begun. Hellenistic
Greece. The Hellenistic period of Greek history begins with the death of
Alexander the Great in 323 BC and ends with the annexation of the Greek
peninsula and islands by Rome in 146 BC. Although the establishment of Roman
rule did not break the continuity of Hellenistic society and culture, which
remained essentially unchanged until the advent of Christianity, it did mark
the end of Greek political independence. During the Hellenistic period the
importance of "Greece proper" (that is, the territory of modern Greece) within
the Greek-speaking world declined sharply. The great centres of Hellenistic
culture were Alexandria and Antioch, capitals of Ptolemaic Egypt and Seleucid
Syria. (See Hellenistic civilization for the history of Greek culture outside
Greece in this period.) Athens and her allies revolted against Macedon upon
hearing that Alexander had died, but were defeated within a year in the Lamian
War. Meanwhile, a struggle for power broke out among Alexander's generals,
which resulted in the break-up of his empire and the establishment of a number
of new kingdoms (see the Wars of the Diadochi). Ptolemy was left with Egypt,
Seleucus with the Levant, Mesopotamia, and points east. Control of Greece,
Thrace, and Anatolia was contested, but by 298 BC the Antigonid dynasty had
supplanted the Antipatrid. Macedonian control of the city-states was
intermittent, with a number of revolts. Athens, Rhodes, Pergamum and other
Greek states retained substantial independence, and joined the Aetolian League
as a means of defending it and restoring democracy in their states, where as
they saw Macedon as a tyrannical kingdom because of the fact they had not
adopted democracy. The Achaean League, while nominally subject to the Ptolemies
was in effect independent, and controlled most of southern Greece. Sparta also
remained independent, but generally refused to join any league. In 267 BC,
Ptolemy II persuaded the Greek cities to revolt against Macedon, in what became
the Chremonidean War, after the Athenian leader Chremonides. The cities were
defeated and Athens lost her independence and her democratic institutions. This
marked the end of Athens as a political actor, although it remained the
largest, wealthiest and most cultivated city in Greece. In 225 BC Macedon
defeated the Egyptian fleet at Cos and brought the Aegean islands, except
Rhodes, under its rule as well. Sparta remained hostile to the Achaeans, and in
227 BC invaded Achaea and seized control of the League. The remaining Acheans
preferred distant Macedon to nearby Sparta, and allied with the former. In 222
BC the Macedonian army defeated the Spartans and annexed their city—the first
time Sparta had ever been occupied by a different state. The orange areas were
often in dispute after 281 BC. The kingdom of Pergamon occupied some of this
area. Not shown: Indo-Greeks.]] Philip V of Macedon was the last Greek ruler
with both the talent and the opportunity to unite Greece and preserve its
independence against the ever-increasing power of Rome. Under his auspices, the
Peace of Naupactus (217 BC) brought conflict between Macedon and the Greek
leagues to an end, and at this time he controlled all of Greece except Athens,
Rhodes and Pergamum. In 215 BC, however, Philip formed an alliance with Rome's
enemy Carthage. Rome promptly lured the Achaean cities away from their nominal
loyalty to Philip, and formed alliances with Rhodes and Pergamum, now the
strongest power in Asia Minor. The First Macedonian War broke out in 212 BC,
and ended inconclusively in 205 BC, but Macedon was now marked as an enemy of
Rome. In 202 BC, Rome defeated Carthage, and was free to turn her attention
eastwards. In 198 BC, the Second Macedonian War broke out because Rome saw
Macedon as a potential ally of the Seleucid Empire, the greatest power in the
east. Philip's allies in Greece deserted him and in 197 BC he was decisively
defeated at the Battle of Cynoscephalae by the Roman proconsul Titus Quinctius
Flaminius. Luckily for the Greeks, Flaminius was a moderate man and an admirer
of Greek culture. Philip had to surrender his fleet and become a Roman ally,
but was otherwise spared. At the Isthmian Games in 196 BC, Flaminius declared
all the Greek cities free, although Roman garrisons were placed at Corinth and
Chalcis. But the freedom promised by Rome was an illusion. All the cities
except Rhodes were enrolled in a new League which Rome ultimately controlled,
and aristocratic constitutions were favoured and actively promoted. Roman
Greece. Militarily, Greece itself declined to the point that the Romans
conquered the land (168 BC onwards), though Greek culture would in turn conquer
Roman life. Although the period of Roman rule in Greece is conventionally dated
as starting from the sacking of Corinth by the Roman Lucius Mummius in 146 BC,
Macedonia had already come under Roman control with the defeat of its king,
Perseus, by the Roman Aemilius Paullus at Pydna in 168 BC. The Romans divided
the region into four smaller republics, and in 146 BC Macedonia officially
became a province, with its capital at Thessalonica. The rest of the Greek
city-states gradually and eventually paid homage to Rome ending their "de jure"
autonomy as well. The Romans left local administration to the Greeks without
making any attempt to abolish traditional political patterns. The agora in
Athens continued to be the centre of civic and political life. Caracalla's
decree in AD 212, the Constitutio Antoniniana, extended citizenship outside
Italy to all free adult men in the entire Roman Empire, effectively raising
provincial populations to equal status with the city of Rome itself. The
importance of this decree is historical, not political. It set the basis for
integration where the economic and judicial mechanisms of the state could be
applied throughout the Mediterranean as was once done from Latium into all
Italy. In practice of course, integration did not take place uniformly.
Societies already integrated with Rome, such as Greece, were favored by this
decree, in comparison with those far away, too poor or just too alien such as
Britain, Palestine or Egypt. Caracalla's decree did not set in motion the
processes that led to the transfer of power from Italy and the West to Greece
and the East, but rather accelerated them, setting the foundations for the
millennium-long rise of Greece, in the form of the Eastern Roman Empire, as a
major power in Europe and the Mediterranean in the Middle Ages. Byzantine
Empire (4th century - 1453). The history of the East Roman or Byzantine Empire
is described by Byzantinist August Heisenberg as the history of "the
Christianized Roman empire of the Greek nation". The division of the empire
into East and West and the subsequent collapse of the Western Roman Empire were
developments that constantly accentuated the position of the Greeks in the
empire and eventually allowed them to become identified with it altogether. The
leading role of Constantinople began when Constantine the Great turned
Byzantium into the new capital of the Roman Empire, from then on to be known as
Constantinople, placing the city at the center of Hellenism a beacon for the
Greeks that lasted to the modern era. The figures of Constantine the Great and
Justinian dominated during 324–610. Assimilating the Roman tradition, the
emperors sought to offer the basis for later developments and for the formation
of the Byzantine Empire. Efforts to secure the borders of the Empire and to
restore the Roman territories marked the early centuries. At the same time, the
definitive formation and establishment of the Orthodox doctrine, but also a
series of conflicts resulting from heresies that developed within the
boundaries of the empire marked the early period of Byzantine history. In the
first period of the middle Byzantine era (610–867) the empire was attacked
both by old enemies (Persians, Lombards, Avars and Slavs) as well as by new
ones, appearing for the first time in history (Arabs, Bulgars). The main
characteristic of this period was that the enemy attacks were not localized to
the border areas of the state but they were extended deep beyond, even
threatening the capital itself. At the same time, these attacks lost their
periodical and temporary character and became permanent settlements that
transformed into new states, hostile to Byzantium. Those states were referred
by the Byzantines as "Sclavinias". Changes were also observed in the internal
structure of the empire which was dictated by both external and internal
conditions. The predominance of the small free farmers, the expansion of the
military estates and the development of the system of themes, brought to
completion developments that had started in the previous period. Changes were
noted also in the sector of administration: the administration and society had
become immiscibly Greek, while the restoration of Orthodoxy after the
iconoclast movement, allowed the successful resumption of missionary action
among neighboring peoples and their placement within the sphere of Byzantine
cultural influence. During this period the state was geographically reduced and
economically damaged, since it lost wealth-producing regions; however, it
obtained greater lingual, dogmatic and cultural homogeneity. From the late 8th
century, the Empire began to recover from the devastating impact of successive
invasions, and the reconquest of Greece began. Greeks from Sicily and Asia
Minor were brought in as settlers. The Slavs were either driven out or
assimilated and the Sclavinias were eliminated. By the middle of the 9th
century, Greece was Greek again, and the cities began to recover due to
improved security and the restoration of effective central control. Economic
prosperity. When the Byzantine Empire was rescued from a period of crisis by
the resolute leadership of the three Komnenoi emperors Alexios, John and Manuel
in the 12th century, Greece prospered. Recent research has revealed that this
period was a time of significant growth in the rural economy, with rising
population levels and extensive tracts of new agricultural land being brought
into production. The widespread construction of new rural churches is a strong
indication that prosperity was being generated even in remote areas. A steady
increase in population led to a higher population density, and there is good
evidence that the demographic increase was accompanied by the revival of towns.
According to Alan Harvey in his book ‘’Economic expansion in the Byzantine
Empire 900-1200’’, towns expanded significantly in the twelfth century.
Archaeological evidence shows an increase in the size of urban settlements,
together with a ‘notable upsurge’ in new towns. Archaeological evidence
tells us that many of the medieval towns, including Athens, Thessaloniki,
Thebes and Corinth, experienced a period of rapid and sustained growth,
starting in the 11th century and continuing until the end of the 12th century.
The growth of the towns attracted the Venetians, and this interest in trade
appears to have further increased economic prosperity in Greece. Certainly, the
Venetians and others were active traders in the ports of the Holy Land, and
they made a living out of shipping goods between the Crusader Kingdoms of
Outremer and the West while also trading extensively with Byzantium and Egypt.
Artistic revival. The 11th and 12th centuries are said to be the Golden Age of
Byzantine art in Greece. Many of the most important Byzantine churches in and
around Athens, for example, were built during these two centuries, and this
reflects the growth of urbanisation in Greece during this period. There was
also a revival in the mosaic art with artists showing great interest in
depicting natural landscapes with wild animals and scenes from the hunt.
Mosaics became more realistic and vivid, with an increased emphasis on
depicting three-dimensional forms. With its love of luxury and passion for
color, the art of this age delighted in the production of masterpieces that
spread the fame of Byzantium throughout the Christian world. Beautiful silks
from the work-shops of Constantinople also portrayed in dazzling color
animals—lions, elephants, eagles, and griffins—confronting each other, or
representing Emperors gorgeously arrayed on horseback or engaged in the chase.
The eyes of many patrons were attracted and the economy of Greece grew. In the
provinces, regional schools of Architecture began producing many distinctive
styles that drew on a range of cultural influences. All this suggests that
there was an increased demand for art, with more people having access to the
necessary wealth to commission and pay for such work. Yet the marvelous
expansion of Byzantine art during this period, one of the most remarkable facts
in the history of the empire, did not stop there. From the tenth to the 12th
century Byzantium was the main source of inspiration for the West. By their
style, arrangement, and iconography the mosaics of St. Mark's at Venice and of
the cathedral at Torcello clearly show their Byzantine origin. Similarly those
of the Palatine Chapel, the Martorana at Palermo, and the cathedral of Cefalu,
together with the vast decoration of the cathedral at Monreale, prove the
influence of Byzantium οn the Norman Court of Sicily in the 12th century.
Hispano-Moorish art was unquestionably derived from the Byzantine. Romanesque
art owes much to the East, from which it borrowed not only its decorative forms
but the plan of some of its buildings, as is proved, for instance, by the domed
churches of south-western France. Princes of Kiev, Venetian doges, abbots of
Monte Cassino, merchants of Amalfi, and the Norman kings of Sicily all looked
to Byzantium for artists or works of art. Such was the influence of Byzantine
art in the 12th century, that Russia, Venice, southern Italy and Sicily all
virtually became provincial centers dedicated to its production. The Fourth
Crusade. The year 1204 marks the beginning of the late Byzantine period, when
probably the most important event for the Empire occurred. Constantinople was
lost for the Greek people for the first time, and the empire was conquered by
Latin crusaders and would be replaced by a new Latin one, for 57 years. In
addition, the period of Latin occupation decisively influenced the empire's
internal development, as elements of feudality entered aspects of Byzantine
life. In 1261 the Greek empire was divided between the former Greek Byzantine
Comnenos dynasty members (Epirus) and Palaiologos dynasty (the last dynasty
until the fall of Constantinople). After the gradual weakening of the
structures of the Greek Byzantine state and the reduction of its land from
Turkish invasions, came the fall of the Greek Byzantine Empire, at the hands of
the Ottomans, in 1453, when the Byzantine period is considered to have ended.
It must be pointed out that the term "Byzantine" is a contemporary one
established by historians. People used to call the Empire from the 10th century
on the Greek Empire as well as Romeo-Greek before that time; that's why Greeks
sometimes call themselves Romioi, in a colloquial form. The Romeo term was used
sometimes because of the legal tradition left in many aspects of the political
administration of the Empire. It must also be added that many empires all
around Europe had used this term, along with the Greek Byzantines, like the
Carolingians, or the Heiliges Römisches Reich (Latin Sacrum Romanum Imperium)
of the Germans who looked at themselves as the legitimate heirs of the Roman
Empire. Ottoman rule (15th century - 1821). When the Ottomans arrived, two
Greek migrations occurred. The first migration entailed the Greek
intelligentsia migrating to Western Europe and influencing the advent of the
Renaissance. The second migration entailed Greeks leaving the plains of the
Greek peninsula and resettling in the mountains. The millet system contributed
to the ethnic cohesion of Orthodox Greeks by segregating the various peoples
within the Ottoman Empire based on religion. The Greeks living in the plains
during Ottoman domination were either Christians who dealt with the burdens of
foreign rule or Crypto-Christians (Greek Muslims who were secret practitioners
of the Greek Orthodox faith). Some Greeks became Crypto-Christians to avoid
heavy taxes and at the same time express their identity by maintaining their
ties to the Greek Orthodox Church. However, Greeks who converted to Islam and
were not Crypto-Christians were deemed Turks in the eyes of Orthodox Greeks,
even if they didn't adopt Turkish language. The Ottomans ruled Greece until the
early 19th century. Modern Greek state (1821-). In the early months of 1821,
the Greeks declared their independence but did not achieve it until 1829. The
Great Powers first shared the same view concerning the necessity of preserving
the "status quo" of the Ottoman Empire, but soon changed their stance. Scores
of non-Greeks volunteered to fight for the cause, including Lord Byron. On 20
October 1827, a combined British, French and Russian naval force destroyed the
Ottoman and Egyptian armada. The Russian minister of foreign affairs, Ioannis
Kapodistrias, himself a Greek, returned home as President of the new Republic.
After his assassination the European powers helped turn Greece into a monarchy;
the first King, Otto, came from Bavaria and the second, George I, from Denmark.
During the 19th and early 20th centuries Greece sought to enlarge its
boundaries to include the ethnic Greek population of the Ottoman Empire. The
Ionian Islands were returned by Britain upon the arrival of the new King George
I in 1863 and Thessaly was ceded by the Ottomans. As a result of the Balkan
Wars of 1912-13 Epirus, southern Macedonia, Crete and the Aegean Islands were
annexed into the Kingdom of Greece. Another enlargement followed in 1947, when
Greece annexed the Dodecanese Islands from Italy. World War I and Greco-Turkish
War. In World War I, Greece sided with the Entente powers against Ottoman
Empire and the other Central Powers. In the war's aftermath, the Great Powers
awarded parts of Asia Minor to Greece, including the city of Smyrna (known as
İzmir today) which had a Greek population of significant size. However, the
Turkish nationalists, led by Mustafa Kemal Atatürk, overthrew the Ottoman
government, organised a military assault on the Greek troops and defeated them.
Immediately afterwards, over one million native Greeks of Turkey had to leave
for Greece as a population exchange between Greece and Turkey. World War II.
Despite the country's numerically small and ill-equipped armed forces, Greece
made a decisive contribution to the Allied efforts in World War II. At the
start of the war Greece sided with the Allies and refused to give in to Italian
demands. Italy invaded Greece by way of Albania on 28 October 1940, but Greek
troops repelled the invaders after a bitter struggle (see Greco-Italian War).
This marked the first Allied victory in the war. Primarily to secure his
strategic southern flank, German dictator Adolf Hitler reluctantly stepped in
and launched the Battle of Greece. Troops from Germany, Bulgaria, and Italy
successfully invaded Greece, through Yugoslavia, overcoming Greek, British,
Australian, and New Zealand units. On 20 May 1941, the Germans attempted to
seize Crete with a large attack by paratroops—with the aim of reducing the
threat of a counter-offensive by Allied forces in Egypt—but faced heavy
resistance. The Greek campaign might have delayed German military plans against
Soviet Union, and it is argued that had the German invasion of the Soviet Union
started on 20 May 1941 instead of 22 June 1941, the Nazi assault against the
Soviet Union might have succeeded. The heavy losses of German paratroopers led
the Germans to launch no further large-scale air-invasions. During the years of
Occupation of Greece by Nazi Germany, thousands of Greeks died in direct
combat, in concentration camps, or of starvation. The occupiers murdered the
greater part of the Jewish community despite efforts by the Greek Orthodox
Church and many other Christian Greeks to shelter the Jews. The economy of
Greece was devastated. When the Soviet Army began its drive across Romania in
August 1944, the German Army in Greece began withdrawing north and
northwestward from Greece into Yugoslavia and Albania to avoid being cut off in
Greece. Hence, the German occupation of Greece ended in October 1944. The
Resistance ELAS seized control of Athens on 12 October 1944. British troops had
already landed on 4 October in Patras, and entered Athens at 14 October 1944.
Greek Civil War. The Greek Civil War (), was fought between 1944 and 1949 in
Greece between the Governmental forces of Greece supported by the United
Kingdom at first, and later by the USA, and the Democratic Army of Greece; the
military branch of the Greek communist party. According to some analysts, it
represented the first example of a post-war West interference in the political
situation of a foreign country. The victory of the British—and later US-
supported government forces led to Greece's membership in NATO and helped to
define the ideological balance of power in the Aegean for the entire Cold War.
The civil war consisted on one side of the armed forces of the postwar non-
Marxist Greek administrations, and on the other, communist-led forces, and key
members of the former resistance organization (ELAS), the leadership of which
was controlled by the Communist Party of Greece (KKE). The first phase of the
civil war occurred in 1942-1944. Marxist and non-Marxist resistance groups
fought each other in a fratricidal conflict to establish the leadership of the
Greek resistance movement. In the second phase (1944) the ascendant communists,
in military control of most of Greece, confronted the returning Greek
government in exile, which had been formed under Western Allied auspices in
Cairo and originally included six KKE-affiliated ministers. In the third phase
(commonly called the "Third Round" by the Communists) (1946–1949), guerrilla
forces controlled by KKE fought against the internationally recognized Greek
Government which was formed after elections boycotted by KKE. Although the
involvement of KKE in the uprisings was universally known, the party remained
legal until 1948, continuing to coordinate attacks from its Athens offices
until proscription. The civil war left Greece with a legacy of political
polarization; as a result, Greece also entered into alliance with the United
States and joined NATO, while relationships with its Communist northern
neighbours, both pro-Soviet and neutral, became strained. Postwar recovery. In
the 1950s and 1960s, Greece developed rapidly, initially with the help of the
U.S. Marshall Plan's grants and loans, and later through growth in the tourism
sector. New attention was given to women's rights, and in 1952 suffrage for
women was guaranteed in the Constitution, full Constitutional equality
following, and Lina Tsaldari becoming the first female minister that decade. In
1967, the Greek military seized power in a coup d'état, overthrew the centre
right government of Panagiotis Kanellopoulos. It established the Greek military
junta of 1967-1974 which became known as the "Régime of the Colonels". In
1973, the régime abolished the Greek monarchy. In 1974, dictator Papadopoulos
denied help to the U.S. After a second coup that year, Colonel Ioannides was
appointed as the new head-of-state. Ioannides was responsible for the 1974 coup
against President Makarios of Cyprus. The coup became the pretext for the first
wave of the Turkish invasion of Cyprus in 1974 (see Greco-Turkish relations).
The Cyprus events and the outcry following a bloody suppression of Athens
Polytechnic uprising in Athens led to the implosion of the military régime. An
exiled politician, Konstantinos Karamanlis, returned and became interim prime
minister on July 23, 1974 and later gained re-election for two further terms at
the head of the conservative Nea Dimokratia party. On August 21, 1971, Greek
forces withdrew from the integrated military structure of NATO in protest at
the Turkish occupation of northern Cyprus. Restoration of democracy. In 1975, a
referendum voted 69%-31% to confirm the deposition of King Constantine II. A
democratic republican constitution came into force. Another previously exiled
politician, Andreas Papandreou also returned and founded the socialist
Panhellenic Socialist Movement (PASOK) party, which won the elections in 1981
and dominated the country's political course for almost two decades. Since the
restoration of democracy, the stability and economic prosperity of Greece have
grown remarkably. Greece rejoined NATO in 1980. Greece joined the European
Union in 1981 and adopted the euro as its currency in 2001. New infrastructure,
funds from the EU and growing revenues from tourism, shipping, services, light
industry and the telecommunications industry have brought Greeks an
unprecedented standard of living. Tensions continue to exist between Greece and
Turkey over Cyprus and the delimitation of borders in the Aegean Sea but
relations have considerably thawed following successive earthquakes—first in
Turkey and then in Greece—and an outpouring of sympathy and generous
assistance by ordinary Greeks and Turks (see Earthquake Diplomacy). Economic
crisis of 2009-2012. From late 2009, fears of a sovereign debt crisis developed
among investors concerning Greece's ability to meet its debt obligations due to
strong increase in government debt levels. This led to a crisis of confidence,
indicated by a widening of bond yield spreads and risk insurance on credit
default swaps compared to other countries, most importantly Germany.
Downgrading of Greek government debt to junk bonds created alarm in financial
markets. On 2 May 2010, the Eurozone countries and the International Monetary
Fund agreed on a loan for Greece, conditional on the implementation of harsh
austerity measures. In October 2011, Eurozone leaders also agreed on a proposal
to write off 50% of Greek debt owed to private creditors, increasing the EFSF
to about €1 trillion and requiring European banks to achieve 9%
capitalization to reduce the risk of contagion to other countries. These
austerity measures have proved extremely unpopular with the Greek public,
precipitating demonstrations and civil unrest. There are widespread fears that
a Greek default on its debt would have global repercussions, endangering the
economies of many other countries in the European Union, threatening the
stability of the European currency, the euro, and possibly plunging the world
into another recession. It has been speculated that the crisis will force
Greece to abandon the euro and bring back its former currency, the drachma.
