History of Qatar When the Ottomans left at the beginning of World War I in
1915, the British and Ottomans recognized Sheikh Abdullah bin Jassim Al-Thani
as the ruler. The Al Thani family had lived in Qatar for 200 years. The 1916
treaty between the United Kingdom and Sheikh Abdullah was similar to those
entered into by the British with other Persian Gulf principalities. Under it,
the ruler agreed not to dispose of any of his territory except to the U.K. and
not to enter into relationships with any other foreign government without
British consent. In return, the British promised to protect Qatar from all
aggression by sea and to lend their good offices in case of a land attack. A
1934 treaty granted more extensive British protection. In 1935, a 75-year oil
concession was granted to the Qatar Petroleum Company, a subsidiary of the Iraq
Petroleum Company, which was owned by Anglo-Dutch, French, and U.S. interests.
High-quality oil was discovered in 1940 at Dukhan, on the western side of the
Qatari peninsula. However, the start of World War II delayed exploitation of
Qatar's oil resources, and oil exports did not begin until 1949. During the
1950s and 1960s gradually increasing oil revenues brought prosperity, rapid
immigration, substantial social progress, and the beginnings of Qatar's modern
history. When the U.K. announced a policy in 1968 (reaffirmed in March 1971) of
ending the treaty relationships with the Persian Gulf sheikdoms, Qatar joined
the other eight states then under British protection (the seven trucial
sheikdoms—the present United Arab Emirates--and Bahrain) in a plan to form a
union of Arab emirates. By mid-1971, as the termination date of the British
treaty relationship (end of 1971) approached, the nine still had not agreed on
terms of union. Accordingly, Qatar declared independence as a separate entity
and became the fully independent State of Qatar on September 3, 1971. In
February 1972, the Heir Apparent, Sheikh Khalifa bin Hamad Al Thani, deposed
his cousin, Ahmed bin Ali Al Thani, and assumed power. Key members of the Al
Thani family supported this move, which took place without violence or signs of
political unrest. On June 27, 1995, the Deputy Emir, Sheikh Hamad bin Khalifa,
deposed his father Khalifa bin Hamad in a bloodless coup. An unsuccessful
counter-coup was staged in 1996. The Emir and his father are now reconciled,
though some supporters of the counter-coup remain in prison. The Emir announced
his intention for Qatar to move toward democracy and has permitted a freer and
more open press and municipal elections as a precursor to expected
parliamentary elections. Qatari citizens approved a new constitution via public
referendum in April 2003, which came into force in June 2005. Pre-history.
Human habitation of the Qatar Peninsula dates as far back as 50,000 years back,
when small groups of Stone Age inhabitants built coastal encampments,
settlements, and sites for working flint, according to archaeological
evidences. Other finds have included pottery from the Al Ubaid culture of
Mesopotamia and northern Arabia (ca. 5000 B.C.), rock carvings, burial mounds,
and a large town that dates from about 500 B.C. at Wusail, twenty kilometers
north of Doha. The Qatar Peninsula was close enough to the Dilmun civilization
(ca. 4000 to 2000 B.C.) in Bahrain to have felt its influence. The peninsula
was used almost continuously as rangeland for nomadic tribes from Najd and Al
Hasa regions in Saudi Arabia, with seasonal encampments around sources of
water. In addition, fishing and pearling settlements were established on those
parts of the coast near a major well. To 1783. The Qatar Peninsula came under
the sway of several great powers over the centuries. The Abbasid era (750-1258)
saw the rise of several settlements, including Murwab. The Portuguese ruled
from 1517 to 1538, when they lost to the Ottomans. In the 1732, the Bani Utbah
tribe migrated from Kuwait to Qatar's northwest coast and founded Zubarah.
After this migration, the Bani Utbah were very close to the rich oyster banks.
After the Persian Occupation of Basra in 1777 many merchants and families moved
from Basra and Kuwait to Zubarah. After this movement, Zubarah became a
thriving center of trade and pearling in the Persian Gulf region. Until the
late eighteenth century, the principal towns were on the east coast—Al
Huwayla, Fuwayrit, and Al Bida—and the modern city of Doha developed around
the largest of these, Al Bida. The population consisted of nomadic and settled
Arabs and a significant proportion of slaves brought originally from East
Africa. The prosperity of Zubarah, which is now in modern Qatar, had also
brought it to the attention of the two main powers at the time, Persia and the
Oman, which were presumably sympathetic to Sheikh Nasr’s ambitions. Zubara's
emerging position as a flourished as a pearling centre and trading port had
brought it to the attention of the two main regional powers, Persia and Oman.
Bahrain offered great potential wealth because of the extensive pearls found in
its waters, however, in 1782, war broke out between the Zubara-based Al-Khalifa
trading clan of the Bani Utbah tribe and the Madhkurs. The battle of Zubarah
took place in the year 1782 between the Al-Khalifa from the Bani Utbah Tribe
and the Army of Nasr Al-Madhkur Ruler of Bahrain and Bushire. 1783–1913. In
response to attacks on Zubarah by Nasr Al-Madhkur who ruled Bahrain and Bushehr
in Persia, the Bani Utbah Al-Khalifa liberated Bahrain from the Persians in
1783. After the Bani Utbah Liberation of Bahrain in 1783, different Arab
families and tribes mostly from Qatar moved to Bahrain to settle there since
the Persians have been expelled from the Island. These families and tribes were
Al-Ma'awdah, Al-Fadhil, Al-Mannai, Al-Noaimi, Al-Sulaiti, Al-Sadah, Al-Thawadi,
and other families and tribes. Most of these tribes settled in Muharraq, the
capital of Bahrain and the center of power at that time. In the early
nineteenth centuries, continuing bloody conflict involved not only the Al
Khalifa, the Al Jalahima, and the Iranians but also the Omanis under Sayyid
Said ibn Sultan Al Said, the nascent Wahhabis of Arabia, and the Ottomans. The
period also saw the rise of British power in the Persian Gulf as a result of
their growing interests in India. Britain's desire for secure passage for East
India Company ships led it to impose its own order in the gulf. The General
Maritime Treaty of 1820 between the East India Company and the sheikhs of the
coastal area—which became known as the Trucial Coast because of the series of
treaties between the sheikhs and the British—was a way of ensuring safe
passage. The agreement acknowledged British authority in the Gulf and sought to
end piracy and the kidnapping of slaves. Bahrain also became a party to the
treaty, and it was assumed by the British and the Bahrainis that Qatar, as a
dependency, was also a party to it. But when, as punishment for piracy, an East
India Company vessel bombarded Doha in 1821, destroying the town and forcing
hundreds to flee, the residents had no idea why they were being attacked. In
1867, when a large Bahraini force sacked and looted Doha and Al Wakrah. This
attack, and the Qatari counterattack, prompted the British political agent,
Colonel Lewis Pelly, to impose a settlement in 1868. His mission to Bahrain and
Qatar and the peace treaty that resulted were milestones in Qatar's history
because they implicitly recognized the distinctness of Qatar from Bahrain and
explicitly acknowledged the position of Mohammed bin Thani, an important
representative of the peninsula's tribes. Overthrow of Ottoman rule. With the
expansion of the Ottoman Empire into eastern Arabia in 1871, Qatar became
vulnerable to occupation. Mohammed bin Thani opposed Ottoman designs on Qatar,
but his son, Jassim bin Mohammed, accepted Ottoman sovereignty in 1872.
Although Jassim bin Mohammed privately complained of the Ottoman presence, he
hoped that with Ottoman support he could dominate those sheikhs in other towns
who opposed him and rebuff Bahrain's claims on Az Zubarah. The question of Az
Zubarah became moot in 1878, however, when Jassim bin Mohammed and his brother
Ahmed bin Muhammed destroyed the town as punishment for the piracy of the Naim,
a tribe that resided in the north of Qatar but was loyal to the sheikh of
Bahrain. Moreover, Jassim bin Mohammed's ambivalent relations with the Ottomans
deteriorated to the point that in 1893 they sent a military force to Doha to
arrest him, ostensibly over his refusal to permit an Ottoman customhouse in
Doha. Fighting broke out, and Jassim bin Mohammed's supporters drove out the
Ottoman force. 1913–1971: Under British rule. The Ottomans officially
renounced sovereignty over Qatar in 1913, and in 1916 the new ruler, Jassim bin
Mohammed's son, Abdullah bin Jassim Al Thani, signed a treaty with Britain
bringing the peninsula into the trucial system. This meant that in exchange for
Britain's military protection from external threats, Qatar relinquished its
autonomy in foreign affairs and other areas, such as the power to cede
territory. The treaty also had provisions suppressing slavery, piracy, and
gunrunning, but the British were not strict about enforcing those provisions.
Despite Qatar's coming under British "protection," Abdullah bin Jassim was far
from secure: recalcitrant tribes refused to pay tribute; disgruntled family
members intrigued against him; and he felt vulnerable to the designs of
Bahrain, not to mention the Wahhabis. The al Thanis were merchant princes,
reliant on trade and especially the pearl trade, and depended on others to do
their fighting for them, primarily the Bini Hajar i.e. Al Hajiri/Hajeri who
owed their allegiance to Ibn Saud, Emir of the Nejd and Al Hasa. Despite
numerous requests by Abdullah bin Jassim — for strong military support, for
weapons, and even for a loan — the British were reluctant to become involved
in inland affairs and kept him at arm's length. This changed in the 1930s, when
competition (mainly between Britain and the United States) for oil concessions
in the region intensified (see below). The scramble for oil raised the stakes
in regional territorial disputes and highlighted the need to settle the
national borders. The first move came in 1922 at a boundary conference in Uqair
when the prospector Major Frank Holmes tried to include Qatar in an oil
concession he was discussing with Ibn Saud. Sir Percy Cox, the British
representative, saw through the ploy and drew a line on the map separating the
Qatar Peninsula from the mainland. The first oil survey took place in 1926
under the direction of a geologist of the Anglo-Persian Oil Company, George
Martin Lees, but no oil was found. The oil issue raised its head again in 1933
after an oil strike in Bahrain—Lees had already noted that, in such an
eventuality, Qatar should be investigated again. After lengthy negotiations
between Anglo-Persian representatives and Sheikh Abdullah bin Jassim, on 17 May
1935 the sheikh put his signature to a concession agreement for a period of 75
years in return for 400,000 rupees on signature and 150,000 rupees per annum
with royalties. As part of the agreement, Great Britain made more specific
promises of assistance than in earlier treaties. Anglo-Persian transferred the
concession to the IPC subsidiary Petroleum Development (Qatar) Ltd. in order to
meet its obligations under the Red Line Agreement. In 1936, Bahrain claimed
rule over a group of islands, the largest of which is Hawar, on the west coast
of Qatar because it had established a small military garrison there. Britain
accepted the Bahraini claim over Abdullah bin Jassim's objections, in large
part because the Bahraini shaykh's personal British adviser was able to frame
Bahrain's case in a legal manner familiar to British officials. The question of
domain continued in the early 1990s. Triggered by a dispute involving the Naim,
the Bahrainis once again laid claim to the deserted town of Az Zubarah in 1937.
Abdullah bin Jassim sent a large, heavily armed force and succeeded in
defeating the Naim. The British political resident in Bahrain supported Qatar's
claim and warned Hamad ibn Isa Al Khalifa, the ruler of Bahrain, not to
intervene militarily. Bitter and angry over the loss of Az Zubarah, Hamad ibn
Isa imposed a crushing embargo on trade and travel to Qatar. Drilling of the
first oil well began at Jebel Dukhan in October 1938 and, over a year later,
the well struck oil in the Upper Jurassic limestone which, unlike the Bahraimi
strike, was similar to Saudi Arabia’s Dammam field discovered three years
before. Production was halted between 1942 and 1947 because of World War II and
its aftermath. The disruption of food supplies caused by the war prolonged a
period of economic hardship in Qatar that had begun in the 1920s with the
collapse of the pearl trade and had increased with the global depression of the
early 1930s and the Bahraini embargo. As they had in previous times of
privation, whole families and tribes moved to other parts of the Persian Gulf,
leaving many Qatari villages deserted. Even Shaykh Abdullah bin Jassim went
into debt and, in preparation for his retirement, groomed his favored second
son, Hamad bin Abdullah Al Thani, to be his successor. Hamad bin Abdullah's
death in 1948, however, led to a succession crisis in which the main candidates
were Abdullah bin Jassim's eldest son, Ali bin Abdullah Al Thani, and Hamad bin
Abdullah's teenage son, Khalifa ibn Hamad Al Thani. Oil exports and payments
for offshore rights began in 1949 and marked a turning point in Qatar. Not only
would oil revenues dramatically transform the economy and society, but they
would also provide the focus for domestic disputes and foreign relations. This
became frighteningly clear to Abdullah bin Jassim when several of his relatives
threatened armed opposition if they did not receive increases in their
allowances. Aged and anxious, Abdullah bin Jassim turned to the British,
promised to abdicate, and agreed, among other things, to an official British
presence in Qatar in exchange for recognition and support for Ali bin Abdullah
as ruler in 1949. The 1950s saw the cautious development of government
structures and public services under British tutelage. Ali bin Abdullah was at
first reluctant to share power, which had centered in his household, with an
infant bureaucracy run and staffed mainly by outsiders. Ali bin Abdullah's
increasing financial difficulties and inability to control striking oil workers
and obstreperous shaykhs, however, led him to succumb to British pressure. The
first real budget was drawn up by a British adviser in 1953. By 1954 there were
forty-two Qatari government employees. A major impetus to the development of
the British-run police force came in 1956 when about 2,000 demonstrators, who
coalesced over issues such as Gamal Abdul Nasser's pan-Arabism and opposition
to Britain and to Shaykh Ali bin Abdullah's retinue, marched through Doha. This
and other demonstrations led Ali bin Abdullah to invest the police with his
personal authority and support, a significant reversal of his previous reliance
on his retainers and beduin fighters. Public services developed haltingly
during the 1950s. The first telephone exchange opened in 1953, the first
desalination plant in 1954, and the first power plant in 1957. Also built in
this period were a jetty, a customs warehouse, an airstrip, and a police
headquarters. In the 1950s, 150 adult males of the Al Thani received outright
grants from the government. Shaykhs also received land and government
positions. This mollified them as long as oil revenues increased. When revenues
declined in the late 1950s, however, Ali bin Abdullah could not handle the
family pressures this engendered. That Shaykh Ali bin Abdullah spent
extravagantly, owned a villa in Switzerland, and hunted in Pakistan fueled
discontent, especially among those who were excluded from the regime's largesse
(non-Al Thani Qataris) and those who were not excluded but thought they
deserved more (other branches of the Al Thani). Seniority and proximity to the
shaykh determined the size of allowances. Succumbing to family pressures and
poor health, Ali bin Abdullah abdicated in 1960. But instead of handing power
over to Khalifa ibn Hamad, who had been named heir apparent in 1948, he made
his son, Ahmad ibn Ali, ruler. Nonetheless, Khalifa ibn Hamad, as heir apparent
and deputy ruler, gained considerable power, in large part because Ahmad ibn
Ali, as had his father, spent much time outside the country. Although he did
not care much for governing, Ahmad ibn Ali could not avoid dealing with family
business. One of his first acts was to increase funding for the shaykhs at the
expense of development projects and social services. In addition to allowances,
adult male Al Thani were also given government positions. This added to the
antiregime resentment already felt by, among others, oil workers, low-ranking
Al Thani, dissident shaykhs, and some leading individuals. These groups formed
the National Unity Front in response to a fatal shooting on April 19, 1963, by
one of Shaykh Ahmad ibn Ali's nephews. The front called a general strike, and
its demands included a reduction of the ruler's privileges, recognition of
trade unions, and increased social services. Ahmad ibn Ali cracked down by
jailing fifty leading individuals and exiling the front's leaders. He also
instituted some reforms, eventually including the provision of land and loans
to poor Qataris. Largely under Khalifa ibn Hamad's guiding hand, the
infrastructure, foreign labor force, and bureaucracy continued to grow in the
1960s. There were even some early attempts at diversifying Qatar's economic
base, most notably with the establishment of a cement factory, a national
fishing company, and small-scale agriculture. 1971–present: Independence. In
1968 Britain announced its intention of withdrawing from military commitments
east of Suez, including those in force with Qatar, by 1971. For a while, the
rulers of Bahrain, Qatar, and the Trucial Coast contemplated forming a
federation after the British withdrawal. A dispute arose between Ahmad ibn Ali
and Khalifa ibn Hamad, however, because Khalifa ibn Hamad opposed Bahrain's
attempts to become the senior partner in the federation. Still giving public
support to the federation, Ahmad ibn Ali nonetheless promulgated a provisional
constitution in April 1970, which declared Qatar an independent, Arab, Islamic
state with the sharia (Islamic law) as its basic law. Khalifa bin Hamad was
appointed prime minister in May. The first Council of Ministers was sworn in on
January 1, 1970, and seven of its ten members were Al Thani. Khalifa bin
Hamad's argument prevailed with regard to the federation proposal. Qatar became
an independent state on September 3, 1971. That Ahmad ibn Ali issued the formal
announcement from his Swiss villa instead of from his Doha palace indicated to
many Qataris that it was time for a change. On February 22, 1972, Khalifa ibn
Hamad deposed Ahmad ibn Ali, who was hunting with his falcons in Iran. Khalifa
ibn Hamad had the tacit support of the Al Thani and of Britain, and he had the
political, financial, and military support of Saudi Arabia. In contrast to his
predecessor's policies, Khalifa ibn Hamad cut family allowances and increased
spending on social programs, including housing, health, education, and
pensions. In addition, he filled many top government posts with close
relatives. In 1993 Khalifa ibn Hamad remained the Emir, but his son, Hamad ibn
Khalifa, the heir apparent and minister of defense, had taken over much of the
day-to-day running of the country. The two consulted with each other on all
matters of importance. On June 27, 1995, the Deputy Emir, Sheikh Hamad bin
Khalifa, deposed his father Emir Khalifa in a bloodless coup. An unsuccessful
counter-coup was staged in 1996. The Emir and his father are now reconciled,
though some supporters of the counter-coup remain in prison. The Emir announced
his intention for Qatar to move toward democracy and has permitted a freer and
more open press and municipal elections as a precursor to expected
parliamentary elections. Qatari citizens approved a new constitution via public
referendum in April 2003, which came into force in June 2005. The current Emir
has announced his intention for Qatar to move towards democracy and has
permitted a nominally free and open press and municipal elections. Economic,
social, and democratic reforms have occurred in recent years. In 2003, a woman
was appointed to the cabinet as minister of education. Qatar and Bahrain have
argued over who owns the Hawar Islands. In 2001, the International Court of
Justice gave Bahrain sovereignty over Hawar Islands while giving Qatar
sovereignty over smaller disputed islands and the Zubarah region on mainland
Qatar. During the trial, Qatar provided the court with 82 forged documents to
substantiate their claims of sovereignty over the territories in question.
These claims were withdrawn at a later stage after Bahrain discovered the
forgeries. Qatar will host the 2022 FIFA World Cup.
