History of Bangladesh The history of Bangladesh as a nation state began in
1971, when it seceded from Pakistan. Prior to the creation of Pakistan in 1947,
modern-day Bangladesh was part of ancient, classical, medieval and colonial
India. The area's early history featured a succession of Indian empires,
internal squabbling, and a tussle between Hinduism and Buddhism for dominance.
Islam made its first appearance during the 12th century when Sufi missionaries
arrived. Later, occasional Muslim rulers reinforced the process of conversion
by building mosques, madrassas and Sufi Khanqah. The borders of present-day
Bangladesh were established with the partition of Bengal and India in 1947,
when the region became East Pakistan, part of the newly formed Islamic State of
Pakistan. However, it was separated from the western wing by of Indian
territory. Due to political exclusion, ethnic and linguistic discrimination, as
well as economic neglect by the politically dominant West Pakistan, popular
agitation led by Sheikh Mujibur Rahman grew against West Pakistan, resulting in
the Bangladesh Liberation War of 1971, which the Bengali people won with the
support of India. After independence, the new state endured famine, natural
disasters and widespread poverty, as well as political turmoil and military
coups. The restoration of democracy in 1991 has been followed by relative calm
and economic progress. Etymology of "Bengal". The exact origin of the word
"Bangla" or Bengal is unknown. According to Mahabharata, Purana, Harivamsha
Vanga was one of the adopted sons of King Vali who founded the Vanga Kingdom.
The earliest reference to "Vangala" ("Bôngal") has been traced in the Nesari
plates (805 AD) of Rashtrakuta Govinda III which speak of Dharmapala as the
king of Vangala. Shams-ud-din Ilyas Shah took the title "Shah-e-Bangalah" and
united the whole region under one government for the first time. The Vanga
Kingdom (also known as Banga) was located in the eastern part of the Indian
Subcontinent, comprising part of West Bengal, India and present-day modern
Bangladesh. Vanga and Pundra were two dominant tribes in Bangladesh in ancient
time. The Hindu epic Mahabharata mentions that the Vanga and Pundra kings took
part in the battle of Kurukshetra. Kouravas and Pandavas fought this battle
near Delhi about three thousand years back. Ancient period. Pre-historic
Bengal. The original settlers spoke non-Aryan languages—they may have spoken
Austric or Austro-Asiatic languages like the languages of the present-day Kola,
Bhil, Santal, Shabara and Pulinda peoples. At a subsequent age, peoples
speaking languages from two other language families—Dravidian and Tibeto-
Burman—seem to have settled in Bengal. Bengal in mythology. Some references
indicate that the early people in Bengal were different in ethnicity and
culture from the Vedic beyond the boundary of Aryandom and who were classed as
'Dasyus'. The Bhagavata Purana classes them as sinful people while Dharmasutra
of Bodhayana prescribes expiatory rites after a journey among the Pundras and
Vangas. Mahabharata speaks of Paundraka Vasudeva who was lord of the Pundrasand
who allied himself with Jarasandha against Krishna. Mahabharata also speaks of
Bengali kings called Chitrasena and Sanudrasena who were defeated by Bhima.
Kalidas mentions that Raghu defeated a coalition of Vanga kings and established
a victory column in the Gangetic delta. Protohistory. Hindu scriptures such as
the Mahabharata say that Bangladesh was divided among the Janapadas: Vanga
(southern Bengal), Pundra (northern Bengal), and Suhma (western Bengal)
according to their respective totems. Scriptures identify Vanga and Anga in
Bangladesh as Indo-Aryan. While western Bangladesh, as part of Magadha, became
part of the Indo-Aryan civilization by the 7th century BCE, the Nanda Dynasty
was the first historical state to unify all of Bangladesh under Indo-Aryan
rule. Overseas Colonization. The Vanga Kingdom was a powerful seafaring nation
of Ancient India. They had overseas trade relations with Java, Sumatra and Siam
(modern day Thailand). According to Mahavamsa, the Vanga prince Vijaya Singha
conquered Lanka (modern day Sri Lanka) in 544 BC and gave the name "Sinhala" to
the country. Bengali people migrated to the Maritime Southeast Asia and Siam
(in modern Thailand), establishing their own colonies there. Gangaridai Empire.
Though north and west Bengal were part of the Magadhan empire southern Bengal
thrived and became powerful with her overseas trades. In 326 BCE, with the
invasion of Alexander the Great the region again came to prominence. The Greek
and Latin historians suggested that Alexander the Great withdrew from India
anticipating the valiant counter attack of the mighty Gangaridai empire that
was located in the Bengal region. Alexander, after the meeting with his
officer, Coenus, was convinced that it was better to return. Diodorus Siculus
mentions Gangaridai to be the most powerful empire in India whose king
possessed an army of 20,000 horses, 200,000 infantry, 2,000 chariots and 4,000
elephants trained and equipped for war. The allied forces of Gangaridai Empire
and Nanda Empire (Prasii) were preparing a massive counter attack against the
forces of Alexander on the banks of Ganges. Gangaridai, according to the Greek
accounts, kept on flourishing at least up to the 1st century AD. Early Middle
Ages. The pre-Gupta period of Bengal is shrouded with obscurity. Before the
conquest of Samudragupta Bengal was divided into two kingdoms: Pushkarana and
Samatata. Chandragupta II had defeated a confederacy of Vanga kings resulting
in Bengal becoming part of the Gupta Empire. Gauda Kingdom. By the 6th century,
the Gupta Empire ruling over the northern Indian subcontinent was largely
broken up. Eastern Bengal became the Vanga Kingdom while the Gauda kings rose
in the west with their capital at Karnasuvarna (Murshidabad). Shashanka, a
vassal of the last Gupta Empire became independent and unified the smaller
principalities of Bengal (Gaur, Vanga, Samatata) and vied for regional power
with Harshavardhana in northern India. But this burst of Bengali power did not
last beyond his death, as Bengal descended afterwards into a period marked by
disunity and foreign invasion.The development of the Bengali calendar is also
often attributed to Shashanka as the starting date falls squarely within his
reign(600 AD–626 AD). The Pala dynasty. Pala dynasty were the first
independent Buddhist dynasty of Bengal. The name "Pala" ( "pal") means
"protector" and was used as an ending to the names of all Pala monarchs. The
Palas were followers of the Mahayana and Tantric schools of Buddhism. Gopala
was the first ruler from the dynasty. He came to power in 750 in Gaur by a
democratic election. This event is recognized as one of the first democratic
elections in South Asia since the time of the Mahā Janapadas. He reigned from
750-770 and consolidated his position by extending his control over all of
Bengal. The Buddhist dynasty lasted for four centuries (750-1120 AD) and
ushered in a period of stability and prosperity in Bengal. They created many
temples and works of art as well as supported the Universities of Nalanda and
Vikramashila. Somapura Mahavihara built by Dharmapala is the greatest Buddhist
Vihara in the Indian Subcontinent. The empire reached its peak under Dharmapala
and Devapala. Dharmapala extended the empire into the northern parts of the
Indian Subcontinent. This triggered once more for the control of the
subcontinent. Devapala, successor of Dharmapala, expanded the empire to cover
much of South Asia and beyond. His empire stretched from Assam and Utkala in
the east, Kamboja (modern day Afghanistan) in the north-west and Deccan in the
south. According to Pala copperplate inscription Devapala exterminated the
Utkalas, conquered the Pragjyotisha (Assam), shattered the pride of the Huna,
and humbled the lords of Gurjara, Pratiharas and the Dravidas. The death of
Devapala ended the period of ascendancy of the Pala Empire and several
independent dynasties and kingdoms emerged during this time. However, Mahipala
− I rejuvenated the reign of the Palas. He recovered control over all of
Bengal and expanded the empire. He survived the invasions of Rajendra Chola and
the Chalukyas. After Mahipala − I the Pala dynasty again saw its decline
until Ramapala, the last great ruler of the dynasty, managed to retrieve the
position of the dynasty to some extent. He crushed the Varendra rebellion and
extended his empire farther to Kamarupa, Orissa and Northern India. The Pala
Empire can be considered as the golden era of Bengal. Never had the Bengali
people reached such height of power and glory to that extent. Palas were
responsible for the introduction of Mahayana Buddhism in Tibet, Bhutan and
Myanmar. The Pala had extensive trade as well as influence in south-east Asia.
This can be seen in the sculptures and architectural style of the Sailendra
Empire (present-day Malaya, Java, Sumatra). Sena dynasty. The Palas were
followed by the Sena dynasty who brought Bengal under one ruler during the 12th
century. Vijay Sen the second ruler of this dynasty defeated the last Pala
emperor Madanapala and established his reign. Ballal Sena introduced caste
system in Bengal and made Nabadwip the capital. The fourth king of this dynasty
Lakshman Sen expanded the empire beyond Bengal to Bihar. Lakshman fled to
eastern Bengal under the onslaught of the Muslims without facing them in
battle. The Sena dynasty brought a period of revival in Hinduism in Bengal. A
popular myth comprehended by some Bengali authors about Jayadeva, the famous
Sanskrit poet of Orissa (then known as the Kalinga) and author of Gita Govinda,
was one of the "Pancharatnas" (meaning 5 gems) in the court of Lakshman Sen
(although this may be disputed by some). Late Middle Ages - arrival of Islam.
Islam made its first appearance in Bengal during the 12th century when Sufi
missionaries arrived. Beginning in 1202, a military commander from the Delhi
Sultanate, Bakhtiar Khilji, overran Bihar and Bengal as far east as Rangpur,
Bogra and the Brahmaputra River. The defeated Laksman Sen and his two sons
moved to a place then called Vikramapur (present-day Munshiganj District),
where their diminished dominion lasted until the late 13th century. Hindu
states continued to exist in the Southern and the Eastern parts of Bengal till
the 1450s such as the Deva dynasty. Also, the Ganesha dynasty began with Raja
Ganesha in 1414, but his successors converted to Islam. There were several
independent Hindu states established in Bengal during the Mughal period like
those of Maharaja Pratapaditya of Jessore and Raja Sitaram Ray of Burdwan.
These kingdoms contributed a lot to the economic and cultural landscape of
Bengal. Extensive land reclamations in forested and marshy areas were carried
out and intrastate trade as well as commerce were highly encouraged. These
kingdoms also helped introduce new music, painting, dancing and sculpture into
Bengali art-forms as well as many temples were constructed during this period.
Militarily, these served as bulwarks against Portuguese and Burmese attacks.
Many of these kingdoms are recorded to have fallen during the late 1700s. While
Koch Bihar Kingdom in the North, flourished during the period of 16th and the
17th centuries as well as weathered the Mughals also and survived till the
advent of the British. Deva Kingdom. The Deva Kingdom was a Hindu dynasty of
medieval Bengal that ruled over eastern Bengal after the collapse Sena Empire.
The capital of this dynasty was Bikrampur in present-day Munshiganj District of
Bangladesh. The inscriptional evidences show that his kingdom was extended up
to the present-day Comilla-Noakhali-Chittagong region. A later ruler of the
dynasty "Ariraja-Danuja-Madhava" Dasharatha-Deva extended his kingdom to cover
much of East Bengal. The end of this dynasty is not yet known. Turkic rule.
Khilji maliks. The period after Bakhtiar Khilji's death in 1207 devolved into
infighting among the Khiljis - representative of a pattern of succession
struggles and intra-empire intrigues during later Turkic regimes. Ghiyasuddin
Iwaz Khalji prevailed and extended the Sultan's domain south to Jessore and
made the eastern Bang province a tributary. The capital was made at Lakhnauti
on the Ganges near the older Bengal capital of Gaur. He managed to make
Kamarupa and Trihut pay tribute to him. But he was later defeated by Shams-ud-
Din Iltutmish. Mameluk rule. The weak successors of Iltutmish encouraged the
local governors to declare independence. Bengal was sufficiently remote from
Delhi that its governors would declare independence on occasion, styling
themselves as Sultans of Bengal. It was during this time that Bengal earned the
name "Bulgakpur" (land of the rebels). Tughral Togun Khan added Oudh and Bihar
to Bengal. Mughisuddin Yuzbak also conquered Bihar and Oudh from Delhi but was
killed during an unsuccessful expedition in Assam. Two Turkic attempts to push
east of the broad Jamuna and Brahmaputra rivers were repulsed, but a third led
by Mughisuddin Tughral conquered the Sonargaon area south of Dhaka to Faridpur,
bringing the Sen Kingdom officially to an end by 1277. Mughisuddin Tughral
repulsed two massive attacks of the sultanate of Delhi before finally being
defeated and killed by Ghiyas ud din Balban., Mahmud Shahi dynasty. Mahmud
Shahi dynasty started when Nasiruddin Bughra Khan declared independence in
Bengal. Thus Bengal regained her independence back. Nasiruddin Bughra Khan and
his successors ruled Bengal for 23 years finally being incorporated into Delhi
Sultanate by Ghyiasuddin Tughlaq. Ilyas Shahi dynasty. Shamsuddin Iliyas Shah
founded an independent dynasty that lasted from 1342-1487. The dynasty
successfully repulsed attempts by Delhi to conquer them. They continued to reel
in the territory of modern-day Bengal, reaching to Khulna in the south and
Sylhet in the east. The sultans advanced civic institutions and became more
responsive and "native" in their outlook and cut loose from Delhi. Considerable
architectural projects were completed including the massive Adina Mosque and
the Darasbari Mosque which still stands in Bangladesh near the border. The
Sultans of Bengal were patrons of Bengali literature and began a process in
which Bengali culture and identity would flourish. The Ilyas Shahi Dynasty was
interrupted by an uprising by the Hindus under Raja Ganesha. However the Ilyas
Shahi dynasty was restored by Nasiruddin Mahmud Shah. Ganesha dynasty. The
Ganesha dynasty began with Raja Ganesha in 1414. After Raja Ganesha seized
control over Bengal he faced an imminent threat of invasion. Ganesha appealed
to a powerful Muslim holy man named Qutb al Alam, to stop the threat. The saint
agreed on the condition that Raja Ganesha's son Jadu would convert to Islam and
rule in his place. Raja Ganesha agreed and Jadu started ruling Bengal as
"Jalaluddin Muhammad Shah" in 1415 AD. Qutb al Alam died in 1416 AD and Raja
Ganesha was emboldened to depose his son and accede to the throne himself as
"Danujamarddana Deva". Jalaluddin was reconverted to Hinduism by the "Golden
Cow" ritual. After the death of his father he once again converted to Islam and
started ruling his second phase. Jalaluddin's son, Shamsuddin Ahmad Shah ruled
for only 3 years due to chaos and anarchy. The dynasty is known for their
liberal policy as well as justice and charity. Hussain Shahi dynasty. The
Habshi rule gave way to the Hussain Shahi dynasty that ruled from 1494-1538.
Alauddin Hussain Shah, considered as the greatest of all the sultans of Bengal
for bringing cultural renaissance during his reign. He extended the sultanate
all the way to the port of Chittagong, which witnessed the arrival of the first
Portuguese merchants. Nasiruddin Nasrat Shah gave refuge to the Afghan lords
during the invasion of Babur though he remained neutral. However Nusrat Shah
made a treaty with Babur and saved Bengal from a Mughal invasion. The last
Sultan of the dynasty, who continued to rule from Gaur, had to contend with
rising Afghan activity on his northwestern border. Eventually, the Afghans
broke through and sacked the capital in 1538 where they remained for several
decades until the arrival of the Mughals. Pashtun rule. Suri dynasty. Sher Shah
Suri established the Sur dynasty in Bengal. After the battle of Chausa he
declared himself independent Sultan of Bengal and Bihar. Sher Shah was the only
Muslim Sultan of Bengal to establish an empire in northern India. The Delhi
Sultanate Islam Shah appointed Muhammad Khan Sur as the governor of Bengal.
After the death of Islam Shah, Muhammad Khan Sur became independent. Muhammad
Khan Sur was followed by Ghyiasuddin Bahadur Shah and Ghyiasuddin Jalal Shah.
The Pashtun rule in Bengal remained for 44 years. Their most impressive
achievement was Sher Shah's construction of the Grand Trunk Road connecting
Sonargaon, Delhi and Kabul. Karrani dynasty. The Sur dynasty was followed by
the Karrani dynasty. Sulaiman Khan Karrani annexed Orissa to the Muslim
sultanate permanently. Daoud Shah Karrani declared independence from Akbar
which led to four years of bloody war between the Mughals and the Pashtuns. The
Mughal onslaught against the Pashtun Sultan ended with the battle of Rajmahal
in 1576, led by Khan Jahan. However, the Pashtun and the local landlords (Baro
Bhuyans) led by Isa Khan resisted the Mughal invasion. Mughal period. Bengal
came once more under the control of Delhi as the Mughals conquered it in 1576.
At that time Dhaka became a Mughal provincial capital. But it remained remote
and thus a difficult to govern the region especially the section east of the
Brahmaputra River remained outside the mainstream of Mughal politics. The
Bengali ethnic and linguistic identity further crystallized during this period,
since the whole of Bengal was united under an able and long-lasting
administration. Furthermore its inhabitants were given sufficient autonomy to
cultivate their own customs and literature. In 1612, during Emperor Jahangir's
reign, the defeat of Sylhet completed the Mughal conquest of Bengal with the
exception of Chittagong. At this time Dhaka rose in prominence by becoming the
provincial capital of Bengal. Chittagong was later annexed in order to stifle
Arakanese raids from the east. A well-known Dhaka landmark, Lalbagh Fort, was
built during Aurangzeb's sovereignty. The Nawabs of Bengal (1717–1880).
Murshid Quli Khan ended the nominal Mughal rule in 1717 when he declared
Bangladesh's independence from the Mughal empire. He shifted the capital to
Murshidabad ushering in a series of independent Bengal Nawabs. The first
dynasty, the Nasiri, ruled from 1717 until 1740. The founder of the Nasiri,
Murshid Quli Jafar Khan, was born a poor Deccani Oriya Brahmin before being
sold into slavery and bought by one Haji Shafi Isfahani, a Persian merchant
from Isfahan who converted him to Islam. He entered the service of the Emperor
Aurangzeb and rose through the ranks before becoming Nazim of Bengal in 1717, a
post he held until his death in 1727. He in turn was succeeded by his grandson
and son-in law until his grandson was killed in battle and succeeded by
Alivardi Khan of the Afshar Dynasty in 1740. The second dynasty, the Afshar,
ruled from 1740 to 1757. They were succeeded by the third and final dynasty to
rule Bengal, the Najafi, when Siraj Ud Daula, the last of the Afshar rulers was
killed at the Battle of Plassey in 1757. The Najafi ruled till 1880. Nawab
Alivardi Khan showed military skill during his wars with the Marathas. He
completely routed the Marathas from Bengal. He crushed an uprising of the
Afghans in Bihar and made the British pay 150,000 Tk for blocking Mughal and
Armenian trade ships. Europeans in Bengal. Portuguese traders and missionaries
were the first Europeans to reach Bengal in the latter part of the 15th
century. They were followed by representatives from the Netherlands, France,
and the British East India Company. The Mughal Subahdar of Bengal Kasim Khan
Mashadi completely destroyed the Portuguese forces in the Battle of Hoogly
(1632). About 10,000 Portuguese men and women died in the battle and 4,400 were
sent captive to Delhi. During Aurangzeb's reign, the local Nawab sold three
villages, including one then known as Calcutta, to the British. Calcutta was
Britain's first foothold in Bengal and remained a focal point of their economic
activity. The British gradually extended their commercial contacts and
administrative control beyond Calcutta to the rest of Bengal. Job Charnock was
one of the first dreamers of a British empire in Bengal. He waged war against
the Mughal authority of Bengal which led to the Anglo-Mughal war for Bengal
(1686–1690). Shaista Khan, the Nawab of Bengal, defeated the British in the
battles of Hoogly as well as Baleshwar and expelled the British from Bengal.
Captain William Heath with a naval fleet moved towards Chittagong but it was a
failure and he had to retreat to Madras. British rule. The British East India
Company gained official control of Bengal following the Battle of Plassey in
1757. This was the first conquest, in a series of engagements that ultimately
lead to the expulsion of other European competitors. The defeat of the Mughals
and the consolidation of the subcontinent under the rule of a corporation was a
unique event in imperialistic history. Kolkata (Anglicized as "Calcutta") on
the Hooghly became a major trading port for bamboo, tea, sugar cane, spices,
cotton, muslin and jute produced in Dhaka, Rajshahi, Khulna, and Kushtia.
Scandals and the bloody rebellion known as the Sepoy Mutiny prompted the
British government to intervene in the affairs of the East India Company. In
1858, authority in India was transferred from the Company to the crown, and the
rebellion was brutally suppressed. Rule of India was organized under a Viceroy
and continued a pattern of economic exploitation. Famine racked the
subcontinent many times, including at least two major famines in Bengal. The
British Raj was politically organized into seventeen provinces of which Bengal
was one of the most significant. For a brief period in the early 20th century,
an abortive attempt was made to divide Bengal into two zones, West Bengal and
East Bengal & Assam. Bengal Renaissance. The Bengal Renaissance refers to a
social reform movement during the nineteenth and early 20th centuries in Bengal
during the period of British rule. The Bengal renaissance can be said to have
started with Raja Ram Mohan Roy (1775–1833) and ended with Rabindranath
Tagore (1861–1941). Nineteenth century Bengal was a unique blend of religious
and social reformers, scholars, literary giants, journalists, patriotic orators
and scientists, all merging to form the image of a renaissance, and marked the
transition from the 'medieval' to the 'modern'. Creation of Pakistan. As the
independence movement throughout British-controlled India began in the late
19th century gained momentum during the 20th century, Bengali politicians
played an active role in Mohandas Gandhi's Congress Party and Mohammad Ali
Jinnah's Muslim League, exposing the opposing forces of ethnic and religious
nationalism. By exploiting the latter, the British probably intended to
distract the independence movement, for example by partitioning Bengal in 1905
along religious lines. The split only lasted for seven years. At first the
Muslim League sought only to ensure minority rights in the future nation. In
1940 the Muslim League passed the Lahore Resolution which envisaged one or more
Muslim majority states in South Asia. Non-negotiable was the inclusion of the
Muslim parts of Punjab and Bengal in these proposed states. The stakes grew as
a new Viceroy Lord Mountbatten of Burma was appointed expressly for the purpose
of effecting a graceful British exit. Communal violence in Noakhali and
Calcutta sparked a surge in support for the Muslim League, which won a majority
of Bengal's Muslim seats in the 1946 election. Accusations have been made that
Hindu and Muslim nationalist instigators were involved in the latter incident.
At the last moment Huseyn Shaheed Suhrawardy and Sarat Chandra Bose came up
with the idea of an independent and unified Bengal state, which was endorsed by
Jinnah. This idea was vetoed by the Indian National Congress. British India was
partitioned and the independent states of India and Pakistan were created in
1947; the region of Bengal was divided along religious lines. The predominantly
Muslim eastern half of Bengal became the East Bengal (later renamed East
Pakistan) state of Pakistan and the predominantly Hindu western part became the
Indian state of West Bengal. Pakistan's history from 1947 to 1971 was marked by
political instability and economic difficulties. In 1956 a constitution was at
last adopted, making the country an "Islamic republic within the Commonwealth".
The nascent democratic institutions foundered in the face of military
intervention in 1958, and the government imposed martial law between 1958 and
1962, and again between 1969 and 1971. Almost from the advent of independent
Pakistan in 1947, frictions developed between East and West Pakistan, which
were separated by more than 1,000 miles of Indian territory. East Pakistanis
felt exploited by the West Pakistan-dominated central government. Linguistic,
cultural, and ethnic differences also contributed to the estrangement of East
from West Pakistan. The Bengali Language Movement. The Bengali Language
Movement, also known as the Language Movement "Bhasha Andolon", was a political
effort in Bangladesh (then known as East Pakistan), advocating the recognition
of the Bengali language as an official language of Pakistan. Such recognition
would allow Bengali to be used in government affairs. When the state of
Pakistan was formed in 1947, its two regions, East Pakistan (also called East
Bengal) and West Pakistan, were split along cultural, geographical, and
linguistic lines. In 1948, the Government of Pakistan ordained Urdu as the sole
national language, sparking extensive protests among the Bengali-speaking
majority of East Pakistan. Facing rising sectarian tensions and mass discontent
with the new law, the government outlawed public meetings and rallies. The
students of the University of Dhaka and other political activists defied the
law and organised a protest on 21 February 1952. The movement reached its
climax when police killed student demonstrators on that day. The deaths
provoked widespread civil unrest led by the Awami Muslim League, later renamed
the Awami League. After years of conflict, the central government relented and
granted official status to the Bengali language in 1956. In 2000, UNESCO
declared 21 February International Mother Language Day for the whole world to
celebrate, in tribute to the Language Movement and the ethno-linguistic rights
of people around the world. The Language Movement catalysed the assertion of
Bengali national identity in Pakistan, and became a forerunner to Bengali
nationalist movements, including the 6-point movement and subsequently the
Bangladesh Liberation War in 1971. In Bangladesh, 21 February is observed as
"Language Movement Day", a national holiday. The Shaheed Minar monument was
constructed near Dhaka Medical College in memory of the movement and its
victims. Politics: 1954–1970. Great differences began developing between the
two wings of Pakistan. While the west had a minority share of Pakistan's total
population, it had the largest share of revenue allocation, industrial
development, agricultural reforms and civil development projects. Pakistan's
military and civil services were dominated by the fair-skinned, Persian-
cultured Punjabis and Afghans. Only one regiment in the Pakistani Army was
Bengali. And many Bengali Pakistanis could not share the natural enthusiasm for
the Kashmir issue, which they felt was leaving East Pakistan more vulnerable
and threatened as a result. Independence. After the Awami League won all the
East Pakistan seats of the Pakistan's National Assembly in the 1970-71
elections, West Pakistan opened talks with the East on constitutional questions
about the division of power between the central government and the provinces,
as well as the formation of a national government headed by the Awami League.
The talks proved unsuccessful, however, and on March 1, 1971, Pakistani
President Yahya Khan indefinitely postponed the pending National Assembly
session, precipitating massive civil disobedience in East Pakistan. On March 2,
1971, a group of students, led by A S M Abdur Rob, student leader & VP of DUCSU
(Dhaka University Central Students Union) raised the new (proposed) flag of
Bangladesh under the direction of Swadhin Bangla Nucleus. On March 3, 1971,
student leader Sahjahan Siraj read the Sadhinotar Ishtehar (Declaration of
independence) at Paltan Maidan in front of Bangabandhu Shaikh Mujib along with
student and public gathering under the direction of Swadhin Bangla Nucleus On
March 7, there was a historical public gathering in Paltan Maidan to hear the
guideline for the revolution and independence from Shaikh Mujib, the frontier
leader of movement that time. Although he avoided the direct speech of
independence as the talks were still underway, he influenced the mob to prepare
for the separation war. The speech is still considered a key moment in the war
of liberation, and is remembered for the phrase, "Ebarer Shongram Muktir
Shongram, Ebarer Shongram Shadhinotar Shongram..." ("This time, the revolution
is for freedom; this time, the revolution is for liberation..."). Formal
Declaration of Independence. After the military crackdown by the Pakistan army
began during the early hours of March 26, 1971 Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur
Rahman was arrested and the political leaders dispersed, mostly fleeing to
neighbouring India where they organized a provisional government afterwards.
Before being held up by the Pakistani Army Sheikh Mujibur Rahman gave a hand
note of the declaration of the independence of Bangladesh and it was circulated
amongst people and transmitted by the then East Pakistan Rifles' wireless
transmitter. Bengali Army Major Zia-Ur-Rahman captured Kalurghat Radio Station
in Chittagong and read the declaration of independence of Bangladesh. "I, Major
Zia-ur-Rahman, do hereby proclaim the independence of Bangladesh." The
Provisional Government of the People's Republic of Bangladesh was formed in
Meherpur, (later renamed as Mujibnagar a place adjacent to the Indian border).
Sheikh Mujibur Rahman was announced to be the head of the state. Tajuddin Ahmed
became the prime minister of the government. There the war plan was sketched
with armed forces established named "Muktibahini" (freedom fighters). M. A. G.
Osmani was assigned as the Chief of the force. The land sketched into 11
sectors under 11 sector commanders. Along with this sectors on the later part
of the war Three special forces were formed namely Z Force, S Force and K
Force. These three forces name were derived from the initial letter of the
commandar's name. The training and most of the arms and ammunitions were
arranged by the Meherpur government which were supported by India. As fighting
grew between the Pakistan Army and the Bengali Mukti Bahini, an estimated ten
million Bengalis, mainly Hindus, sought refuge in the Indian states of Assam,
Tripura and West Bengal. The crisis in East Pakistan produced new strains in
Pakistan's troubled relations with India. The two nations had fought a war in
1965, mainly in the west, but the pressure of millions of refugees escaping
into India in autumn of 1971 as well as Pakistani aggression reignited
hostilities with Pakistan. Indian sympathies lay with East Pakistan, and on
December 3, 1971, India intervened on the side of the Bangladeshis. Surrender
and aftermath. On 16 December 1971, Lt. Gen A. A. K. Niazi, CO of Pakistan Army
forces located in East Pakistan signed the Instrument of Surrender and the
nation of "Bangla Desh" ("Country of Bengal") was finally established the
following day. At the time of surrender only a few countries had provided
diplomatic recognition to the new nation. Over 90,000 Pakistani troops
surrendered to the Indian forces making it the largest surrender since World
War II. The new country changed its name to Bangladesh on January 11, 1972 and
became a parliamentary democracy under a constitution. Shortly thereafter on
March 19 Bangladesh signed a friendship treaty with India.Bangladesh sought
admission in the UN with most voting in its favour, but China vetoed this as
Pakistan was its key ally. The United States, also a key ally of Pakistan, was
one of the last nations to accord Bangladesh recognition. To ensure a smooth
transition, in 1972 the Simla Agreement was signed between India and Pakistan.
The treaty ensured that Pakistan recognised the independence of Bangladesh in
exchange for the return of the Pakistani PoWs. India treated all the PoWs in
strict accordance with the Geneva Convention, rule 1925. It released more than
93,000 Pakistani PoWs in five months. Further, as a gesture of goodwill, nearly
200 soldiers who were sought for war crimes by Bengalis were also pardoned by
India. The accord also gave back more than of land that Indian troops had
seized in West Pakistan during the war, though India retained a few strategic
areas; most notably Kargil (which would in turn again be the focal point for a
warbetween the two nations in 1999). This was done as a measure of promoting
"lasting peace" and was acknowledged by many observers as a sign of maturity by
India. But some in India felt that the treaty had been too lenient to Bhutto,
who had pleaded for leniency, arguing that the fragile democracy in Pakistan
would crumble if the accord was perceived as being overly harsh by Pakistanis.
