History of Uganda The history of Uganda comprises the history of the territory
of present-day Uganda in East Africa and the peoples inhabiting the region.
Early independent Uganda (1962-71). Britain granted independence to Uganda in
1962, and the first elections were held on 1 March 1961. Benedicto Kiwanuka of
the Democratic Party became the first Chief Minister. Uganda became a republic
the following year, maintaining its Commonwealth membership. In succeeding
years, supporters of a centralized state vied with those in favor of a loose
federation and a strong role for tribally-based local kingdoms. Political
maneuvering climaxed in February 1966, when Prime Minister Milton Obote
suspended the constitution and assumed all government powers, removing the
positions of president and vice president. In September 1967, a new
constitution proclaimed Uganda a republic, gave the president even greater
powers, and abolished the traditional kingdoms. Uganda under Idi Amin
(1971–79). On 25 January 1971, Obote's government was ousted in a military
coup led by armed forces commander Idi Amin Dada. Amin declared himself
'president,' dissolved the parliament, and amended the constitution to give
himself absolute power. Idi Amin's six-year rule produced economic decline,
social disintegration, and massive human rights violations. The Acholi and
Langi ethnic groups were particular objects of Amin's political persecution
because they had supported Obote and made up a large part of the army. In 1978,
the International Commission of Jurists estimated that more than 100,000
Ugandans had been murdered during Amin's reign of terror; some authorities
place the figure as high as 300,000—a statistic cited at the end of the 2006
movie The Last King of Scotland, which chronicled part of Amin's dictatorship.
A border altercation involving Ugandan exiles who had a camp close to the
Ugandan border of Mutukula resulted into an attack by the Uganda army into
Tanzania. In October 1978, Tanzanian armed forces repulsed an incursion by
Amin's troops into Tanzanian territory. The Tanzanian army, backed by Ugandan
exiles, waged a war of liberation against Amin's troops and the Libyan soldiers
sent to help him. On 11 April 1979 Kampala was captured and Amin fled with his
remaining forces to Libya. Uganda since 1979. After Amin' removal, the Uganda
National Liberation Front formed an interim government with Yusuf Lule as
president and Jeremiah Lucas Opira as the Secretary General of the UNLF. This
government adopted a ministerial system of administration and created a quasi-
parliamentary organ known as the National Consultative Commission (NCC). The
NCC and the Lule cabinet reflected widely differing political views. In June
1979, following a dispute over the extent of presidential powers, the NCC
replaced Lule with Godfrey Binaisa. In a continuing dispute over the powers of
the interim presidency, Binaisa was removed in May 1980. Thereafter, Uganda was
ruled by a military commission chaired by Paulo Muwanga. The December 1980
elections returned the UPC to power under the leadership of President Milton
Obote, with Muwanga serving as vice president. Under Obote, the security forces
had one of the world's worst human rights records. In their efforts to stamp
out an insurgency led by Yoweri Museveni's National Resistance Army (NRA), they
laid waste to a substantial section of the country, especially in the Luwero
area north of Kampala. Obote ruled until 27 July 1985, when an army brigade,
composed mostly of ethnic Acholi troops and commanded by Lt. Gen. Bazilio
Olara-Okello, took Kampala and proclaimed a military government. Obote fled to
exile in Zambia. The new regime, headed by former defense force commander Gen.
Tito Okello (no relation to Lt. Gen. Olara-Okello), opened negotiations with
Museveni's insurgent forces and pledged to improve respect for human rights,
end tribal rivalry, and conduct free and fair elections. In the meantime,
massive human rights violations continued as the Okello government carried out
a brutal counterinsurgency in an attempt to destroy the NRA's support.
Negotiations between the Okello government and the NRA were conducted in
Nairobi in the fall of 1985, with Kenyan President Daniel arap Moi seeking a
cease-fire and a coalition government in Uganda. Although agreeing in late 1985
to a cease-fire, the NRA continued fighting, and seized Kampala and the country
in late January 1986, forcing Okello's forces to flee north into Sudan.
Museveni's forces organized a government with Museveni as president. Since
assuming power, the government dominated by the political grouping created by
Museveni and his followers, the National Resistance Movement (NRM or the
"Movement"), has largely put an end to the human rights abuses of earlier
governments, initiated substantial political liberalization and general press
freedom, and instituted broad economic reforms after consultation with the
International Monetary Fund (IMF), World Bank, and donor governments. In
northern areas such as Acholiland, there has been armed resistance against the
government since 1986. Acholi based rebel groups include the Uganda People's
Democratic Army and the Holy Spirit Movement. Currently, the only remaining
rebel group is the Lord's Resistance Army headed by Joseph Kony, which has
carried out widespread abduction of children to serve as soldiers or sex
slaves. In 1996, Uganda was a key supporter of the overthrow of Zairean
President Mobutu Sese Seko in the First Congo War in favor of rebel leader
Laurent-Désiré Kabila. Between 1998 and 2003, the Ugandan army was involved
in the Second Congo War in the renamed Democratic Republic of the Congo and the
government continues to support rebel groups such as the Movement for the
Liberation of Congo and some factions of the Rally for Congolese Democracy. In
August 2005, Parliament voted to change the constitution to lift presidential
term limits, allowing Museveni to run for a third term if he wishes to do so.
In a referendum in July, 2005, 92.5% supported restoring multiparty politics,
thereby scrapping the no-party or "movement" system. Kizza Besigye, Museveni's
political rival, returned from exile in October 2005, and was a presidential
candidate for the 2006 elections. In the same month, Milton Obote died in South
Africa. Museveni won the February 2006 presidential election. In 2009, the
Anti-Homosexuality Bill was proposed and under consideration. It was proposed
on 13 October 2009 by Member of Parliament David Bahati and would, if enacted,
broaden the criminalization of homosexuality in Uganda, including introducing
the death penalty for people who have previous convictions, who are HIV-
positive, or who engage in sexual acts with those under 18, introducing
extradition for those engaging in same-sex sexual relations outside Uganda, and
penalising individuals, companies, media organizations, or NGOs who support
LGBT rights.
