History of the United States (1776–1789) Between 1776 and 1789, the United
States emerged as an independent country, creating and ratifying its new
constitution, and establishing its national government. In order to assert
their traditional rights, American Patriots seized control of the colonies and
launched a war for independence. The Americans declared independence on July 4,
1776, raised armies under the command of General George Washington, forged a
military alliance with France, and captured the two main British invasion
armies. Nationalists replaced the governing Articles of Confederation to
strengthen the federal government's powers of defense and taxation with the
Constitution of the United States in 1789, still in effect today. American
Revolution. During the 17th and early 18th centuries, the British colonies had
developed traditions of popular self-government while enjoying the benign
neglect of Britain, which was preoccupied by civil war and other problems.
After the conclusion of the world war in 1763 (known in Europe and Canada as
the Seven Years' War and in the United States as the French and Indian War),
Britain had emerged as the world's dominant power. The British Parliament's
attempt to impose taxes on the North American colonists raised fears among the
Americans that their rights as "Englishmen," particularly their rights of self-
government, were in danger. The colonials had developed a decidedly republican
political viewpoint, which rejected royalty, aristocracy and corruption and
called for sovereignty of the people and emphasized civic duty. A series of
disputes with Parliament over taxation led first to informal committees of
correspondence among the colonies, then to coordinated protest and resistance,
and finally to the calling of a general convention—the First Continental
Congress—to inaugurate a trade boycott against Britain. The Continental
Congress included thirteen of the colonies. The British responded by turning
over western lands to Quebec (in the Quebec Act), and after Bostonians dumped
tea in the harbor (because it was taxed), they cracked down on Massachusetts
through the Intolerable Acts. The British sent in the army and stripped
Massachusetts of self-government, causing the colonies to ready their militias
and prepare for war. Military hostilities begin. On April 19, 1775, a
detachment of the British Army marched inland from Boston, in search of a cache
of arms and with orders to arrest certain prominent local leaders. At
Lexington, Massachusetts, they fired upon local militia. They reached Concord,
but the supplies and leaders were gone. Retreating toward Boston, they were
subjected to continual organized militia attacks and were saved by a British
rescue force. This Battle of Lexington and Concord ignited the American
Revolutionary War. As news spread, local shadow governments (called "committees
of correspondence") in each of the 13 colonies drove out royal officials and
sent militiamen to Boston to besiege the British army there. The Second
Continental Congress first met in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, in the aftermath
of armed clashes in April. With all thirteen colonies represented, it
immediately began to organize itself as a central government with control over
the army and diplomacy; it instructed the colonies to write constitutions for
themselves as states. In June 1775, George Washington, a charismatic Virginia
political leader with combat experience in the French and Indian War, was
unanimously appointed commander of a newly organized Continental Army. He took
command in Boston and sent for artillery to barrage the British. In every
state, a minority professed loyalty to the King, but nowhere did they have
power. These Loyalists were kept under close watch by standing Committees of
Safety created by the Provincial Congresses. The unwritten rule was such people
could remain silent, but vocal or financial or military support for the King
would not be tolerated. The estates of outspoken Loyalists were seized; they
fled to British-controlled territory, especially New York City. Invasion of
Canada. During the winter of 1775-76, an attempt by the Patriots to capture
Quebec failed, and the buildup of British forces at Halifax, Nova Scotia,
precluded that colony from joining the 13 states. The Americans were able to
capture a British fort at Ticonderoga, New York, and to drag its cannon over
the snow to the outskirts of Boston. The appearance of troops and cannon on
Dorchester Heights, above the city, led the British Army to evacuate Boston on
March 17, 1776. Declaration of Independence. On July 2, 1776, the Second
Continental Congress, still meeting in Philadelphia, voted unanimously for the
independence "of the thirteen United States of America." Two days later, on
July 4, Congress adopted the Declaration of Independence. The drafting of the
Declaration was the responsibility of a Committee of Five, which included,
among others, John Adams and Benjamin Franklin; it was drafted by Thomas
Jefferson and revised by the others and the Congress as a whole. The most
famous words of the Declaration of Independence, "We hold these truths to be
self-evident, that all men are created equal, that they are endowed by their
Creator with certain unalienable rights, that among these, are Life, Liberty,
and the pursuit of Happiness", were drafted by Jefferson. The new nation would
always celebrate July 4 as its birthday. British return: 1776–1777. The
British returned in force in August 1776, landing in New York and engaging the
fledgling Continental Army at the Battle of Long Island in one of the largest
engagements of the war. They quickly seized New York City and nearly captured
General Washington and his army. The British made the city their main political
and military base of operations in North America, holding it until late 1783.
Patriot evacuation and British military occupation made the city the
destination for Loyalist refugees, and a focal point of Washington's
intelligence network. The British soon seized New Jersey, and American fortunes
looked dim. It was a "time to try men's souls," as Tom Paine said. But
Washington struck back in a surprise attack, crossing the icy Delaware River
into New Jersey and defeated British armies at Trenton and Princeton, thereby
regaining New Jersey. The victories gave an important boost to pro-independence
supporters at a time when morale was flagging, and have become iconic images of
the war. A grand British strategic plan, the Saratoga Campaign, was drafted in
London to make coordinated movements down from Canada and down the Hudson
River, to meet at Albany, New York, dividing the colonies in two, separating
New England from the rest. Failed communications and poor planning resulted in
the army descending from Canada, commanded by General John Burgoyne, bogging
down in dense forest north of Albany. Meanwhile, the British Army that was
supposed to advance up the Hudson River to meet Burgoyne, went, instead, to
Philadelphia, in a vain attempt to end the war by capturing the American
capital city. Burgoyne's army was overwhelmed at Saratoga by a swarming of
local militia, spearheaded by a cadre of American regulars. The American
victory at Saratoga led the French into an open military alliance with the
United States through the Treaty of Alliance (1778). Britain now faced a major
world power. The French were joined by Spain and the Netherlands, all European
naval powers with an interest in stemming British power. The king had no
significant allies and his naval advantage was now neutralized; Britain had no
allies and had to worry about losing a major world war and faced invasion from
France. The British move South, 1778–1783. The British now tried to salvage
something by a campaign to seize the southern states. With limited regular
troops at their disposal, the British commanders realized that success depended
on a large-scale mobilization of Loyalists. In late December 1778, the British
had captured Savannah. In 1780 they launched a fresh invasion and took
Charleston as well. A significant victory at the Battle of Camden meant that
the invaders soon controlled most of Georgia and South Carolina. The British
set up a network of forts inland, hoping the Loyalists would rally to the flag.
Not enough Loyalists turned out, however, and the British had to move out. They
fought their way north into North Carolina and Virginia, with a severely
weakened army. Behind them much of the territory they left behind dissolved
into a chaotic guerrilla war, as the bands of Loyalist one by one were
overwhelmed by the patriots. The British army under Cornwallis marched to
Yorktown, Virginia where they expected to be rescued by a British fleet. When
that fleet was defeated by a French fleet, however, they became trapped, and
were surrounded by a much stronger force of Americans and French under
Washington's command. In October 1781, General Cornwallis surrendered. News of
the defeat effectively ended the fighting in America, although the naval war
continued. Support for the conflict had never been strong in Britain, where
many sympathized with the rebels, but now it reached a new low. King George III
personally wanted to fight on, but he lost control of Parliament, and had to
agree to peace negotiations. Peace. Long negotiations resulted in the Treaty of
Paris (1783), which provided highly favorable boundaries for the United States;
it included nearly all land east of the Mississippi River and south of Canada,
except British Florida, which was awarded to Spain. Encompassing a vast region
nearly as large as Western Europe, the west contained a few thousand American
pioneers and tens of thousands of Indians, most of whom had been allied to the
British but were now abandoned by London. Development of federal institutions.
Articles of Confederation. The Treaty of Paris left the United States
independent and at peace but with an unsettled governmental structure. The
Second Continental Congress had drawn up Articles of Confederation on November
15, 1777, to regularize its own status. These described a permanent
confederation, but granted to the Congress—the only federal
institution—little power to finance itself or to ensure that its resolutions
were enforced. There was no president and no judiciary. Although historians
generally agree that the Articles were too weak to hold the fast-growing nation
together, they do give Congress credit for resolving the western issue, as the
states voluntarily turned over their lands to national control. The Land
Ordinance of 1785 and Northwest Ordinance created territorial government, set
up protocols for the admission of new states, the division of land into useful
units, and set aside land in each township for public use. This system
represented a sharp break from imperial colonization, as in Europe, and
provided the basis for the rest of American continental expansion through the
19th Century. By 1783, with the end of the British blockade, the new nation was
regaining its prosperity. However, trade opportunities were restricted by the
mercantilism of the British and French empires. Before the war the Americans
had shipped food and other products to the British colonies in the Caribbean,
but now the ports were closed, since only British ships could trade there.
France and Spain had similar policies for their empires. Simultaneously, new
manufacturers faced sharp competition from British products which were suddenly
available again. The inability of the Congress to redeem the currency or the
public debts incurred during the war, or to facilitate trade and financial
links among the states aggravated a gloomy situation. In 1786-87 Shays'
Rebellion, an uprising of farmers in western Massachusetts against the state
court system, threatened the stability of state government. The Continental
Congress printed paper money which was so depreciated that it ceased to pass as
currency, spawning the expression "not worth a continental". Congress could not
levy taxes and could only make requisitions upon the states, which did not
respond generously. Less than a million and a half dollars came into the
treasury between 1781 and 1784, although the states had been asked for two
million in 1783 alone. When Adams went to London in 1785 as the first
representative of the United States, he found it impossible to secure a treaty
for unrestricted commerce. Demands were made for favors and there was no
assurance that individual states would agree to a treaty. Adams stated it was
necessary for the states to confer the power of passing navigation laws to
Congress, or that the states themselves pass retaliatory acts against Great
Britain. Congress had already requested and failed to get power over navigation
laws. Meanwhile, each state acted individually against Great Britain to little
effect. When other New England states closed their ports to British shipping,
Connecticut hastened to profit by opening its ports. By 1787 Congress was
unable to protect manufacturing and shipping. State legislatures were unable or
unwilling to resists attacks upon private contracts and public credit. Land
speculators expected no rise in values when the government could not defend its
borders nor protect its frontier population. The idea of a convention to revise
the Articles of Confederation grew in favor. Alexander Hamilton realized while
serving as Washington's top aide that a strong central government was necessary
to avoid foreign intervention and allay the frustrations due to an ineffectual
Congress. Hamilton led a group of like-minded nationalists, won Washington's
endorsement, and convened the Annapolis Convention in 1786 to petition Congress
to call a constitutional convention to meet in Philadelphia to remedy the long-
term crisis. Constitutional Convention. Congress, meeting in New York, called
on each state to send delegates to the Constitutional Convention of 1787,
meeting in Philadelphia. James Madison was the moving force in devising the
great compromises needed for a strong government. The Constitution, proposed by
the Convention, called for a federal government—limited in scope but
independent of and superior to the states—within its assigned role able to
tax and equipped with both Executive and Judicial branches as well as a two
house legislature. The national legislature—or Congress—envisioned by the
Convention embodied the key compromise of the Convention between the small
states which wanted to retain the power they had under the one state/one vote
Congress of the Articles of Confederation and the large states which wanted the
weight of their larger populations and wealth to have a proportionate share of
power. The upper House—the Senate—would represent the states equally, while
the House of Representatives would be elected from districts of approximately
equal population. The Constitution itself called for ratification by state
conventions specially elected for the purpose, and the Confederation Congress
recommended the Constitution to the states, asking that ratification
conventions be called. Several of the smaller states, led by Delaware, embraced
the Constitution with little reservation. But in New York and Virginia, the
matter became one of controversy. Virginia had been the first successful
British colony in North America, had a large population, and its political
leadership had played prominent roles in the Revolution. New York was a large,
populous state; with the best situated and sited port on the coast, the state
was essential for the success of the United States. Local New York politics
were tightly controlled by a parochial elite led by Governor George Clinton,
and local political leaders did not want to share their power with the national
politicians. The New York ratification convention became the focus for a
struggle over the wisdom of adopting the Constitution. Struggle for
ratification. Those who advocated the Constitution took the name Federalists
and quickly gained supporters throughout the nation. The most influential
Federalists were Alexander Hamilton and James Madison, the anonymous authors of
the Federalist Papers, a series of 85 essays published in New York newspapers,
under the pen name "Publius". The papers were seminal documents for the new
United States and have often been cited by jurists. These were written to sway
the closely divided New York legislature. Opponents of the plan for stronger
government took the name Anti-Federalists. They feared that a government with
the power to tax would soon become as despotic and corrupt as Great Britain had
been only decades earlier. The most notable Anti-federalists were Patrick Henry
and George Mason. They were also quite concerned with the absence of a bill of
rights in the Constitution. Collectively, their writings are referred to as the
Anti-Federalist Papers. The Federalists gained a great deal of prestige and
advantage from the approval of George Washington, who had chaired the
Constitutional Convention. Thomas Jefferson, who was serving as Minister to
France at the time, was neither a Federalist nor an Anti-federalist but decided
to remain neutral and accept either outcome. Promises of a Bill of Rights from
Madison secured ratification in Virginia while in New York, the Clintons, who
controlled New York politics, was outmaneuvered as Hamilton secured
ratification by a 30-27 vote by the New York convention. Under the terms of the
Constitution, the federal government could be put into operation when nine had
ratified, so technically, it went into effect with the ratification of New
Hampshire on June 21, 1788. With the addition of Virginia on June 25 and with
New York's ratification on July 26, eleven states had then ratified; North
Carolina and Rhode Island eventually signed on to make it unanimous. The old
Confederation Congress called for elections to the new Congress as well as the
first presidential election. Washington was unanimously chosen as first
President; John Adams became the first Vice President. New York was designated
as the national capital; Washington and Adams were inaugurated in April 1789 at
Federal Hall in lower Manhattan. Under the leadership of James Madison, the
first Congress made good on the Federalist pledge of a Bill of Rights,
proposing to the states twelve amendments, ten of which were speedily adopted
and became known as the Bill of Rights. The Federalists, who had advocated the
Constitution, enjoyed the opportunity to put the new government into operation,
while after the adoption of the Constitution, the Anti-federalists, never as
well-organized, effectively ceased to exist. Alexander Hamilton in 1790-92
created a national network of friends of the government that became the
Federalist party, which controlled the national government until 1801. However,
the ideals of states' rights and a weaker federal government were in many ways
absorbed by the growth of a new party, the Republican or Democratic-Republican
Party, which eventually assumed the role of loyal opposition to the
Federalists. It strongly opposed a national bank, and the pro-British foreign
policy promoted by Hamilton. Jefferson and the Democratic-Republicans were pro-
French seeing France during the French Revolution as a democratic ally. The
Republicans under Thomas Jefferson took control of the Federal government in
1801 with the election of Jefferson as President.
