History of parliamentary procedure The history of parliamentary procedure
refers to the origins and evolution of parliamentary law used by deliberative
assemblies. "Demeter's Manual" traces the origins of parliamentary law, by
which is meant orderly deliberation and action by an assembly of persons or a
body of citizens, to c. 750 BC in Greece. It was during that era that the idea
of self-government, with the right to deliberate in assembly and to speak and
vote on public questions, was conceived. The Greeks instituted the Athenian
agora, equivalent to the American town meeting, consisting of the whole body of
male citizens above eighteen years of age, which met forty times each year on
the Acropolis. Any citizen could address the meeting from the Bema and vote on
questions before the assembly. Circa 450 BC, the Romans adopted the concept of
self-government and expanded it with the institution of the Roman Forum, where
Roman orators addressed the General Assembly from the Rostra and the people
afterward voted on pending questions. According to Robert's Rules of Order, one
commonly held view is that "our own tradition of parliamentary process may be
traced to ways of life in Anglo-Saxon tribes before their migration to the
island of Britain starting in the fifth century A.D. Among these peoples on the
continent of Europe, the tribe was the largest regularly existing political
unit." MSN Encarta notes, "Each of the several Anglo-Saxon kingdoms had its own
witenagemot until the subjugation of them all by Egbert, king of Wessex,
between 825 and 829. Thereafter the witenagemot of Wessex gradually developed
into a single assembly for the whole country." RONR notes that the structure of
Ango-Saxon governmental machinery was left largely intact even after Norman
Conquest in 1066, the Norman kings assembling a "Great Council" of court
officials, barons, and prelates that was constitutionally a continuation of the
witenagemot. By the beginning of the 20th century, "Robert's Rules of Order",
had been almost universally adopted. In 1950, Alice Sturgis published the
"Sturgis Standard Code of Parliamentary Procedure", later revised in 2001 by
AIP as "The Standard Code of Parliamentary Procedure", arguing that
organizations need not continue operating under 19th century rules, and that it
would be better to go with a simpler set of rules. In 1969 George Demeter
published "Demeter's Manual of Parliamentary Law and Procedure, Blue Book
Edition", that was longer and more in-depth than the then current version of
"Robert's Rules of Order Revised" (ROR).
