History of the United States (1918‚Äì1945) The history of the United States
from 1918 through 1945 covers the post-World War I era, the Great Depression,
and World War II. After the World War I, the U.S. rejected the Versailles
Treaty and did not join the League of Nations. In 1920, the manufacture, sale,
import and export of alcohol was prohibited by an amendment to the United
States Constitution. Possession of liquor, and drinking it, was never illegal.
The overall level of alcohol consumption did go down, however, state and local
governments avoided aggressive enforcement. The federal government was
overwhelmed with cases, so that bootlegging and speakeasies flourished in every
city, and well-organized criminal gangs exploded in numbers, finances, power,
and influence on city politics. During most of the 1920s, the United States
enjoyed a period of sustained prosperity. Agriculture went through a bubble in
soaring land prices that collapsed in 1921, and that sector remained depressed.
Coal mining was shrinking as oil became the main energy source. Otherwise most
sectors prospered. Prices were stable, and the Gross Domestic Product (GDP)
grew steadily until 1929, when the financial bubble burst. In foreign policy
the nation never joined the League of Nations, but instead took the initiative
to disarm the world, most notably at the Washington Conference in 1921-1922.
Washington also stabilized the European economy through the Dawes Plan and the
Young Plan. The Immigration Act of 1924 was aimed at stabilizing the
traditional ethnic balance and strictly limiting the total inflow. The Wall
Street Crash of 1929 and the ensuing Great Depression led to government efforts
to restart the economy and help its victims. The recovery, however, was very
slow. The nadir of the Great Depression was 1933, and recovery was rapid until
the recession of 1938 proved a setback. There were no major new industries in
the 1930s that were big enough to drive growth the way autos, electricity and
construction had been so powerful in the 1920s. GDP surpassed 1929 levels in
1940. By 1939, isolationist sentiment in America had ebbed, and after the
stunning fall of France in 1940 to Nazi Germany the United States began
rearming itself and sent a large stream of money and military supplies to
Britain, China and Russia. After the sudden Japanese Attack on Pearl Harbor,
the United States entered the war against Imperial Japan, Fascist Italy, and
Nazi Germany, known as the "Axis Powers". Italy surrendered in 1943, and
Germany and Japan in 1945, after massive devastation and loss of life, while
the US emerged far richer and with few casualties. 1919: strikes, riots and
scares. The United States was in turmoil throughout 1919. The huge number of
returning veterans could not find work, something the Wilson administration had
given little thought to. After the war, fear of subversion resumed in the
context of the Red Scare, massive strikes in major industries (steel,
meatpacking) and violent race riots. Radicals bombed Wall Street and workers
went on strike in Seattle, in February. During 1919, a series of more than 20
riotous and violent black-white race-related incidents occurred. These included
the Chicago, Omaha, and Elaine Race Riots. A phenomenon known as the "Red
Scare" took place 1918-1919. With the rise of violent Communist revolutions in
Europe, leftist radicals were emboldened by the Bolshevik Revolution in Russia
and were eager to respond to Lenin's call for world revolution. On May 1, 1919,
a parade in Cleveland, Ohio, protesting the imprisonment of the Socialist Party
leader, Eugene Debs, erupted into the violent May Day Riots. A series of
bombings in 1919 and assassination attempts further inflamed the situation.
Attorney General A. Mitchell Palmer conducted the Palmer Raids, a series of
raids and arrests of non-citizen socialists, anarchists, radical unionists, and
immigrants. They were charged with planning to overthrow the government. By
1920, over 10,000 arrests were made, and the aliens caught up in these raids
were deported back to Europe, most notably the anarchist Emma Goldman, who
years before had attempted to assassinate industrialist Henry Clay Frick.
Aftermath of World War I. A popular Tin Pan Alley song of 1919 asked,
concerning the United States troops returning from World War I, "How Ya Gonna
Keep 'Em Down On the Farm After They've Seen Paree?". In fact, many did not
remain "down on the farm"; there was a great migration of youth from farms to
nearby towns and smaller cities. The average distance moved was only 10 miles
(16¬ km). Few went to the cities over 100,000. However, agriculture became
increasingly mechanized with widespread use of the tractor, other heavy
equipment, and superior techniques disseminated through County Agents, who were
employed by state agricultural colleges and funded by the Federal government.
In 1919, Woodrow Wilson campaigned for the U.S. to join the new League of
Nations, which he had been instrumental in creating, but he rejected the
Republican compromise on the issue and it was impossible to gain a 2/
3 majority. During a grueling cross-country tour to promote the League, Wilson
suffered a series of strokes. He never recovered physically and lost his
leadership skills and was unable to negotiate or compromise. The Senate
rejected entry into the League. Defeat in the Great War left Germany in a state
of turmoil and heavily in debt for war reparations payments to the victorious
Allies. The Allies in turned owed large sums to the U.S. Treasury for war
loans. The U.S. effectively orchestrated payment of reparations; under the
Dawes Plan, American banks loaned money to Germany, to pay the reparations to
countries like Britain and France, which in turn paid off their own war debts
to the U.S. In the 1920s, European and American economies reached new levels of
industrial production and prosperity. Woman suffrage. After a long period of
agitation, U.S. women were able in 1920 to obtain the necessary votes from a
majority of men to obtain the right to vote in all state and federal elections.
Women participated in the 1920 Presidential and Congressional elections.
Politicians responded to the new electorate by emphasizing issues of special
interest to women, especially prohibition, child health, public schools, and
world peace. Women did respond to these issues, but in terms of general voting
they shared the same outlook and the same voting behavior as men. The suffrage
organization NAWSA became the League of Women Voters. Alice Paul's National
Woman's Party began lobbying for full equality and the Equal Rights Amendment,
which would pass Congress during the second wave of the women's movement in
1972, but was not ratified and never took effect. The main surge of women
voting came in 1928, when the big-city machines realized they needed the
support of women to elect Al Smith, while rural dry counties mobilized women to
support Prohibition and vote for Republican Herbert Hoover. Catholic women were
reluctant to vote in the early 1920s, but they registered in very large numbers
for the 1928 election‚Äîthe first in which Catholicism was a major issue. A few
women were elected to office, but none became especially prominent during this
time period. Overall, the women's rights movement was dormant in the 1920s, as
Susan B. Anthony and the other prominent activists were dead, and apart from
Alice Paul few younger women came along to replace them. Roaring Twenties. In
the U.S. presidential election of 1920, the Republican Party returned to the
White House with the landslide victory of Warren G. Harding, who promised a
"return to normalcy" after the years of war, ethnic hatreds, race riots and
exhausting reforms. Harding used new advertising techniques to lead the GOP to
a massive landslide, carrying the major cities as many Irish Catholics and
Germans, feeling betrayed, deserted the Democrats. Prosperity. Except for a
recession in 1920-1921, the United States enjoyed a period of prosperity. Good
times were widespread for all sectors (except agriculture and coal mining). New
industries (especially electric power, movies, automobiles, gasoline, tourist
travel, highway construction and housing) flourished. "The business of America
is business," proclaimed President Coolidge. Entrepreneurship flourished and
was widely hailed. Business interests had captured control of the regulatory
agencies established before 1915 and used progressive rhetoric, emphasizing
technological efficiency and prosperity as the keys to social improvement.
William Allen White, a leading progressive spokesman, supported GOP candidate
Herbert Hoover in 1928 as one who could "spiritualize" business prosperity and
make it serve progressive ends. Energy was a key to the economy, especially
electricity and oil. As electrification reached all the cities and towns,
consumers demanded new products such as light bulbs, refrigerators and
toasters. Factories installed electric motors and saw productivity surge. With
the oil booms in Texas, Oklahoma, California, the United States dominated world
petroleum production, now even more important in an age of automobiles and
trucks. Unions. Labor unions grew very rapidly during the war, emerging with a
large membership, full treasuries, and a temporary government guarantee of the
right of collective bargaining. Inflation was high during the war, but wages
went up even faster. However, unions were weak in heavy industry, such as
automobiles and steel. Their main strength was in construction, printing,
railroads, and other crafts where the AFL at a strong system in place. Total
union membership had soared from 2.7 million in 1914 to 5 million at its peak
in 1919. An aggressive spirit appeared in 1919, as demonstrated by the general
strike in Seattle, and the police strike in Boston. The larger unions made a
dramatic move for expansion in 1919 by calling major strikes in clothing,
meatpacking, steel, coal and railroads. The corporations fought back, and the
strikes failed. The unions held on to their gains among machinists, textile
workers, and seamen, and in such industries as food and clothing, but overall
membership fell back to 3.5 million, where it stagnated until the New Deal
passed the Wagner Act in 1935. Real earnings (after taking inflation,
unemployment and short hours into account) of all employees doubled over 1918-
45. Setting 1918 as 100, the index went to 112 in 1923, 122 in 1929, 81 in 1933
(the low point of the depression) 116 in 1940, and 198 in 1945. The bubble of
the late 1920s was reflected by the extension of credit to a dangerous degree,
including in the stock market, which rose to record high levels. Government
size had been at low level, causing major freedom of the economy and more
prosperity. It became apparent in retrospect after the Stock Market Crash of
1929 that credit levels had become dangerously inflated. The stock market crash
was also caused by the increased government spending of Herbert Hoover and
excessive market speculation. Jazz. The "Jazz Age" symbolize the popularity of
new music and dance forms, which attracted younger people in all the large
cities, as the older generation worried about the threat of looser sexual
standards as suggested by the uninhibited "flapper". In every locality,
Hollywood discovered an audience for its silent films. It was an age of
celebrity and heroes, with movie stars, boxers, home run hitters, tennis aces,
and football standouts grabbing widespread attention. Black culture, especially
in music and literature, flourished in many cities such as New Orleans,
Memphis, and Chicago, but nowhere more than in New York City, site of the
Harlem Renaissance. The Cotton Club nightclub and the Apollo Theater became
famous venues for artists and writers. Radio was a new industry that grew
explosively from home-made crystal sets, picking up faraway stations, to
stations in every large city by the mid-decade. By 1927 two national networks
had been formed, the NBC Red Network and the Blue Network (ABC). The broadcast
fare was mostly music, especially by big bands. Prohibition. In 1920, the
manufacture, sale, import and export of alcohol was prohibited by the
Eighteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution in an attempt to
alleviate high rates of alcoholism and, especially, political corruption led by
saloon-based politicians. It was enforced at the federal level by the Volstead
Act. Most states let the federals do the enforcing. Drinking or owning liquor
was not illegal, only the manufacture or sale. National Prohibition ended in
1933, although it continued for a while in some states. Prohibition is
considered by most (but not all) historians to have been a failure because
organized crime was strengthened. Ku Klux Klan. Ku Klux Klan (KKK) is the name
of three entirely different organizations (1860s, 1920s, post 1960) that used
the same nomenclature and costumes but had no direct connection. The KKK of the
1920s was a purification movement that rallied against crime, especially
violation of prohibition, and decried the growing "influence" of "big-city"
Catholics and Jews. Its membership was often exaggerated but possibly reached
as many as 4 million men, but no prominent national figure claimed membership;
no daily newspaper endorsed it, and indeed most actively opposed the Klan.
Membership was verily evenly spread across the nation's white Protestants,
North and South, urban and rural. Historians in recent years have explored the
Klan in depth. The KKK of the 1860s and the current KKK were indeed violent.
However, historians discount lurid tales of a murderous group in the 1920s.
Some crimes were probably committed in Deep South states but were quite
uncommon elsewhere. The local Klans seem to have been poorly organized and were
exploited as money-making devices by organizers more than anything else.
(Organizers charged a $10 application fee and up to $50 for costumes.)
Nonetheless, the KKK had become prominent enough that it staged a huge rally in
Washington DC in 1925. Soon afterward, the national headlines reported rape and
murder by the KKK leader in Indiana, the group quickly lost its mystique and
nearly all its members. Scopes "Monkey" Trial. The Scopes Trial of 1925 was a
Tennessee court case that tested a state law which forbade the teaching of "any
theory that denies the story of the Divine Creation of man as taught in the
Bible, and to teach instead that man has descended from a lower order of
animals." The law was the result of a systematic drive by religious
Fundamentalists to throw back the onslaught of modern ideas in theology and
science. In a spectacular trial that drew national attention thanks to the
roles of three-time Democratic presidential candidate William Jennings Bryan
for the prosecution, and famed lawyer Clarence Darrow for the defense, John T.
Scopes was convicted of teaching evolution, but the verdict was overturned on a
technicality. The Fundamentalists were widely ridiculed, with writers like H.L.
Mencken poking merciless ridicule at them; their efforts to pass state laws
proved a failure. Federal government. In retrospect, the 1920s are sometimes
seen as the last gasp of unregulated "robber-baron" capitalism. The federal
government took on an increasing role in business affairs. In addition to
Prohibition, the government obtained new powers and duties such as funding and
overseeing the new U.S. Highway system and the regulation of radio frequencies.
The result was a rapid spread of standardized roads and broadcasts that were
welcomed by most Americans. The Harding Administration was rocked by the Teapot
Dome scandal, the most famous of a number of episodes involving Harding's
cabinet members. The president, exhausted and ill from the news of the
scandals, died of an apparent heart attack in August 1923 during a cruise to
Alaska. His vice-president, Calvin Coolidge, succeeded him. Coolidge could not
have been a more different personality than his predecessor. Dour, puritanical,
and spotlessly honest, his White House stood in sharp contrast to the drinking,
gambling, and womanizing that went on under Harding. In 1924, he was easily
elected in his own right with the slogan "Keep Cool With Coolidge". Overall,
the Harding and Coolidge administrations marked a return to the hands-off style
of 19th-century presidents in contrast to the activism of Roosevelt and Wilson.
Coolidge, who spent the entire summer on vacation during his years in office,
famously said "The business of the American people is business." When Coolidge
declined to run again in the 1928 election, the Republican Party nominated
engineer and Secretary of Commerce Herbert Hoover, who was elected by a wide
margin over Al Smith, the first Catholic nominee. Hoover was a technocrat who
had low regard for politicians. Instead he was a believer in the efficacy of
individualism and business enterprise, with a little coordination by the
government, to cure all problems. He envisioned a future of unbounded plenty,
and the imminent end of poverty in America. A year after his election, the
stock market crashed, and the nation's economy slipped downward into the Great
Depression. After the crash, Hoover attempted any number of efforts to restore
the economy, especially the fast-sinking agricultural sector. None worked.
Hoover believed in stimulus spending, and encourage state and local
governments, as well as the federal government, to spend heavily on public
buildings, roads, bridges‚Äîand, most famously, the Hoover dam on the Colorado
River. But with tax revenues falling fast, the states and localities plunged
into their own fiscal crisis. Republicans, following their traditional mass
drums, along with pressure from the farm bloc, passed the Smoot-Hawley Tariff
Act, which raised tariffs. Canada and other nations retaliated by raising their
tariffs on American goods, and moving their trade in other directions. American
imports and exports plunged by more than two thirds, but since international
trade was less than 5% of the American economy, the damage done was limited.
The entire world economy, led by the United States, had fallen into a downward
spiral that got worse and worse, and in 1931-32 began plunging downward even
faster. Hoover had Congress set up a new relief agency, the Reconstruction
Finance Corporation, in 1932, but it proved too little too late. Great
Depression. Historians and economists still have not agreed on the causes of
the Great Depression, but there is general agreement that it began in the
United States in late 1929, and was either started or worsened by "Black
Thursday", the stock market crash of Thursday, October 24, 1929. Sectors of the
U.S. economy had been showing some signs of distress for months before October
1929. Business inventories of all types were three times as large as they had
been a year before (an indication that the public was not buying products as
rapidly as in the past); and other signposts of economic health‚Äîfreight
carloads, industrial production, wholesale prices‚Äîwere slipping downward. The
events in the United States triggered a world-wide depression, which led to
deflation and a great increase in unemployment. In the United States between
1929 and 1933, unemployment soared from 3% of the workforce to 25%, while
manufacturing output collapsed by one-third. Local relief was overwhelmed.
Unable to support their families, many unemployed men deserted (often going to
"Hoovervilles") so the meagre relief supplies their families received would
stretch farther. For many, their next meal was found at a soup kitchen, if at
all. Adding to the misery of the times, drought arrived in the Great Plains.
Decades of bad farming practices caused the topsoil to erode, and combined with
the weather conditions (the 1930s was the overall warmest decade of the 20th
century in North America) caused an ecological disaster. The dry soil was
lifted by wind and blown into huge dust storms that blanketed entire towns, a
phenomenon that continued for several years. Those who had lost their homes and
livelihoods in the Dust Bowl were lured westward by advertisements for work put
out by agribusiness in western states, such as California. The migrants came to
be called Okies, Arkies, and other derogatory names as they flooded the labor
supply of the agricultural fields, driving down wages, pitting desperate
workers against each other. They came into competition with Mexican laborers,
who were deported en masse back to their home country. In the South, the
fragile economy collapsed further. To escape, rural workers and sharecroppers
migrated north by train with hopes to work in auto plants around Detroit. In
the Great Lakes states, farmers had been experiencing depressed market
conditions for their crops and goods since the end of World War I. Many family
farms that had been mortgaged during the 1920s to provide money to ‚Äúget
through until better times‚Äù were foreclosed when farmers were unable to make
payments. Worldwide, desperate governments sought economic recovery by adopting
restrictive, autarkic policies‚Äîhigh tariffs, import quotas, and barter
agreements‚Äîand by experimenting with new plans for their internal economies.
Britain adopted far-reaching measures in the development of a planned national
economy. In Nazi Germany, economic recovery was pursued through rearmament,
conscription, and public works programs. In Benito Mussolini's Italy, the
economic controls of his corporate state were tightened. Some observers
throughout the world saw in the massive program of economic planning and state
ownership of the Soviet Union what appeared to be a depression-proof economic
system and a solution to the crisis in capitalism. The New Deal. In the United
States, upon accepting Democratic nomination for president in 1932, Franklin D.
Roosevelt promised "a new deal for the American people," a phrase that has
endured as a label for his administration and its many domestic achievements.
The Republicans, blamed for the Depression, or at least for lack of an adequate
response to it, were easily defeated by Roosevelt in 1932. Unlike many other
world leaders in the 1930s, however, Roosevelt entered office with no single
ideology or plan for dealing with the depression. The "new deal" was often
contradictory, pragmatic, and experimental. What some considered incoherence of
the New Deal's ideology, however, was the presence of several competing ones,
based on programs and ideas not without precedents in the American political
tradition. The New Deal consisted of many different efforts to end the Great
Depression and reform the American economy. Many of them failed, but there were
enough successes to establish it as the most important episode of the 20th
century in the creation of the modern American state. The desperate economic
situation, combined with the substantial Democratic victories in the 1932
Congressional elections, gave Roosevelt unusual influence over Congress in the
"First Hundred Days" of his administration. He used his leverage to win rapid
passage of a series of measures to create welfare programs and regulate the
banking system, stock market, industry and agriculture. "Bank holiday" and
Emergency Banking Act. On March 6, two days after taking office, Roosevelt
issued a proclamation closing all American banks for four days until Congress
could meet in a special session. Ordinarily, such an action would cause
widespread panic. But the action created a general sense of relief. First, many
states had already closed down the banks before March 6. Second, Roosevelt
astutely and euphemistically described it as a "bank holiday." And third, the
action demonstrated that the federal government was stepping in to stop the
alarming pattern of bank failures. Three days later, President Roosevelt sent
to Congress the Emergency Banking Act, a generally conservative bill, drafted
in large part by holdovers from the Hoover administration, designed primarily
to protect large banks from being dragged down by the failing smaller ones. The
bill provided for United States Treasury Department inspection of all banks
before they would be allowed to reopen, for federal assistance to tottering
large institutions, and for a thorough reorganization of those in greatest
difficulty. A confused and frightened Congress passed the bill within four
hours of its introduction. Three-quarters of the banks in the Federal Reserve
System reopened within the next three days, and $1 billion in hoarded currency
and gold flowed back into them within a month. The immediate banking crisis was
over. The Glass-Stegall Act established various provisions designed to prevent
another Great Depression from happening again. These included separating
investment from savings and loan banks, and forbidding the purchase of stock
with no money down. Roosevelt also removed the currency of the United States
from the gold standard, which was widely blamed for limiting the money supply
and causing deflation, although the silver standard remained until 1971.
Private ownership of gold bullion and certificates was banned, and would remain
so until 1975. Economy Act. On the morning after passage of the Emergency
Banking Act, Roosevelt sent to Congress the Economy Act, which was designed to
convince the public, and moreover the business community, that the federal
government was in the hands of no radical. The act proposed to balance the
federal budget by cutting the salaries of government employees and reducing
pensions to veterans by as much as 15%. Otherwise, Roosevelt warned, the nation
faced a $1 billion deficit. The bill revealed clearly what Roosevelt had always
maintained: that he was as much of a fiscal conservative at heart as his
predecessor was. And like the banking bill, it passed through Congress almost
instantly‚Äîdespite heated protests by some congressional progressives. Farm
programs. The celebrated First Hundred Days of the new administration also
produced a federal program to protect American farmers from the uncertainties
of the market through subsidies and production controls, the Agricultural
Adjustment Act (AAA), which Congress passed in May 1933. The AAA reflected the
desires of leaders of various farm organizations and Roosevelt's Secretary of
Agriculture, Henry A. Wallace. Relative farm incomes had been falling for
decades. The AAA included reworkings of many long-touted programs for agrarian
relief, which had been demanded for decades. The most important provision of
the AAA was the provision for crop reductions‚Äîthe "domestic allotment"
system, which was intended to raise prices for farm commodities. In order to
keep prices at a stable level, farmers were paid to not produce crops. The most
controversial component of the anti-deflationary domestic allotment system was
the large-scale destruction of existing crops and livestock to reduce
surpluses. At a time in which many families were suffering from malnutrition
and starvation, it was a difficult measure. However, gross farm incomes
increased by half in the first three years of the New Deal and the relative
position of farmers improved significantly for the first time in twenty years.
Many families at the time felt that the benefit, increased income for farmers
(and the lobbying farm organizations), outweighed the cost of malnourishment
and death. Roosevelt felt that without the allotment system, the decreasing
commodity prices would have worsened the Great Depression significantly. This
was later proven decades later when prices for farm commodities, falling
sharply due to the Green Revolution, led to disastrous results. 'Alphabet
soup'. Roosevelt also created an "alphabet soup" of new federal regulatory
agencies such as the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) to oversee
the stock market, and a reform of the banking system that included a system of
insurance for deposits (the FDIC --- the Federal Deposit Insurance
Corporation). The most successful initiatives in alleviating the miseries of
the Great Depression were a series of relief measures to aid some of the 15
million unemployed Americans, among them the Civilian Conservation Corps, the
Civil Works Administration, and the Federal Emergency Relief Administration.
The early New Deal also began the Tennessee Valley Authority, an unprecedented
experiment in flood control, public power, and regional planning. Second New
Deal. The Second New Deal (1935‚Äì36) was the second stage of the New Deal
programs. President Franklin D. Roosevelt announced his main goals in January
1935: improved use of national resources, security against old age,
unemployment and illness, and slum clearance, as well as a national welfare
program (the WPA) to replace state relief efforts. The most important programs
included Social Security, the National Labor Relations Act ("Wagner Act"), the
Banking Act, rural electrification, and breaking up utility holding companies.
Programs that were later ended by the Supreme Court or the Conservative
Coalition included the Works Progress Administration (WPA), the National Youth
Administration (NYA), the Resettlement Administration, and programs for retail
price control, farm rescues, coal stabilization, and taxes on the rich and the
Undistributed profits tax. Liberals in Congress passed the Bonus Bill for World
War veterans over FDR's veto. The Second New Deal proved especially
controversial as it attempted to redistribute wealth, income and power in favor
of the poor, the old, farmers and labor unions. Liberals strongly supported the
new direction, and formed the New Deal Coalition of union members, big city
machines, the white South, and ethnic minorities to support it. Conservatives,
typified by the American Liberty League, were strongly opposed. Labor
agitation. Roosevelt's first term saw a massive amount of labor upheaval. In
1934 alone, there was the 1934 West Coast waterfront strike that brought all of
San Francisco into a four-day general strike, the Minneapolis Teamsters Strike
of 1934 that brought the Teamsters and other unions out for a strike causing
the governor to declare martial law, the 1934 textile workers strike that
brought hundreds of thousands of textile workers on the East Coast out on
strike, as well as other strikes. The Industrial Workers of the World (IWW) and
the communists no longer being a force in the labor movement, the conservative
American Federation of Labor, which organized along craft union lines and which
preached labor/capital cooperation, dominated the U.S. labor movement until the
1930s. In 1935, eight unions within the AFL organized the Congress of
Industrial Organizations (CIO) to promote industrial unionism. The CIO unions
were expelled by the AFL in 1936, and in 1938 they formed a rival federation to
the AFL. The CIO had much success in organizing, with the Steel Workers
Organizing Committee getting a contract with U.S. Steel in 1937, and winning
the Flint Sit-Down Strike and getting General Motors to recognize the United
Auto Workers as the collective bargainer for GM workers. Having succeeded with
GM, the UAW next turned its attention to Chrysler, which quickly came to terms.
The last of the Big Three would prove to be a harder nut to crack, as Henry
Ford remained absolutely opposed to unions. His security forces beat several
UAW organizers outside the company's River Rouge plant in May 1937. Despite
pressure on all fronts, Ford would not budge until a wildcat strike in 1941
convinced him to give in and unionize. Recession of 1937 and recovery. The
economy eventually recovered from the low point of the winter of 1932-33, with
sustained improvement until 1937, when the Recession of 1937 brought back 1934
levels of unemployment. There is a broad consensus among scholars that the New
Deal policies did not lengthen and deepen the depression; only 5% of
professional historians and 27% of professional economists believe it served to
lengthen and deepen the Great Depression. Apart from the WPA and CCC, most New
Deal spending programs, such as the PWA and AAA, operated through private
firms. The New Deal and Roosevelt's leadership were under assault during
Roosevelt's second term, which suffered new economic setbacks in the Recession
of 1937. A sharp economic downturn began in the fall of 1937 and continuing
through most of 1938. Conservatives said it was caused by the labor unions'
assault on industry through massive strikes and the way the New Deal
discourages further investment. Keynesian economists argued it was a result of
a premature effort by FDR to balance the budget by reducing federal spending.
The administration reacted by launching a rhetorical campaign against business
monopoly power, which was cast as the villain. The Supreme Court began busily
dismantling the New Deal by ruling many of its programs unconstitutional and
Roosevelt sought to replace the judges with more sympathetic ones in his
infamous "Court Packing". Despite that, the New Deal gradually wound down and
by 1939 the president had turned his attention towards foreign policy. But the
administration's other response to the 1937 downturn had more tangible results.
Ignoring his own Treasury Department, Roosevelt embarked on an antidote to the
depression, reluctantly abandoning his efforts to balance the budget and
launching a $5 billion spending program in the spring of 1938, an effort to
increase mass purchasing power and attack deflation. Roosevelt explained his
program in a fireside chat in which he finally acknowledged that it was up to
the government to "create an economic upturn" by making "additions to the
purchasing power of the nation." World War II and the end of the Great
Depression. It was not until the administration expanded Federal spending to
support World War II, that the nation's economy fully recovered. Between 1939
and 1944 (the peak of wartime production), the nation's output almost doubled.
Consequently, unemployment plummeted‚Äîfrom 14% in 1940 to less than 2% in
1943, as the labor force grew by ten million. The war economy was not so much a
triumph of free enterprise as the result of government bankrolling business.
While unemployment remained high throughout the New Deal years, consumption,
investment, and net exports‚Äîthe pillars of economic growth‚Äîremained low. It
was World War II, not the New Deal, which finally ended the crisis. Nor did the
New Deal substantially alter the distribution of power within American society
and economy; and it had only a small impact on the distribution of wealth among
the population.. Legacies of the New Deal. Although the New Deal did not end
the depression, it increased the regulatory functions of the federal government
in the stock market, the banking system, and others. It also produced a new
political coalition that sustained the Democratic Party as the majority party
in national politics for more than a generation after its own end. Laying the
foundations for the postwar era, Roosevelt and the New Deal helped enhance the
power of the federal government as a whole. Roosevelt also established the
presidency as the preeminent center of authority within the federal government.
By creating a large array of protections for various groups of
citizens‚Äîworkers, farmers, and others‚Äîwho suffered from the crisis,
enabling them to challenge the powers of the corporations, the Roosevelt
administration generated a set of political ideas‚Äîknown to later generations
as New Deal liberalism‚Äîthat remained a source of inspiration for decades and
that helped shape the next experiment in liberal reform, the Great Society of
the 1960s. On the other hand, the Roosevelt administration and its liberalism
became the source of a vigorous conservative reaction. Led in Congress by
Senator Robert A. Taft and the Conservative coalition, they blocked almost all
New Deal proposals after 1936, and shut down the WPA, CCC and many other
programs by 1943. Eventually in the 1970s and 1980s, a bipartisan coalition
ended most New Deal regulations and programs. The most important remaining ones
in the 21st century are Social Security and the Securities and Exchange
Commission. World War II. Foreign and military policy. Isolationist sentiment
with regard to foreign wars in America had ebbed, but the United States at
first declined to enter the war, limiting itself to giving supplies and weapons
via Lend Lease to Britain, China, and the Soviet Union. American feeling
changed drastically with the sudden Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor. The U.S.
enthusiastically went to war against Japan, Italy, and Nazi Germany. Italy
surrendered in 1943, followed by Germany and Japan in 1945. The economy doubled
and tripled in size as a massive industrial mobilization was accompanied by
artificial wage and price controls. 16 million men entered the military (most
were drafted), in addition to 300,000 women volunteers. After a series of
defeats inflicted by Japan, the U.S. Navy turned the tide at Midway (June
1942), then inexorably moved toward total destruction of the Japanese military.
After small-scale invasions of North Africa (1942) and Italy (1943), the main
American effort was a strategic bombing campaign that destroyed the German
Luftwaffe, followed by a massive invasion of France in 1944. American forces
met up with Soviet forces marching into Germany from the east in May 1945.
Overall, the entire nation was turned into a vast war machine, affecting
society more than any other conflict fought by the United States, except
perhaps the Civil War. After winning a bitter contest for re-election to
unprecedented third and fourth terms, Roosevelt's health was deteriorating, and
he died on April 12, 1945 of a massive brain hemorrhage. Harry S. Truman
continued most of Roosevelt's wartime policies but changed his cabinet. On
August 6, 1945, the U.S. dropped an atomic bomb on Hiroshima, Japan, followed
on August 9 by a second atomic bomb on Nagasaki. Japan surrendered a few days
later and was occupied by the Americans under Douglas MacArthur; MacArthur's
five year rule transformed Japan's government, society and economy along
American lines. Homefront. Economics. The main contributions of the U.S. to the
Allied war effort comprised money, industrial output, food, petroleum,
technological innovation, and (especially 1944-45), soldiers. Much of the focus
in Washington was maximizing the economic output of the nation. The overall
result was a dramatic increase in GDP, the export of vast quantities of
supplies to the Allies and to American forces overseas, the end of
unemployment, and a rise in civilian consumption even as 40% of the GDP went to
the war effort. This was achieved by tens of millions of workers moving from
low-productivity occupations to high efficiency jobs, improvements in
productivity through better technology and management, and the move into the
active labor force of students, retired people, housewives, and the unemployed,
and an increase in hours worked. It was exhausting; leisure activities declined
sharply. People tolerated the extra work because of patriotism, the pay, and
the confidence it was only "for the duration" and life would return to normal
as soon as the war was won. Most durable goods became unavailable, and meat,
clothing, and gasoline was tightly rationed. In industrial areas housing was in
short supply as people doubled up and lived in cramped quarters. Prices and
wages were controlled, and Americans saved a high portion of their incomes,
which led to renewed growth after the war instead of a return to depression.
Taxes and controls. Federal tax policy was highly contentious during the war,
with President Franklin D. Roosevelt battling a conservative Congress. Everyone
agreed on the need for high taxes to pay for the war. Roosevelt tried
unsuccessfully to impose a 100% tax on incomes over $25,000 (equal to $ today),
while Congress enlarged the base downward. By 1944 nearly every employed person
was paying federal income taxes (compared to 10% in 1940). Many controls were
put on the economy. The most important were price controls, imposed on most
products and monitored by the Office of Price Administration. Wages were also
controlled. Corporations dealt with numerous agencies, especially the War
production Board (WPB), and the War and Navy departments, which had the
purchasing power and priorities that largely reshaped and expanded industrial
production. Rationing. In 1942 a rationing system was begun to guarantee
minimum amounts of necessities to everyone (especially poor people) and prevent
inflation. Tires were the first item to be rationed in January 1942 because
supplies of natural rubber were interrupted. Gasoline rationing proved an even
better way to allocate scarce rubber. By 1943 one needed government issued
ration coupons to purchase typewriters, sugar, gasoline, bicycles, footwear,
fuel oil, silk, nylon, coffee, stoves, shoes, meat, cheese, butter, margarine,
canned foods, dried fruits, jam, and many other items. Some items‚Äîlike new
automobiles and appliances were no longer made. The rationing system did not
apply to used goods (like clothes or cars). The ration system was complex and
confusing, but high levels of patriotism made it acceptable as people helped
each other through the maze of rules. To get a classification and a book of
rationing stamps, one had to appear before a local rationing board. Each person
in a household received a ration book, including babies and children. When
purchasing gasoline, a driver had to present a gas card along with a ration
book and cash. Ration stamps were valid only for a set period to forestall
hoarding. All forms of automobile racing were banned, including Indianapolis.
Sightseeing driving was banned, too. People had more money than they could
spend, so they saved it, especially in government savings bonds. Bond rallies
in many cities featured Hollywood film stars, who drew in the crowds needed to
make the program a success. The buyer paid 3/4 of the face value of a war bond,
and received the full face value back after a set number of years. Workers were
challenged to put "at least 10% of every paycheck into Bonds". Compliance was
very high, with entire factories of workers earning a special "Minuteman" flag
to fly over their plant if all workers belonged to the "Ten Percent Club".
There were seven major War Loan drives, all of which exceeded their goals. An
added advantage was that citizens who were putting their money into War Bonds
were not putting it into the home front wartime economy. Work force. The
unemployment problem ended in the United States with the beginning of World War
II, when stepped up wartime production created millions of new jobs and the
draft pulled young men out. Women also joined the workforce to replace men who
had joined the forces, though in fewer numbers. Roosevelt stated that the
efforts of civilians at home to support the war through personal sacrifice was
as critical to winning the war as the efforts of the soldiers themselves.
"Rosie the Riveter" became the symbol of women laboring in manufacturing. The
war effort brought about significant changes in the role of women in society as
a whole. At the end of the war, many of the munitions factories closed. Other
women were replaced by returning veterans. However most women who wanted to
continue working did so. Labor shortages were felt in agriculture, even though
most farmers were given an occupational exemption and few were drafted. Large
numbers volunteered or moved to cities for factory jobs. At the same time many
agricultural commodities were in greater demand by the military and for the
civilian populations of Allies. In some areas schools were temporarily closed
at harvest time to enable students to work. About 400,000 German prisoners of
war were used as farm laborers both during and immediately after the war. With
the war‚Äôs ever increasing need for able bodied men consuming America‚Äôs
labor force in the early 1940s, industry turned to teen-aged boys and girls to
fill in as replacements. Consequently, many states had to change their child-
labor laws to allow these teenagers to work. By 1943, there were almost three
million American teenage boys and girls working in American fields and
factories. In the process of bringing great numbers of children into the
workforce, the War altered the lives of many adolescents. Lured by high wartime
wages, they took jobs and forgot about their education. Between 1940 and 1944,
the number of teenage workers in America increased by 1.9 million; the number
attending school declined by 1.25 million. Labor unions. The war mobilization
changed the relationship of the Congress of Industrial Organizations (CIO) with
both employers and the national government. Both the CIO and the larger
American Federation of Labor (AFL) grew rapidly in the war years. Nearly all
the unions that belonged to the CIO were fully supportive of both the war
effort and of the Roosevelt administration. However the United Mine Workers,
who had taken an isolationist stand in the years leading up to the war and had
opposed Roosevelt's reelection in 1940, left the CIO in 1942. The major unions
supported a wartime no-strike pledge that aimed to eliminate not only major
strikes for new contracts, but also the innumerable small strikes called by
shop stewards and local union leadership to protest particular grievances. In
return for labor's no-strike pledge, the government offered arbitration to
determine the wages and other terms of new contracts. Those procedures produced
modest wage increases during the first few years of the war but not enough to
keep up with inflation, particularly when combined with the slowness of the
arbitration machinery. Even though the complaints from union members about the
no-strike pledge became louder and more bitter, the CIO did not abandon it. The
Mine Workers, by contrast, who did not belong to either the AFL or the CIO for
much of the war, threatened numerous strikes including a successful twelve-day
strike in 1943. The strikes and threats made mine leader John L. Lewis a much
hated man and led to legislation hostile to unions. All the major unions grew
stronger during the war. The government put pressure on employers to recognize
unions to avoid the sort of turbulent struggles over union recognition of the
1930s, while unions were generally able to obtain maintenance of membership
clauses, a form of union security, through arbitration and negotiation. Workers
also won benefits, such as vacation pay, that had been available only to a few
in the past while wage gaps between higher skilled and less skilled workers
narrowed. Most union leaders saw women as temporary wartime replacements for
the men in the armed forces. It was important that the wages of these women be
kept high so that the veterans would get high wages. Racial tensions. The
cities were relatively peaceful; much-feared large-scale race riots did not
happen, but there were small-scale confrontations, notably the 1943 race riot
in Detroit and the anti-Mexican Zoot Suit Riots in Los Angeles in 1943. Some
German and Italian were rounded up and interned as enemy aliens who lacked U.S.
citizenship and were known by the FBI as supporters of the enemy. Japanese
internment. About 100,000 Japanese citizens on the West Coast and their
children were interned by the U.S. government. They were sent to inland camps.
Canada followed a similar policy. The 100,000 or more Japanese Americans in
Hawaii were not interred. The American camps were closed in 1944. End of an
era. 1945 marked the end of an era. In foreign policy the United Nations was
established on October 24, 1945, to serve as a world body to help prevent
future world wars. By a vote of 65 to 7, the United States Senate, on December
4, 1945, approved the treaty that set full American participation in the UN,
with a veto in the all-important Security Council. This marked a turn away from
the traditional interest in strategic local concerns of the U.S. and toward
more international involvement. Fears of a postwar depression did not
materialize, thanks in part to the large stock of savings that paid for the
pent-up demands for housing, cars, new clothes‚Äîand babies. The Baby Boom
began as the veterans returned, many moving to the rapidly expanding suburbs.
Optimism was the hallmark of the new age‚Äîan age of grand expectations.
