History of women in the United States "For Women's suffrage see also History of
women's suffrage in the United States." "For lesbians see also Lesbian American
history." This is a history of women in the United States. 1500‚Äì1600. The
first European settlement inside what is now United States territory was
founded in 1526. In that year a judge from Santo Domingo, Lucas V√°zquez de
Ayll√≥n, obtained from Charles I, King of Spain, a patent authorizing him to
make settlements on the mainland of America, and to Christianize the American
natives. Accordingly, with 600 settlers, including women, men, and children, he
sailed to America from Puerto de la Plata, San Domingo, with three small
vessels. The settlers founded the colony of San Miguel de Gualdape at what is
present-day Georgetown, South Carolina. This was the first European settlement
in North America. It also contained the first slaves brought to America, about
100 African people, who eventually staged a rebellion and fled into the forest,
where they may have taken refuge with the Native Americans. In any case, owing
to the severity of winter, the hostility of the Native Americans, and internal
discord, in the spring of 1527 all the settlers, under the leadership of
Francis Gomez, reembarked for Santo Domingo in two of the vessels, one of which
sank along with all on board, leaving only 150 of the people alive to reach
their destination. Fort Caroline, the first French colony in the present-day
United States, was founded in 1564 in what is today Jacksonville, Florida.
About 300 people founded this colony, including four women, 110 sailors, 120
soldiers, some artisans, and some servants. However, in 1565 the Spanish
destroyed the French colony and built their own settlement in nearby St.
Augustine, which became the first permanent European settlement in the
continental United States. French leader Jean Ribault had left Fort Caroline
virtually undefended, as he sailed in a growing hurricane to challenge the new
Spanish presence in St. Augustine. The French at Fort Caroline had no idea that
the Spanish were in the vicinity and were not prepared for this attack. The
Spanish soldiers stormed through the unlocked gates of the fort early on the
morning of September 20, 1565, easily capturing the fort and many of its
defenders. It is believed that 40 or 50 of the French men escaped by leaping
over the walls or taking refuge on boats in the river. All the French women and
children who did not escape (there were about 50) were taken captive, and later
shipped to Puerto Rico. The 140 or so men in the fort were killed. St.
Augustine was established in 1565, with 800 people founding it, including less
than one hundred women (the exact number is unknown), 500 soldiers, 200
sailors, and some married men, children, and officials; all were from Spain.
The first English people to arrive in America were the members of the Roanoke
Colony. This colony was established in what is now North Carolina in July 1587,
with 17 women, 91 men, and 9 boys as the founding colonists. On August 18,
1587, Virginia Dare was born; she was the first English child born in the
United States. She was the daughter of Eleanor and Ananias Dare of the Roanoke
colony, who were parishioners of St Bride's and were married in the church, and
also had Virginia baptized there. A bust of Virginia now stands above the
baptismal font in the church. It is not known what happened to the members of
the Roanoke colony; however, it is likely that they were attacked by Native
Americans, and those not killed were assimilated into the local tribes.
1600‚Äì1700. Matoaka (better known by her nickname "Pocahontas," meaning
"little wanton" or possibly "the naughty one" or "spoiled child"), was born
about 1600 to the Native American chief Powhatan. Powhatan had numerous wives
(each wife gave him a single child and then was sent back to her village to be
supported by the paramount chief until she found another husband), and thus
Matoaka had many half-brothers and half-sisters. Her mother‚Äôs name is
unknown. The legend that she saved John Smith from being clubbed to death by
her father in 1607 has no evidence behind it. Smith told the story for the
first time seventeen years after it supposedly happened, and Smith also claimed
that he was saved from death by a woman on two other occasions. The rescue
legend was part of a longer account used as justification to wage war on
Powhatan's Nation. Early histories did establish that Matoaka befriended Smith
and the Jamestown colony. She often went to the settlement and played games
with the boys there. When the colonists were starving, "every once in four or
five days, Pocahontas with her attendants brought him (Smith) so much provision
that saved many of their lives that else for all this had starved with hunger."
But as the colonists expanded their settlement further, the Virginia Indians
felt their lands were threatened, and conflicts arose again. Matoaka was taken
prisoner by the colonists while she was on a social visit in 1612, when she was
seventeen, and was held hostage at Jamestown for over a year, during which time
she converted to Christianity and agreed to marry John Rolfe. This marriage
occurred in April 1614, resulting in her being given the name Rebecca Rolfe.
She never married John Smith. Little is known about her life while imprisoned,
although colonist Ralph Hamor wrote that she received "extraordinary courteous
usage." Linwood "Little Bear" Custalow, in a 2007 book, asserted that
Pocahontas was raped during this time, citing oral tradition handed down over
four centuries. However, according to historian Helen Rountree, "Other
historians have disputed that such oral tradition survived and instead argue
that any mistreatment of Pocahontas would have gone against the interests of
the English in their negotiations with Powhatan." Matoaka's marriage to John
Rolfe was the first recorded interracial marriage in American history. This
marriage brought a peace between the English colonists and the Powhatans, and
in 1615 Matoaka gave birth to her first child, Thomas. Matoaka and John Rolfe
sailed to England in 1616. Matoaka proved popular with the English gentry, and
she was presented at the court of King James I. In March 1617, Matoaka and John
prepared to sail back to Virginia. However, the day before they were to leave,
Matoaka died, probably of smallpox, and was buried at the parish church of St.
George in Gravesend, England. Jamestown, the first English settlement in
America, was established in 1607 in what is now Virginia. The first women to
arrive in Jamestown, Mrs. Anne Forrest and her fourteen-year-old maid, Anne
Burras, arrived in late 1608. In December 1608 Anne Burras married a carpenter
and laborer named John Laydon in the first wedding ceremony held in Jamestown,
and in 1609 they had a child named Virginia Laydon (not to be confused with
Virginia Dare), who was the first child born in Jamestown. The first American
slaves since those in Lucas Vasquez de Allyon's unsuccessful colony in
1526‚Äì1527 were brought to Jamestown in 1619. These slaves were from the
Caribbean, and there were twenty of them, including three women. Also in 1619,
90 young single women from England went to Jamestown to become wives of the men
there, with the women being auctioned off for 150¬ pounds of tobacco each (to
be paid to the shipping company), as that was the cost of each woman's travel
to America. Such women were called "tobacco brides". There were many such
voyages of women to America for this purpose (the 1619 voyage being the first),
with the women promised free passage and trousseaus for their trouble. On
November 21, 1620, the Mayflower arrived in America (specifically in what is
today Provincetown, Massachusetts), bringing the Pilgrims. There were 102
people aboard ‚Äì 18 married women traveling with their husbands, seven
unmarried women traveling with their parents, three young unmarried women, one
girl, and 73 men. Three of the married women ‚Äì Elizabeth Hopkins, Susannah
White, and Mary Allerton ‚Äì had been in their last trimester of pregnancy when
the Mayflower left. No women died during the Mayflower's voyage; however, 78%
of the women died during their first winter in America, a far higher percentage
than for men or children. Dorothy Bradford was the first woman to die, and the
only woman who died in the month of December; while many of the men, including
her husband, were out exploring on Cape Cod, she accidentally fell off the
Mayflower into the waters of Provincetown Harbor. Only a few of the women's
death dates were recorded: Rose Standish died on January 29, Mary Allerton died
on February 25, and Elizabeth Winslow died on March 24. Most of the women died
in February and March. The extremely high mortality rate among women is
probably explainable by the fact the men were out in the fresh air, felling
trees, building structures and drinking fresh New England water, while the
women were confined to the damp and crowded quarters of the Mayflower, where
disease would have spread much more quickly. The women continued to live on the
Mayflower for four months after it docked, while the men built storehouses and
living quarters onshore. Furthermore, many of the sick were probably cared for
on board the ship by the women, increasing their exposure to colds and
pneumonia. Only five women survived their first winter in America, and one of
the five survivors, Katherine Carver, died in May, her husband John having died
of sunstroke a month earlier. Therefore, by the time of the first Thanksgiving
in autumn 1621, there were only four women from the Mayflower left alive:
Eleanor Billington, Elizabeth Hopkins, Mary Brewster, and Susanna Winslow.
Susanna Winslow was the widow of William White, who had died the first winter;
she remarried to Edward Winslow, whose wife Elizabeth had also died the first
winter. Meanwhile, all of the wives who had been left behind in England were
still living. Four of them came on the ship Anne in 1623, had additional
children, and raised their families at Plymouth. In the 1630s Anne Hutchinson
began to hold religious meetings in her home, which attracted the attendance
not only of women but of prominent men, including affluent young civil
officials. Hutchinson‚Äôs charisma indeed was so great that it became a threat
to the ability of the clergy to govern; this was especially clear when some of
her male supporters refused to join the militia in pursuit of Pequot natives.
The authorities, led by Reverend John Winthrop (who was also the colony‚Äôs
governor), first attacked her indirectly by banishing her brother-in-law, a
minister who shared her views. Hutchinson herself was summoned to trial late in
1637 and also banished, but allowed to remain under house arrest until the end
of winter. In March, 1638, she was again brought before the court and formally
excommunicated; she and her children soon joined her husband, who had prepared
a home for them in the new colony of Rhode Island, which had been founded less
than two years earlier by other dissidents exiled from Massachusetts. At nearly
47, Anne Hutchinson was once again pregnant and so severely ill that her
physical condition had interfered with her ability to defend herself on trial.
Her medical problem probably was a gross tumor of the placenta that had killed
the fetus she delivered in late summer, but Puritan leadership ‚Äî who saw all
events in theological terms ‚Äî deemed this ‚Äúmonstrous birth‚Äù to have been
the judgment of God. In 1642, at age 51, she took her six children to the Dutch
colony that now is New York; however, a year later, disgruntled Algonquians
attacked her home, killing everyone but her youngest daughter Susanna, who was
taken captive. Today a river and a highway in that area bear the Hutchinson
name. In 1660 Mary Dyer, a Quaker who had been among Hutchinson's followers,
was hanged in Massachusetts for her religious beliefs. The hangman, Edward
Wanton, was so impressed by her he quit his job and became a Quaker himself.
There were two notable firsts for American women in the 1600s. In 1648 Margaret
Brent, an English immigrant to the Colony of Maryland, was the first woman in
the English North American colonies to appear before a court of the Common Law.
Appointed as Lord Baltimore's representative, on January 21, 1648, Brent
attended the Provincial Court's assembly to request a voice in the council; she
also asked for two votes in its proceedings (one as an independent landowner
and the other as Lord Baltimore's attorney.) Governor Thomas Greene refused her
request, as the assembly at the time considered such privileges for women to be
reserved for queens. Brent left but said that she "Protested against all
proceedings ... unless she may be present and have vote as aforesaid." In 1650
Anne Dudley Bradstreet became America's first published poet, with the
publication of her book of poetry entitled "The Tenth Muse Lately Sprung up in
America". It was also published in London that same year, making Bradstreet the
first female poet ever published in both England and the New World. In 1655
Elizabeth Key Grinstead, who was a slave in Virginia, won her freedom in a
lawsuit based on her father's status as a free Englishman (her mother was a
slave and her father was her mother's owner), helped by the fact that her
father had baptized her as Christian in the Church of England. However, in 1662
the Virginia House of Burgesses passed a law stating that any child born in the
colony would follow the status of its mother, slave or free. This was an
overturn of a longheld principle of English Common Law, whereby a child's
status followed that of the father; it enabled white men who raped slave women
to hide the mixed-race children born as a result and removed their
responsibility to acknowledge, support, or emancipate those children. In the
small Puritan community of Salem Village, Massachusetts, the Salem witch trials
began in 1692. They began when a group of girls (Betty Parris, her cousin
Abigail Williams, and several others) gathered in the evenings in the home of
Reverend Parris to listen to stories told by one of his slaves, Tituba. They
also played fortune-telling games, which were strictly forbidden by the
Puritans. One night, while trying to see the faces of their future husbands in
an egg white dropped in a glass of water, one girl believed she saw the shape
of a coffin. Soon after, the girls began acting strangely, leading the Puritan
community to suspect that the girls were victims of witchcraft. The girls named
three townswomen as witches - Tituba, Sarah Good, and Sarah Osbourne; Tituba
confessed to having seen the devil and also stated that there was a coven of
witches in the Salem Village area. The other two women insisted they were
innocent, but were found guilty of practicing witchcraft. As the weeks passed,
the affected girls accused other townspeople of torturing them with witchcraft,
and some on trial also named others as witches. By the end of the trials in
1693, 24 people had died, some in jail but 19 by hanging, and Giles Corey by
being pressed to death. Some of the accused confessed to being witches, but
none of those were hanged, only those who maintained their innocence; those who
were hanged include 13 women and 6 men ‚Äì Bridget Bishop, George Burroughs,
Martha Carrier, Martha Corey, Mary Easty, Sarah Good, Elizabeth Howe, George
Jacobs, Sr., Susannah Martin, Rebecca Nurse, Alice Parker, Mary Parker, John
Proctor, Ann Pudeator, Wilmott Redd, Margaret Scott, Samuel Wardwell, Sarah
Wildes, and John Willard. 1700‚Äì1800. The typical woman in colonial America
(that is, America before the Revolutionary War) was expected to spin, sew,
preserve food, cook, and clean while caring for her children and perhaps
raising chickens and geese. Families tended to be large, and childbearing was
dangerous to health in those days; so many women died from that and other
causes (such as the American climate's effect on their health) that the term
"now-wife" was coined to refer to a man's present wife as compared to those
that he had previously lost. Often women were taught to read so that they could
read the Bible, but few learned to write as it was thought that there was no
reason a woman should know how to write. Furthermore, a colonial woman was
expected to be subservient to her father until she married and then to her
husband. Ministers often told their congregations that women were inferior to
men and more inclined to sin and error. However, several colonial American
women had notable accomplishments that are known to this day. The earliest
known work of literature by an African American and by a slave, Lucy Terry's
poem "Bars Fight," was composed in 1746 and was first published in 1855 in
Josiah Holland's "History of Western Massachusetts ". The poem describes a
violent incident that occurred between settlers and Native Americans in
Deerfield, Massachusetts in 1746. Former slave Phillis Wheatley became a
literary sensation in 1770 after she wrote a poem on the death of the
evangelical preacher George Whitefield. In 1773, 39 of Phillis Wheatley's poems
were published in London as a book entitled "Poems on Various Subjects,
Religious and Moral". This was the first published book by an African American.
In 1756 Lydia Chapin Taft became the first woman in American history to vote,
casting a vote in the local town hall meeting in place of her deceased husband.
She voted that her town of Uxbridge (in Massachusetts colony) should increase
the amount of money sent to help fight the French and Indian war. She later
voted in two other town hall meetings. Women had the right to vote in some
states in early American history, but soon lost it. In 1777 women lost the
right to vote in New York, in 1780 women lost the right to vote in
Massachusetts, and in 1784 women lost the right to vote in New Hampshire.
Furthermore, women in all states except New Jersey lost the right to vote in
1787 when the Constitutional Convention placed voting qualifications in the
hands of the states. From 1775 until 1807, the state constitution in New Jersey
permitted all persons worth over fifty pounds to vote; free black people and
single women therefore had the vote until 1807, but not married women, who
could have no independent claim to ownership of fifty pounds (anything they
owned or earned belonged to their husbands by law). Deborah Sampson was the
only woman who fought in the Revolutionary War (1775‚Äì1783). Women were not
allowed to join the army, but in 1782 Deborah disguised herself as a man and
joined the 4th Massachusetts Regiment, going by the name of Robert Shurtliff of
Uxbridge and soon saw action in the front lines against the British. When shot
in the thigh she removed the musket ball herself, fearful of having her
identity discovered. However, her leg never healed properly, and her gender was
finally revealed when she was hospitalized for a wound-related infection in
1783. But despite her deception, she was given an honorable discharge in
recognition of her fine service. Furthermore, in the American Revolution women
served on the battlefield as nurses and under many other jobs. In 1776 at the
battle of Fort Washington, Margaret Corbin fired her husband's cannon after he
was killed, and was herself severely wounded in the battle, later receiving a
pension from Congress in recognition of her service, making her the first
American woman ever to receive a government pension. Also, in 1778 at the
battle of Monmouth, Mary Ludwig Hays McCauley fired her husband's cannon after
he was wounded in battle. Mary's deed, although a true story, is the source of
the "Molly Pitcher" legend. During the Revolutionary War in March 1776, Abigail
Adams wrote to her husband John Adams, who was one of the revisers and signers
of the Declaration of Independence, stating, "And, by the way, in the new code
of laws which I suppose it will be necessary for you to make, I desire you
would remember the ladies and be more generous and favorable to them than your
ancestors. Do not put such unlimited power into the hands of the husbands."
However, John Adams replied in April 1776, "As to your extraordinary code of
laws, I cannot but laugh...Depend upon it, we know better than to repeal our
masculine systems." Whether John Adams said this in irony, expressing
frustration with his male colleagues, or in sincerity is unknown. The
Declaration of Independence (written beginning in June 1776) and directed at
the British monarch George III, who was asserting sovereignty through the
Divine right of kings stated "All men are created equal" and did not mention
women's rights. The Constitution, however, which was drafted after the King's
claim of sovereignty was defeated in the Revolutionary War, during a pre-
government period of more than a decade, which was adopted by a Ratification
process, and which is the is the governing document in the United States, does
not mention the term "Man" but refers to "Persons" or "People". Rosemarie
Zagarri (2007) argues the Revolution created an ongoing debate on the rights of
woman and created an environment favorable to women‚Äôs participation in
politics. She asserts that for a brief decade, a "comprehensive transformation
in women‚Äôs rights, roles, and responsibilities seemed not only possible but
perhaps inevitable" (p.¬ 8) For example, the American Revolution produced the
idea of "Republican Motherhood", which was the idea that if the republic of
America were to succeed, women must be schooled in virtue so they could teach
their children. Therefore, the first American academies for women were founded
in the 1790s. However the opening of possibilities also engendered a backlash
that actually set back the cause of women‚Äôs rights and led to a greater
rigidity that marginalized women from political life. Furthermore, at least one
story of women's participation in the American Revolution, the legend that
Betsy Ross designed or made the first American flag, has no evidence at all
behind it, although she was a real person who lived in Philadelphia during the
Revolution. There was also a significant portion of the population of the
colonies and early United States, especially in the Delaware River Valley, who
held cultural or religious views of sex equality. The Quaker segment of the
population held views that all human beings, regardless of sex, age, or race or
other characteristics, had the same Inner light. Quaker and Quaker-derived
views informed the drafting and ratification of the Constitution, including
through the direct influence of some of the Framers of the Constitution, such
as John Dickinson (politician) and Thomas Mifflin, who were either Quakers
themselves or came from regions founded or heavily populated with Quakers. Two
notable books published in the late 1700s by American women were "American
Cookery" and "The Gleaner"."American Cookery", written in 1796 by Amelia
Simmons, was the first known cookbook written by an American. It was popular
and was published in many editions, but only four copies of the original 1796
edition are known to have survived. "The Gleaner", a three-volume book of
political essays and plays published in 1798 by Judith Sargent Murray, was the
first self-published book by a woman in America. It became a minor classic, and
was read by George Washington and John Adams. 1800‚Äì1900. During the Lewis and
Clark Expedition (1804‚Äì1806), which was the first overland expedition
undertaken by Americans to the Pacific coast and back, the Shoshone woman
Sacagawea was the only woman to accompany the 33 members of the permanent party
to the Pacific Ocean and back. She joined the expedition in November 1804,
after the explorers (Lewis and Clark) made winter camp at Fort Mandan in
present-day North Dakota. The two captains hired her husband, the French-
Canadian fur trapper Toussaint Charbonneau, as an interpreter, with the
understanding that she would come along to interpret the Shoshone language,
which she did. Sacagawea was only about 16 and was pregnant at the time. The
Cult of Domesticity, a new ideal of womanhood was also created at this time.
This ideal rose from the reality that a 19th century middle-class family did
not have to make what it needed in order to survive, as previous families had
to, and therefore men could now work in jobs that produced goods or services
while their wives and children stayed at home. The ideal woman became one who
stayed at home and taught children how to be proper citizens. Nevertheless,
many women of the time did work outside the home; for example, in the War of
1812 (1812‚Äì1815) Mary Marshall and Mary Allen worked as nurses aboard
American commodore Stephen Decatur's ship "United States". Furthermore, during
the War of 1812, in 1814 when the British army was advancing to the White
House, First Lady Dolley Madison insisted on staying until the Gilbert Stuart
painting of George Washington was rescued, and personally took the Declaration
of Independence with her before leaving. With the help of volunteers and a
wagon, she also took with her President Madison‚Äôs working papers from his
desk, his books, some paintings, and the White House silver and china. Many
women in the 19th century were involved in reform movements, particularly
abolitionism. In 1831, Maria Stewart (who was African-American) began to write
essays and make speeches against slavery, promoting educational and economic
self-sufficiency for African Americans. The first woman of any color to speak
on political issues in public, Stewart gave her last public speech in 1833
before retiring from public speaking to work in women's organizations. Although
her career was short, it set the stage for the African-American women speakers
who followed; Frances Ellen Watkins Harper, Sojourner Truth, and Harriet
Tubman, among others. Since more direct participation in the public arena was
fraught with difficulties and danger, many women assisted the movement by
boycotting slave-produced goods and organizing fairs and food sales to raise
money for the cause. To take one example of the danger, Pennsylvania Hall was
the site in 1838 of the Anti-Slavery Convention of American Women, and as 3,000
white and black women gathered to hear prominent abolitionists such as Maria
Weston Chapman, the speakers' voices were drowned out by the mob which had
gathered outside. When the women emerged, arms linked in solidarity, they were
stoned and insulted. The mob returned the following day and burned the hall,
which had been inaugurated only three days earlier, to the ground. Furthermore,
the Grimke sisters from South Carolina (Angelina and Sarah Grimke), received
much abuse and ridicule for their abolitionist activity, which consisted of
traveling throughout the North, lecturing about their first-hand experiences
with slavery on their family plantation. Since more direct participation in the
public arena was fraught with difficulties and danger, many women assisted the
movement by boycotting slave-produced goods and organizing fairs and food sales
to raise money for the cause. To take one example of the danger, Pennsylvania
Hall was the site in 1838 of the Anti-Slavery Convention of American Women, and
as 3,000 white and black women gathered to hear prominent abolitionists such as
Maria Weston Chapman, the speakers' voices were drowned out by the mob which
had gathered outside. When the women emerged, arms linked in solidarity, they
were stoned and insulted. The mob returned the following day and burned the
hall, which had been inaugurated only three days earlier, to the ground.
Furthermore, the Grimke sisters from South Carolina (Angelina and Sarah
Grimke), received much abuse and ridicule for their abolitionist activity,
which consisted of traveling throughout the North, lecturing about their first-
hand experiences with slavery on their family plantation. Even so, many women's
anti-slavery societies were active before the Civil War, the first one having
been created in 1832 by free black women from Salem, Massachusetts Fiery
abolitionist, Abby Kelley Foster, was an ultra-abolitionist, who also led Lucy
Stone, and Susan B. Anthony into the anti-slavery movement. Another important
reform movement was the struggle of American women for education. In 1821, Emma
Willard founded the Troy Female Seminary in Troy, New York, which was the first
American educational institution to offer young women a college education equal
to that given to young men. The first three women in the United States to earn
and receive their bachelor's degrees ‚Äì Mary Hosford (later Fisher), Elizabeth
Smith Prall (later Russell), and Mary Caroline Rudd (later Allen) ‚Äì received
them from Oberlin College in 1841; Oberlin College had become the first
coeducational college in the United States in 1833. Furthermore, Oberlin was
also the first college to grant a degree to an African-American woman, Mary
Jane Patterson, in 1862. Another reform movement women were heavily involved
with was the rights of those confined in institutions. Dorothea Dix was one of
the most notable such reformers. Prior to the Civil War's beginning in 1861
(when she became the Union's Superintendent of Female Nurses), she investigated
the conditions of many jails, mental hospitals, and almshouses, and presented
her findings to state legislatures. Due to her work, many hospitals were built,
along with additions and improvements made to existing facilities. In contrast
to popular attitudes of the time that such things were not necessary, she
insisted on a therapeutic setting for the curable insane and a humanely
comfortable setting for those regarded as incurable. During the Mexican War
(1846‚Äì1848) Elizabeth Newcom enlisted in Company D of the Missouri Volunteer
Infantry disguised as a man, calling herself Bill Newcom. She marched
600¬ miles from Missouri to winter camp at Pueblo, Colorado, before she was
discovered to be a woman and discharged. Also, in 1846 Sarah Borginnis
resupplied American soldiers with food while they were under fire, and was
therefore nicknamed "the heroine of Fort Brown"; then-General Zachary Taylor
rewarded her with the rank of brevet colonel. The first wave of feminism began
with the Seneca Falls Convention, the first women's rights convention, held at
the Wesleyan Chapel in Seneca Falls, New York, on July 19 and 20, 1848. This
Convention was inspired by the fact that in 1840, when Elizabeth Cady Stanton
met Lucretia Mott at the World Anti-Slavery Convention in London, the
conference refused to seat Mott and other women delegates from America because
of their gender. Stanton, the young bride of an antislavery agent, and Mott, a
Quaker preacher and veteran of reform, talked then of calling a convention to
address the condition of women. An estimated three hundred women and men
attended the Convention, including notables Lucretia Mott and Frederick
Douglass. At the conclusion, 68 women and 32 men signed the "Declaration of
Sentiments and Resolutions", which was written by Elizabeth Cady Stanton and
the M'Clintock family. The style and format of the "Declaration of Sentiments
and Resolutions" was that of the "Declaration of Independence"; for example the
"Declaration of Sentiments and Resolutions" stated, "We hold these truths to be
self evident, that all men and women are created equal and endowed by their
creator with certain inalienable rights." The Declaration further stated, "The
history of mankind is a history of repeated injuries and usurpations on the
part of man towards woman." It went on to specify female grievances in regard
to the laws denying married women ownership of wages, money, and property (all
of which they were required to turn over to their husbands; laws requiring
this, in effect throughout America, were called coverture laws), women's lack
of access to education and professional careers, and the lowly status accorded
women in most churches. Furthermore, the Declaration declared that women should
have the right to vote. Two weeks later a Woman's Rights Convention was held in
Rochester, New York on August 2. It was followed by state and local conventions
in Ohio, Pennsylvania, and New York. The first National Woman's Rights
Convention was held in Worcester, Massachusetts in 1850. Women's rights
conventions were held regularly from 1850 until the start of the Civil War. In
1849 Elizabeth Blackwell, born in England, graduated from Geneva Medical
College in New York at the head of her class and thus became the first female
doctor in America. In 1857 she and her sister Emily, and their colleague Marie
Zakrzewska, founded the New York Infirmary for Women and Children, the first
American hospital run by women and the first dedicated to serving women and
children. Women continued to be active in reform movements in the second half
of the 19th century. In 1851 former slave Sojourner Truth gave a famous speech,
called "Ain't I a Woman?," at the Women's Convention in Akron, Ohio. In this
speech she condemned the attitude that women were too weak to have equal rights
with men, noting the hardships she herself had endured as a slave. In 1852
Harriet Beecher Stowe wrote the abolitionist book "Uncle Tom's Cabin". Begun as
a serial for the Washington anti-slavery weekly, the "National Era", the book
focused public interest on the issue of slavery, and was deeply controversial
for its strong anti-slavery stance at the time it was written. In writing the
book, Stowe drew on her personal experience: she was familiar with slavery, the
antislavery movement, and the underground railroad because Kentucky, across the
Ohio River from Cincinnati, Ohio, where Stowe had lived, was a slave state.
"Uncle Tom's Cabin" was a best-seller, selling 10,000 copies in the United
States in its first week; 300,000 in the first year; and in Great Britain, 1.5
million copies in one year. Following publication of the book, Harriet Beecher
Stowe became a celebrity, speaking against slavery both in America and Europe.
She wrote "A Key to Uncle Tom's Cabin" in 1853, extensively documenting the
realities on which the book was based, to refute critics who tried to argue
that it was inauthentic; and published a second anti-slavery novel, "Dred", in
1856. Later, when she visited President Lincoln, legend claims that he greeted
her as "the little lady who made this big war," meaning the Civil War, but
there is no proof this happened. Campaigners for other social changes, such as
Caroline Norton who campaigned for women's rights, respected and drew upon
Stowe's work. In the years before the Civil War, Harriet Tubman, a runaway
slave herself, freed more than 70 slaves over the course of 13 secret rescue
missions to the South. Furthermore, in June 1863, Harriet Tubman became the
first woman to plan and execute an armed expedition in United States history;
acting as an advisory to Colonel James Montgomery and his 300 soldiers, Tubman
led them in a raid in South Carolina from Port Royal to the interior, some
twenty-five miles up the Combahee River, where they freed approximately 800
slaves. During the American Civil War (1861‚Äì1865) at least 240 biological
women are known to have worn male clothing in order to serve; however, some of
them, such as Albert Cashier, were transgender men. Dorothea Dix served as the
Union's Superintendent of Female Nurses throughout the war, placing her in
charge of all female nurses working in army hospitals, which was over 3,000
nurses; women provided casualty care and nursing to Union and Confederate
troops at field hospitals and on the Union Hospital Ship "Red Rover".
Furthermore, Dr. Mary Edwards Walker served as assistant surgeon with General
Burnside's Union forces in 1862 and with an Ohio regiment in East Tennessee the
following year; imprisoned in Richmond as a spy, she was eventually released
and returned to serve as a hospital surgeon at a women‚Äôs prisoner-of-war
hospital in Louisville, Kentucky. After the war, President Andrew Johnson
awarded her the Medal of Honor, making her the only woman ever to receive it.
Also in 1866, Elizabeth Cady Stanton and Susan B. Anthony formed the American
Equal Rights Association, an organization for white and black women and men
dedicated to the goal of suffrage for all. In 1868 the Fourteenth Amendment was
passed, this was the first Amendment to ever specify the voting population as
"male". In 1869 the women's rights movement split into two factions as a result
of disagreements over the Fourteenth and soon-to-be-passed Fifteenth
Amendments, with the two factions not reuniting until 1890. Elizabeth Cady
Stanton and Susan B. Anthony formed the more radical, New York-based National
Woman Suffrage Association (NWSA). Lucy Stone, Henry Blackwell, and Julia Ward
Howe organized the more conservative American Woman Suffrage Association
(AWSA), which was centered in Boston. In 1870 the Fifteenth Amendment
enfranchised black men. NWSA refused to work for its ratification, arguing,
instead, that it be "scrapped" in favor of a Sixteenth Amendment providing
universal suffrage. Frederick Douglass broke with Stanton and Anthony over
NWSA's position. From 1870 to 1875 several women, including Virginia Louisa
Minor, Victoria Woodhull, and Myra Bradwell, attempted to use the Fourteenth
Amendment in the courts to secure the vote (Minor and Woodhull) or the right to
practice law (Bradwell), but they were all unsuccessful. In 1872 Susan B.
Anthony was arrested and brought to trial in Rochester, New York, for
attempting to vote for Ulysses S. Grant in the presidential election; she was
convicted and fined $100 and the costs of her prosecution but refused to pay.
At the same time, Sojourner Truth appeared at a polling booth in Battle Creek,
Michigan, demanding a ballot; she was turned away. Also in 1872, Victoria
Woodhull became the first woman to run for President, although she could not
vote and only received a few votes, losing to Ulysses S. Grant. She was
nominated to run by the Equal Rights Party, and advocated the 8-hour work day,
graduated income tax, social welfare programs, and profit sharing, among other
positions. In 1874 The Woman's Christian Temperance Union (WCTU) was founded by
Annie Wittenmyer to work for the prohibition of alcohol; with Frances Willard
at its head (starting in 1876), the WCTU also became an important force in the
fight for women's suffrage. In 1878 a woman suffrage amendment was first
introduced in the United States Congress, but it did not pass. American women
achieved several firsts in the professions in the second half of the 1800s. In
1866 Lucy Hobbs Taylor became the first American woman to receive a dentistry
degree. In 1878 Mary L. Page became the first woman in America to earn a degree
in architecture when she graduated from the University of Illinois at Urbana-
Champaign. In 1879 Belva Lockwood became the first woman allowed to argue
before the Supreme Court; the first case in which she did so was the 1880 case
"Kaiser v. Stickney". Arabella Mansfield had previously become America's first
female lawyer when she was admitted to the bar in 1869. In 1891 Marie Owens,
born in Canada, was hired in Chicago as America's first female police officer.
Due to women's greater involvement in law and law enforcement, in 1871 the
first state laws specifically making wife beating illegal were passed, though
proliferation of laws to all states and adequate enforcement of those laws
lagged very far behind. In 1889 Jane Addams and Ellen Gates Starr established
the first settlement house in America (a settlement house is a center in an
underprivileged area that provides community services), in what was then a
dilapidated mansion in one of the poorest immigrant slums of Chicago on the
corner of Halstead and Polk streets. This settlement house, called Hull House,
provided numerous activities and services including health and child care,
clubs for both children and adults, an art gallery, kitchen, gymnasium, music
school, theater, library, employment bureau, and a labor museum. By 1910, 400
settlement houses had been established in America; the majority of settlement
house workers were women. Jane Addams was also a noted peace activist who
shared the Nobel Peace Prize with Nicholas Murray Butler in 1931 In 1891 Queen
Liliuokalani, the last reigning monarch of the Hawaiian islands, ascended the
throne. The McKinley Tariff (passed in 1890) had begun to cause a recession in
the islands by withdrawing the safeguards ensuring a mainland market for
Hawaiian sugar, and American interests in Hawaii began to consider annexation
for Hawaii to re-establish an economic competitive position for sugar. In 1893,
Queen Liliuokalani sought to issue a new constitution through an edict from the
throne, but could not as a group led by politician Sanford B. Dole overthrew
her. They had the help of the American minister in Hawaii, John L. Stevens, who
called for troops to take control of Iolani Palace and various other
governmental buildings. In 1894 the Queen was deposed, the monarchy repealed,
and a provisional government was established which later became the Republic of
Hawaii In 1895, Liliuokalani was arrested and forced to reside in Iolani Palace
after a cache of weapons was found in the gardens of her home in Washington
Place, although she denied knowing of the existence of this cache and was
reportedly unaware of others' efforts to restore the royalty. In 1896, she was
released and returned to her home at Washington Place where she lived for the
next two decades. Hawaii was annexed to the United States through a joint
resolution of the U. S. Congress in 1898. During the Spanish-American War
(1898) thousands of US soldiers sick with typhoid, malaria, and yellow fever
overwhelmed the capabilities of the Army Medical Department, so Dr. Anita
Newcomb McGee suggested to the Army Surgeon General that the Daughters of the
American Revolution (DAR) be appointed to select professionally qualified
nurses to serve under contract to the US Army. Before the war ended, 1,500
civilian contract nurses were assigned to Army hospitals in the US, Hawaii (not
a state at that time), Cuba, Puerto Rico, Guam and the Philippines, as well as
to the hospital ship "Relief". Twenty nurses died. The Army appointed Dr. McGee
as Acting Assistant Surgeon General, making her the first woman ever to hold
the position. The Army was impressed by the performance of its contract nurses
and had Dr. McGee write legislation creating a permanent corps of Army nurses.
1900‚Äì2000. There were various firsts achieved by American women in the early
1900s. In July 1900 Marion Jones won 3rd place in Women's Singles Tennis and
3rd in Mixed Doubles Tennis with her male partner from the United Kingdom at
the second modern Summer Olympics in Paris, France. In October, Margaret Ives
Abbott, Pauline Whittier, and Daria Pratt won the Women's 9 Hole Golf 1st, 2nd,
and 3rd place, respectively. These were the only women's events (there were
none at the first Olympics, and medals debuted later). In 1902, Martha
Washington became the first woman to be honored on a U.S. postage stamp. In
1911 Harriet Quimby became the first American woman to earn a pilot's license.
In the spring of 1912, she became the first woman to fly a plane over the
English channel; it was a 50¬ hp monoplane. In 1917 Jeannette Rankin, a
Republican from Montana, became the first woman elected to the House of
Representatives. Margaret Sanger was an influential campaigner for birth
control rights in the 1910s. She originally worked as a visiting nurse in the
New York City's tenements and wrote about sex education and women's health. In
1914, Sanger's articles in "The Woman Radical" brought her a federal indictment
for violating the Comstock Act (which since 1873 had banned birth control
devices and information on birth control devices, sexually transmitted
diseases, human sexuality, and abortion), prompting her to flee to England. As
soon as the ship left U.S. waters, she cabled a radical publisher in New Jersey
to tell them to distribute 100,000 copies of her birth control pamphlet,
"Family Limitation". ". Sanger remained exiled in Europe until late 1915;
William Sanger had been arrested and jailed for distributing one copy of
"Family Limitation", and Margaret Sanger returned to face the charges against
her. Personal tragedy intervened when the Sanger's five-year-old daughter died
suddenly from pneumonia; public sentiments resulted in dismissal of the charges
against Margaret Sanger. Rather than backing away from controversy, Sanger and
her sister Ethel Byrne, also a nurse, opened the first birth control clinic in
the United States on October 16, 1916, modeled after those Sanger had seen in
Holland. Nine days later police closed the clinic and arrested Sanger, Byrne,
and the clinic's interpreter. Byrne was tried and convicted first, and went on
a hunger strike; Sanger was convicted and served 30 days in jail. However, the
publicity surrounding Sanger's activities had made birth control a matter of
public debate. The campaign for women's suffrage picked up speed in the 1910s.
A parade for women's suffrage was held on Monday, March 3, 1913, down
Pennsylvania Avenue in America's capital. Suffragist and lawyer Inez Milholland
led the parade, clad in a white cape astride a white horse; behind her
stretched a long line with nine bands, four mounted brigades, three heralds,
about 24 floats, and more than 5,000 marchers. Furthermore, in 1916 Inez was
the keynote speaker in a western pro-suffrage tour organized by Alice Paul.
Between one and two thousand people usually attended Inez‚Äôs speeches, which
centered on the power of uniting women. Though she hid her pernicious anemia,
the difficult traveling and speaking schedule made it worse, and she collapsed
in October 1916 during her last public appearance. Inez was carried from the
stage, but fifteen minutes later she returned, took a seat, finished her
speech, and stayed for a question and answer session. That night she went into
the hospital, and she died six weeks later. Inez‚Äôs last sentence before her
collapse became a battle cry for suffragists: ‚ÄúMr. President, how long must
women go on fighting for liberty?‚Äù‚Äù In the spring of 1917, shortly after
Woodrow Wilson had been inaugurated for his second term as President and war
with Germany had been declared, women from the National Woman's Party (founded
in 1913 by Alice Paul and Lucy Burns) began picketing the White House and the
Capitol in support of an amendment that would guarantee women's suffrage. By
mid-June, Alice Paul had been warned by the chief of police that further
demonstrations would lead to arrests, and between June 22 and 26, 27 women were
arrested for obstructing traffic, but were released without penalty. On June 26
several of the picketers were arrested and charged with obstructing traffic,
and confined to the District Jail for three days after refusing to pay a 25
dollar fine. The next series of arrests produced the same penalties; however,
on July 14 sixteen women were arrested, tried, and sentenced to 60 days in
Occoquan Workhouse in Virginia, where the cells were infested with rats, and
the food was infested with mealworms. Furthermore, on November 14, 1917, newly
convicted suffragists arrived at Occoquan and were waiting in a holding room;
what happened to them has come to be known as the "Night of Terror".
Superintendent Whittaker burst into the room, followed by 15 to 20 guards (the
exact number is uncertain) and shouted orders to take the suffragists to their
cells. May Nolan, a 73-year-old woman with a lame leg, was literally dragged
off by two guards, despite saying that she would go willingly. Dorothy Day had
her arm twisted behind her back and was purposefully slammed down twice over
the back of an iron bench. Dora Lewis was thrown into a cell with such force
that she was knocked unconscious, and for several minutes her companions
believed that she was dead. Alice M. Cosu of New Orleans was also thrown
forcefully into her cell; she suffered a heart attack and repeated and
persistent requests for medical attention for her went unanswered by the
authorities throughout the night. Lucy Burns, who had been arrested once again
on November 10, shortly after completing her previous 60-day sentence, was
identified by Superintendent Whittaker as the ringleader for the group. She was
manacled to her cell bars, hands above her head, and remained that way until
morning; later, her clothing was removed and she was left with only a blanket.
While in Occoquan, several suffragists went on hunger strikes and were
subsequently placed in solitary confinement and subject to forced-feeding.
World War I (which America entered in 1917, and which ended November 11, 1918)
was the first American war in which women were officially allowed to serve in
the military (although some had served in previous wars by disguising
themselves as men.) The Army Nurse Corps (all female until 1955) was founded in
1901, and the Navy Nurse Corps (all female until 1964) was founded in 1908, and
nurses in both served overseas at military hospitals during the war. During the
course of the war, 21,480 Army nurses served in military hospitals in the
United States and overseas and eighteen African-American Army nurses served
stateside caring for German prisoners of war (POWs) and African-American
soldiers. More than 1,476 Navy nurses served in military hospitals stateside
and overseas. More than 400 military nurses died in the line of duty during
World War I; the vast majority of these women died from a highly contagious
form of influenza known as the "Spanish Flu," which swept through crowded
military camps and hospitals and ports of embarkation. In 1917 women were first
able to join the Navy for jobs other than nurse; they were able to become
yeomen, electricians (radio operators), and any other ratings necessary to the
naval district operations. 13,000 women enlisted, and the majority became
yeomen and were designated as yeoman (F) for female yeoman. Furthermore, in
order to release men for the front lines, the Army employed 450 female
telephone operators who served overseas, beginning in March 1918 and continuing
until the war ended. These women, who retained their civilian status and were
not officially considered veterans until 1978, were the members of the Signal
Corps Female Telephone Operators Unit 25, better known as the "Hello Girls".
They were required to be fluent in both French and English, and assisted the
French and British, both allies of America, in communicating with each other.
On August 13, 1918, Opha Mae Johnson became the first female Marine when she
enlisted in the Marine Corps Reserve; over 300 women served in the Marines
during World War One, performing duties within the United States so that the
male Marines could fight overseas. Also in 1918, twin sisters Genevieve and
Lucille Baker became the first women to serve in the Coast Guard; they were the
only women to serve in the Coast Guard during World War One. After World War I
ended in 1918, American women were no longer allowed to serve in the military,
except as nurses, until World War II. However, in 1920 a provision of the Army
Reorganization Act granted military nurses the status of officers with
"relative rank" from second lieutenant to major (but not full rights and
privileges). The 19th amendment to the Constitution, giving all American women
the right to vote, passed in 1920. It came up before the House of
Representatives in 1918 with the two-thirds votes needed for passage barely
within reach; Representative Frederick Hicks of New York had been at the
bedside of his dying wife but left at her urging to support the cause. He
provided the final, crucial vote, and then returned home for her funeral.
However, the Senate failed to pass the amendment that year. The amendment was
approved by Congress next year on June 4, 1919, and the states started
ratifying. In 1920, Tennessee was the 36th to do so, meeting the 3/4s (of then
48 states) required for enactment; the remaining states ratified later. The
amendment passed the Tennessee Senate easily. However, as it moved on to the
House, vigorous opposition came from people in the liquor industry, who thought
that if women got the vote, they would use it to pass Prohibition. Distillery
lobbyists came to fight the amendment, bringing liquor. ‚ÄúBoth suffrage and
anti-suffrage men were reeling through the hall in an advanced state of
intoxication,‚Äù suffragist Carrie Chapman Catt reported. Nevertheless, the
suffragists thought they could count on a one-vote victory in the House. Then
the speaker, whom they had counted on as a ‚Äúyes‚Äù for the amendment, changed
his mind. Yet suddenly, Harry Burn, the youngest member of the House, a 24-
year-old "no" vote from East Tennessee, got up and announced that he had
received a letter from his mother (Febb Ensminger Burn) telling him to "be a
good boy and help Mrs. Chapman Catt." "I know that a mother‚Äôs advice is
always the safest for a boy to follow", Burn said, switching sides, and the
amendment was ratified that day, August 18, 1920, officially becoming part of
the Constitution when it was signed into law on August 26, 1920. Suffragist
Carrie Chapman Catt calculated that the campaign for women's right to vote had
involved 56 referendum campaigns directed at male voters, plus 480 campaigns to
get Legislatures to submit suffrage amendments to voters, 47 campaigns to get
constitutional conventions to write woman suffrage into state constitutions;
277 campaigns to get State party conventions to include woman suffrage planks,
30 campaigns to get presidential party campaigns to include woman suffrage
planks in party platforms and 19 campaigns with 19 successive Congresses. The
first wave of feminism is generally considered to have ended in 1920 when
American women won the right to vote. On August 31, 1920, five days after the
19th amendment was signed into law, Hannibal, Missouri, held a special election
to fill the seat of an alderman who had resigned. At 7 a.m., despite pouring
rain, Mrs. Marie Ruoff Byrum, wife of Morris Byrum and daughter-in-law of
Democratic committeeman Lacy Byrum, cast her ballot in the first ward. She thus
became the first woman to vote in the United States under the 19th amendment,
as well as the first woman to vote in the state of Missouri. The "new woman"
was in fashion throughout the twenties; this meant a woman who rejected the
pieties (and often the politics) of the older generation, smoked and drank in
public, had casual sex, and embraced consumer culture. Also called "flappers",
these women wore short skirts (at first just to the ankles, eventually up to
the knees) and bobbed hair in a short cut ‚Äì like a boy's, but longer. Just as
the flapper rejected the long hair popular in earlier years, she also discarded
Victorian fashions, especially the corset, which accentuated women's curves.
Flappers preferred to be slender, although it sometimes meant dieting or
binding their breasts and wearing restrictive undergarments to appear thin,
flat-chested, and long-limbed. Cultivating a flapper image and adhering to
modern beauty standards also involved purchasing and applying cosmetics, which
had not often been done previously by women other than prostitutes. These women
further pushed the boundaries of what was considered proper for a woman by
their public activities; swearing, smoking cigarettes, drinking alcohol
(illegal from 1920 until 1933), dancing, and dating. The first appearance of
the word "flapper" and the flapper image in the United States came from the
popular 1920 Frances Marion movie, "The Flapper", starring Olive Thomas. Thomas
had starred in a similar role in 1917, though it was not until "The Flapper"
that the term was used. In her final movies she was seen in the flapper image.
Other actresses, such as Clara Bow, Louise Brooks, Colleen Moore, and Joan
Crawford would soon build their careers on the same image, achieving great
popularity. Women achieved many groundbreaking firsts in the 1920s and 1930s.
In 1921 Edith Wharton became the first woman to win the Pulitzer Prize for
Fiction, due to her novel "The Age of Innocence". In 1922, Rebecca Felton of
Georgia became the first woman appointed to the U.S. Senate; however, she
served for only two days. In 1923 the Equal Rights Amendment, written by
suffragist Alice Paul, was first introduced to Congress. Never ratified, the
amendment states "Equality of rights under the law shall not be denied or
abridged by the United States or by any state on account of sex. Also in 1923,
Margaret Sanger opened the first birth control clinic in America, the Control
Clinical Research Bureau in Manhattan, to provide contraceptive devices to
women and collect accurate statistics to prove their safety and long-term
effectiveness. That same year, Sanger incorporated the American Birth Control
League, a new organization meant to work on the global issues of world
population growth, disarmament, and world famine. The two organizations
subsequently merged, becoming Planned Parenthood Federation of America, Inc.
(PPFA). In 1925, Nellie Tayloe Ross became the first woman elected as a
governor in the United States, for the state of Wyoming. Also in 1925, the
World Exposition of Women‚Äôs Progress (the first women‚Äôs world‚Äôs fair)
opened in Chicago. In 1926 Gertrude Ederle, born in New York, became the first
woman to swim across the English channel, arriving in almost two hours less
time than any of the men who had swum across before her. In 1928, women
competed for the first time in Olympic field events. Also in 1928, women earned
39% of all college degrees in America, up from 19% at the turn of the 20th
century. In 1932 Hattie Caraway of Arkansas became the first woman elected to
the Senate. Furthermore, in 1932 Amelia Earhart became the first woman to fly
solo across the Atlantic, taking her journey on the 5th anniversary of
Lindbergh's solo Atlantic flight . She was awarded the National Geographic
Society's gold medal from President Herbert Hoover, and Congress awarded her
the Distinguished Flying Cross. Later in 1932 she became the first woman to fly
solo nonstop coast to coast, and set the women's nonstop transcontinental speed
record, flying 2,447.8¬ miles in 19 hours 5 minutes. In 1935 she became the
first person to solo the 2,408-mile distance across the Pacific between
Honolulu and Oakland, California; this was also the first flight where a
civilian aircraft carried a two-way radio. Later in 1935, she became the first
person to fly solo from Los Angeles to Mexico City. Still later in 1935, she
became the first person to fly solo nonstop from Mexico City to Newark. In 1937
Amelia Earhart began a flight around the world but vanished during it; her
remains, effects, and plane have never been found. The first woman to fly solo
around the world and return home safely was the American amateur pilot Jerrie
Mock, who did so in 1964. In 1933 Frances Perkins was appointed by President
Franklin Roosevelt as his Secretary of Labor, making her the first woman to
hold a job in a Presidential cabinet. However, women also faced many challenges
during this time. A National Education Association survey showed that between
1930 and 1931, 63% of cities dismissed female teachers as soon as they became
married, and 77% did not hire married women as teachers. Also, a survey of
1,500 cities from 1930 to 1931 found that three-quarters of those cities did
not employ married women for any jobs. In January 1932, Congress passed the
Federal Economy Act which stipulated that no two persons in the family could be
working in government service at the same time; three-fourths of employees
discharged as a result of this Act were women. However, during the Great
Depression white women's unemployment rate was actually lower than that for
men, because women were paid less and because men would not take what they
considered to be "women's jobs" such as clerical work or domestic service. Yet
as a result of rising unemployment, white women's movement into professional
and technical work slowed. Birth control activism was an important cause in the
1930s. In 1936 Margaret Sanger helped bring the case of "United States v. One
Package" to the U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals. The decision in that case
allowed physicians to legally mail birth control devices and information;
however, it applied only to New York, Connecticut, and Vermont; birth control
did not become legal for married couples throughout the United States until the
1965 Supreme Court decision Griswold v. Connecticut, and did not become legal
for unmarried couples throughout the United States until the 1972 Supreme Court
decision Eisenstadt v. Baird. In 1937 The American Medical Association
officially recognized birth control as an integral part of medical practice and
education, and North Carolina became the first state to recognize birth control
as a public health measure and to provide contraceptive services to indigent
mothers through its public health program. In 1939 black singer Marian Anderson
sang on the steps of the Lincoln Memorial, which was considered a milestone in
the civil rights movement. She had originally wanted to sing at Washington
D.C.'s largest venue, Constitution Hall, but The Daughters of the American
Revolution barred her from performing there because of her race. Due to this,
Eleanor Roosevelt, who was then the First Lady, resigned from the organization.
This stands as one of the first actions taken by someone in the White House to
address the era's racial inequality. Anderson performed at the White House
three years prior in 1936, making her the first African-American performer to
do so. When the United States entered World War II in 1941, 12 million women
were already working (making up one quarter of the workforce), and by the end
of the war, the number was up to 18 million (one third of the workforce).
However, while eventually 3 million women worked in war plants, the majority of
women who worked during World War II worked in traditionally female
occupations, like the service sector. During this time, the "Rosie the Riveter"
concept became popular with working women. Furthermore, during World War II
350,000 women served in the military, as WACS, WAVES, SPARS, Marines and
nurses. More than 60,000 Army nurses served stateside and overseas during World
War II; 67 Army nurses were captured by the Japanese in the Philippines in 1942
and were held as POWs for over two and a half years. More than 14,000 Navy
nurses served stateside, overseas on hospital ships, and as flight nurses
during the war. Five Navy nurses were captured by the Japanese on the island of
Guam and held as POWs for five months before being exchanged; a second group of
eleven Navy nurses were captured by the Japanese in the Philippines and held
for 37 months. Over 150,000 American women served in the Women's Army Corps
(WAC) during World War II; the Corps was formed in 1942. Many Army WACs
computed the velocity of bullets, measured bomb fragments, mixed gunpowder, and
loaded shells. Others worked as draftswomen, mechanics, and electricians, and
some received training in ordnance engineering. Later in the war, women were
trained to replace men as radio operators on U.S. Army hospital ships. The
"Larkspur", the "Charles A. Stafford", and the "Blanche F. Sigman" each
received three enlisted women and one officer near the end of 1944. This
experiment proved successful, and the assignment of female secretaries and
clerical workers to hospital ships occurred soon after. Eventually the Air
Force obtained 40% of all WACs in the Army; women were assigned as weather
observers and forecasters, cryptographers, radio operators and repairmen, sheet
metal workers, parachute riggers, link trainer instructors, bombsight
maintenance specialists, aerial photograph analysts, and control tower
operators. Over 1,000 WACs ran the statistical control tabulating machines (the
precursors of modern-day computers) used to keep track of personnel records. By
January 1945 only 50% of AAF WACs held traditional assignments such as file
clerk, typist, and stenographer. A few Air Force WACs were assigned flying
duties; two WAC radio operators assigned to Mitchel Field, New York, flew as
crew members on B-17 training flights. WAC mechanics and photographers also
made regular flights. Three WACs were awarded Air Medals, including one in
India for her work in mapping "the Hump," the mountainous air route overflown
by pilots ferrying lend-lease supplies to the Chinese Army. One woman died in
the crash of an aerial broadcasting plane. In 1942 the WAVES (Women Accepted
for Volunteer Emergency Service) division was founded as an all-female division
of the Navy, and more than 80,000 women served in it, including computer
scientist Grace Hopper, who later achieved the rank of rear admiral. While
traditionally female secretarial and clerical jobs took a large portion of the
WAVES women, thousands of WAVES performed previously atypical duties in the
aviation community, Judge Advocate General Corps, medical professions,
communications, intelligence, science and technology. The WAVES ended and women
were accepted into the regular Navy in 1948. The first six enlisted women to be
sworn into the regular Navy on July 7, 1948 were Kay Langdon, Wilma Marchal,
Edna Young, Frances Devaney, Doris Robertson. and Ruth Flora. On October 15,
1948, the first eight women to be commissioned in the regular Navy, Joy Bright
Hancock, Winifred Quick Collins, Ann King, Frances Willoughby, Ellen Ford,
Doris Cranmore, Doris Defenderfer, and Betty Rae Tennant took their oaths as
naval officers. Semper Paratus Always Ready, better known as SPARS, was the
United States Coast Guard Women‚Äôs Reserve, created Nov. 23, 1942; more than
11,000 women served in SPARS during World War II. SPARs were assigned stateside
and served as storekeepers, clerks, photographers, pharmacist's mates, cooks,
and in numerous other jobs. The program was largely demobilized after the war.
The Marine Corps created a Women's Reserve in 1943; women served as Marines
during the war in over 225 different specialties, filling 85% of the enlisted
jobs at Headquarters Marine Corps and comprising one-half to two-thirds of the
permanent personnel at major Marine Corps posts. Marine women served stateside
as clerks, cooks, mechanics, drivers, and in a variety of other positions. The
Women's Airforce Service Pilots (also known as WASP) was created in 1943 to
free male pilots for combat service. WASPs flew stateside missions as ferriers,
test pilots, and anti-aircraft artillery trainers. Some 25,000 women applied to
join the WASP, but only 1,830 were accepted and took the oath, and out of those
only 1,074 women passed the training and joined. The WASPs flew over 60 million
miles in all, in every type of military aircraft. Many women were spies for
America during World War II, for example the singer Josephine Baker, whose long
residency in France helped her form an underground network, and Claire
Phillips, a spy in the Philippines (then occupied by Japan) who in addition to
spying sent aid and supplies to the American POWs; Claire was tortured, but
never admitted to knowing the people in her spy ring, and after the war she was
recognized by the American and Philippine governments for her heroism. Once
World War II ended in 1945, civilian female workers were expected to give up
their jobs to returning male veterans and go back home to have and raise
children put off by the war. In 1946, 4 million women were fired from their
jobs. But for many women, work was an economic necessity, and they simply went
back to the sort of low-paying jobs they had held before the war. However, most
people in the 1950s felt that ideally women should be homemakers and men should
be breadwinners. A booming economy helped to make this possible; by the mid-
1950s, 40% of Americans were living in the suburbs with, on average, 3.8
children, two cars and two television sets. Although 35% of women did go to
college in the 1950s, most attended not to learn skills but to find a husband.
Furthermore, although 46% of women worked during the 1950s, 75% of them worked
in simple clerical or sales jobs. The average working woman in the 1950s earned
60% of the average working man's salary. However, there were still advances for
women in the military. The Army-Navy Nurse Act of 1947 made the Army Nurse
Corps and Women's Medical Specialist Corps part of the regular Army and gave
permanent commissioned officer status to Army and Navy nurses. In 1948 Congress
passed the Women's Armed Forces Integration Act, which authorized women to
enlist in the military alongside men, rather than in their own separate units,
although women were still not allowed to serve in combat. Furthermore, in 1948
Executive Order 9981 ended racial segregation in the armed services. In 1949
the Air Force Nurse Corps was established (the Air Force itself was created in
1947). That same year, the first African-American women enlisted in the Marine
Corps. The Korean War was fought from 1950 until 1953. Many servicewomen who
had joined the Reserves following World War II were involuntarily recalled to
active duty during the Korean War. 540 Army nurses (all military nurses during
the Korean War were female) served in the combat zone and many more were
assigned to large hospitals in Japan during the war. One Army nurse (Genevieve
Smith) died in a plane crash en route to Korea on July 27, 1950, shortly after
hostilities began. Navy nurses served on hospital ships in the Korean theater
of war as well as at Navy hospitals stateside. Eleven Navy nurses died en route
to Korea when their plane crashed in the Marshall Islands. Air Force nurses
served stateside, in Japan and as flight nurses in the Korean theater during
the war. Three Air Force nurses were killed in plane crashes while on duty.
Many other servicewomen were assigned to duty in the theater of operations in
Japan and Okinawa. Women were heavily involved in lesbian rights and civil
rights throughout the 1950s. In 1955 the first national lesbian political and
social organization in the United States, called Daughters of Bilitis, was
founded by four lesbian couples in San Francisco (including Del Martin and
Phyllis Lyon). On December 1, 1955, Rosa Parks, a seamstress and volunteer
secretary for the NAACP, was arrested in Montgomery, Alabama for refusing to
give up her seat on a bus to a white man, as required by law at the time;
shortly after this a bus boycott began, inspired by her actions, advocating for
an end to all segregated busing. The night of Rosa Parks' arrest, with her
permission, Mrs. Jo Ann Robinson stayed up mimeographing 35,000 handbills
calling for a boycott of the Montgomery bus system. Prior to Rosa Parks'
action, Claudette Colvin and Mary Louise Smith had refused to give up their
seats on buses to white women, but their cases were rejected by civil rights
lawyers as they were not considered sympathetic enough. Aurelia Shines Browder
refused to give up her seat to a white man in Montgomery, Alabama in April
1955, and she filed suit against the city and its Mayor W.A. "Tacky" Gayle. It
was on her case, known as Browder v Gayle, that the Supreme Court ruled in 1956
that segregated busing was unconstitutional, thus ending the bus boycott.
Aurelia Browder was the lead plaintiff in the case, and Susie McDonald,
Claudette Colvin, and Mary Louise Smith were the other plaintiffs. Yet women
still occupied a lower position than men in many sectors of American life. In
1957, the National Manpower Council (NMC) at Columbia University published its
study, "Womanpower, A Statement by the National Manpower Council with Chapters
by the Council Staff". It was a comprehensive look at the experience of women
in the labor force, their employment needs, and the implications of both for
education, training, and public policy. This NMC analysis called women
"essential" and "distinctive" workers and recommended that the Secretary of
Labor establish a committee to review "the consequences and adequacy of
existing Federal and state laws which have a direct bearing on the employment
of women." But this suggestion was not acted upon by the Eisenhower
Administration. In 1959, three landmark books on women were published: "A
Century of Struggle" by Eleanor Flexner, the first professional history of the
19th century women's movement, which contained an implicit call to arms; "A
Century of Higher Education for American Women" by Mabel Newcomer, which
disclosed that the relative position of women in the academic world was in
decline; and "Women and Work In America" by Robert Smuts, which drew attention
to the fact that "the picture of women's occupations outside the home between
1890 and 1950 had changed in only a few essentials. In reaction to such
findings, by 1961, President John F. Kennedy was under pressure to establish a
President's Commission on the Status of Women. Esther Peterson, Assistant
Secretary of Labor and director of the Women's Bureau, and the highest ranking
woman in the Kennedy Administration, wanted such a commission. Along with equal
pay legislation, it had long been on the agenda of labor movement women and it
was in that movement that Peterson's working career had been concentrated.
Another wish of the women's movement, effective birth control, came true as in
1961 the first birth control pill, called Enovid, received FDA approval and
went on the market. Women's organizations, notably the American Association of
University Women and Business and Professional Women, had been proposing a
women's rights commission for many years; they found a champion in Eleanor
Roosevelt, who backed the proposal when she met with Kennedy at the White House
after his election. The establishment of the Commission may also have been
regarded by Kennedy as an expedient way to pay off his political debts to the
women who had supported his campaign but were disappointed with his poor record
of appointments of women to his administration. There was also a desire to have
Eleanor Roosevelt, one of the most respected women in the country, associated
with the Kennedy Administration. Roosevelt had only reluctantly supported JFK's
presidential candidacy after her first choice, Adlai Stevenson, lost the
nomination. However, she agreed to be the Chairperson of the President's
Commission on the Status of Women, which was held from 1961 until 1963. The
Commission's Report, called "The American Woman" and issued in 1963, noted
discrimination against women in the areas of education, home and community
services, employment, social insurance and taxation, and legal, civil and
political rights. The report also recommended continued network-building.
President Kennedy implemented two Commission recommendations that established
an Interdepartmental Committee on the Status of Women and a Citizens' Advisory
Council on the Status of Women, composed of twenty private citizens appointed
by the President. These two groups co-sponsored four national conferences of
state commissions on the status of women. Another important event of 1963 was
the publication of Betty Friedan's influential book "The Feminine Mystique",
which is often cited as the founding moment of second-wave feminism. This book
highlighted Friedan's view of a coercive and pervasive post-World War-II
ideology of female domesticity that stifled middle-class women's opportunities
to be anything but homemakers. Friedan's book is credited with sparking second-
wave feminism by directing women's attention to the broad social basis of their
problems, stirring many to political and social activism. Also in 1963,
President Kennedy signed the Equal Pay Act into law, which amended the Fair
Labor Standards Act to prohibit pay discrimination because of sex. It requires
the employer to pay equal wages to men and women doing equal work on jobs
requiring equal skill, effort, and responsibility, which are performed under
similar working conditions. Another accomplishment for feminism in 1963 was
that feminist activist Gloria Steinem published her article "I Was a Playboy
Bunny", a behind the scenes look at the sexist treatment of Playboy bunnies,
which was one of her first major assignments in investigative journalism. There
were several political firsts for women in the 1960s. On November 22, 1963,
following the assassination of President Kennedy, federal judge Sarah T. Hughes
administered the Presidential Oath of Office to Lyndon Johnson aboard Air Force
One, the only time a woman has done so, as the Chief Justice of the Supreme
Court normally has this honor. 1964 was the first year in which more women
voted in a Presidential election than men; more women have voted than men in
every Presidential election since. One of the most important advances for
women's rights in this decade was not begun by a feminist. On Saturday,
February 8, 1964, while the Civil Rights Act was being debated on the House
floor, Howard W. Smith of Virginia, Chairman of the Rules Committee and staunch
opponent of all civil rights legislation, rose up and offered a one word
amendment to Title VII, which prohibited employment discrimination. He proposed
to add "sex" to that one title of the bill in order "to prevent discrimination
against another minority group, the women,"... (110 Cong. Rec., February 8,
1964, 2577). This stimulated several hours of humorous debate, later called
"ladies day in the House", before the amendment was passed by a teller vote of
168 to 133. Howard W. Smith later confessed to his colleague, Congresswoman
Martha Griffiths, "Martha, I‚Äôll tell you the truth. I offered it as a joke."
The Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, in charge of the enforcement of
Title VII, ignored sex discrimination complaints, and the prohibition against
sex discrimination in employment went unenforced for the next few years. One
EEOC director called the prohibition "a fluke...conceived out of wedlock," and
even the liberal magazine "The New Republic" asked, "Why should a mischievous
joke perpetrated on the floor of the House of Representatives be treated by a
responsible administration body with this kind of seriousness?" In 1966, at the
third National Conference of State Commissions on the Status of Women, the
conference organizers did not allow resolutions or actions of any kind meant to
abolish discrimination against women, so some women who were attending decided
to form an advocacy organization of their own. Cornering a large table at the
conference luncheon, so that they could start organizing before they had to
rush for planes, each of those women chipped in five dollars, Betty Friedan
wrote the acronym NOW on a napkin, and the National Organization for Women was
created. Its first meeting was held on June 28, 1966 in Betty Friedan's hotel
room, with 28 women attending. At its first conference in October 1966, Friedan
was elected NOW's first president, and her fame as the author of the
bestselling book "The Feminine Mystique" helped attract thousands of women to
the organization. Friedan drafted NOW's original Statement of Purpose, which
began, "The purpose of NOW is to take action to bring women into full
participation in the mainstream of American society now, exercising all the
privileges and responsibilities thereof in truly equal partnership with men."
Furthermore, in 1966, Congresswoman Martha Griffiths admonished the EEOC on the
floor of Congress for their failure to enforce the prohibition against sex
discrimination in employment. Employment discrimination against women began to
be taken more seriously in the late 1960s. In 1967, President Lyndon Johnson
issued Executive Order 11375, which declared that federal employers must take
affirmative action to ensure that employees receive equal treatment and
opportunities regardless of gender, race, color, or religion. In 1968 the EEOC,
following two years of protests by NOW, banned all help wanted ads which
specified which sex a job applicant should be, except those jobs for which
being a certain sex was a bona fide occupational requirement (such as actress),
opening many hitherto unattainable jobs to women. The Supreme Court ruled the
ban legal in Pittsburgh Press Co. v Pittsburgh Commission on Human Relations,
413 U.S. 376 (1973). There were several other feminist advances in the late
1960s, in both conservative and liberal circles. In 1968 conservative women
separated from NOW and organized Women's Equity Action League (WEAL) to
campaign for equal opportunities for women in education, economics, and
employment, while avoiding issues such as abortion, sexuality, and the Equal
Rights Amendment. Also in 1968, liberal activist Robin Morgan led a protest of
the Miss America pageant in Atlantic City; at the protest a group of about one
hundred women tossed items that they considered symbolic of women‚Äôs
oppression into a Freedom Trash Can, including copies of Playboy, high-heeled
shoes, corsets, and girdles. They also crowned a sheep as Miss America. Lindsy
Van Gelder, a reporter for the Post, wrote a piece about the protest in which
she compared the trash-can procession to the burning of draft cards at antiwar
marches. However, the rumor that women burned their bras at the protest is not
true. Litigation for women's rights now began to have a serious impact on
American life. In 1969 California adopted the nation‚Äôs first no-fault divorce
law, which was intended to promote equality between men and women. In 1969 the
case Weeks v Southern Bell was decided in favor of Lorena Weeks, who had
applied for a better job as a switchperson, but had her application rejected
because, her union boss said, "the man is the breadwinner in the family, and
women just do not need this type of job." Weeks filed a complaint with the
EEOC, but the phone company cited a Georgia law that prohibited women from
lifting anything heavier than 30¬ pounds, although the 34-pound manual
typewriter Weeks used as a clerk had to be lifted by hand onto her desk every
morning and stored away every night. After the case was decided, she received
$31,000 in back pay and got the job. In the 1971 Supreme Court case Reed v
Reed, the Supreme Court ruled that it is illegal for any state to prefer all
men over all women as administrators of assets. This was the first time ever
that the Court had struck down a state law on the ground that it discriminated
against women in violation of the Equal Protection Clause of the 14th
amendment. In addition to litigation, feminist activists also began to form
their own institutions to propagate their ideals. In 1971 Rep. Bella Abzug,
Betty Friedan, and Gloria Steinem founded the National Women's Political Caucus
to advocate for more women and feminists in elective office. Also in 1971,
Gloria Steinem and others began publishing Ms. Magazine, the first national
feminist magazine The first three hundred thousand copies of Ms. sold out in
eight days; the magazine name comes from the fact that the title Ms. was
originally popularized by feminists in the 1970s to replace Miss and Mrs. and
provide a parallel term to Mr., in that both Ms. and Mr. designate gender
without indicating marital status. In 1972, former NOW members Pat Goltz and
Cathy Callaghan founded Feminists for Life, with the goal of eliminating the
root causes that they felt drove women to abortion, contending that abortion
violated core feminist principles of justice, non-discrimination and
nonviolence. One of the most important feminist successes of the early 1970s
was when Nixon signed into law the Equal Employment Opportunity Act of 1972 and
Title IX of the Education Amendments of 1972. The Equal Employment Opportunity
Act of 1972 gives the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC) authority
to sue in federal courts when it finds reasonable cause to believe that there
has been employment discrimination based on race, color, religion, sex, or
national origin. In the case of public employment, the EEOC refers the matter
to the United States Attorney General to bring the lawsuit. Title IX of the
Education Amendments of 1972 requires gender equity in every educational
program that receives federal funding including but not limited to sports.
However, the feminist movement did have some notable setbacks around this time.
In 1972 President Nixon vetoed the Comprehensive Child Development Bill of
1972, which many feminists advocated and which would have established both
early-education programs and after-school care across the country, with tuition
on a sliding scale based on a family‚Äôs income bracket, and the program
available to everyone but participation required of no one. The Equal Rights
Amendment passed the Senate and then the House of Representatives in 1972, and
on March 22, 1972, it was sent to the states for ratification. However, it was
not ratified before the deadline for ratification passed, and therefore never
became law. The most influential ERA opponent was Phyllis Schlafly, right-wing
leader of the Eagle Forum/STOP ERA, who claimed that the ERA would deny a
woman‚Äôs right to be supported by her husband, privacy rights would be
overturned, women would be sent into combat, and abortion rights and same-sex
marriages would be upheld. Furthermore, some states'-rights advocates thought
the ERA was a federal power grab, and business interests such as the insurance
industry opposed a measure they believed would cost them money. Opposition to
the ERA was also organized by fundamentalist religious groups. Pro-ERA advocacy
was led by the National Organization for Women (NOW) and ERAmerica, a coalition
of nearly 80 other organizations. One of the most controversial developments in
American women's lives has been the legalization of abortion. In 1973 in the
Supreme Court case Roe v Wade, the Supreme Court ruled that it is an illegal
violation of privacy to outlaw or regulate any aspect of abortion performed
during the first trimester of pregnancy, and that government can only enact
abortion regulations reasonably related to maternal health in the second and
third trimesters, and can enact abortion laws protecting the life of the fetus
only in the third trimester. Furthermore, even in the third trimester, an
exception has to be made to protect the life of the mother. This ruling has
been extremely controversial from the moment it was made. Linda Coffee and
Sarah Weddington had brought the lawsuit that led to Roe v Wade on behalf of a
pregnant woman, Dallas area resident Norma L. McCorvey ("Jane Roe"), claiming a
Texas law criminalizing most abortions violated Roe's constitutional rights.
The Texas law banned all abortions except those necessary to save the life of
the mother, and Roe claimed that while her life was not endangered, she could
not afford to travel out of state and had a right to terminate her pregnancy in
a safe medical environment. One of the most famous feminist media events, aside
from the 1968 Miss America protest, was the tennis match known as the "Battle
of the Sexes." In this match, on September 20, 1973, in Houston, Texas, women's
tennis champion Billie Jean King defeated Bobby Riggs 6-4, 6-3, 6-3, before a
worldwide television audience estimated at almost 50 million. 55-year-old
former tennis champion Bobby Riggs had defeated Australian tennis player
Margaret Court earlier that year, and he was an outspoken opponent of feminism,
saying for example, "If a woman wants to get in the headlines, she should have
quintuplets," " and calling himself a "male chauvinist pig". There were a few
important legal gains for women in the mid-1970s. The Women's Educational
Equity Act, enacted in 1974, provides federal funds for projects designed to
promote gender equity in the curriculum, in counseling and guidance, in
physical education, and in the development of classroom materials. The Act also
supports activities for reentering women students, expanding vocational and
career education for women, and funding women's resource center initiatives.
The Equal Credit Opportunity Act, enacted in 1974, illegalizes credit
discrimination on the basis of race, color, religion, national origin, sex,
marital status, age, or because someone receives public assistance. Due to this
Act, creditors may ask you for most of this information in certain situations,
but they may not use it when deciding whether to give you credit or when
setting the terms of your credit. In the 1975 Supreme Court case Taylor v
Louisiana, the Supreme Court ruled that excluding women from the jury pool is
illegal because it violates a person's right to a fair trial by a
representative segment of the community. In 1978, the Pregnancy Discrimination
Act was passed, making employment discrimination on the basis of pregnancy,
childbirth, or related medical conditions illegal. Another important event
around this time was the Vietnam War. Approximately 7,000 American military
women served in Vietnam during the Vietnam War (1965‚Äì1975), the majority of
them as nurses. An Army nurse, Sharon Ann Lane, was the only U.S. military
woman to die from enemy fire in Vietnam. An Air Force flight nurse, Capt Mary
Therese Klinker, died when the C-5A Galaxy transport evacuating Vietnamese
orphans which she was aboard crashed on takeoff. Six other American military
women also died in the line of duty. An important gain for military women
occurred when in 1976, the five federal United States Service academies (West
Point, Coast Guard Academy, Naval Academy, Air Force Academy, Merchant Marines
Academy) were required to admit women as a result of Public Law 94-106 signed
by President Gerald Ford on Oct. 7, 1975. The law passed the House by a vote of
303 to 96 and the Senate by voice vote after divisive argument within Congress,
resistance from the Department of Defense and legal action initiated by women
to challenge their exclusion. More than 300 women enrolled in the academies in
1976. During the 1970s, feminists also worked to bring greater attention and
help to women suffering from domestic violence and rape. While it is not true
that the expression "rule of thumb" comes from men beating women with sticks as
big as their thumbs, as has been rumored, it is true that little help was
available to battered women before the 1970s, when some of the first battered
women's shelters were created and states began adopting domestic violence laws
providing for civil orders of protection and better police protection (the
first "modern" women's shelter in the world was Haven House, which opened in
1964 in California). It is not true that either Catherine MacKinnon or Andrea
Dworkin (both feminist activists) said "all sex is rape", or "all men are
rapists," or "all sex is sexual harassment", as has been rumored; however,
during the 1970s feminist activists worked to change laws stating that there
had to be a witness other than the woman herself to charge a man with rape, and
that a woman's sexual history could be brought up at trial, while the alleged
rapist's could not. Also, due to feminist activism the first law against
marital rape (raping one's spouse) was enacted by South Dakota in 1975. By
1993, marital rape had become a crime in all 50 states in America. The 1980s
brought more firsts for American women. 1980 was the first year that a higher
percentage of women than men voted in a Presidential election, and a higher
percentage of women than men have voted in every Presidential election since.
In 1981 Sandra Day O'Connor was confirmed unanimously by the Senate and became
the first female Supreme Court Justice. In 1983 Sally Ride became the first
female American astronaut. In 1984, Geraldine Ferraro became the first woman
nominated for Vice President by a major party (the Democratic Party), although
she was not elected. Also, in 1984 Katherine Sullivan became the first American
woman to walk in space. In 1987 Wilma Mankiller became the first woman to be
elected chief of a major Native American tribe (Cherokee). In 1991 she was re-
elected with 83% of the vote; during her tenure the Cherokee nation‚Äôs
membership more than doubled, to 170,000 from about 68,000. In 1987, Congress
declared March as the first National Women's History Month. A special
Presidential Proclamation is issued every year since which honors the
achievements of American women. Younger women now began to be more involved in
feminism. In the early 1990s, third wave feminism began as a response to the
second wave's perceived inadequacies and shortcomings. Third wave feminism,
which continues today, is most often associated with a younger generation of
feminist activism, an interest in popular culture and sexual agency, and an
acceptance of pluralism and contradiction. In 1991 in Olympia, Washington, Riot
grrrl began in reaction to the domination of the punk rock scene of America's
Pacific Northwest by all-male bands, and as an attempt to establish a female-
friendly presence within this scene. Riot grrrl consisted of feminist punk
bands such as Bikini Kill and Bratmobile, and their zines, meetings and songs.
The concerns of military women again came to the fore as the Persian Gulf War
(1990‚Äì1991) utilized an unprecedented proportion of women from the active
forces (7%) as well as the Reserve and National Guard (17%). Over 40,000 US
military women served in combat support positions throughout the war. Sixteen
women died during the war and two were held prisoner. In 1991 the Tailhook
Scandal occurred at the annual Tailhook Association convention held in Las
Vegas, with more than 26 women (14 of them officers) being assaulted by scores
of drunken naval and marine officers. Accusations that the Navy mishandled the
subsequent investigation were deeply damaging to the Navy's reputation. Another
famous sexual harassment case occurred when in 1991 Anita Hill, a law professor
at the University of Oklahoma, came forward with accusations that Clarence
Thomas (who had just been nominated for the Supreme Court) had sexually
harassed her. Hill had worked for Thomas years earlier when he was head of the
Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, and she charged that Thomas harassed
her with inappropriate discussion of sexual acts and pornographic films after
she rebuffed his invitations to date him. When Thomas testified against Hill's
claims before the Senate Judiciary Committee, he called the hearings, "a high-
tech lynching for uppity blacks," although Hill herself was black. In the end,
the Senate voted 52-48 to confirm Clarence Thomas as an associate justice of
the Supreme Court. The 1990s brought more firsts for women in politics and the
military. 1992 was known as the "Year of the Woman" because more women than
ever before were elected to political office that year (women gained 19 House
and 3 Senate seats for a total of 47 seats in the House and seven seats in the
Senate) including Carol Moseley Braun, the first black female senator. In 1993
Ruth Bader Ginsburg was confirmed by Congress as a Supreme Court Justice,
becoming the second woman on the court. In 1994 Shannon Faulkner applied to the
The Citadel, The Military College of South Carolina and was accepted for
admission. She had left her gender information off the application. When it was
discovered that she was a woman, The Citadel revoked her offer, so Faulkner
filed suit against The Citadel to gain admission. The court rejected The
Citadel's arguments, clearing her way to attend the school under court order.
Faulkner became the first female cadet in 1995, but resigned a few days into
her first week. A similar case occurred about this time that forced the
Virginia Military Institute to open its doors to women. On June 28, 1996, two
days after the U.S. Supreme Court's decision in United States v Virginia, the
Citadel's governing board voted unanimously to remove a person's gender as a
requirement for admission. In 1999 Nancy Mace became the first woman to
graduate from the Citadel. The first women graduated from the Virginia Military
Institute in 2001 (Melissa Graham of Burleson, Texas, and Chih-Yuan Ho of
Taipei, Taiwan). Two important cases concerning women's rights were litigated
in the late 1990s. The Matter of Kasinga was a legal case decided in June 1996
involving Fauziya Kassindja (surname also spelled as Kasinga), a Togolese
teenager seeking asylum in the United States in order to escape a tribal
practice of female genital mutilation. The Board of Immigration Appeals granted
her asylum in June 1996 after an earlier judge denied her claims. The case set
a precedent in United States immigration law as applicants could now seek
asylum in the United States from gender-based persecution, whereas previously
religious or political grounds were often used to grant asylum. In 1999 Lilly
Ledbetter, a supervisor at a Goodyear tire plant in Alabama, sued Goodyear
because she was being paid at least 15% less than the men who held the same
job. A jury sided with her and awarded her back pay of $224,000 and nearly $3.3
million in punitive damages, but the company appealed, arguing she filed her
claim too late, and it won a reversal from a U.S. appeals court in Atlanta. In
2007 the Supreme Court agreed with the company and ruled that her suit should
have been thrown out at the start because it relied on evidence of
discrimination in the 1980s, not on unfair pay decisions in 1998 or 1999; the
Supreme Court declared that employees wishing to file discrimination charges
must do so no more than 180 days after they have received their first
discriminatory paycheck, although Lilly Ledbetter did not know she had been
discriminated against in pay until much more than 180 days had passed. However,
in 2009 President Barack Obama signed the Lilly Ledbetter Fair Pay Act into law
(the first bill signed into law during his presidency), which changed the law
so that now workers can sue up to 180 days after receiving any discriminatory
paycheck, not just the first discriminatory paycheck. 2000 ‚Äì present. From
2003 until 2011, American women soldiers served in the Iraq War. This time
included several firsts for women in the military. In 2008, Ann Dunwoody became
the first female four-star general in the United States military. In 2011,
Sandra Stosz assumed command of the U.S. Coast Guard Academy, becoming the
first woman superintendent of that institution, and the first woman to command
any U.S. service academy. Also in 2011, Patricia Horoho became the first female
U.S. Army surgeon general. In 2004, Del Martin and Phyllis Lyon became the
first same-sex couple to be legally married in the United States, since San
Francisco mayor Gavin Newsom allowed city hall to grant marriage licenses to
same-sex couples. However, all same-sex marriages done in 2004 in California
were annulled. But after the California Supreme Court decision in 2008 that
granted same-sex couples in California the right to marry, Del Martin and
Phyllis Lyon remarried, and were again the first same-sex couple in the state
to marry. Later in 2008 Prop 8 illegalized same-sex marriage in California, but
the marriages that occurred between the California Supreme Court decision
legalizing same-sex marriage and the approval of Prop 8 illegalizing it are
still considered valid, including the marriage of Del Martin and Phyllis Lyon.
American women achieved many political firsts in the 2000s. In 2007, Nancy
Pelosi became the first female Speaker of the House of Representatives; she
held the position for just under four years. In 2008 Democratic presidential
candidate Hillary Clinton became the first woman to win a presidential primary,
winning the New Hampshire Democratic primary although polls had predicted she
would lose. She eventually lost the Democratic nomination for President to
Barack Obama, who went on to become President; however, Hillary Clinton did
receive 18 million votes. In 2008, Alaska governor Sarah Palin became the first
woman nominated for Vice President by the Republican Party, although she was
not elected. In 2009 and 2010, respectively, Sonia Sotomayor and Elena Kagan
were confirmed as Supreme Court Associate Justices, making them the third and
fourth female justices, but because Justice O'Connor had previously retired,
this made the first time three women have served together on the Supreme Court.
Sen. Barbara Mikulski of Maryland was re-elected to a fifth term in 2010; when
the 112th Congress was sworn in, she became the longest serving female senator
ever, passing Sen. Margaret Chase Smith. During this term, she surpassed Edith
Nourse Rogers as the woman to serve the longest in the U.S. Congress. In 2009,
due to the Matthew Shepard and James Byrd, Jr. Hate Crimes Prevention Act being
signed into law, the definition of federal hate crime was expanded to include
those violent crimes in which the victim is selected due to their actual or
perceived gender and/or gender identity; previously federal hate crimes were
defined as only those violent crimes where the victim is selected due to their
race, color, religion, or national origin. Furthermore, the Matthew Shepard and
James Byrd, Jr. Hate Crimes Prevention Act requires the Federal Bureau of
Investigation to track statistics on hate crimes based on gender and gender
identity (statistics for the other groups were already tracked).
