History of Thailand Tai peoples who originally lived in southwestern China,
migrated into mainland Southeast Asia over a period of many centuries. The
oldest known mention of their existence in the region by the exonym "Siamese"
is in a 12th century A.D. inscription at the Khmer temple complex of Angkor Wat
in Cambodia, which refers to "syam", or "dark brown" people. It was believed
that "Siam" derived from the Hindi word "shyam", or brown race, with a
contemptuous signification. During the reign of Rama III (1824–1851), a
Scottish trader had experimental coins struck in England at the king's behest,
Though not adopted for use, the name of the country put on these first coins
was "Muang Thai", not Siam. Also spelled "Siem", "Syâm" or "Syâma", it has
been identified with the Sanskrit "Śyâma" (, meaning "dark" or "brown"). The
names Shan and A-hom seem to be variants of the same word, and Śyâma is
possibly not its origin but a learned and artificial distortion. The country's
designation as Siam by Westerners likely came from Portuguese, the first
Europeans to give a coherent account of the country. Portuguese chronicles
noted that the king of Sukhothai had sent an expedition to Malacca at the
southern tip of the Malay Peninsula in 1455. Following their conquest of
Malacca in 1511, the Portuguese sent a diplomatic mission to Ayutthaya. A
century later, on August 15, 1612, "The Globe", an East India Company
merchantman bearing a letter from King James I, arrived in "the Road of Syam" .
"By the end of the 19th century, "Siam" had become so enshrined in geographical
nomenclature that it was believed that by this name and no other would it
continue to be known and styled." Indianized kingdoms such as the Mon, Khmer
and Malay kingdoms had ruled the region. Thai people established their own
states starting with Sukhothai, Chiang Saen and Chiang Mai and Lanna Kingdom
and then Ayutthaya kingdom. These states fought each other and were under
constant threat from the Khmers, Burma and Vietnam. Much later, the European
colonial powers threatened in the 19th and early 20th centuries, but Thailand
survived as the only Southeast Asian state to avoid European colonial rule
because the French and the English decided it would be a neutral territory to
avoid conflicts between their colonies. After the end of the absolute monarchy
in 1932, Thailand endured sixty years of almost permanent military rule before
the establishment of a democratic elected-government system. Initial states of
Thailand. Prior to the southwards migration of the Tai people from Yunnan in
the 10th century, the Indochina peninsula had been a home to various indigenous
animistic communities for as far back as 500,000 years ago. The recent
discovery of Homo erectus fossils such as Lampang man is but one example. The
remains were first discovered during excavations in Lampang province, Thailand.
The finds have been dated from roughly 1,000,000-500,000 years ago in the
Pleistocene. There are myriad sites in Thailand dating to the Bronze (1500 BC-
500 BC) and Iron Ages (500 BC-AD 500). The most thoroughly researched of these
sites are located in the country's Northeast, especially in the Mun and Chi
River valleys. The Mun River in particular is home to many 'moated' sites which
comprise mounds surrounded by ditches and ramparts. The mounds contain evidence
of prehistoric occupation. Around the 1st century AD, according to Funan
epigraphy and the records of Chinese historians (Coedes), a number of trading
settlements of the South appear to have been organized into several Malay
states, among the earliest of which are believed to be Langkasuka and
Tambralinga. Some trading settlements show evidences of Roman trade: a Roman
gold coin showing Roman emperor Antoninus Pius (161 AD) has been found in
southern Thailand. Ancient civilizations. Prior to the arrival of the Tai
people and culture into what is now Thailand, the region hosted a number of
indigenous Mon-Khmer and Malay civilizations. Yet little is known about
Thailand before the 13th century as the literary and concrete sources are
scarce and most of the knowledge about this period is gleaned from
archeological evidence. Dvaravati. The Chao Phraya valley in what is now
Central Thailand had once been the home of Mon Dvaravati culture, which
prevailed from the 7th century to the 10th century. The existence of the
civilizations had long been forgotten by the Thai when Samuel Beal discovered
the polity among the Chinese writings on Southeast Asia as “Tou-lo-po-ti”.
During the early 20th century the archeologists led by George Coedès made
grand excavations on what is now Nakorn Pathom and found it to be a center of
Dvaravati culture. The constructed name Dvaravati was confirmed by a Sanskrit
plate inscription containing the name “Dvaravati”. Later on, many more
Dvaravati sites were discovered throughout the Chao Phraya valley. The two most
important sites were Nakorn Pathom and Uthong (in the present Suphanburi
Province). The inscriptions of Dvaravati were in Sanskrit and Mon using the
script derived from the Pallava script of the Pallava dynasty. The religion of
Dvaravati is thought to be Theravada through contacts with Sri Lanka, with the
ruling class also participating in Hindu rites. The Dvaravati art, including
the Buddha sculptures and stupas, showed strong similarities to those of the
Gupta dynasty. The most prominent production of Dvaravati art are the
"Thammachakra"s or the Stone Wheels signifying Buddhist principles. The eastern
parts of the Chao Phraya valley were subjected to a more Khmer and Hindu
influence as the inscriptions are found in Khmer and Sanskrit. Dvaravati was
not a kingdom but a network of city-states paying tributes to more powerful
ones according to the "mandala" model. Dvaravati culture expanded into Isan as
well as southwards as far as the Isthmus of Kra. Dvaravati was a part of
ancient international trade as Roman artifacts were also found and Dvaravati
tributes to the Tang court are recorded. The culture came to an end around the
10th century when it was replaced by a more unified Lavo-Khmer polity. Si
Kottaboon. In what is considered as present day Isan another Indianized kingdom
of Si Kottaboon rose with the capital of Nakhon Phanom. The territory of Si
Khottaboon covered mostly in northern Isan and central Laos. Southern Thailand.
Below the Isthmus of Kra was the place of Malay civilizations. Primordial Malay
kingdoms are described as tributaries to Funan by 2nd century Chinese sources
– though most of them proved to be tribal organizations instead of full-
fledged kingdoms. From the 6th century onwards, two major mandalas ruled
Southern Thailand – the Kanduli and the Langkasuka. Kanduli centered on what
is now Surat Thani Province and Langasuka on Pattani. Southern Thailand was the
center of Hinduism and Mahayana. The Tang dynasty monk I Ching stopped at
Langkasuka to study Pali grammar and Mahayana during his journey to India
around 800 AD. At that time, the kingdoms of Southern Thailand quickly fell
under the influences of the Malay kingdom of Srivijaya from Sumatra. Classical
era. From about the 10th century to the 14th century Thailand was known through
archeological findings and a number of local legends. The period saw the Khmer
domination over a large portion of Chao Phraya basin and the Isan. The
expansion of Tai people and culture southwards also happened during the
classical era. Hariphunchai. According to the Jamadevivamsa, the city of
Hariphunchai (modern Lamphun) was founded by the hermits; Jamadevi, a Lavo
princess, was invited to rule the city in around 700 AD. However, the date is
considered too early for the foundation of Hariphunchai as Jamadevi brought no
Thammachakras to the north. Hariphunchai may be a later (about the 10th
century) offshoot of the Lavo kingdom or instead related to the Thaton kingdom.
Hariphunchai was the center of Theravada in the north. The kingdom flourished
during the reign of King Attayawong who built the Dhatu of Hariphunchai in
1108. The kingdom had strong relations to another Mon kingdom of Thaton. During
the 11th century, Hariphunchai waged lengthy wars with the Tai Ngoenyang
kingdom of Chiang Saen. Weakened by Tai invasions, Hariphunchai eventually fell
in 1293 to Mangrai the Great, king of Lanna, the successor state of the
Ngoenyang kingdom. Arrival of the Tais. The most recent and accurate theory
about the origin of the Tai people stipulates that Guangxi province in China is
really the Tai motherland instead of Yunnan province. A large number of Tai
people, known as the Zhuang, still live in Guangxi today. Around 700 AD, Tai
people who did not come under Chinese influence settled in what is now Dien
Bien Phu in modern Vietnam according to the Khun Borom legend. From there, the
Tais began to radiate into northern highlands and founded the cities of Luang
Prabang and Chiang Saen. The "Simhanavati legend" tells us that a Tai chief
named Simhanavati drove out the native Wa people and founded the city of Chiang
Saen around 800 AD. For the first time, the Tai people made contact with the
Indianized civilizations of Southeast Asia. Through Hariphunchai, the Tais of
Chiang Saen adopted Theravada Buddhism and Sanskrit royal names. The Dhatu of
Doi Tung, constructed around 850 AD, signified the piety of Tai people on the
Theravada religion. Around 900 AD, major wars were fought between Chiang Saen
and Hariphunchai. The Mon forces captured Chiang Saen and its king fled. In
937, Prince Prom the Great took Chiang Saen back from the Mon and inflicted
severe defeats on Hariphunchai. Around 1000 AD, Chiang Saen was destroyed by an
earthquake with all the inhabitants killed. A council was established to govern
the kingdom for a while, and then a local Wa man known as Lavachakkaraj was
elected the King of the new city of Chiang Saen or Ngoenyang. The Lavachakkaraj
dynasty would rule over the region for about 500 years. The overpopulation
might have encouraged the Tais to seek their fortune further southwards. By
1100 AD, the Tai had established themselves as "Po Khun"s (ruling fathers) at
Nan, Phrae, Songkwae, Sawankhalok, Chakangrao, etc. on the upper Chao Phraya
valley. These southern Tai princes faced Khmer influence from Lavo. Some of
them became subordinates to the Lavo-Khmer polity. Chao Phraya Basin under the
Tai. There are several legends about the Tai coming to rule mandalas of Central
Thailand including Lavo and Suphannabhum. The Suphannabhum mandala had been
independent from Khmer influence and composed originally the Western Provinces
of modern Thailand including Suphanburi, Ratchaburi, and Phetchaburi. In the
12th century, the Tai "Po Khun"s of the upper Chao Phraya coalesced around the
"Po Khun" of Sukhothai - an important Khmer outpost. With the weakened Khmer
authority, "Po Khun" Si Nau Namthom of Sukhothai gained the autonomy of upper
Chao Phraya valley. However, during the reign of Jayavarman VII, the Khmer
power was strengthened and the Tai "Po Khun"s were subdued and brought under
Khmer suzerainty. Suphannabhum was also weakened by Khmer invasions and only
the city of Suphanburi itself was left. Lavo. Around the 10th century, the
city-states of Dvaravati merged into two mandalas – the Lavo (modern Lopburi)
and the Supannabhum (modern Suphanburi). According to a legend in the Northern
Chronicles, in 903, a king of Tambralinga invaded and took Lavo and installed a
Malay prince to the Lavo throne. The Malay prince was married to a Khmer
princess who had fled an Angkorian dynastic bloodbath. The son of the couple
contested for the Khmer throne and became Suryavarman I, thus bringing Lavo
under Khmer domination through personal union. Suryavarman I also expanded into
the Khorat Plateau (later styled Isan), constructing many temples. Suryavarman,
however, had no male heirs and again Lavo was independent. King Anawratha of
Bagan invaded Lavo in 1057 and took a Lavo princess as his wife. The power of
the Lavo kingdom reached the zenith in the reign of Narai (1072–1076). Lavo
faced Burmese invasions under Kyanzittha, whose mother was the Lavo princess,
in 1080 but was able to repel. After the death of Narai, however, Lavo was
plunged into bloody civil war and the Khmer under Suryavarman II took advantage
by invading Lavo and installing his son as the King of Lavo. The repeated but
discontinued Khmer domination eventually "Khmerized" Lavo. Lavo was transformed
from a Theravadic Monic Dvaravati city into a Hindu Khmer one. Lavo became the
entrepôt of Khmer culture and power of the Chao Phraya river basin. The bas-
relief at Angkor Wat showed a Lavo army as one of the subordinates to Angkor.
However, one interesting note is that a Tai army was shown as a part of Lavo
army, a century before the establishment of the Sukhothai kingdom. Sukhothai
and Lanna. Thai city-states gradually became independent from the weakened
Khmer Empire. It is said that Sukhothai was established as a sovereign, strong
kingdom by Pho Khun Si Indrathit in 1238 AD. A political feature which
"classic" Thai historians call "father governs children" existed at this time.
Everybody could bring their problems to the king directly, as there was a bell
in front of the palace for this purpose. The city briefly dominated the area
under King Ramkhamhaeng, who established the Thai alphabet, but after his death
in 1365, Sukothai fell into decline and became subject to another emerging Thai
state: the Ayutthaya Kingdom in the lower Chao Phraya area. Another Thai state
that coexisted with Sukhothai was the eastern state of Lanna, centred in Chiang
Mai. King Phya Mangrai was its founder. This city-state emerged in the same
period as Sukhothai. Evidently Lanna became closely allied with Sukhothai.
After the Ayutthaya kingdom had emerged and expanded its influence from the
Chao Phraya valley, Sukhothai was finally subdued. Fierce battles between Lanna
and Ayutthaya also constantly took place and Chiang Mai was eventually
subjugated, becoming Ayutthaya's 'vassal'. Lanna's independent history ended in
1558, when it finally fell to the Burmese; thereafter it was dominated by Burma
until the late 18th century. Local leaders then rose up against the Burmese
with the help of the rising Thai kingdom of Thonburi of king Taksin. The
'Northern City-States' then became vassals of the lower Thai kingdoms of
Thonburi and Bangkok. In the early 20th century they were annexed and became
part of modern Siam, the country now called Thailand. Ayutthaya. The city of
Ayutthaya was located on a small island, encircled by three rivers. Due to its
superior location, Ayutthaya quickly became powerful, politically and
economically. Ayutthaya had different, various names ranging from 'Ayothaya',
derived from Ayodhya, an Indian holy city,'Krung Thep', 'Phra Nakorn' and
'Dvaravati'. The first ruler of the Kingdom of Ayutthaya, King Ramathibodi I
(ruled 1351 to 1369), made two important contributions to Thai history: the
establishment and promotion of Theravada Buddhism as the official religion –
to differentiate his kingdom from the neighbouring Hindu kingdom of Angkor –
and the compilation of the Dharmashastra, a legal code based on Hindu sources
and traditional Thai custom. The Dharmashastra remained a tool of Thai law
until late in the 19th century. In the 417 years of existence, the Ayutthaya
kingdom was frequently plagued by internal fighting but this did not prevent
its rise as a major power on mainland Southeast Asia. Ayutthaya's culture and
traditions became the model for the next period in Thai history, the Bangkok
based Rattanakosin Kingdom of the Chakri Dynasty. Beginning with arrival of
Portuguese ambassador Duarte Fernandes in 1511, Ayutthaya, known to the
Europeans as 'Kingdom of Siam', came into contact with the West during the 16th
century. It became one of the most prosperous cities in East Asia. According to
George Modelski, Ayutthaya is estimated to have been the largest city in the
world in 1700 CE, with a population of around 1 million. Trade flourished with
the Dutch and French among the most active foreigners in the kingdom together
with the Chinese and Japanese. The Ayutthaya period is known as "Golden age of
medicine in Thailand" due to progress in the field of medicine at that time. In
the Year 1563 a.d., 15 years after Suriyothai died, Prince Bayinnong Ascended
to the throne as the King of Hongsawadee, the heir of the King Tabengchaweti.he
led his army past Maelamao border taking over the Northern cities on his way to
the Kingdom of Ayodhya. Once King Bayinnong had control over Kampaenphet,
Sukhothai and Sawankhalok, he led his forces to the northern kingdom of
Phitisanulok. King Bayinnong Defeated Phitisanulok taken the eldest son of the
King of Phitisanulok,Prince Ong Dam. (or Prince Naresuan)Prince Ekkathat is
Prince Naresuan Younger Brother that trained Military skills and tradition of
Burma and in 1581 King Bayinnong died of an illness from his coming of a
conflict battle against the Kingdom of Yakkai.The son of King Bayinnong became
King afterwards. Some of the Northern states revolted against Hongsadee
including Phitsanulok Ayodhya, and Mon. To gain their Independence. Ayutthaya
expanded its sphere of influence over a considerable area, ranging from the
Islamic states on the Malay Peninsula, the Andaman ports of present day
Myanmar, the Angkor kingdom of Cambodia, to states in northern Thailand. In the
18th century, the power of the Ayutthaya Kingdom gradually declined as fighting
between princes and officials plagued its political arena. Outlying
principalities became more and more independent, ignoring the capital's orders
and decrees. In the 18th century, the last phase of the kingdom arrived. The
Burmese, who had taken control of Lanna and had also unified their kingdom
under the powerful Konbaung Dynasty, launched several blows against Ayutthaya
in the 1750s and 1760s. Finally, in 1767, after several months of siege, the
Burmese broke through Ayutthaya's walls, sacked the city and burned it down.
The royal family fled the city and Ayutthaya's last king Ekkathat died of
starvation ten days later while in hiding. The Ayutthaya royal line had been
extinguished. Overall there had been 33 kings in this period, including an
unofficial king. Thonburi and Bangkok period. After more than 400 years of
power, in 1767, the Kingdom of Ayutthaya was brought down by invading Burmese
armies, its capital burned, and the territory split. General Taksin (now known
as King Taksin the Great) managed to reunite the Thai kingdom from his new
capital of Thonburi and declared himself king in 1769. However, later due to
stress and many factors, King Taksin went mad. General Chakri (later becoming
Rama I) helped run the empire instead. The King Taksin ordained as a monk and
ventured into the forest and never to be seen again. General Chakri succeeded
him in 1782 as Rama I, the first king of the Chakri dynasty. In the same year
he founded the new capital city at Bangkok, across the Chao Phraya river from
Thonburi, Taksin's capital. In the 1790s Burma was defeated and driven out of
Siam, as it was then called. Lanna also became free of Burmese occupation, but
the king of a new dynasty who was installed in the 1790s was effectively a
tributary ruler of the Chakri monarch. The heirs of Rama I became increasingly
concerned with the threat of European colonialism after British victories in
neighboring Burma in 1826. The first Thai recognition of Western power in the
region was the Treaty of Amity and Commerce with the United Kingdom in 1826. In
1833, the United States began diplomatic exchanges with Siam, as Thailand was
called until 1939, and again between 1945 and 1949. However, it was during the
later reigns of King Mongkut (1804–1868), and his son King Chulalongkorn
(1853–1910), that Thailand established firm rapprochement with Western
powers. It is a widely held view in Thailand that the diplomatic skills of
these monarchs, combined with the modernising reforms of the Thai government,
made Siam the only country in Southeast Asia to avoid European colonisation.
This is reflected in the country's modern name, "Prathet Thai" or
"Thai‐land", used since 1939 (although the name was reverted to Siam during
1945–49), in which "prathet" means "nation". The Anglo-Siamese Treaty of 1909
defined the modern border between Siam and British Malaya by securing Thai
authority over the provinces of Pattani, Yala, Narathiwat and Satun, which were
previously part of the semi‐independent Malay sultanates of Pattani and
Kedah. A series of treaties with France fixed the country's current eastern
border with Laos and Cambodia. End of absolute monarchy, and military rule. The
Siamese revolution of 1932 was led by a group of young military officers and
civil servants. The group held key figures, ministers who were of the royal
blood as hostages while the king, Rama VII, was at the summer palace in Hua
Hin. The coup, usually called 'The Revolution of 1932', transformed the
Government of Thailand from an absolute to a constitutional monarchy. The
cabinet was presided by the prime minister. Military men always played a
significant role in the politics even before 1932. Already in 1912, during the
Rama VI reign, young soldiers who had plotted a coup urging a constitution and
a change of the king's status had been arrested. King Rama VII, Prajadhipok
initially accepted this change, granting the Constitution but later abdicated
from his position due to conflicts with the government. The revolutionary
government decided to install his ten year old nephew, Ananda Mahidol as the
new monarch. Upon his abdication, King Prajadhipok said that the duty of a
ruler was to reign for the good of the whole people, not for a selected few.
Within a decade Thai politics ran into turmoil as the revolutionary government
plunged into factions; military and civilian figures. Fear of communism,
extreme revolutionary ideas and ultranationalism caused the sharp fighting
among the new ruling elites. Eventually the military faction emerged. The
regime became authoritarian under the prime minister Plaek Phibunsongkhram, one
of the members of the Revolutionary military wing. His regime was also famous
in promoting the 'Pan - Thaism', the ultra - nationalist policy aiming at
unifying Tai, Thai - speaking people nearby into the kingdom. Moreover, in
1941, Phibun regime decided to ally with Japan. The young King Ananda Mahidol
(Rama VIII) died in 1946 under somewhat mysterious circumstances, the official
explanation being that he shot himself by accident while cleaning his gun. He
was succeeded by his brother Bhumibol Adulyadej, the longest reigning king of
Thailand, and very popular with the Thais. Although nominally a constitutional
monarchy, Thailand was ruled by a series of military governments, most
prominently led by Plaek Phibunsongkhram and Sarit Dhanarajata, interspersed
with brief periods of democracy. In early January 1941, Thailand invaded French
Indochina, beginning the French-Thai War. The Thais, well equipped and slightly
outnumbering the French forces, easily reclaimed Laos. The French, outnumbering
the Thai navy force, decisively won the naval Battle of Koh Chang. The Japanese
mediated the conflict, and a general armistice was declared on January 28. On
May 9 a peace treaty was signed in Tokyo, with the French being coerced by the
Japanese into relinquishing their hold on the disputed territories. On December
8, 1941, a few hours after the attack on Pearl Harbor, Japan demanded the right
to move troops across Thailand to the Malayan frontier. Japan invaded Thailand
and engaged the Thai army for six to eight hours before Phibunsongkhram ordered
an armistice. Shortly thereafter Japan was granted free passage, and on
December 21, 1941, Thailand and Japan signed a military alliance with a secret
protocol wherein Tokyo agreed to help Thailand regain territories lost to the
British and French (i.e. the Shan States of Burma, Malaya, Singapore, & part of
Yunnan, plus Laos & Cambodia) Subsequently, Thailand undertook to 'assist'
Japan in its war against the Allies. Japan's distrust of Thailand extended to
the point of rearming their 'ally' with controlled munitions, including the
famous Siamese Mauser, which was manufactured in an unusual caliber. The Seri
Thai (Free Thai Movement) was an underground resistance movement against Japan
founded by Seni Pramoj, the Thai ambassador in Washington, with the assistance
of the United States Office of Strategic Services (OSS.) Led from within
Thailand from the office of the regent Pridi, it operated freely, often with
support from members of the Royal family such as Prince Chula Chakrabongse, and
members of the government. After Japan's defeat in 1945, due to the help of
Seri Thai, American support mitigated Allied terms, although the British
demanded repatriations in the form of rice sent to Malaya, and the French,
return of territories lost in the Franco-Thai War. In exchange for supporting
Thailand's admission to the United Nations, the Soviet Union demanded repeal of
anticommunist legislation. It should also be noted that some former British
POW's erected a monument expressing gratitude to the citizens of Ubon
Ratchathani. In the postwar period, Thailand had close relations with the
United States, which it saw as a protector from communist revolutions in
neighboring countries. See United States Air Force in Thailand. Communist
guerrillas existed in the country from early '60s up to 1987, counting almost
12,000 full-time fighters at the peak of movement, but never posed a serious
threat to the state. Recently, Thailand also has been an active member in the
regional Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN), especially after
democratic rule was restored in 1992. Democracy. Post-1973 has been marked by a
struggle to define the political contours of the state. It was won by the King
and General Prem Tinsulanonda, who favored a monarchy constitutional order. The
post-1973 years have seen a difficult and sometimes bloody transition from
military to civilian rule, with several reversals along the way. The revolution
of 1973 inaugurated a brief, unstable period of democracy, with military rule
being reimposed after the 6 October 1976 Massacre. For most of the 1980s,
Thailand was ruled by Prem Tinsulanonda, a democratically inclined strongman
who restored parliamentary politics. Thereafter the country remained a
democracy apart from a brief period of military rule from 1991 to 1992. The
populist Thai Rak Thai party, led by prime minister Thaksin Shinawatra, came to
power in 2001. He was popular with the urban, sububan and rural poor for his
populist social programs, his rule came under attack from the elite who saw
danger in his parliamentary dictatorship. Also in mid-2005, Sondhi Limthongkul,
a well-known media tycoon, became the foremost Thaksin critic. Eventually
Sondhi and his allies developed the movement into a mass protest and later
unified under the name of People's Alliance for Democracy (PAD). On September
19, 2006, after the dissolution of the parliament, Thaksin then became head of
a provisional government. While he was in New York for a meeting of the UN,
Army Commander-in-Chief Lieutenant General Sonthi Boonyaratglin launched the
bloodless September 2006 Thailand military coup d'état supported by anti-
Thaksin elements in civil society and among the Democrat Party. A general
election on 23 December 2007 restored a civilian government, led by Samak
Sundaravej of the People's Power Party, as a successor to Thai Rak Thai. In
mid-2008, the People's Alliance for Democracy (PAD) led large protests against
the government of Prime Minister Samak Sundaravej, whom they criticized for his
ties to former Prime Minister Thaksin Shinawatra. On 26 August 2008, the
protesters illegally occupied several government ministries, including the
Government House which they sacked, to force the government to give in to
demands. Beginning August 29, protesters disrupted air and rail infrastructure,
including Suvarnabhumi airport. They have never been prosecuted. The chaos
ended in December when three of the parties that formed the government were
dissolved by the Constitutional Court for election fraud. After this decision,
many previous coalition partners of the government then defected and joined the
main opposition party, the Democrat party, and refusing elections to
immediately form a new government in the favour of the old guard elites. On
July 3, 2011, opposition Pheu Thai Party won general elections in a landslide.
