Hussite Wars The Hussite Wars, also called the Bohemian Wars or the Hussite
Revolution, involved the military actions against and amongst the followers of
Jan Hus, who led a rebellion against the Roman Catholic church, in Bohemia in
the period 1419 to "circa" 1434. The Hussite Wars were notable for the
extensive use of early hand-held gunpowder weapons such as hand cannons. The
Hussite warriors were basically infantry, and their many defeats of larger
armies with heavily armoured knights helped effect the infantry revolution. In
the end, it was an inconclusive war. Origins. The Hussite movement assumed a
revolutionary character as soon as the news of the execution of Jan Hus by
order of the Council of Constance (6 July 1415) reached Prague. The knights and
nobles of Bohemia and Moravia, who were in favour of church reform, sent a
protest to the Council of Constance on 2 September 1415, known as the
"protestatio Bohemorum", which condemned the execution of Hus in the strongest
language. The attitude of Sigismund, Holy Roman Emperor, who sent threatening
letters to Bohemia declaring that he would shortly drown all Wycliffites and
Hussites, greatly incensed the people. Troubles broke out in various parts of
Bohemia, and drove many Catholic priests from their parishes. Almost from the
beginning the Hussites divided into two groups, though many minor divisions
also arose among them. Shortly before his death Hus had accepted a doctrine
preached during his absence by his adherents at Prague, namely that of
Utraquism, or the obligation of the faithful to receive communion in both
kinds, bread and wine ("sub utraque specie"). This doctrine became the
watchword of the moderate Hussites known as the Utraquists or Calixtines, from
the Latin "calix" (the chalice), in Czech "kališníci" (from "kalich"); while
the more extreme Hussites soon became known as the Taborites ("táborité"),
named after the city of Tábor that became their centre; or Orphans ("sirotci")
a name they adopted after the death of their beloved leader and general Jan
Žižka. Under the influence of his brother Sigismund, King Wenceslaus IV
(Václav in Czech, Wenzel in German) of Bohemia endeavoured to stem the Hussite
movement. A certain number of Hussites led by Nicolas of Hus — no relation of
Jan Hus, though of the same town — left Prague. They held meetings in various
parts of Bohemia, particularly at Sezimovo Ústí (not to be confused with
Ústí nad Labem), near the spot where the town of Tábor was founded soon
afterwards. At these meetings they violently denounced Sigismund, and the
people everywhere prepared for war. In spite of the departure of many prominent
Hussites, the troubles at Prague continued. On 30 July 1419, when a Hussite
procession headed by the priest Jan Želivský marched through the streets of
Prague, anti-Hussites threw stones at the Hussites from the windows of the
town-hall of the ‘new town’. The people, headed by Jan Žižka, threw the
burgomaster and several town-councillors, who had instigated this outrage, from
the windows and into the street (the first "Defenestration of Prague"), where
they were killed by the fall. It has been reputed that King Wenceslaus IV was
so stunned by the defenestration that he died from the shock shortly after on
16 August 1419. (Alternatively, it is possible that he may have just died of
natural causes.) The outbreak of fighting. The death of the king resulted in
renewed troubles in Prague and in almost all parts of Bohemia. Many Catholics,
mostly Germans — mostly still faithful to the pope — were expelled from the
Bohemian cities. In Prague, in November 1419, severe fighting took place
between the Hussites and the mercenaries whom Queen Sophia (widow of Wenceslaus
and regent after the death of her husband) had hurriedly collected. After a
considerable part of the city had been damaged or destroyed, the parties
declared a truce on 13 November. The nobles, sympathetic to the Hussite cause,
but supporting the regent, promised to act as mediators with Sigismund, while
the citizens of Prague consented to restore to the royal forces the castle of
Vyšehrad, which had fallen into their hands. Žižka, who disapproved of this
compromise, left Prague and retired to Plzeň. Unable to maintain himself there
he marched to southern Bohemia, and after defeating the Catholics at the battle
of Sudoměř (25 March 1420) in the first pitched battle of the Hussite wars,
he arrived at Ústí, one of the earliest meeting-places of the Hussites. Not
considering its situation sufficiently strong, he moved to the neighbouring new
settlement of the Hussites, called by the biblical name of Tábor. Tabor soon
became the centre of the extreme, militant Hussites, who differed from the
Utraquists by recognizing only two sacraments - Baptism and Communion - and by
rejecting most of the ceremony of the Roman Catholic Church. The ecclesiastical
organization of Tabor had a somewhat puritanical character, and the government
was established on a thoroughly democratic basis. Four captains of the people
("hejtmané") were elected, one of whom was Žižka; and a very strictly
military discipline was instituted. Wagenburg tactics. Depending on the
terrain, Hussites prepared carts for the battle, forming them into squares or
circles. The carts were joined wheel to wheel by chains and positioned aslant,
with their corners attached to each other, so that horses could be harnessed to
them quickly, if necessary. In front of this wall of carts a ditch was dug by
camp followers. The crew of each cart consisted of 16-22 soldiers: 4-
8 crossbowmen, 2 handgunners, 6-8 soldiers equipped with pikes or flails (the
flail was the Hussite "national weapon"), 2 shield carriers and 2 drivers. The
Hussites' battle consisted of two stages, the first defensive, the second an
offensive counterattack. In the first stage the army placed the carts near the
enemy army and by means of artillery fire provoked the enemy into battle. The
artillery would usually inflict heavy casualties at close range. In order to
avoid more losses, the enemy knights finally attacked. Then the infantry hidden
behind the carts used firearms and crossbows to ward off the attack, weakening
the enemy. The shooters aimed first at the horses, depriving the cavalry of its
main advantage. Many of the knights died as their horses were shot and they
fell. As soon as the enemy's morale was lowered, the second stage, an offensive
counterattack, began. The infantry and the cavalry burst out from behind the
carts striking violently at the enemy - mostly from the flanks. While fighting
on the flanks and being shelled from the carts the enemy was not able to put up
much resistance. They were forced to withdraw, leaving behind dismounted
knights in heavy armor who were unable to escape the battlefield. The enemy
armies suffered heavy losses and the Hussites soon had the reputation of not
taking captives. The first anti-Hussite crusade. These articles, which contain
the essence of the Hussite doctrine, were rejected by Sigismund, mainly through
the influence of the papal legates, who considered them prejudicial to the
authority of the Roman see. Hostilities therefore continued. Though Sigismund
had retired from Prague, the castles of Vyšehrad and Hradčany remained in
possession of his troops. The citizens of Prague laid siege to the Vyšehrad
(see Battle of Vyšehrad), and towards the end of October (1420) the garrison
was on the point of capitulating through famine. Sigismund attempted to relieve
the fortress, but was decisively defeated by the Hussites on 1 November near
the village of Pankrác. The castles of Vyšehrad and Hradčany now
capitulated, and shortly afterwards almost all Bohemia fell into the hands of
the Hussites. The second anti-Hussite crusade. Internal troubles prevented the
followers of Hus from fully capitalising on their victory. At Prague a
demagogue, the priest Jan Želivský, for a time obtained almost unlimited
authority over the lower classes of the townsmen; and at Tábor a religious
communistic movement (that of the so-called Adamites) was sternly suppressed by
Žižka. Shortly afterwards a new crusade against the Hussites was undertaken.
A large German army entered Bohemia and in August 1421 laid siege to the town
of Žatec. After an unsuccessful attempt of storming the city, the crusaders
retreated somewhat ingloriously on hearing that the Hussite troops were
approaching. Sigismund only arrived in Bohemia at the end of the year 1421. He
took possession of the town of Kutná Hora but was decisively defeated by Jan
Žižka at the Battle of Deutschbrod (Německý Brod) on 6 January 1422. Civil
war. Bohemia was for a time free from foreign intervention, but internal
discord again broke out, caused partly by theological strife and partly by the
ambition of agitators. Jan Želivský was on 9 March 1422 arrested by the town
council of Prague and decapitated. There were troubles at Tábor also, where a
more radical party opposed Žižka's authority. Bohemia obtained a temporary
respite when, in 1422, Prince Sigismund Korybut of Lithuania (nephew of King
Władysław II Jagiełło of Poland) briefly became ruler of the country. He
was a governor sent by Grand Duke of Lithuania Vytautas, who accepted the
Hussite proposal to be their new king. His authority was recognized by the
Utraquist nobles, the citizens of Prague, and the more moderate Taborites.
Sigismund Korybut, however, remained a short time in Bohemia, as in 1423 he was
called to come back to Lithuania, after Jagiello had made a treaty with
Sigismund. On his departure, civil war broke out, the Taborites opposing in
arms the more moderate Utraquists, who at this period are also called by the
chroniclers the "Praguers", as Prague was their principal stronghold. On 27
April 1423, Žižka now again leading, the Taborites defeated the Utraquist
army under Čeněk of Wartenberg at the Battle of Hořice; and shortly
afterwards an armistice was concluded at Konopilt. The third anti-Hussite
crusade. Papal influence had meanwhile succeeded in calling forth a new crusade
against Bohemia, but it resulted in complete failure. In spite of the
endeavours of their rulers, Poles and Lithuanians did not wish to attack the
kindred Czechs; the Germans were prevented by internal discord from taking
joint action against the Hussites; and the King of Denmark, who had landed in
Germany with a large force intending to take part in the crusade, soon returned
to his own country. Free for a time from foreign threat, the Hussites invaded
Moravia, where a large part of the population favoured their creed; but,
paralysed again by dissensions, they soon returned to Bohemia. The city of
Hradec Králové, which had been under Utraquist rule, espoused the doctrine of
Tabor, and called Žižka to its aid. After several military successes gained
by Žižka in 1423 and the following year, a treaty of peace between the
Hussites was concluded on 13 September 1424 at Libeň, a village near Prague,
now part of that city. Campaigns of 1426 and 1427. In 1426 the Hussites were
again attacked by foreign enemies. In June of that year their forces, led by
Prokop the Great - who took the command of the Taborites shortly after
Žižka's death in October 1424 - and Sigismund Korybut, who had returned to
Bohemia, signally defeated the Germans at Ústí nad Labem. After this great
victory, and another at the Battle of Tachov in 1427, the Hussites repeatedly
invaded Germany, though they made no attempt to occupy permanently any part of
the country. Polish and Lithuanian involvement. From 1421 to 1427 the Hussites
received military support from the Poles. Poland, though a devoutly Catholic
nation, was supporting the Hussites on non-religious grounds. Poland's motive
was to save their fellow Slavs from German attempts at conquest similar to the
Polish-Lithuanian-Teutonic War (1409-1411). Because of this, Jan Žižka
arranged for the crown of Bohemia to be offered to Jagiello, the King of
Poland, who, under pressure from his own advisors, refused it. The crown was
then offered to Grand Duke Vytautas of Lithuania and Vytautas accepted it, with
the condition that the Hussites reunite with the Catholic Church. In 1422,
Žižka accepted the Polish king's nephew, Sigismund Korybut, as regent of
Bohemia for Vytautas. Korybut never managed to return the Hussites to the
Catholic Church; and he even had to resort to force of arms when dealing with
the various factions. Korybut did not tolerate the Protestant rebels breaking
their promise of reuniting with the Catholic Church. On a few occasions, he
even fought against both the Taborites and the Orebites to try to force them
into reuniting. Large scale Polish involvement was ended in 1427 when Korybut
was arrested by the Hussites after Polish plans to hand over the Hussite forces
to Emperor Sigismund were discovered. The Poles, however, did not really want
to withdraw; the only reason they did is because the Pope planned to call a
crusade against Poland if they did not. Beautiful rides (Chevauchée).
"Spanilé jízdy", or beautiful rides, as the Hussites called them, were
undertaken in many different foreign lands. Throughout the Hussite Wars,
especially under the leadership of Prokop the Great, invasions were made into
Silesia, Saxony, Hungary, Lusatia, and Meissen. Every raid that the Hussites
carried out was against a country that had supplied the Germans with men during
the anti-Hussite crusades. These raids were made to try to strike enough fear
in these areas to make sure that they would not help out the Germans again.
However, the raids did not have the desired effect; these countries kept
supplying soldiers to the crusade against the Hussites. During yet another war
between Poland and the Monastic State of the Teutonic Knights, some Hussite
raiders helped the Poles. In 1433, a Hussite army of 7,000 fighting men marched
through Neumark into Prussia and captured Dirschau on the Vistula River. They
would eventually reach the mouth of the Vistula where it enters the Baltic Sea
near Danzig. There, they performed a great victory celebration to show that
nothing but the ocean could stop the Hussites. The Prussian historian Heinrich
von Treitschke would later write that they had "greeted the sea with a wild
Czech song about God's warriors, and filled their water bottles with brine in
token that the Baltic once more obeyed the Slavs". Peace talks and renewed
wars. The almost uninterrupted series of victories of the Hussites now rendered
vain all hope of subduing them by force of arms. Moreover, the conspicuously
democratic character of the Hussite movement caused the German princes, who
were afraid that such views might extend to their own countries, to desire
peace. Many Hussites, particularly the Utraquist clergy, were also in favour of
peace. Negotiations for this purpose were to take place at the ecumenical
council which had been summoned to meet at Basel on 3 March 1431. The Roman See
reluctantly consented to the presence of heretics at this council, but
indignantly rejected the suggestion of the Hussites that members of the Greek
Church, and representatives of all Christian creeds, should also be present.
Before definitely giving its consent to peace negotiations, the Roman Church
determined on making a last effort to reduce the Hussites to subjection; this
resulted in the 5th Crusade against the Hussites. On 1 August 1431 a large army
of crusaders under Frederick I, Elector of Brandenburg, whom Cardinal Cesarini
accompanied as papal legate, crossed the Bohemian border. On 8 August the
crusaders reached the city of Domažlice and began besieging it. On the 14th
August, a Hussite relief army reinforced with some 6,000 Polish hussites and
under the command of Prokop arrived, and completely routed the crusaders at the
resulting Battle of Domažlice. As the legend has it, upon seeing the Hussite
banners and hearing their battle hymn "Ktož jsú boží bojovníci" ("Ye Who
are Warriors of God"), the invading Papal forces immediately took to flight. On
15 October the members of the council, already assembled at Basel, issued a
formal invitation to the Hussites to take part in its deliberations. Prolonged
negotiations ensued; but finally a Hussite embassy, led by Prokop and including
John of Rokycan, the Taborite bishop Nicolas of Pelhřimov, the ‘English
Hussite’ Peter Payne and many others, arrived at Basel on 4 January 1433. It
was found impossible to reach an agreement. Negotiations were not, however,
broken off, and a change in the political situation of Bohemia finally resulted
in a settlement. In 1434 war again broke out between the Utraquists and the
Taborites. On 30 May of that year the Taborite army, led by Prokop the Great
and Prokop the Lesser, who both fell in the battle, was totally defeated and
almost annihilated at Lipany. An end to the Polish Hussite movement in Poland
would arrive as well: the Polish Hussites, often reinforced by their Czech Slav
brethren, had been raiding there for years, and the royal Polish forces under
Władysław III of Varna would defeat the Hussites at the Battle of Grotniki,
bringing the Hussite Wars to an end. Peace agreement. The moderate party thus
obtained the upper hand; and it formulated its demands in a document which was
finally accepted by the Church of Rome in a slightly modified form, and which
is known as ‘the compacts.’ The compacts, mainly founded on the articles of
Prague, declare that:— I. The Holy Sacrament is to be given freely in both
kinds to all Christians in Bohemia and Moravia, and to those elsewhere who
adhere to the faith of these two countries. 2. All mortal sins shall be
punished and extirpated by those whose office it is so to do. 3. The word of
God is to be freely and truthfully preached by the priests of the Lord, and by
worthy deacons. 4. The priests in the time of the law of grace shall claim no
ownership of worldly possessions. On 5 July 1436 the compacts were formally
accepted and signed at Jihlava (Iglau), in Moravia, by King Sigismund, by the
Hussite delegates, and by the representatives of the Roman Catholic Church. The
last-named, however, refused to recognize as archbishop of Prague John of
Rokycan, who had been elected to that dignity by the estates of Bohemia.
Aftermath. The Utraquist creed, frequently varying in its details, continued to
be that of the established church of Bohemia until all non-Catholic religious
services were prohibited shortly after the Battle of the White Mountain in
1620. The Taborite party never recovered from its defeat at Lipany, and after
the town of Tábor had been captured by George of Poděbrady in 1452, Utraquist
religious worship was established there. The Bohemian Brethren (Unitas
Fratrum), whose intellectual originator was Petr Chelčický but whose actual
founders were Brother Gregory, a nephew of Archbishop Rokycany, and Michael,
curate of Žamberk, to a certain extent continued the Taborite traditions, and
in the 15th and 16th centuries included most of the strongest opponents of Rome
in Bohemia. J. A. Komenský (Comenius), a member of the brotherhood, claimed
for the members of his church that they were the genuine inheritors of the
doctrines of Hus. After the beginning of the German Reformation, many
Utraquists adopted to a large extent the doctrines of Martin Luther and of John
Calvin and, in 1567, obtained the repeal of the compacts which no longer seemed
sufficiently far-reaching. From the end of the 16th century the inheritors of
the Hussite tradition in Bohemia were included in the more general name of
"Protestants" borne by the adherents of the Reformation. At the end of the
Hussite Wars in 1431 the lands of Bohemia had been totally ravaged. The
bishopric of Würzburg was left in such bad shape after the Hussite Wars, that
the impoverishment of the people was still evident in 1476. The poor conditions
contributed directly to the peasant conspiracy that broke out that same year in
Würzburg.
