Kingdom of Poland (1025–1385) The Kingdom of Poland (pol. "Królestwo
Polskie", lat. "Regnum Poloniae", ukr. "Королівство
Польське") was the Polish state from the coronation of the first King
Bolesław I the Brave in 1025 to the union with Lithuania and the rule of the
Jagiellon dynasty in 1385. Early Kingdom. The basis for the development of a
Polish state was laid by the Piast, which were preeminent since the 9th
century. Duke Mieszko I's conversion to Christianity paved the way for Poland
to become a member of the family of Christian kingdoms. In 1000, during the
Congress of Gniezno, Poland was recognized as a state by the Holy Roman Empire
and the Pope. In 1025, Duke Boleslaus I the Brave was crowned King of Poland,
marking the starting date for a Polish Kingdom, though for long years the Poles
were ruled not by Kings but by Dukes. The King ruled the country in his own
responsibility but was expected to respect traditional customs of people. The
succession to the rule was not legally restricted by primogeniture. All sons of
the King or Duke had the same rights of inheritance and the one that in some
way proved the strongest succeeded to the throne. Period of fragmentation. Duke
Bolesław III the Wrymouth, who reigned 1102 to 1138, tried to end the repeated
struggles between various claimants by setting the government of Poland on a
more formal footing. In his testament, he divided his lands into five Duchies,
which he distributed among his sons. To ensure unity, he established the
"senioral principle", which stated that the eldest member of the dynasty should
be High Duke and have supreme power over the other Dukes. The High Duke ruled,
in addition to the Duchy he inherited, over the indivisible "senioral part", a
vast strip of land running north-south down the middle of Poland, with Kraków
as the chief city. The High Duke's prerogatives also included control over
Pomerania, a fief of the Holy Roman Empire. While the senorial part always fell
to that member of the Dynasty that happened to be senior, the other four
Duchies were inherited in the usual way among the descendants of Boleslaw's
sons. However, these provisions were soon broken, with the various Dukes trying
to gain the position of High Duke for themselves, regardless of actual
seniority. The provisions, meant to ensure unity fragmented the country even
further and resulted in a decline of monarchical power. Poland even came under
the influence of the Přemyslid kings of Bohemia, whose dynasty however died
out before they could gain a stable foothold in Poland. The accession of the
Piast Duke Władysław I the Elbow-high ended the power struggle amongst the
Polish nobility. He united the various principalities of the Kingdom of Poland
and in 1320, was crowned King. His son Casimir the Great greatly strengthened
the Polish state in both foreign and domestic affairs. Dynastic change and
union with Lithuania. Casimir was the last male member of the Piast dynasty and
was succeeded by his nephew Louis, King of Hungary from the Angevine dynasty.
The upsurge of the monarchy continued under Louis. Since Louis had no son
either, his daughter Jadwiga became the heir of the Polish monarchy. Under the
terms of the Union of Krewo, she married Jagiełło, Grand Duke of Lithuania,
who converted to Christianity. This marriage created not only a dynastic union
between Poland and Lithuania but also bound the two countries together for the
next four centuries.
