History of Poland during the Jagiellon dynasty History of Poland during the
Jagiellon dynasty is the period in the history of Poland that spans the late
Middle Ages and early Modern Era. Beginning with the Lithuanian Grand Duke
Jogaila (Władysław II Jagiełło), the Jagiellon dynasty (1386–1572) formed
the Polish–Lithuanian union. The partnership brought vast Lithuania-
controlled Rus' areas into Poland's sphere of influence and proved beneficial
for the Poles and Lithuanians, who coexisted and cooperated in one of the
largest political entities in Europe for the next four centuries. In the Baltic
Sea region Poland's struggle with the Teutonic Knights continued and included
the Battle of Grunwald (1410) and in 1466 the milestone Peace of Thorn under
King Casimir IV Jagiellon; the treaty created the future Duchy of Prussia. In
the south Poland confronted the Ottoman Empire and the Crimean Tatars, and in
the east helped Lithuania fight the Grand Duchy of Moscow. Poland's and
Lithuania's territorial expansion included the far north region of Livonia.
Poland was developing as a feudal state, with predominantly agricultural
economy and an increasingly dominant landed nobility component. The "Nihil
novi" act adopted by the Polish Sejm (parliament) in 1505, transferred most of
the legislative power from the monarch to the Sejm. This event marked the
beginning of the period known as "Golden Liberty", when the state was ruled by
the "free and equal" Polish nobility. Protestant Reformation movements made
deep inroads into the Polish Christianity, which resulted in unique at that
time in Europe policies of religious tolerance. The European Renaissance
currents evoked in late Jagiellon Poland (kings Sigismund I the Old and
Sigismund II Augustus) an immense cultural flowering. Late Middle Ages
(14th–15th century). Jagiellon monarchy. In 1385 the Union of Krewo was
signed between Queen Jadwiga and Jogaila, the Grand Duke of Lithuania, the last
pagan state in Europe. The act arranged for Jogaila's baptism (after which
Jogaila was known in Poland by his baptismal name, Władysław, and the Polish
version of his Lithuanian name, Jagiełło) and for the couple's marriage and
constituted the beginning of the Polish–Lithuanian union. The Union
strengthened both nations in their shared opposition to the Teutonic Knights
and the growing threat of the Grand Duchy of Moscow. Vast expanses of Rus'
lands, including the Dnieper River basin and extending south to the Black Sea,
were at that time under Lithuanian control. Lithuania fought the invading
Mongols and had taken advantage of the power vacuum in the south and east
resulting from the Mongol destruction of Kievan Rus'. The population of the
Grand Duchy's enlarged territory was accordingly heavily Ruthenian and Eastern
Orthodox. The territorial expansion caused Lithuania's confrontation with the
emerging from the Tatar rule and itself expanding Grand Duchy of Moscow. The
Union's intention was to create a common state under King Władysław
Jagiełło, but the Polish ruling oligarchy's idea of incorporation of
Lithuania into Poland turned out to be unrealistic. There were going to be
territorial disputes and warfare between Poland and Lithuania or Lithuanian
factions; the Lithuanians at times had even found it expedient to conspire with
the Teutonic Knights against the Poles. Geographic consequences of the personal
union and the preferences of the Jagiellon kings accelerated the process of
reorientation of Polish territorial priorities to the east. Between 1386 and
1572 Poland and Lithuania, joined until 1569 by a personal union, were ruled by
a succession of constitutional monarchs of the Jagiellon dynasty. The political
influence of the Jagiellon kings was diminishing during this period, which was
accompanied by the ever increasing role in central government and national
affairs of landed nobility. The royal dynasty however had a stabilizing effect
on Poland's politics. The Jagiellon Era is often regarded as a period of
maximum political power, great prosperity, and in its later stage, the Golden
Age of Polish culture. Social and economic developments. The 13th and 14th
century feudal rent system, under which each estate had well defined rights and
obligations, degenerated around the 15th century, as the nobility tightened
their control of the production, trade and other economic activities, created
many directly owned agricultural enterprises known as folwarks (feudal rent
payments were being replaced with forced labor on lord's land), limited the
rights of the cities and pushed most of the peasants into serfdom. Such
practices were increasingly sanctioned by the law. For example the Piotrków
Privilege of 1496, granted by King Jan Olbracht, banned rural land purchases by
townspeople and severely limited the ability of peasant farmers to leave their
villages. Polish towns, lacking national representation protecting their class
interests, preserved some degree of self-government (city councils and jury
courts), and the trades were able to organize and form guilds. The nobility
soon excused themselves from their principal duty – mandatory military
service in case of war (pospolite ruszenie). The nobility's split into two main
layers was institutionalized (never legally formalized) in the "Nihil novi"
"constitution" of 1505, which required the king to consult the sejm, that is
the senate (highest level officials), as well as the lower chamber of
(regional) deputies, before enacting any changes. The masses of ordinary
szlachta competed or tried to compete against the uppermost rank of their
class, the magnates, for the duration of Poland's independent existence. Poland
and Lithuania in personal union under Jagiełło. The first king of the new
dynasty was the Grand Duke of Lithuania Jogaila, or Władysław II Jagiełło
as the King of Poland. He was elected a king of Poland in 1386, after becoming
a Catholic Christian and marrying Jadwiga of Anjou, daughter of Louis I, who
was Queen of Poland in her own right. Latin Rite Christianization of Lithuania
followed. Jogaila's rivalry in Lithuania with his cousin Vytautas, opposed to
Lithuania's domination by Poland, was settled in 1392 and in 1401 in the Union
of Vilnius and Radom: Vytautas became the Grand Duke of Lithuania for life
under Jogaila's nominal supremacy. The agreement made possible close
cooperation between the two nations, necessary to succeed in the upcoming
struggle with the Teutonic Order. The Union of Horodło (1413) specified the
relationship further and had granted privileges to the Roman Catholic (as
opposed to Eastern Orthodox) portion of Lithuanian nobility. Struggle with the
Teutonic Knights. The Great War of 1409–1411, precipitated by the Lithuanian
uprising in the Order controlled Samogitia, included the Battle of Grunwald
(Tannenberg), where the Polish and Lithuanian-Rus' armies completely defeated
the Teutonic Knights. The offensive that followed lost its impact with the
ineffective siege of Malbork (Marienburg). The failure to take the fortress and
eliminate the Teutonic (later Prussian) state had for Poland dire historic
consequences in the 18th, 19th and 20th centuries. The Peace of Thorn (1411)
had given Poland and Lithuania rather modest territorial adjustments, including
Samogitia. Afterwards there were negotiations and peace deals that didn't hold,
more military campaigns and arbitrations. One attempted, unresolved arbitration
took place at the Council of Constance. There in 1415, Paulus Vladimiri, rector
of the Kraków Academy, presented his "Treatise on the Power of the Pope and
the Emperor in respect to Infidels", in which he advocated tolerance,
criticized the violent conversion methods of the Teutonic Knights, and
postulated that pagans have the right to peaceful coexistence with Christians
and political independence. This stage of the Polish-Lithuanian conflict with
the Teutonic Order ended with the Treaty of Melno in 1422. Another war (see
Battle of Pabaiskas) was concluded in the Peace of Brześć Kujawski in 1435.
Hussite movement; Polish-Hungarian union. During the Hussite Wars
(1420–1434), Jagiełło, Vytautas and Sigismund Korybut were involved in
political and military maneuvering concerning the Czech crown, offered by the
Hussites first to Jagiełło in 1420. Zbigniew Oleśnicki became known as the
leading opponent of a union with the Hussite Czech state. The Jagiellon dynasty
was not entitled to automatic hereditary succession, as each new king had to be
approved by nobility consensus. Władysław Jagiełło had two sons late in his
life, from his last marriage. In 1430 the nobility agreed to the succession of
the future Władysław III, only after the King gave in and guaranteed the
satisfaction of their new demands. In 1434 the old monarch died and his minor
son Władysław was crowned; the Royal Council led by Bishop Oleśnicki
undertook the regency duties. In 1438 the Czech anti-Habsburg opposition,
mainly Hussite factions, offered the Czech crown to Jagiełło's younger son
Casimir. The idea, accepted in Poland over Oleśnicki's objections, resulted in
two unsuccessful Polish military expeditions to Bohemia. After Vytautas' death
in 1430 Lithuania became embroiled in internal wars and conflicts with Poland.
Casimir sent as a boy by King Władysław on a mission there in 1440, was
surprisingly proclaimed by the Lithuanians a Grand Duke of Lithuania, and
stayed in Lithuania. Oleśnicki gained the upper hand again and pursued his
long-term objective of Poland's union with Hungary. At that time Turkey
embarked on a new round of European conquests and threatened Hungary, which
needed the powerful Polish-Lithuanian ally. Władysław III in 1440 assumed
also the Hungarian throne. Influenced by Julian Cesarini, the young king led
the Hungarian army against the Ottoman Empire in 1443 and again in 1444. Like
his mentor, Władysław Warneńczyk was killed at the Battle of Varna.
Beginning toward the end of Jagiełło's life, Poland was practically governed
by a magnate oligarchy led by Oleśnicki. The rule of the dignitaries was
actively opposed by various "szlachta" groups. Their leader Spytek of Melsztyn
was killed during an armed confrontation in 1439, which allowed Oleśnicki to
purge Poland of the remaining Hussite sympathizers and pursue his other
objectives without significant opposition. Casimir IV Jagiellon. In 1445
Casimir, the Grand Duke of Lithuania, was asked to assume the Polish throne
vacated by the death of his brother Władysław. Casimir was a tough negotiator
and did not accept the Polish nobility's conditions for his election. He
finally arrived in Poland and was crowned in 1447 on his terms. Becoming a King
of Poland Casimir also freed himself from the control the Lithuanian oligarchy
had imposed on him; in the Vilnius Privilege of 1447 he declared the Lithuanian
nobility having equal rights with Polish "szlachta". In time Kazimierz
Jagiellończyk was able to remove from power Cardinal Oleśnicki and his group,
basing his own power on the younger middle nobility camp instead. A conflict
with the pope and the local Church hierarchy over the right to fill vacant
bishop positions Casimir also resolved in his favor. War with the Teutonic
Order and its resolution. In 1454 the Prussian Confederation, an alliance of
Prussian cities and nobility opposed to the increasingly oppressive rule of the
Teutonic Knights, asked King Casimir to take over Prussia and stirred up an
armed uprising against the Knights. Casimir declared a war on the Order and a
formal incorporation of Prussia into the Polish Crown; those events led to the
Thirteen Years' War. The weakness of pospolite ruszenie (the szlachta wouldn't
cooperate without new across-the-board concessions from Casimir) prevented a
takeover of all of Prussia, but in the Second Peace of Thorn (1466) the Knights
had to surrender the western half of their territory to the Polish Crown (the
areas known afterwards as Royal Prussia, a semi-autonomous entity), and to
accept Polish-Lithuanian suzerainty over the remainder (the later Ducal
Prussia). Poland regained Pomerelia and with it the all-important access to the
Baltic Sea, as well as Warmia. In addition to land warfare, naval battles had
taken place, where ships provided by the City of Danzig (Gdańsk) successfully
fought Danish and Teutonic fleets. Other 15th century Polish territorial gains,
or rather revindications, included the Duchy of Oświęcim and Duchy of Zator
on Silesia's border with Lesser Poland, and there was notable progress
regarding the incorporation of the Piast Masovian duchies into the Crown.
Turkish and Tatar wars. The influence of the Jagiellon dynasty in Central
Europe had been on the rise. In 1471 Casimir's son Władysław became a king of
Bohemia, and in 1490 also of Hungary. The southern and eastern outskirts of
Poland and Lithuania became threatened by Turkish invasions beginning in the
late 15th century. Moldavia's involvement with Poland goes back to 1387, when
Petru I, Hospodar of Moldavia, seeking protection against the Hungarians, paid
Jagiełło homage in Lviv, which gave Poland access to the Black Sea ports. In
1485 King Casimir undertook an expedition into Moldavia, after its seaports
were overtaken by the Ottoman Turks. The Turkish controlled Crimean Tatars
raided the eastern territories in 1482 and 1487, until they were confronted by
King Jan Olbracht (John Albert), Casimir's son and successor. Poland was
attacked in 1487–1491 by remnants of the Golden Horde. They had invaded into
Poland as far as Lublin before being beaten at Zaslavl. King John Albert in
1497 made an attempt to resolve the Turkish problem militarily, but his efforts
were unsuccessful as he was unable to secure effective participation in the war
by his brothers, King Ladislaus II of Bohemia and Hungary and Alexander, the
Grand Duke of Lithuania, and because of the resistance on the part of Stephen
the Great, the ruler of Moldavia. More Ottoman Empire-instigated destructive
Tatar raids took place in 1498, 1499 and 1500. John Albert's diplomatic peace
efforts that followed were finalized after the king's death in 1503, resulting
in a territorial compromise and an unstable truce. Crimean Khanate invasions in
Poland and Lithuania continued also during the reign of King Alexander in 1502
and 1506; in 1506 the Tatars were defeated at the Battle of Kletsk by Michael
Glinski. Moscow's threat to Lithuania; Sigismund I. Lithuania was increasingly
threatened by the growing power of the Grand Duchy of Moscow. Through the
campaigns of 1471, 1492 and 1500 Moscow took over much of Lithuania's eastern
possessions. The Grand Duke Alexander was elected King of Poland in 1501, after
the death of John Albert. In 1506 he was succeeded by Sigismund I the Old
("Zygmunt I Stary") in both Poland and Lithuania, as the political realities
were drawing the two states closer together. Prior to that Sigismund had been a
Duke of Silesia by the authority of his brother Ladislaus II of Bohemia, but
like other Jagiellon rulers before him, he had not pursued the Polish Crown's
claim to Silesia. Culture in the Late Middle Ages. The culture of the 15th
century Poland was mostly medieval. Under favorable social and economic
conditions the crafts and industries in existence already in the preceding
centuries became more highly developed, and their products were much more
widespread. Paper production was one of the new industries, and printing
developed during the last quarter of the century. In 1473 Kasper Straube
produced in Kraków the first Latin print, in 1475 in Wrocław (Breslau) Kasper
Elyan printed for the first time in Polish, and after 1490 from Schweipolt
Fiol's shop in Kraków came the world's oldest prints in Cyrillic, namely Old
Church Slavonic language religious texts. Luxury items were in high demand
among the increasingly prosperous nobility, and to a lesser degree among the
wealthy town merchants. Brick and stone residential buildings became common,
but only in cities. The mature Gothic style was represented not only in
architecture, but also prominently in sacral wooden sculpture. The altar of
Veit Stoss in St. Mary's Church in Kraków is one of the most magnificent in
Europe art works of its kind. The Kraków University, which stopped functioning
after the death of Casimir the Great, was renewed and rejuvenated around 1400.
Augmented by a theology department, the "academy" was supported and protected
by Queen Jadwiga and the Jagiellon dynasty members, which is reflected in its
present name. Europe's oldest department of mathematics and astronomy was
established in 1405. Among the university's prominent scholars were Stanisław
of Skarbimierz, Paulus Vladimiri and Albert of Brudzewo, Copernicus' teacher.
The precursors of Polish humanism, John of Ludzisko and Gregory of Sanok, were
professors at the university. Gregory's court was the site of an early literary
society at Lwów (Lviv), after he had become the archbishop there. Scholarly
thought elsewhere was represented by Jan Ostroróg, a political publicist and
reformist, and Jan Długosz, a historian, whose "Annals" is the largest in
Europe history work of his time and a fundamental source for history of
medieval Poland. There were also active in Poland distinguished and influential
foreign humanists. Filippo Buonaccorsi, a poet and diplomat, who arrived from
Italy in 1468 and stayed in Poland until his death in 1496, established in
Kraków another literary society. Known as Kallimach, he wrote the lives of
Gregory of Sanok, Zbigniew Oleśnicki, and very likely that of Jan Długosz. He
tutored and mentored the sons of Casimir IV and postulated unrestrained royal
power. Conrad Celtes, a German humanist, organized in Kraków the first in this
part of Europe humanist literary and scholarly association "Sodalitas
Litterarum Vistulana". Early Modern Era (16th century). Agriculture-based
economic expansion. The folwark, a serfdom based large-scale farm and
agricultural business, was a dominant feature on Poland's economic landscape
beginning in the late 15th century and for the next 300 years. This dependence
on nobility-controlled agriculture diverged the ways of central-eastern Europe
from those of the western part of the continent, where, in contrast, elements
of capitalism and industrialization were developing to a much greater extent
than in the East, with the attendant growth of the bourgeoisie class and its
political influence. The combination of the 16th century agricultural trade
boom in Europe, with the free or cheap peasant labor available, made during
that period the folwark economy very profitable. The 16th century saw also
further development of mining and metallurgy, and technical progress took place
in various commercial applications. Great quantities of exported agricultural
and forest products floated down the rivers and transported by land routes
resulted in positive trade balance for Poland throughout the 16th century.
Imports from the West included industrial and luxury products and fabrics. Most
of the grain exported was leaving Poland through Danzig (Gdańsk), which
because of its location at the terminal point of the Vistula and its
tributaries waterway and of its Baltic seaport trade role became the
wealthiest, most highly developed, and most autonomous of the Polish cities. It
was also by far the largest center of crafts and manufacturing. Other towns
were negatively affected by Danzig's near-monopoly in foreign trade, but
profitably participated in transit and export activities. The largest of them
were Kraków (Cracow), Poznań, Lwów (Lviv), and Warszawa (Warsaw), and
outside of the Crown, Breslau (Wrocław). Thorn (Toruń) and Elbing (Elbląg)
were the main, after Danzig, cities in Royal Prussia. Burghers and nobles.
During the 16th century, prosperous patrician families of merchants, bankers,
or industrial investors, many of German origin, still conducted large-scale
business operations in Europe or lent money to Polish noble interests,
including the royal court. Some regions were relatively highly urbanized, for
example in Greater Poland and Lesser Poland at the end of the 16th century 30%
of the population lived in cities. The townspeople's upper layer was ethnically
multinational and tended to be well-educated. Numerous burgher sons studied at
the Academy of Kraków and at foreign universities; members of their group are
among the finest contributors to the culture of Polish Renaissance. Unable to
form their own nationwide political class, many, despite the legal obstacles,
melted into the nobility. The nobility or "szlachta" in Poland constituted a
greater proportion (up to 10%) of the population, than in other European
countries. In principle they were all equal and politically empowered, but some
had no property and were not allowed to hold offices, or participate in sejms
or sejmiks, the legislative bodies. Of the "landed" nobility some possessed a
small patch of land which they tended themselves and lived like peasant
families (mixed marriages gave some peasants one of the few possible paths to
nobility), while the magnates owned dukedom-like networks of estates with
several hundred towns and villages and many thousands of subjects. The 16th
century Poland was a "republic of nobles", and it was the nobility's "middle
class" that formed the leading component during the later Jagiellon period and
afterwards, but the magnates held the highest state and church offices. At that
time "szlachta" in Poland and Lithuania was ethnically diversified and belonged
to various religious denominations. During this period of tolerance such
factors had little bearing on one's economic status or career potential.
Jealous of their class privilege ("freedoms"), the Renaissance "szlachta"
developed a sense of public service duties, educated their youth, took keen
interest in current trends and affairs and traveled widely. While the Golden
Age of Polish Culture adopted the western humanism and Renaissance patterns,
the style of the nobles beginning in the second half of the century acquired a
distinctly eastern flavor. Visiting foreigners often remarked on the splendor
of the residencies and consumption-oriented lifestyle of wealthy Polish nobles.
Reformation. In a situation analogous with that of other European countries,
the progressive internal decay of the Polish Church created conditions
favorable for the dissemination of the Reformation ideas and currents. For
example, there was a chasm between the lower clergy and the nobility-based
Church hierarchy, which was quite laicized and preoccupied with temporal
issues, such as power and wealth, often corrupt. The middle nobility, which had
already been exposed to the Hussite reformist persuasion, increasingly looked
at the Church's many privileges with envy and hostility. The teachings of
Martin Luther were accepted most readily in the regions with strong German
connections: Silesia, Greater Poland, Pomerania and Prussia. In Danzig
(Gdańsk) in 1525 a lower-class Lutheran social uprising took place, bloodily
subdued by Sigismund I; after the reckoning he established a representation for
the plebeian interests as a segment of the city government. Königsberg and the
Duchy of Prussia under Albrecht Hohenzollern became a strong center of
Protestant propaganda dissemination affecting all of northern Poland and
Lithuania. Sigismund I quickly reacted against the "religious novelties",
issuing his first related edict in 1520, banning any promotion of the Lutheran
ideology, or even foreign trips to the Lutheran centers. Such attempted (poorly
enforced) prohibitions continued until 1543. Sigismund's son Sigismund II
Augustus ("Zygmunt II August"), a monarch of a much more tolerant attitude,
guaranteed the freedom of the Lutheran religion practice in all of Royal
Prussia by 1559. Besides Lutheranism, which, within the Polish Crown,
ultimately found substantial following mainly in the cities of Royal Prussia
and western Greater Poland, the teachings of the persecuted Anabaptists and
Unitarians, and in Greater Poland the Czech Brothers, were met, at least among
the "szlachta", with a more sporadic response. In Royal Prussia, 41% of the
parishes were counted as Lutheran in the second half of the 16th century, but
that percentage kept increasing. According to Kasper Cichocki, who wrote in the
early 17th century, only remnants of Catholicism were left there in his time.
Lutheranism was strongly dominant in Royal Prussia throughout the 17th century,
with the exception of Warmia (Ermland). Around 1570, of the at least 700
Protestant congregations in Poland-Lithuania, over 420 were Calvinist and over
140 Lutheran, with the latter including 30-40 ethnically Polish. Protestants
encompassed approximately 1/2 of the magnate class, 1/4 of other nobility and
townspeople, and 1/20 of the non-Orthodox peasantry. The bulk of the Polish-
speaking population had remained Catholic, but the proportion of Catholics
became significantly diminished within the upper social ranks. Calvinism on the
other hand, in mid 16th century gained many followers among both the "szlachta"
and the magnates, especially in Lesser Poland and Lithuania. The Calvinists,
who led by Jan Łaski were working on unification of the Protestant churches,
proposed the establishment of a Polish national church, under which all
Christian denominations, including Eastern Orthodox (very numerous in the Grand
Duchy of Lithuania and Ukraine), would be united. After 1555 Sigismund II, who
accepted their ideas, sent an envoy to the pope, but the papacy rejected the
various Calvinist postulates. Łaski and several other Calvinist scholars
published in 1563 the Bible of Brest, a complete Polish Bible translation from
the original languages, an undertaking financed by Mikołaj Radziwiłł the
Black. After 1563–1565 (the abolishment of state enforcement of the Church
jurisdiction), full religious tolerance became the norm. The Polish Catholic
Church emerged from this critical period weakened, but not badly damaged (the
bulk of the Church property was preserved), which facilitated the later success
of Counter-Reformation. Among the Calvinists, who also included the lower
classes and their leaders, ministers of common background, disagreements soon
developed, based on different views in the areas of religious and social
doctrines. The official split took place in 1562, when two separate churches
were officially established, the mainstream Calvinist, and the smaller, more
reformist, known as the Polish Brethren or Arians. The adherents of the radical
wing of the Polish Brethren promoted, often by way of personal example, the
ideas of social justice. Many Arians (Piotr of Goniądz, Jan Niemojewski) were
pacifists opposed to private property, serfdom, state authority and military
service; through communal living some had implemented the ideas of shared usage
of the land and other property. A major Polish Brethren congregation and center
of activities was established in 1569 in Raków near Kielce, and lasted until
1638, when Counter-Reformation had it closed. The notable Sandomierz Agreement
of 1570, an act of compromise and cooperation among several Polish Protestant
denominations, excluded the Arians, whose more moderate, larger faction toward
the end of the century gained the upper hand within the movement. The act of
the Warsaw Confederation, which took place during the convocation sejm of 1573,
provided guarantees, at least for the nobility, of religious freedom and peace.
It gave the Protestant denominations, including the Polish Brethren, formal
rights for many decades to come. Uniquely in 16th century Europe, it turned the
Commonwealth, in the words of Cardinal Stanislaus Hosius, a Catholic reformer,
into a "safe haven for heretics". Culture of Polish Renaissance. Golden Age of
Polish culture. The Polish "Golden Age", the period of the reigns of Sigismund
I and Sigismund II, the last two Jagiellon kings, or more generally the 16th
century, is most often identified with the rise of the culture of Polish
Renaissance. The cultural flowering had its material base in the prosperity of
the elites, both the landed nobility and urban patriciate at such centers as
Cracow and Danzig. As was the case with other European nations, the Renaissance
inspiration came in the first place from Italy, a process accelerated to some
degree by Sigismund I's marriage to Bona Sforza. Many Poles traveled to Italy
to study and to learn its culture. As imitating Italian ways became very trendy
(the royal courts of the last two Jagiellon kings provided the leadership and
example for everybody else), many Italian artists and thinkers were coming to
Poland, some settling and working there for many years. While the pioneering
Polish humanists, greatly influenced by Erasmus of Rotterdam, accomplished the
preliminary assimilation of the antiquity culture, the generation that followed
was able to put greater emphasis on the development of native elements, and
because of its social diversity, advanced the process of national integration.
Literacy, education and patronage of intellectual endeavors. Beginning in 1473
in Cracow (Kraków), the printing business kept growing. By the turn of the
16th/17th century there were about 20 printing houses within the Commonwealth,
8 in Cracow, the rest mostly in Danzig (Gdańsk), Thorn (Toruń) and Zamość.
The Academy of Kraków and Sigismund II possessed well-stocked libraries;
smaller collections were increasingly common at noble courts, schools and
townspeople's households. Illiteracy levels were falling, as by the end of the
16th century almost every parish ran a school. The Lubrański Academy, an
institution of higher learning, was established in Poznań in 1519. The
Reformation resulted in the establishment of a number of gymnasiums,
academically oriented secondary schools, some of international renown, as the
Protestant denominations wanted to attract supporters by offering high quality
education. The Catholic reaction was the creation of Jesuit colleges of
comparable quality. The Kraków University in turn responded with humanist
program gymnasiums of its own. The university itself experienced a period of
prominence at the turn of the 15th/16th century, when especially the
mathematics, astronomy and geography faculties attracted numerous students from
abroad. Latin, Greek, Hebrew and their literatures were likewise popular. By
the mid 16th century the institution entered a crisis stage, and by the early
17th century regressed into Counter-reformational conformism. The Jesuits took
advantage of the infighting and established in 1579 a university college in
Vilnius, but their efforts aimed at taking over the Academy of Kraków were
unsuccessful. Under the circumstances many elected to pursue their studies
abroad. Zygmunt I Stary, who built the presently existing Wawel Renaissance
castle, and his son Sigismund II Augustus, supported intellectual and artistic
activities and surrounded themselves with the creative elite. Their patronage
example was followed by ecclesiastic and lay feudal lords, and by patricians in
major towns. Science. Polish science reached its culmination in the first half
of the 16th century. The medieval point of view was criticized, more rational
explanations were attempted. Copernicus' "De revolutionibus orbium coelestium",
published in Nuremberg in 1543, shook up the traditional value system extended
into an understanding of the physical universe, doing away with its
Christianity-adopted Ptolemaic anthropocentric model and setting free the
explosion of scientific inquiry. Generally the prominent scientists of the
period resided in many different regions of the country, and increasingly, the
majority were of urban, rather than noble origin. Nicolaus Copernicus, a son of
a Toruń trader from Kraków, made many contributions to science and the arts.
His scientific creativity was inspired at the University of Kraków, at the
institution's height; he also studied at Italian universities later. Copernicus
wrote Latin poetry, developed an economic theory, functioned as a cleric-
administrator, political activist in Prussian sejmiks, and led the defense of
Olsztyn against the forces of Albrecht Hohenzollern. As an astronomer, he
worked on his scientific theory for many years at Frombork, where he died.
Josephus Struthius became famous as a physician and medical researcher. Bernard
Wapowski was a pioneer of Polish cartography. Maciej Miechowita, a rector at
the Cracow Academy, published in 1517 "Tractatus de duabus Sarmatiis", a
treatise on the geography of the East, an area in which Polish investigators
provided first-hand expertise for the rest of Europe. Andrzej Frycz Modrzewski
was one of the greatest theorists of political thought in Renaissance Europe.
His most famous work, "On the Improvement of the Commonwealth", was published
in Kraków in 1551. Modrzewski criticized the feudal societal relations and
proposed broad realistic reforms. He postulated that all social classes should
be subjected to the law to the same degree, and wanted to moderate the existing
inequities. Modrzewski, an influential and often translated author, was a
passionate proponent of peaceful resolution of international conflicts. Bishop
Wawrzyniec Goślicki (Goslicius), who wrote and published in 1568 a study
entitled "De optimo senatore" ("The Counsellor" in the 1598 English
translation), was another popular and influential in the West political
thinker. Historian Marcin Kromer wrote "De origine et rebus gestis Polonorum"
(On the origin and deeds of Poles) in 1555 and in 1577 "Polonia", a treatise
highly regarded in Europe. Marcin Bielski's "Chronicle of the Whole World", a
universal history, was written ca. 1550. The chronicle of Maciej Stryjkowski
(1582) covered the history of Eastern Europe. Literature. Modern Polish
literature begins in the 16th century. At that time the Polish language, common
to all educated groups, matured and penetrated all areas of public life,
including municipal institutions, the legal code, the Church and other official
uses, coexisting for a while with Latin. Klemens Janicki, one of the
Renaissance Latin language poets, a laureate of a papal distinction, was of
peasant origin. Another plebeian author, Biernat of Lublin, wrote his own
version of Aesop's fables in Polish, permeated with his socially radical views.
A Literary Polish language breakthrough came under the influence of the
Reformation with the writings of Mikołaj Rej. In his "Brief Discourse", a
satire published in 1543, he defends a serf from a priest and a noble, but in
his later works he often celebrates the joys of the peaceful but privileged
life of a country gentleman. Rej, whose legacy is his unbashful promotion of
the Polish language, left a great variety of literary pieces. Łukasz
Górnicki, an author and translator, perfected the Polish prose of the period.
His contemporary and friend Jan Kochanowski became one of the greatest Polish
poets of all time. Kochanowski was born in 1530 into a prosperous noble family.
In his youth he studied at the universities of Kraków, Königsberg and Padua
and traveled extensively in Europe. He worked for a time as a royal secretary,
and then settled in the village of Czarnolas, a part of his family inheritance.
Kochanowski's multifaceted creative output is remarkable for both the depth of
thoughts and feelings that he shares with the reader, and for its beauty and
classic perfection of form. Among Kochanowski's best known works are bucolic
"Frascas" (trifles), epic poetry, religious lyrics, drama-tragedy "The
Dismissal of the Greek Envoys", and the most highly regarded "Threnodies" or
laments, written after the death of his young daughter. The poet Mikołaj Sęp
Szarzyński, an intellectually refined master of small forms, bridges the late
Renaissance and early Baroque artistic periods. Music. Following the European
and Italian in particular musical trends, the Renaissance music was developing
in Poland, centered around the royal court patronage and branching from there.
Sigismund I kept from 1543 a permanent choir at the Wawel castle, while the
Reformation brought large scale group Polish language church singing during the
services. Jan of Lublin wrote a comprehensive tablature for the organ and other
keyboard instruments. Among the composers, who often permeated their music with
national and folk elements, were Wacław of Szamotuły, Mikołaj Gomółka, who
wrote music to Kochanowski translated psalms, and Mikołaj Zieleński, who
enriched the Polish music by adopting the Venetian School polyphonic style.
Architecture, sculpture and painting. Architecture, sculpture and painting
developed also under Italian influence from the beginning of the 16th century.
A number of professionals from Tuscany arrived and worked as royal artists in
Kraków. Francesco Fiorentino worked on the tomb of Jan Olbracht already from
1502, and then together with Bartolommeo Berrecci and Benedykt from Sandomierz
rebuilt the royal castle, which was accomplished between 1507 and 1536.
Berrecci also built Sigismund's Chapel at Wawel Cathedral. Polish magnates,
Silesian Piast princes in Brzeg, and even Kraków merchants (by the mid 16th
century their class economically gained strength nationwide) built or rebuilt
their residencies to make them resemble the Wawel Castle. Kraków's Sukiennice
and Poznań City Hall are among numerous buildings rebuilt in the Renaissance
manner, but Gothic construction continued alongside for a number of decades.
Between 1580 and 1600 Jan Zamoyski commissioned the Venetian architect Bernardo
Morando to build the city of Zamość. The town and its fortifications were
designed to consistently implement the Renaissance and Mannerism aesthetic
paradigms. Tombstone sculpture, often inside churches, is richly represented on
graves of clergy and lay dignitaries and other wealthy individuals. Jan Maria
Padovano and Jan Michałowicz of Urzędów count among the prominent artists.
Painted illuminations in Balthasar Behem Codex are of exceptional quality, but
draw their inspiration largely from Gothic art. Stanisław Samostrzelnik, a
monk in the Cistercian monastery in Mogiła near Kraków, painted miniatures
and polychromed wall frescos. Republic of middle nobility; execution movement.
During the reign of Sigismund I, "szlachta" in the lower chamber of the General
Sejm (from 1493 a bicameral legislative body), initially decidedly outnumbered
by their more privileged colleagues from the senate (which is what the
appointed for life prelates and barons of the royal council were being called
now), acquired a more numerous and fully elected representation. Sigismund
however preferred to rule with the help of the magnates, pushing "szlachta"
into the "opposition". After the "Nihil novi" act of 1505, a collection of laws
known as Łaski's Statutes was published in 1506 and distributed to Polish
courts. The legal pronouncements, intended to facilitate the functioning of a
uniform and centralized state, with ordinary "szlachta" privileges strongly
protected, were frequently ignored by the kings, beginning with Sigismund I,
and the upper nobility or church interests. This situation became the basis for
the formation around 1520 of the "szlachta"'s execution movement, for the
complete codification and execution, or enforcement, of the laws. In 1518
Sigismund I married Bona Sforza d'Aragona, a young, strong-minded Italian
princess. Bona's sway over the king and the magnates, her efforts to strengthen
the monarch's political position, financial situation, and especially the
measures she took to advance her personal and dynastic interests, including the
forced royal election of the minor Sigismund Augustus in 1529 and his premature
coronation in 1530, increased the discontent among "szlachta" activists. The
opposition middle "szlachta" movement came up with a constructive reform
program during the Kraków "sejm" of 1538/1539. Among the movement's demands
were termination of the kings' practice of alienation of royal domain, giving
or selling land estates to great lords at the monarch' discretion, and a ban on
concurrent holding of multiple state offices by the same person, both
legislated initially in 1504. Sigismund I's unwillingness to move toward the
implementation of the reformers' goals negatively affected the country's
financial and defensive capabilities. The relationship with "szlachta" had only
gotten worse during the early years of the reign of Sigismund II Augustus and
remained bad until 1562. Sigismund Augustus' secret marriage with Barbara
Radziwiłł in 1547, before his accession to the throne, was strongly opposed
by his mother Bona and by the magnates of the Crown. Sigismund, who took over
the reign after his father's death in 1548, overcame the resistance and had
Barbara crowned in 1550; a few months later the new queen died. Bona, estranged
from her son returned to Italy in 1556, where she died soon afterwards. The
"sejm", until 1573 summoned by the king at his discretion (for example when he
needed funds to wage a war), composed of the two chambers presided over by the
monarch, became in the course of the 16th century the main organ of the state
power. The reform-minded execution movement had its chance to take on the
magnates and the church hierarchy (and take steps to restrain their abuse of
power and wealth) when Sigismund Augustus switched sides and lent them his
support at the "sejm" of 1562. During this and several more sessions of the
parliament, within the next decade or so, the Reformation inspired "szlachta"
was able to push through a variety of reforms, which resulted in a fiscally
more sound, better governed, more centralized and territorially unified Polish
state. Some of the changes were too modest, other had never become completely
implemented (e. g. recovery of the usurped Crown land), but nevertheless for
the time being the middle "szlachta" movement was victorious. Mikołaj
Sienicki, a Protestant activist, was a parliamentary leader of the execution
movement and one of the organizers of the Warsaw Confederation. Resources and
strategic objectives. Despite the favorable economic development, the military
potential of 16th century Poland was modest in relation to the challenges and
threats coming from several directions, which included the Ottoman Empire, the
Teutonic state, the Habsburgs, and Muscovy. Given the declining military value
and willingness of pospolite ruszenie, the bulk of the forces available
consisted of professional and mercenary soldiers. Their number and provision
depended on "szlachta"-approved funding (self-imposed taxation and other
sources) and tended to be insufficient for any combination of adversaries. The
quality of the forces and their command was good, as demonstrated by victories
against a seemingly overwhelming enemy. The attainment of strategic objectives
was supported by a well-developed service of knowledgeable diplomats and
emissaries. Because of the limited resources at the state's disposal, the
Jagiellon Poland had to concentrate on the area most crucial for its security
and economic interests, which was the strengthening of Poland's position along
the Baltic coast. Prussia; struggle for Baltic area domination. The Peace of
Thorn of 1466 reduced the Teutonic Knights, but brought no lasting solution to
the problem they presented for Poland and their state avoided paying the
prescribed tribute. The chronically difficult relations had gotten worse after
the 1511 election of Albrecht as Grand Master of the Order. Faced with
Albrecht's rearmament and hostile alliances, Poland waged a war in 1519; the
war ended in 1521, when mediation by Charles V resulted in a truce. As a
compromise move Albrecht, persuaded by Martin Luther, initiated a process of
secularization of the Order and the establishment of a lay duchy of Prussia, as
Poland's dependency, ruled by Albrecht and afterwards by his descendants. The
terms of the proposed pact immediately improved Poland's Baltic region
situation, and at that time also appeared to protect the country's long-term
interests. The treaty was concluded in 1525 in Kraków; the remaining state of
the Teutonic Knights (East Prussia centered on Königsberg) was converted into
the Protestant (Lutheran) Duchy of Prussia under the King of Poland and the
homage act of the new Prussian duke in Kraków followed. In reality the House
of Hohenzollern, of which Albrecht was a member, the ruling family of the
Margraviate of Brandenburg, had been actively expanding its territorial
influence; for example already in the 16th century in Farther Pomerania and
Silesia. Motivated by a current political expediency, Sigismund Augustus in
1563 allowed the Brandenburg elector branch of the Hohenzollerns, excluded
under the 1525 agreement, to inherit the Prussian fief rule. The decision,
confirmed by the 1569 "sejm", made the future union of Prussia with Brandenburg
possible. Sigismind II, unlike his successors, was however careful to assert
his supremacy. The Polish Lithuanian Commonwealth, ruled after 1572 by elective
kings, was even less able to counteract the growing importance of the
dynastically active Hohenzollerns. In 1568 Sigismund Augustus, who had already
embarked on a war fleet enlargement program, established the Maritime
Commission. A conflict with the City of Gdańsk (Danzig), which felt that its
monopolistic trade position was threatened, ensued. In 1569 Royal Prussia had
its legal autonomy largely taken away, and in 1570 Poland's supremacy over
Danzig and the Polish King's authority over the Baltic shipping trade were
regulated and received statutory recognition (Karnkowski's Statutes). Wars with
Moscow. In the 16th century the Grand Duchy of Moscow continued activities
aimed at unifying the old Rus' lands still under Lithuanian rule. The Grand
Duchy of Lithuania had insufficient resources to counter Moscow's advances,
already having to control the Rus' population within its borders and not being
able to count on loyalty of Rus' feudal lords. As a result of the protracted
war at the turn of the 15th and 16th centuries, Moscow acquired large tracts of
territory east of the Dnieper River. Polish assistance and involvement were
increasingly becoming a necessary component of the balance of power in the
eastern reaches of the Lithuanian domain. Under Vasili III Moscow fought a war
with Lithuania and Poland between 1512 and 1522, during which in 1514 the
Russians took Smolensk. That same year the Polish-Lithuanian rescue expedition
fought the victorious Battle of Orsha under Hetman Konstanty Ostrogski and
stopped the Duchy of Moscow's further advances. An armistice implemented in
1522 left Smolensk land and Severia in Russian hands. Another round of fighting
took place during 1534–1537, when the Polish aid led by Hetman Jan Tarnowski
made possible the taking of Gomel and fiercely defeated Starodub. New truce
(Lithuania kept only Gomel), stabilization of the border and over two decades
of peace followed. The Jagiellons and the Habsburgs; Ottoman Empire expansion.
In 1515, during a congress in Vienna, a dynastic succession arrangement was
agreed to between Maximilian I, Holy Roman Emperor and the Jagiellon brothers,
Vladislas II of Bohemia and Hungary and Sigismund I of Poland and Lithuania. It
was supposed to end the Emperor's support for Poland's enemies, the Teutonic
and Russian states, but after the election of Charles V, Maximilian's successor
in 1519, the relations with Sigismund had worsened. The Jagiellon rivalry with
the House of Habsburg in central Europe was ultimately resolved to the
Habsburgs' advantage. The decisive factor that damaged or weakened the
monarchies of the last Jagiellons was the Ottoman Empire's Turkish expansion.
Hungary's vulnerability greatly increased after Suleiman the Magnificent took
the Belgrade fortress in 1521. To prevent Poland from extending military aid to
Hungary, Suleiman had a Tatar-Turkish force raid southeastern Poland-Lithuania
in 1524. The Hungarian army was defeated in 1526 at the Battle of Mohács,
where the young Louis II Jagiellon, son of Vladislas II, was killed.
Subsequently, after a period of internal strife and external intervention,
Hungary was partitioned between the Habsburgs and the Ottomans. The 1526 death
of Janusz III of Masovia, the last of the Masovian Piast dukes line (a remnant
of the fragmentation period divisions), enabled Sigismund I to finalize the
incorporation of Masovia into the Polish Crown in 1529. From the early 16th
century the Pokuttya border region was contested by Poland and Moldavia (see
Battle of Obertyn). A peace with Moldavia took effect in 1538 and Pokuttya
remained Polish. An "eternal peace" with the Ottoman Empire was negotiated by
Poland in 1533 to secure frontier areas. Moldavia had fallen under Turkish
domination, but Polish-Lithuanian magnates remained actively involved there.
Sigismund II Augustus even claimed "jurisdiction" and in 1569 accepted a
formal, short-lived suzerainty over Moldavia. Livonia; struggle for Baltic area
domination. Because of its desire to control Livonian Baltic seaports,
especially Riga, and other economic reasons, in the 16th century the Grand
Duchy of Lithuania was becoming increasingly interested in extending its
territorial rule to Livonia, a country, by the 1550s largely Lutheran,
traditionally ruled by the Brothers of the Sword knightly order. This put
Poland and Lithuania on a collision course with Moscow and other powers, which
had also attempted expansion in that area. Soon after the 1525 Kraków (Cracow)
treaty, Albrecht (Albert) of Hohenzollern, seeking a dominant position for his
brother Wilhelm, the Archbishop of Riga, planned a Polish-Lithuanian fief in
Livonia. What happened instead was the establishment of a Livonian pro-Polish-
Lithuanian party or faction. Internal fighting in Livonia took place when the
Grand Master of the Brothers concluded in 1554 a treaty with Moscow, declaring
his state's neutrality regarding the Russian-Lithuanian conflict. Supported by
Albrecht and the magnates Sigismund II declared a war on the Order. Grand
Master Wilhelm von Fürstenberg accepted the Polish-Lithuanian conditions
without a fight, and according to the 1557 Poswol treaty, a military alliance
obliged the Livonian state to support Lithuania against Moscow. Other powers
aspiring to the Livonian Baltic access responded with partitioning of the
Livonian state, which triggered the lengthy Livonian War, fought between 1558
and 1583. Ivan IV of Russia took Dorpat (Tartu) and Narva in 1558, and soon the
Danes and Swedes had occupied other parts of the country. To protect the
integrity of their country, the Livonians now sought a union with the Polish-
Lithuanian state. Gotthard Kettler, the new Grand Master, met in Vilnius
(Vilna, Wilno) with Sigismund Augustus in 1561 and declared Livonia a vassal
state under the Polish King. The agreement of November 28 called for
secularization of the Brothers of the Sword Order and incorporation of the
newly established Duchy of Livonia into the "Rzeczpospolita" ("Republic") as an
autonomous entity. Under the Union of Vilnius the Duchy of Courland and
Semigallia was also created as a separate fief, to be ruled by Kettler.
Sigismund II obliged himself to recover the parts of Livonia lost to Moscow and
the Baltic powers, which had led to grueling wars with Russia (1558–1570 and
1577–1582) and heavy struggles having to do also with the fundamental issues
of control of the Baltic trade and freedom of navigation. The Baltic region
policies of the last Jagiellon king and his advisors were the most mature of
the 16th century Poland's strategic programs. The outcome of the efforts in
that area was to a considerable extent successful for the Commonwealth. The
conclusion of the above wars took place during the reign of King Stephen
Báthory. Poland and Lithuania in real union under Sigismund II. Sigismund II's
childlessness added urgency to the idea of turning the personal union between
Poland and the Grand Duchy of Lithuania into a more permanent and tighter
relationship; it was also a priority for the execution movement. Lithuania's
laws were codified and reforms enacted in 1529, 1557, 1565–1566 and 1588,
gradually making its social, legal and economic system similar to that of
Poland, with the expanding role of the middle and lower nobility. Fighting wars
with Moscow under Ivan IV and the threat perceived from that direction provided
additional motivation for the real union for both Poland and Lithuania. The
process of negotiating the actual arrangements turned out to be difficult and
lasted from 1563 to 1569, with the Lithuanian magnates, worried about losing
their dominant position, being at times uncooperative. It took Sigismunt II's
unilateral declaration of the incorporation into the Polish Crown of
substantial disputed border regions, including most of Lithuanian Ukraine, to
make the Lithuanian magnates rejoin the process, and participate in the
swearing of the act of the Union of Lublin on July 1, 1569. Lithuania for the
near future was becoming more secure on the eastern front. It's increasingly
Polonized nobility made in the coming centuries great contributions to the
Commonwealth's culture, but at the cost of Lithuanian national development. The
Lithuanian language survived as a peasant vernacular and also as a written
language in religious use, from the publication of the Lithuanian Catechism by
Martynas Mažvydas in 1547. The Ruthenian language was and remained in the
Grand Duchy's official use even after the Union, until the takeover of Polish.
The Commonwealth: multicultural, magnate dominated. By the Union of Lublin a
unified Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth ("Rzeczpospolita") was created,
stretching from the Baltic Sea and the Carpathian mountains to present-day
Belarus and western and central Ukraine (which earlier had been Kievan Rus'
principalities). Within the new federation some degree of formal separateness
of Poland and Lithuania was retained (distinct state offices, armies,
treasuries and judicial systems), but the union became a multinational entity
with a common monarch, parliament, monetary system and foreign-military policy,
in which only the nobility enjoyed full citizenship rights. Moreover, the
nobility's uppermost stratum was about to assume the dominant role in the
Commonwealth, as magnate factions were acquiring the ability to manipulate and
control the rest of "szlachta" to their clique's private advantage. This trend,
facilitated further by the liberal settlement and land acquisition consequences
of the union, was becoming apparent at the time of, or soon after the 1572
death of Sigismund Augustus, the last monarch of the Jagiellon dynasty. One of
the most salient characteristics of the newly-established Commonwealth was its
multiethnicity, and accordingly diversity of religious faiths and
denominations. Among the peoples represented were Poles (about 50% or less of
the total population), Lithuanians, Latvians, Rus' people (corresponding to
today's Belarusians, Ukrainians, Russians or their East Slavic ancestors),
Germans, Estonians, Jews, Armenians, Tatars and Czechs, among others, for
example smaller West European groups. As for the main social segments in the
early 17th century, nearly 70% of the Commonwealth's population were peasants,
over 20% residents of towns, and less than 10% nobles and clergy combined. The
total population, estimated at 8–10 millions, kept growing dynamically until
the middle of the century. The Slavic populations of the eastern lands, Rus' or
Ruthenia, were solidly, except for the Polish colonizing nobility (and
Polonized elements of local nobility), Eastern Orthodox, which portended future
trouble for the Commonwealth. Jewish settlement. Poland had become the home to
Europe's largest Jewish population, as royal edicts guaranteeing Jewish safety
and religious freedom, issued during the 13th century (Bolesław the Pious,
Statute of Kalisz of 1264), contrasted with bouts of persecution in Western
Europe. This persecution intensified following the Black Death of 1348–1349,
when some in the West blamed the outbreak of the plague on the Jews. As
scapegoats were sought, pogroms and mass killings took place in a number of
German cities, which caused an exodus of survivors heading east. Much of Poland
was spared from this disease, and Jewish immigration brought their valuable
contributions and abilities to the rising state. The number of Jews in Poland
kept increasing throughout the Middle Ages; the population had reached about
30,000 toward the end of the 15th century, and, as refugees escaping further
persecution elsewhere kept streaming in, 150,000 in the 16th century. A royal
privilege issued in 1532 granted the Jews freedom to trade anywhere within the
kingdom. Massacres and expulsions from many German states continued until
1552–1553. By the mid-16th century, 80% of the world's Jews lived and
flourished in Poland in Lithuania; most of western and central Europe was by
that time closed to Jews. In Poland-Lithuania the Jews were increasingly
finding employment as managers and intermediaries, facilitating the functioning
of and collecting revenue in huge magnate-owned land estates, especially in the
eastern borderlands, developing into an indispensable mercantile and
administrative class. Despite the partial resettlement of Jews in Western
Europe following the Thirty Years' War (1618–1648), a great majority of world
Jewry had lived in Eastern Europe (in the Commonwealth and in the regions
further east and south, where many migrated), until the 1940s. Notes. "a."This
is true especially regarding legislative matters and legal framework. Despite
the restrictions the nobility imposed on the monarchs, the Polish kings had
never become figureheads. In practice they wielded considerable executive
power, up to and including the last king, Stanisław August Poniatowski. Some
were at times even accused of absolutist tendencies, and it may be for the lack
of sufficiently strong personalities or favorable circumstances, that none of
the kings had succeeded in significant and lasting strengthening of the
monarchy.
