Livonian Crusade The Livonian Crusade refers to the German and Danish conquest
of medieval Livonia, the territory constituting modern Latvia and Estonia,
during the Northern Crusades. The lands on the eastern shores of the Baltic Sea
were the last corners of Europe to be Christianized. On 2 February 1207, in the
territories conquered, an ecclesiastical state called Terra Mariana was
established as a principality of the Holy Roman Empire, and proclaimed by pope
Innocent III in 1215 as a subject of the Holy See. After the success of the
crusade, the German- and Danish-occupied territory was divided into six feudal
principalities by William of Modena. History. War against Livs and Latgalians
(1198–1209). Christianity had come to Latvia with the Swedes in the 9th
century and the Danes in the 11th. By the time German traders began to arrive
in the second half of the 12th century to trade along the ancient Daugava-
Dnieper route to Byzantium, many Latvians had already been baptized. Meinhard
of Segeberg arrived in Livland (as it was named in German) in 1184 with the
mission of converting the pagan Livonians, and was consecrated as its bishop in
1186. The indigenous Livonians (Livs), who had been paying tribute to the East
Slavic Principality of Polotsk, and were often under attack by their southern
neighbours the Semigallians, at first considered the Low Germans (Saxons) to be
useful allies. The first prominent Livonian to be converted was their leader
Caupo of Turaida, who was baptized around 1189. Pope Celestine III called for a
crusade against pagans in Northern Europe in 1193. When peaceful means of
conversion failed to produce results, the impatient Meinhard plotted to convert
the Livonians forcibly, but was thwarted. He died in 1196, having failed his
mission. His appointed replacement, bishop Berthold of Hanover, arrived with a
large contingent of crusaders in 1198. Shortly afterward, while riding ahead of
his troops in battle, Berthold was surrounded and killed, and his forces
defeated. To avenge Berthold's defeat, Pope Innocent III issued a bull
declaring a crusade against the Livonians. Albrecht von Buxthoeven, consecrated
as bishop in 1199, arrived the following year with a large force, and
established Riga as the seat of his bishopric in 1201. In 1202 he formed the
Livonian Brothers of the Sword to aid in the conversion of the pagans to
Christianity and, more importantly, to protect German trade and secure German
control over commerce. As the German grip tightened, the Livonians and their
christened chief rebelled against the crusaders. Caupo's forces were defeated
at Turaida in 1206, and the Livonians were declared to be converted. Caupo
subsequently remained an ally of the crusaders until his death in the Battle of
St. Matthew's Day in 1217. By 1208 the important Daugava trading posts of
Salaspils (Holme), Koknese (Kokenhusen) and Sēlpils (Selburg) had been taken
over as a result of Albert's energetic campaigning. In the same year, the
rulers of the Latgalian counties Tālava, Satekle, and Autine established
military alliances with the Order, and construction began on both Cēsis
(Wenden) castle and a stone castle in Koknese, where the Daugava and Pērse
rivers meet, replacing the wooden castle of the Latgalians. In 1209 Albert,
leading the forces of the Order, captured the capital of the Latgalian
principality of Jersika, and took the wife of the ruler Visvaldis captive.
Visvaldis was forced to submit his kingdom to Albert as a grant to the
Archbishopric of Riga, and received back only a portion of it as a fief.
Tālava, weakened in wars with Estonians and Russians, became a vassal state of
the Archbishopric of Riga in 1214, and in 1224 was finally divided between the
Archbishopric and the Order. War against Estonians (1208–1227). By 1208 the
Crusaders were strong enough to begin operations against the Estonians, who
were at that time divided into eight major and seven smaller Counties, led by
elders, with limited co-operation between them. With the help of the newly
converted local tribes of Livs and Latgalians, the crusaders initiated raids
into Sakala and Ugaunia in Southern Estonia. The Estonian tribes fiercely
resisted the attacks from Riga and occasionally sacked territories controlled
by the crusaders. In 1208–27, war parties of the different sides rampaged
through Livonia, Latgalia, and other Estonian counties, with the Livs,
Latgalians and Russians of the Republic of Novgorod serving variously as allies
of both crusaders and Estonians. Hill forts, which were the key centers of
Estonian counties, were besieged, captured, and re-captured a number of times.
A truce between the war-weary sides was established for three years
(1213–1215). It proved generally more favourable to the Germans, who
consolidated their political position, while the Estonians were unable to
develop their system of loose alliances into a centralised state. They were led
by Lembitu of Lehola, the elder of Sackalia, who by 1211 had come to the
attention of German chroniclers as the central figure of the Estonian
resistance. The Livonian leader Caupo was killed in the Battle of St. Matthew's
Day near Viljandi (Fellin) on September 21, 1217, but Lembitu was also killed,
and the battle was a crushing defeat for the Estonians. The Christian kingdoms
of Denmark and Sweden were also eager for expansion on the eastern shores of
the Baltic. In 1218 Albert asked King Valdemar II of Denmark for assistance,
but Valdemar instead arranged a deal with the Order. The king was victorious in
the Battle of Lyndanisse in Revelia in 1219, to which the origin of the
Dannebrog is attributed. He subsequently founded the fortress Castrum Danorum,
which was unsuccessfully besieged by the Estonians in 1220 and 1223. King John
I of Sweden tried to establish a Swedish presence in the province of Wiek, but
his troops were defeated by the Oeselians in the Battle of Lihula in 1220.
Revelia, Harrien, and Vironia, the whole of northern Estonia, fell to Danish
control. During the uprising of 1223, all Christian strongholds in Estonia save
Tallinn fell into Estonian hands, with their defenders killed. By 1224 all of
the larger fortresses were reconquered by the crusaders, except for Tharbata,
which was defended by a determined Estonian garrison and 200 Russian
mercenaries. The leader of the Russian troops was Vyachko, to whom the Novgorod
Republic had promised the fortress and its surrounding lands "if he could
conquer them for himself". Tharbata was finally captured by the crusaders in
August 1224 and all its defenders killed. Early in 1224 Emperor Frederick II
had announced at Catania that Livonia, Prussia, Sambia and a number of
neighboring provinces would henceforth be considered "reichsfrei", that is,
subordinate directly to the Roman Catholic Church and the Holy Roman Empire
only, as opposed to being under the jurisdiction of local rulers. At the end of
the year Pope Honorius III announced the appointment of Bishop William of
Modena as papal legate for Livonia, Prussia, and other countries. In 1224 the
Livonian Brothers of the Sword established their headquarters at Fellin
(Viljandi) in Sackalia, where the walls of the Master's castle are still
standing. Other strongholds included Wenden (Cēsis), Segewold (Sigulda), and
Ascheraden (Aizkraukle). The Chronicle of Henry of Livonia, one of the greatest
medieval narratives, was written probably as a report for William of Modena,
giving him the history of the Church in Livonia up to his time. It relates how
in 1226, in the stronghold Tarwanpe, William of Modena successfully mediated a
peace between the Germans, the Danes and the Vironians. War against Saaremaa
(1206–1261). The last Estonian county to hold out against the invaders was
the island country of Saaremaa (Ösel), whose war fleets had continued to raid
Denmark and Sweden during the years of fighting against the German crusaders.
In 1206, a Danish army led by king Valdemar II and Andreas, the Bishop of Lund,
landed on Saaremaa and attempted to establish a stronghold, without success. In
1216 the Livonian Brothers of the Sword and the bishop Theodorich joined forces
and invaded Saaremaa over the frozen sea. The Oeselians retaliated by raiding
German-held territories in Latvia the following spring. In 1220 a Swedish army
led by king John I of Sweden and the bishop Karl of Linköping captured Lihula
in Rotalia in Western Estonia. The Oeselians attacked the Swedish stronghold
later the same year and killed the entire garrison, including the Bishop of
Linköping. In 1222, the Danish king Valdemar II attempted a second conquest of
Saaremaa, this time establishing a stone fortress housing a strong garrison.
The stronghold was besieged and surrendered within five days, the Danish
garrison returning to Revel while leaving Bishop Albert of Riga's brother
Theodoric and others behind as hostages for peace. The castle was leveled by
the Oeselians. In 1227, the Livonian Brothers of the Sword, the town of Riga,
and the Bishop of Riga organized a combined attack against Saaremaa. After the
surrender of two major Oeselian strongholds, Muhu and Valjala, the Oeselians
formally accepted Christianity. After the defeat of the Livonian Brothers of
the Sword in the Battle of Saule in 1236 fighting again broke out on Saaremaa.
In 1241 the Oeselians once again accepted Christianity by signing treaties with
the Livonian Order's Master Andreas de Velven and the Bishopric of Ösel-Wiek.
This was followed by a treaty signed in 1255 by the Master of the Order, Anno
Sangerhausenn, and, on behalf of the Oeselians, elders whose names were
phonetically transcribed by Latin scribes as Ylle, Culle, Enu, Muntelene,
Tappete, Yalde, Melete, and Cake The treaty granted the Oeselians several
distinctive rights regarding the ownership and inheritance of land, the social
order, and the practice of religion. Warfare erupted in 1261 as the Oeselians
once more renounced Christianity and killed all the Germans on the island. A
peace treaty was signed after the united forces of the Livonian Order, the
Bishopric of Ösel-Wiek, and Danish Estonia, including mainland Estonians and
Latvians, defeated the Oeselians by capturing their stronghold at Kaarma. Soon
thereafter, the Livonian Order established a stone fort at Pöide. On July 24,
1343, the Oeselians arose yet again, killing all the Germans on the island,
drowning all the clerics, and besieging the Livonian Order's castle at Pöide.
After the garrison surrendered the Oeselians massacred the defenders and
destroyed the castle. In February 1344 Burchard von Dreileben led a campaign
over the frozen sea to Saaremaa. The Oeselians' stronghold was conquered and
their leader Vesse was hanged. In the early spring of 1345, the next campaign
of the Livonian Order ended with a treaty mentioned in the Chronicle of Hermann
von Wartberge and the Novgorod First Chronicle. Saaremaa remained the vassal of
the master of the Livonian Order and the Bishopric of Ösel-Wiek until 1559.
Wars against Curonians and Semigallians (1219–1290). Following the defeat of
the Estonians, the crusade moved against the Curonians (1242–1267) and
Semigallians (1219–1290), Baltic tribes living to the south and west of the
Daugava river and closely allied with the Samogitians. After the defeat in the
Battle of Saule by Samogitians and Semigallians, the remnants of the Livonian
Brothers of the Sword were reorganised in 1237, as a subdivision of the
Teutonic Order and became known as the Livonian Order. The Battle of Durbe was
another victory of Samogitians and allied Curonians over the united forces of
Livonian and Teutonic Orders in 1260. Crusaders finally overpowered the
Curonians in 1267, and despite of severe defeat in the Battle of Garoza in
1287, subsequently the Semigallians in 1290. The unconquered southern parts of
their territories (Sidrabe, Rakte, Ceklis, Megava etc.) were united under the
rule of the Grand Duchy of Lithuania. Aftermath. After the conquest, all
remaining local pagans were ostensibly Christianized although no Christian
literature or church services became available in native languages until the
Protestant Reformation period in the 16th century. The land was divided into
six feodal principalities by Papal Legate William of Modena: Archbishopric of
Riga, Bishopric of Courland, Bishopric of Dorpat, Bishopric of Ösel-Wiek, the
lands ruled by the Livonian Brothers of the Sword and Dominum directum of King
of Denmark, the Duchy of Estonia. In 1227 the Livonian Brothers of the Sword
conquered all Danish territories in Northern Estonia. After the Battle of Saule
the surviving members of the Brothers of the Sword merged into the Teutonic
Order of Prussia in 1237 and became known as Livonian Order. On 7 June 1238 by
the Treaty of Stensby the Teutonic knights returned the Duchy of Estonia to
Valdemar II, until in 1346, after St. George's Night Uprising, the lands were
sold back to the order and became part of the Ordenstaat.
