Meiji Restoration The , also known as the "Meiji Ishin", "Revolution", "Reform"
or "Renewal", was a chain of events that restored imperial rule to Japan in
1868 under Emperor Meiji. The goals of the restored government were expressed
by the new emperor in the Charter Oath. The Restoration led to enormous changes
in Japan's political and social structure, and spanned both the late Edo period
(often called Late Tokugawa shogunate) and the beginning of the Meiji period.
The period spanned from 1868 to 1912 and was responsible for the emergence of
Japan as a modernised nation in the early twentieth century. Alliances and
allegiances. The formation in 1866 of the Satsuma-Chōshū Alliance between
Saigō Takamori, the leader of the Satsuma domain, and Kido Takayoshi, the
leader of the Chōshū domain, built the foundation of the Meiji restoration.
These two leaders supported the Emperor Kōmei (Emperor Meiji's father) and
were brought together by Sakamoto Ryōma for the purpose of challenging the
ruling Tokugawa Shogunate ("bakufu") and restoring the Emperor to power. On
February 3, 1867, Emperor Meiji ascended the throne after Emperor Kōmei's
death on January 30, 1867. This period also saw Japan change from being a
feudal society to having a market economy and left the Japanese with a
lingering Western influence. End of the Shogunate. The Tokugawa Shogunate came
to its official end on November 9, 1867, when Tokugawa Yoshinobu, the 15th
Tokugawa Shogun, "put his prerogatives at the Emperor's disposal" and resigned
10 days later. This was effectively the "restoration" ("Taisei Hōkan") of
imperial rule – although Yoshinobu still had significant influence and it was
not until January 3, the following year, with the young emperor's edict that
the restoration fully occurred. Some shogunate forces escaped to Hokkaidō,
where they attempted to set up a breakaway Republic of Ezo; however, forces
loyal to the Emperor ended this attempt in May 1869 with the Battle of Hakodate
in Hokkaidō. The defeat of the armies of the former shogun (led by Enomoto
Takeaki and Hijikata Toshizō) marked the final end of the Tokugawa Shogunate,
with the Emperor's power fully restored. The growth of vassals later held
inherited lands and provided military service and homage to their lords after
the defeat of the armies. The Bakuhan Taisei split feudal power between the
shogunate in Edo and provincial domains throughout Japan. Provinces had a
degree of sovereignty and were allowed an independent administration of the Han
in exchange for loyalty to the Shogun, who was responsible for foreign
relations and national security. The shogun and lords were all daimyo: feudal
lords with their own bureaucracies, policies, and territories. The Shogun also
administered the most powerful han, the hereditary fief of the House of
Tokugawa. Each level of government administered its own system of taxation.
Motives. There were many causes to the Meiji Restoration. The Japanese knew
that they were behind the rest of the world when American Commodore Matthew C.
Perry came to Japan to try to issue a treaty that would open up Japanese ports
to trade. Perry came to Japan in large warships with armament and technology
that far outclassed those of Japan at the time. The leaders of the Meiji
Restoration, as this revolution came to be known, acted in the name of
restoring imperial rule in order to strengthen Japan against the threat
represented by the colonial powers of the day. The word "Meiji" means
"enlightened rule" and the goal was to combine "western advances" with the
traditional, "eastern" values. The main leaders of this were: Itō Hirobumi,
Matsukata Masayoshi, Kido Takayoshi, Itagaki Taisuke, Yamagata Aritomo, Mori
Arinori, Ōkubo Toshimichi, and Yamaguchi Naoyoshi. Under the leadership of
Mori Arinori, a group of prominent Japanese intellectuals went on to form the
Meiji Six Society in 1873 in order to continue to "promote civilization and
enlightenment" through western ethics and ideas. However, during the
restoration, political power simply moved from the Tokugawa Shogunate to an
oligarchy consisting of these leaders, mostly from the Satsuma Province (Ōkubo
Toshimichi and Saigō Takamori), and Chōshū Province (Itō Hirobumi, Yamagata
Aritomo, and Kido Takayoshi). This reflected their belief in the more
traditional practice of imperial rule, whereby the Emperor of Japan serves
solely as the spiritual authority of the nation and his ministers govern the
nation in his name. Effects. The Meiji Restoration accelerated
industrialization in Japan, which led to its rise as a military power by the
year 1905, under the slogan of . The Meiji oligarchy that formed the government
under the rule of the Emperor first introduced measures to consolidate their
power against the remnants of the Edo period government, the shogunate, daimyo,
and the samurai class. In 1868, all Tokugawa lands were seized and placed under
"imperial control", thus placing them under the prerogative of the new Meiji
government. In 1869, the daimyo of the Tosa, Hizen, Satsuma and Chōshū
domains, who were pushing most fiercely against the shogunate, were persuaded
to 'return their domains to the Emperor'. Other daimyo were subsequently
persuaded to do so, thus creating, arguably for the first time, a central
government in Japan which exercised direct power through the entire 'realm'
(天下). Finally, in 1871, the daimyo, past and present, were summoned before
the Emperor, where it was declared that all domains were now to be returned to
the Emperor. The roughly 300 domains (han) were turned into prefectures, each
under the control of a state-appointed governor. By 1888, several prefectures
had been merged in several steps to reduce their number to 75. The daimyo were
promised 1/10 of their fiefs' income as private income. Later, their debts and
payments of samurai stipends were to be taken over by the state. The oligarchs
also endeavoured to abolish the four divisions of society. Throughout Japan at
the time, the samurai numbered 1.9 million. (For comparison, this was more than
10 times the size of the French privileged class before the 1789 French
Revolution. Moreover, the samurai in Japan were not merely the lords, but also
their higher retainers—people who actually worked.) With each samurai being
paid fixed stipends, their upkeep presented a tremendous financial burden,
which may have prompted the oligarchs to action. Whatever their true
intentions, the oligarchs embarked on another slow and deliberate process to
abolish the samurai class. First, in 1873, it was announced that the samurai
stipends were to be taxed on a rolling basis. Later, in 1874, the samurai were
given the option to convert their stipends into government bonds. Finally, in
1876, this commutation was made compulsory. To reform the military, the
government instituted nationwide conscription in 1873, mandating that every
male would serve in the armed forces upon turning 21 for four years; followed
by three more years in the reserves. One of the primary differences between the
samurai and peasant class was the right to bear arms; this ancient privilege
was suddenly extended to every male in the nation. Furthermore, samurai were no
longer allowed to walk about town bearing a sword or weapon to show their
status as in former times. This led to a series of riots from disgruntled
samurai. One of the major riots was the one led by Saigō Takamori, the Satsuma
Rebellion, which eventually turned into a civil war. This rebellion was,
however, put down swiftly by the newly formed Imperial Japanese Army, trained
in Western tactics and weapons, even though the core of the new army was the
Tokyo police force, which was largely composed of former samurai. This sent a
strong message to the dissenting samurai that their time was indeed up. There
were fewer subsequent samurai uprisings and the distinction became all but a
name as the samurai joined the new society. The ideal of samurai military
spirit lived on in romanticized form and was often used as propaganda during
the early 20th century wars of the Empire of Japan. However, it is equally true
that the majority of samurai were content despite having their status
abolished. Many found employment in the government bureaucracy, which resembled
an elite class in its own right. The samurai, being better educated than most
of the population, became teachers, gun makers, government officials, or
military officers. While the formal title of samurai was abolished, the elitist
spirit that characterized the samurai class lived on. The oligarchs also
embarked on a series of land reforms. In particular, they legitimized the
tenancy system which had been going on during the Tokugawa period. Despite the
bakufu's best efforts to freeze the four classes of society in place, during
their rule villagers had begun to lease land out to other farmers, becoming
rich in the process. This greatly disrupted the clearly defined class system
which the bakufu had envisaged, partly leading to their eventual downfall. The
military of Japan was also strengthened, and they showed themselves as a
growing world power by winning both the Sino-Japanese war, and the Russo-
Japanese war. The victory against Russia was the more shocking as it was the
first time since the Mongol invasion of Europe that an Asian nation had
obtained a major victory against a European power. Besides drastic changes to
the social structure of Japan, in an attempt to create a strong centralized
state defining its national identity, the government established a dominant
national dialect that replaced local and regional dialects called hyojungo,
which was based on patterns of the Tokyo’s samurai classes that has
eventually become the norm in the realms of education, media, government and
business. Industrial growth. The rapid industrialization and modernization of
Japan both allowed and required a massive increase in production and
infrastructure. Japan built industries such as shipyards, iron smelters, and
spinning mills, which were then sold to well-connected entrepreneurs.
Consequently, domestic companies became consumers of Western technology and
applied it to produce items that would be sold cheaply in the international
market. With this, industrial zones grew enormously, and there was massive
migration to industrializing centers from the countryside. Industrialization
additionally went hand in hand with the development of a national railway
system and modern communications. With industrialization came the demand for
coal. There was dramatic rise in production, as shown in the table below. Coal
was needed for two things: steamships and railroads. The growth of these
sectors is shown below. Controversy in semantics. Ongoing debate continues
between historians as to the historical legitimacy of the name "restoration",
as opposed to a "coup" or "revolution". There are reasons to call it all three.
Advocates of the term "coup" would point out the fact that there was a change
in only the regime, with the fighting confined to the elite, which managed to
avoid being spread to the rest of society and that there was a shared sense of
national mission and class values. However, this term only refers to the
political leaders—not commoners. More importantly, it also does not represent
the wider historical context of the period, and the various ideological
struggles of the time in addition to the subsequent radical changes of society.
The direct challenge to the legitimacy of the Tokugawa Regime in 1868
identifies this event as a revolution. This term also implies an anticipation
of subsequent radical changes and indicates that the regime was toppled through
the combination of concerns and actions of different groups. This term is
problematic because it gives the false impression that rebels had unified or
coherent plans for the future and it does not account for the relatively
peaceful transition or how much actually stayed the same within the country.
The events of 1868 can be viewed in terms of a restoration because the
opposition made claims that the Tokugawa Shogunate had usurped the power to
govern from the Emperor. This claim as well as the strictly isolationist
sentiments of the times is an accurate representation of the event, in some
ways. The word restoration implies a focus on the elite ideological debates but
does not address the regional and religious tensions of the period. It also
undervalues the strategic nature of restorationist claims and gives a false
impression of unity among the rebelling houses. The most detrimental
implication of this term is that it offers no concrete explanation of how
ordinary people came to accept the legitimacy of direct imperial rule.
