Military history of the United States The military history of the United States
spans a period of over two centuries. During those years, the United States
evolved from a new nation fighting Great Britain for independence
(1775–1783), through the monumental American Civil War (1861–65) to the
world's sole remaining superpower of the late 20th century and early 21st
century. Overview. The Continental Congress in 1775 created the Continental
Army and named General George Washington its commander. This newly formed army,
along with state militia forces, and the French army and navy, defeated the
British in 1781. The new Constitution in 1789 made the president the commander
in chief, with authority for the Congress to levy taxes, and make the rules. As
of 2012, the U.S. military consists of an Army, Navy, Air Force and Marine
Corps under the command of the United States Department of Defense. There also
is the United States Coast Guard, which is controlled by the Department of
Homeland Security. The President of the United States is the commander in
chief, and exercises the authority through the Secretary of Defense and the
Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, which supervises combat operations. In
addition, each state has a national guard commanded by the state's governor and
coordinated by the National Guard Bureau. The President of the United States
has the authority during national emergencies to assume control of individual
state National Guard units. Timeline. Colonial wars (1620–1774). The
beginning of the United States military lies in civilian frontier settlers,
armed for hunting and basic survival in the wilderness. These were organized
into local militias for small military operations, mostly against Native
American tribes but also to resist possible raids by the small military forces
of neighboring European colonies. They relied on the British regular army and
navy for any serious military operation. In major operations outside the
locality involved, the militia was not employed as a fighting force. Instead
the colony asked for (and paid) volunteers, many of whom were also militia
members. In the early years of the British colonization of North America,
military action in the thirteen colonies that would become the United States
were the result of conflicts with Native Americans, such as in the Pequot War
of 1637, King Philip's War in 1675, the Yamasee War in 1715 and Father Rale's
War in 1722. Beginning in 1689, the colonies became involved in a series of
wars between Great Britain and France for control of North America, the most
important of which were Queen Anne's War, in which the British conquered French
colony Acadia, and the final French and Indian War (1754–1763) when Britain
was victorious over all the French colonies in North America. This final war
was to give thousands of colonists, including Virginia colonel George
Washington, military experience which they put to use during the American
Revolution. War of Independence (1775–1783). Ongoing political tensions
between Great Britain and the thirteen colonies reached a crisis in 1774 when
the British placed the province of Massachusetts under martial law after the
Patriots protested taxes they regarded as a violation of their constitutional
rights as Englishmen. When shooting began at Lexington and Concord in April
1775, militia units from across New England rushed to Boston and bottled up the
British in the city. The Continental Congress appointed George Washington as
commander-in-chief of the newly created Continental Army, which was augmented
throughout the war by colonial militia. He drove the British out of Boston but
in late summer 1776 they returned to New York and nearly captured Washington's
army. Meanwhile the revolutionaries expelled British officials from the 13
states, and declared themselves an independent nation in July 1776. The
British, for their part, lacked both a unified command and a clear strategy for
winning. With the use of the Royal Navy, the British were able to capture
coastal cities, but control of the countryside eluded them. A British sortie
from Canada in 1777 ended with the disastrous surrender of a British army at
Saratoga. With the coming in 1777 of General von Steuben, the training and
discipline along Prussian lines began, and the Continental Army began to evolve
into a modern force. France and Spain then entered the war against Great
Britain as Allies of the US, ending its naval advantage and escalating the
conflict into a world war. The Netherlands later joined France, and the British
were outnumbered on land and sea in a world war, as they had no major allies
apart from Indian tribes. A shift in focus to the southern American states in
1779 resulted in a string of victories for the British, but General Nathanael
Greene engaged in guerrilla warfare and prevented them from making strategic
headway. The main British army was surrounded by Washington's American and
French forces at Yorktown in 1781, as the French fleet blocked a rescue by the
Royal Navy. The British then sued for peace. George Washington. General George
Washington (1732–1799) proved an excellent organizer and administrator, who
worked successfully with Congress and the state governors, selecting and
mentoring his senior officers, supporting and training his troops, and
maintaining an idealistic Republican Army. His biggest challenge was logistics,
since neither Congress nor the states had the funding to provide adequately for
the equipment, munitions, clothing, paychecks, or even the food supply of the
soldiers. As a battlefield tactician Washington was often outmaneuvered by his
British counterparts. As a strategist, however, he had a better idea of how to
win the war than they did. The British sent four invasion armies. Washington's
strategy forced the first army out of Boston in 1776, and was responsible for
the surrender of the second and third armies at Saratoga (1777) and Yorktown
(1781). He limited the British control to New York and a few places while
keeping Patriot control of the great majority of the population. The Loyalists,
on whom the British had relied too heavily, comprised about 20% of the
population but never were well organized. As the war ended, Washington watched
proudly as the final British army quietly sailed out of New York City in
November 1783, taking the Loyalist leadership with them. Washington astonished
the world when, instead of seizing power, he retired quietly to his farm in
Virginia. Patriots had a strong distrust of a permanent "standing army", so the
Continental Army was quickly demobilized, with land grants to veterans. General
Washington, who throughout the war deferred to elected officials, averted a
potential coup d'état and resigned as commander-in-chief after the war,
establishing a tradition of civil control of the U.S. military. Early national
period (1783–1812). Following the American Revolution, the United States
faced potential military conflict on the high seas as well as on the western
frontier. The United States was a minor military power during this time, having
only a modest army and navy. A traditional distrust of standing armies,
combined with faith in the abilities of local militia, precluded the
development of well-trained units and a professional officer corps.
Jeffersonian leaders preferred a small army and navy, fearing that a large
military establishment would involve the United States in excessive foreign
wars, and potentially allow a domestic tyrant to seize power. In the Treaty of
Paris after the Revolution, the British had ceded the lands between the
Appalachian Mountains and the Mississippi River to the United States, without
consulting the Shawnee, Cherokee, Choctaw and other smaller tribes who lived
there. Because many of the tribes had fought as allies of the British, the
United States compelled tribal leaders to sign away lands in postwar treaties,
and began dividing these lands for settlement. This provoked a war in the
Northwest Territory in which the U.S. forces performed poorly; the Battle of
the Wabash in 1791 was the most severe defeat ever suffered by the United
States at the hands of American Indians. President Washington dispatched a
newly trained army to the region, which decisively defeated the Indian
confederacy at the Battle of Fallen Timbers in 1794. When revolutionary France
declared in 1793, the United States sought to remain neutral, but the Jay
Treaty, which was favorable to Great Britain, angered the French government,
which viewed it as a violation of the 1778 Treaty of Alliance. French
privateers began to seize U.S. vessels, which led to an undeclared "Quasi-War"
between the two nations. Fought at sea from 1798 to 1800, the United States won
a string of victories in the Caribbean. George Washington was called out of
retirement to head a "provisional army" in case of invasion by France, but
President John Adams managed to negotiate a truce, in which France agreed to
terminate the prior alliance and cease its attacks. Barbary wars. The Berbers
along the Barbary Coast (modern day Libya) sent pirates to capture merchant
ships and hold the crews for ransom. The U.S. paid protection money until 1801,
when President Thomas Jefferson refused to pay and sent in the Navy to
challenge the Barbary States, the First Barbary War followed. After the U.S.S.
"Philadelphia" was captured in 1803, Lieutenant Stephen Decatur led a raid
which successfully burned the captured ship, preventing Tripoli from using or
selling it. In 1805, after William Eaton captured the city of Derna, Tripoli
agreed to a peace treaty. The other Barbary states continued to raid U.S.
shipping, until the Second Barbary War in 1815 ended the practice. War of 1812.
By far the largest military action in which the United States engaged during
this era was the War of 1812. With Britain locked in a major war with
Napoleon's France, its policy was to block American shipments to France. The
United States sought to remain neutral while pursuing overseas trade. Britain
cut the trade and impressed seamen on American ships into the Royal Navy,
despite intense protests. Britain supported an Indian insurrection in the
American Midwest, with the goal of creating an Indian state there that would
block American expansion. The United States finally declared war on the United
Kingdom in 1812, the first time the U.S. had officially declared war. Not
hopeful of defeating the Royal Navy, the U.S. attacked the British Empire by
invading British Canada, hoping to use captured territory as a bargaining chip.
The invasion of Canada was a debacle, though concurrent wars with Native
Americans on the western front (Tecumseh's War and the Creek War) were more
successful. After defeating Napoleon in 1814, Britain sent large veteran armies
to invade New York, raid Washington and capture the key control of the
Mississippi River at New Orleans. The New York invasion was a fiasco after the
much larger British army retreated to Canada. The raiders succeeded in the
burning of Washington on 25 August 1814, but were repulsed in their Chesapeake
Bay Campaign at the Battle of Baltimore and the British commander killed. The
major invasion in Louisiana was stopped by a one-sided military battle that
killed the top three British generals and thousands of soldiers. The winners
were the commanding general of the Battle of New Orleans, Major General Andrew
Jackson, who became president and the Americans who basked in a victory over a
much more powerful nation. The peace treaty proved successful, and the U.S. and
Canada never again went to war. The losers were the Indians, who never gained
the independent territory in the Midwest promised by Britain. War with Mexico
(1846–48). With the rapid expansion of the farming population, Democrats
looked to the west for new lands, an idea which became known as "Manifest
Destiny." In the Texas Revolution (1835–36), the settlers declared
independence and defeated the Mexican army, but Mexico was determined to
reconquer the lost province and threatened war with the U.S. if it annexed
Texas. The U.S., much larger and more powerful, did annex Texas in 1845 and war
broke out in 1846 over boundary issues. In the Mexican-American War 1846–48,
the U.S. Army under Generals Zachary Taylor and Winfield Scott and others,
invaded and after a series of victorious battles (and no major defeats) seized
New Mexico and California, and also blockaded the coast, invaded northern
Mexico, and invaded central Mexico, capturing the national capital. The peace
terms involved American purchase of the area from California to New Mexico for
$10 million. American Civil War (1861–1865). Sectional tensions had long
existed between the states located north of the Mason-Dixon Line and those
south of it, primarily centered on the "peculiar institution" of slavery and
the ability of states to overrule the decisions of the national government.
During the 1840s and 1850s, conflicts between the two sides became
progressively more violent. After the election of Abraham Lincoln in 1860 (who
southerners thought would work to end slavery) states in the South seceded from
the United States, beginning with South Carolina in late 1860. On April 12,
1861, forces of the South (known as the Confederate States of America or simply
the Confederacy) opened fire on Fort Sumter, whose garrison was loyal to the
Union. The American Civil War caught both sides unprepared. The Confederacy
hoped to win by getting Britain and France to intervene, or else by wearing
down the North's willingness to fight. The U.S. sought a quick victory focused
on capturing the Confederate capital at Richmond, Virginia. The Confederates
under Robert E. Lee tenaciously defended their capital until the very end. The
war spilled across the continent, and even to the high seas. Most of the
material and personnel of the South were used up, while the North prospered.
The American Civil War is sometimes called the "first modern war" due to the
mobilization (and destruction) of the civilian base. It also is characterized
by many technical innovations involving railroads, telegraphs, rifles, trench
warfare, and ironclad warships with turret guns. Post-Civil War era
(1865–1917). Indian Wars (1865–1891). After the Civil War, population
expansion, railroad construction, and the disappearance of the buffalo herds
heightened military tensions on the Great Plains. Several tribes, especially
the Sioux and Comanche, fiercely resisted confinement to reservations. The main
role of the Army was to keep indigenous peoples on reservations and to end
their wars against settlers and each other, William Tecumseh Sherman and Philip
Sheridan were in charge. A famous victory for the Plains Nations was the Battle
of the Little Big Horn in 1876, when Col. George Armstrong Custer and two
hundred plus members of the 7th Cavalry were killed by a force consisting of
Native Americans from the Lakota, Northern Cheyenne, and Arapaho nations. The
last significant conflict came in 1891. Spanish-American War (1898). The
Spanish-American War was a short decisive war marked by quick, overwhelming
American victories at sea and on land against Spain. The Navy was well-prepared
and won laurels, even as politicians tried (and failed) to have it redeployed
to defend East Coast cities against potential threats from the feeble Spanish
fleet. The Army performed well in combat in Cuba. However, it was too oriented
to small posts in the West and not as well-prepared for an overseas conflict.
It relied on volunteers and state militia units, which faced logistical,
training and food problems in the staging areas in Florida. The United States
freed Cuba (after an occupation by the U.S. Army). By the peace treaty Spain
ceded to the United States its colonies of Puerto Rico, Guam, and the
Philippines. The Navy set up coaling stations there and in Hawaii (which
voluntarily joined the U.S. in 1898). The U.S. Navy now had a major forward
presence across the Pacific and (with the lease of Guantánamo Bay Naval Base
in Cuba) a major base in the Caribbean guarding the approaches to the Gulf
Coast and the Panama Canal. Philippine-American War (1899–1902). The
Philippine-American War (1899–1902) was an armed conflict between a group of
Filipino revolutionaries and the American forces following the ceding of the
Philippines to the United States after the defeat of Spanish forces in the
Battle of Manila. The Army sent in 100,000 soldiers (mostly from the National
Guard) under General Elwell Otis. Defeated in the field and losing its capital
in March 1899, the poorly armed and poorly led rebels broke into armed bands.
The insurgency collapsed in March 1901 when the leader Emilio Aguinaldo was
captured by General Frederick Funston and his Macabebe allies. Casualties
included 1037 Americans killed in action and 3340 who died from disease; 20,000
rebels were killed. Modernization. The Navy was modernized in the 1880s, and by
the 1890s had adopted the naval power strategy of Captain Alfred Thayer Mahan--
as indeed did every major navy. The old sailing ships were replaced by modern
steel battleships, bringing them in line with the navies of Britain and
Germany. In 1907, most of the Navy's battleships, with several support vessels,
dubbed the Great White Fleet, were featured in a 14-month circumnavigation of
the world. Ordered by President Theodore Roosevelt, it was a mission designed
to demonstrate the Navy's capability to extend to the global theater. Secretary
of War Elihu Root (1899–1904) led the modernization of the Army. His goal of
a uniformed chief of staff as general manager and a European-type general staff
for planning was stymied by General Nelson A. Miles but did succeed in
enlarging West Point and establishing the U.S. Army War College as well as the
General Staff. Root changed the procedures for promotions and organized schools
for the special branches of the service. He also devised the principle of
rotating officers from staff to line. Root was concerned about the Army's role
in governing the new territories acquired in 1898 and worked out the procedures
for turning Cuba over to the Cubans, and wrote the charter of government for
the Philippines. Rear Admiral Bradley A. Fiske was at the vanguard of new
technology in naval guns and gunnery, thanks to his innovations in fire control
1890–1910. He immediately grasped the potential for air power, and called for
the development of a torpedo plane. Fiske, as aide for operations in 1913–15
to Assistant Secretary Franklin D. Roosevelt, proposed a radical reorganization
of the Navy to make it a war-fighting instrument. Fiske wanted to centralize
authority in a chief of naval operations and an expert staff that would develop
new strategies, oversee the construction of a larger fleet, coordinate war
planning including force structure, mobilization plans, and industrial base,
and insure that the US Navy possessed the best possible war machines.
Eventually, the Navy adopted his reforms and by 1915 started to reorganize for
possible involvement in the World War then underway. Banana Wars (1898–1935).
"Banana Wars" is an informal term for the minor intervention in Latin America
from 1898 until 1934. These include military presence in Cuba, Panama with the
Panama Canal Zone, Haiti (1915–1935), Dominican Republic (1916–1924) and
Nicaragua (1912–1925) & (1926–1933). The U.S. Marine Corps began to
specialize in long-term military occupation of these countries, primarily to
safeguard customs revenues which were the cause of local civil wars. Moro
Rebellion (1899–1913). The Moro Rebellion was an armed insurgency between
Muslim Filipino tribes in the southern Philippines between 1899 and 1913.
Pacification was never complete as sporadic antigovernment insurgency continues
into the 21st century, with American advisors helping the Philippine government
forces. Mexico (1910–1919). The Mexican Revolution involved a civil war with
hundreds of thousands of deaths and large numbers fleeing combat zones. Tens of
thousands fled to the U.S. President Wilson sent U.S. forces to occupy the
Mexican city of Veracruz for six months in 1914. It was designed to show the
U.S. was keenly interested in the civil war and would not tolerate attacks on
Americans, especially the April 9, 1914, "Tampico Affair", which involved the
arrest of American sailors by soldiers of the regime of Mexican President
Victoriano Huerta. In early 1916 Pancho Villa a Mexican general ordered 500
soldiers on a murderous raid on the American city of Columbus New Mexico, with
the goal of robbing banks to fund his army. The German Secret Service
encouraged Pancho Villa in his attacks to involve the United States in an
intervention in Mexico which would distract the United States from its growing
involvement in the war and divert aid from Europe to support the intervention.
Wilson called up the state militias (National Guard) and sent them and the U.S.
Army under General John J. Pershing to punish Villa in the Pancho Villa
Expedition. Villa fled, with the Americans in pursuit deep into Mexico, thereby
arousing Mexican nationalism. By early 1917 President Venustiano Carranza had
contained Villa and secured the border, so Wilson ordered Pershing to withdraw.
World War I (1917–1918). The United States originally wished to remain
neutral when World War I broke out in August 1914. However, it insisted on its
right as a neutral party to immunity from German submarine attack, even though
its ships carried food and raw materials to Britain. In 1917 the Germans
resumed submarine attacks, knowing that it would lead to American entry. When
the U.S declared war, the U.S. army was still small by European standards and
mobilization would take a year. Meanwhile the U.S. continued to provide
supplies and money to Britain and France, and initiated the first peacetime
draft. Industrial mobilization took longer than expected, so divisions were
sent to Europe without equipment, relying instead on the British and French to
supply them. By summer 1918, a million American soldiers, or "doughboys" as
they were often called, of the American Expeditionary Force were in Europe
under the command of John J. Pershing, with 25,000 more arriving every week.
The failure of Germany's spring offensive exhausted its reserves and they were
unable to launch new offensives. The German Navy and home front then revolted
and a new German government signed a conditional surrender, the Armistice,
ending the war against the western front on November 11, 1918. Russian
Revolution. The so-called Polar Bear Expedition was the involvement of U.S.
troops, during the Russian Revolution, in blocking the Bolsheviks in
Arkhangelsk, Russia in 1918 and 1919. 1920s: Naval disarmament. The U.S.
sponsored a major world conference to limit the naval armaments of world
powers, including the U.S., Britain, Japan, and France, plus smaller nations.
Secretary of State Charles Evans Hughes made the key proposal of each country
to reduce its number of warships by a formula that was accepted. The conference
enabled the great powers to reduce their navies and avoid conflict in the
Pacific. The treaties remained in effect for ten years, but were not renewed as
tensions escalated. 1930s: Neutrality Acts. After the costly U.S. involvement
in World War I, isolationism grew within the nation. Congress refused
membership in the League of Nations, and in response to the growing turmoil in
Europe and Asia, the gradually more restrictive Neutrality Acts were passed,
which were intended to prevent the U.S. from supporting either side in a war.
President Franklin D. Roosevelt sought to support Britain, however, and in 1940
signed the Lend-Lease Act, which permitted an expansion of the "cash and carry"
arms trade to develop with Britain, which controlled the Atlantic sea lanes.
Roosevelt favored the Navy (he was in effective charge in World War I), and
used relief programs such as the PWA to support Navy yards and build warships.
For example in 1933 he authorized $238 million in PWA funds for thirty-two new
ships. The Army Air Corps received only $11 million, which barely covered
replacements and allowed no expansion. World War II (1941–1945). Starting in
1940 (18 months before Pearl Harbor) the nation mobilized, giving high priority
to air power. American involvement in World War II in 1940-41 was limited to
providing war material and financial support to Britain, the Soviet Union, and
the Republic of China. The US entered officially on 8 December 1941 following
the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor, Hawaii. Japanese naval forces soon seized
American, Dutch and British possessions across the Pacific and Southeast Asia,
except for Australia, which became a main American forward base along with
Hawaii. The loss of eight battleships and 2000 sailors and airmen at Pearl
Harbor forced the US to rely on its remaining aircraft carriers, which won a
major victory over Japan at Midway just six months into the war, and on its
growing submarine fleet. The Navy and Marine Corps followed this up with an
island hopping campaign across the central and south Pacific in 1943–45,
reaching the outskirts of Japan in the Battle of Okinawa. During 1942 and 1943,
the US deployed millions of men and thousands of planes and tanks to the UK,
beginning with the strategic bombing of Nazi Germany and occupied Europe and
leading up to the Allied invasions of occupied North Africa in November 1942,
Sicily and Italy in 1943, France in 1944, and the invasion of Germany in 1945,
parallel with the Soviet invasion from the east. That led to the surrender of
Nazi Germany in May 1945. In the Pacific, the US experienced much success in
naval campaigns during 1944, but bloody battles at Iwo Jima and Okinawa in 1945
led the US to look for a way to end the war with minimal loss of American
lives. The U.S. used atomic bombing of Hiroshima and Nagasaki to shock the
Japanese leadership, which (combined with the Soviet invasion of Manchuria)
quickly caused the surrender of Japan. The United States was able to mobilize
quickly, eventually becoming the dominant military power in most theaters of
the war (excepting only eastern Europe), and the industrial might of the US
economy became a major factor in the Allies' mobilization of resources.
Strategic and tactical lessons learned by the US, such as the importance of air
superiority and the dominance of the aircraft carrier in naval actions,
continue to guide US military doctrine more than 65 years later. World War II
holds a special place in the American psyche as the country's greatest triumph,
and the soldiers of World War II are frequently referred to as "the greatest
generation." Over 16 million served (about 11% of the population), and over
400,000 died during the war. The U.S. emerged as one of the two undisputed
superpowers along with the Soviet Union, and unlike the Soviet Union, the US
homeland was virtually untouched by the ravages of war. During and following
World War II, the United States and Britain developed an increasingly strong,
if one-sided, defence and intelligence relationship. Manifestations of this
include extensive basing of US forces in the UK, shared intelligence, shared
military technology (e.g. nuclear technology) and shared procurement. Cold War
era (1945–1991). Following World War II, the United States emerged as a
global superpower vis-a-vis the Soviet Union in the Cold War. In this period of
some forty years, the United States provided foreign military aid and direct
involvement in proxy wars against the Soviet Union. It was the principal
foreign actor in the Korean War and Vietnam War during this era. Nuclear
weapons were held in ready by the United States under a concept of mutually
assured destruction with the Soviet Union. Postwar Military Reorganization
(1947). The National Security Act of 1947, meeting the need for a military
reorganization to complement the U.S. superpower role, combined and replaced
the former Department of the Navy and War Department with a single cabinet-
level Department of Defense. The act also created the National Security
Council, the Central Intelligence Agency, and the Air Force. Korean War
(1950–1953). The Korean War was a conflict between the United States and its
United Nations allies and the communist powers under influence of the Soviet
Union (also a UN member nation) and the People's Republic of China (which later
also gained UN membership). The principal combatants were North and South
Korea. Principal allies of South Korea included the United States, Canada,
Australia, the United Kingdom, although many other nations sent troops under
the aegis of the United Nations. Allies of North Korea included the People's
Republic of China, which supplied military forces, and the Soviet Union, which
supplied combat advisors and aircraft pilots, as well as arms, for the Chinese
and North Korean troops. The war started badly for the US and UN. North Korean
forces struck massively in the summer of 1950 and nearly drove the outnumbered
US and ROK defenders into the sea. However the United Nations intervened,
naming Douglas MacArthur commander of its forces, and UN-US-ROK forces held a
perimeter around Pusan, gaining time for reinforcement. MacArthur, in a bold
but risky move, ordered an amphibious invasion well behind the front lines at
Inchon, cutting off and routing the North Koreans and quickly crossing the 38th
Parallel into North Korea. As UN forces continued to advance toward the Yalu
River on the border with Communist China, the Chinese crossed the Yalu River in
October and launched a series of surprise attacks that sent the UN forces
reeling back across the 38th Parallel. Truman originally wanted a Rollback
strategy to unify Korea; after the Chinese successes he settled for a
Containment policy to split the country. MacArthur argued for rollback but was
fired. Peace negotiations dragged on for two years until President Dwight D.
Eisenhower threatened China with nuclear weapons; an armistice was quickly
reached with the two Koreas remaining divided at the 38th parallel. North and
South Korea are still today in a state of war, having never signed a peace
treaty, and American forces remain stationed in South Korea as part of American
foreign policy. Lebanon crisis of 1958. In the Lebanon crisis of 1958 that
threatened civil war, Operation Blue Bat deployed several hundred Marines to
bolster the pro-Western Lebanese government from July 15 to October 25, 1958.
Dominican Intervention. On April 28, 1965, 400 Marines were landed in Santo
Domingo to evacuate the American Embassy and foreign nationals after dissident
Dominican armed forces attempted to overthrow the ruling civilian junta. By
mid-May, peak strength of 23,850 U.S. soldiers, Marines, and Airmen were in the
Dominican Republic and some 38 naval ships were positioned offshore. They
evacuated nearly 6,500 men, women, and children of 46 nations, and distributed
more than 8 million tons of food. Vietnam War (1964–1975). The Vietnam War
was a war fought between 1959 and 1975 on the ground in South Vietnam and
bordering areas of Cambodia and Laos ("see" Secret War) and in the strategic
bombing ("see" Operation Rolling Thunder) of North Vietnam. American advisors
came in the late 1950s to help the RVN (Republic of Vietnam) combat Communist
insurgents known as "Viet Cong." Major American military involvement began in
1964, after Congress provided President Lyndon B. Johnson with blanket approval
for presidential use of force in the Gulf of Tonkin Resolution. Fighting on one
side was a coalition of forces including the Republic of Vietnam (South Vietnam
or the "RVN"), the United States, supplemented by South Korea, Thailand,
Australia, New Zealand, and the Philippines. The allies fought against the
North Vietnamese Army (NVA) as well as the National Liberation Front (NLF, also
known as Viet communists Viet Cong), or "VC", a guerrilla force within South
Vietnam. The NVA received substantial military and economic aid from the Soviet
Union and China, turning Vietnam into a proxy war. The military history of the
American side of the war involved different strategies over the years. The
bombing campaigns of the Air Force were tightly controlled by the White House
for political reasons, and until 1972 avoided the main Northern cities of Hanoi
and Haiphong and concentrated on bombing jungle supply trails, especially the
Ho Chi Minh Trail. The most controversial Army commander was William
Westmoreland whose strategy involved systematic defeat of all enemy forces in
the field, despite heavy American casualties that alienated public opinion back
home. The U.S. framed the war as part of its policy of containment of Communism
in south Asia, but American forces were frustrated by an inability to engage
the enemy in decisive battles, corruption and incompetence in the Army of the
Republic of Vietnam, and ever increasing protests at home. The Tet Offensive in
1968, although a major military defeat for the NLF with half their forces
eliminated, marked the psychological turning point in the war. With President
Richard M. Nixon opposed to containment and more interested in achieving
détente with both the Soviet Union and China, American policy shifted to
"Vietnamization," – providing very large supplies of arms and letting the
Vietnamese fight it out themselves. After more than 57,000 dead and many more
wounded, American forces withdrew in 1973 with no clear victory, and in 1975
South Vietnam was finally conquered by communist North Vietnam and unified.
Memories and lessons from the war are still a major factor in American
politics. One side views the war as a necessary part of the Containment policy,
which allowed the enemy to choose the time and place of warfare. Others note
the U.S. made major strategic gains as the Communists were defeated in
Indonesia, and by 1972 both Moscow and Beijing were competing for American
support, at the expense of their allies in Hanoi. Critics see the conflict as a
"quagmire"--an endless waste of American blood and treasure in a conflict that
did not concern US interests. Fears of another quagmire have been major factors
in foreign policy debates ever since. The draft became extremely unpopular, and
President Nixon ended it in 1973, forcing the military (the Army especially) to
rely entirely upon volunteers. That raised the issue of how well the
professional military reflected overall American society and values; the
soldiers typically took the position that their service represented the highest
and best American values. Grenada. In October, 1983, a violent power struggle
threatened American lives in the small Caribbean nation of Grenada. Neighboring
nations asked the U.S. to intervene. The invasion was a hurriedly devised
grouping of paratroopers, Marines, Rangers, and special operations forces in
Operation Urgent Fury. Over a thousand Americans quickly seized the entire
island, taking hundreds of military and civilian prisoners, especially Cubans.
Beirut. In 1983 fighting between Palestinian refugees and Lebanese factions
reignited that nation's long-running civil war. A UN agreement brought an
international force of peacekeepers to occupy Beirut and guarantee security. US
Marines landed in August 1982 along with Italian and French forces. On October
23, 1983, a suicide bomber driving a truck filled with 6 tons of TNT crashed
through a fence and destroyed the Marine barracks, killing 241 Marines; seconds
later, a second bomber leveled a French barracks, killing 58. Subsequently the
US Navy engaged in bombing of militia positions inside Lebanon. While US
President Ronald Reagan was initially defiant, political pressure at home
eventually forced the withdrawal of the Marines in February 1984. Libya. Code-
named "Operation "El Dorado Canyon"", comprised the joint United States Air
Force, Navy and Marine Corps air-strikes against Libya on April 15, 1986. The
attack was carried out in response to the 1986 Berlin discotheque bombing, and
resulted in the killing of 45 officers and 15 civilians. Panama. On December
20, 1989 the United States invaded Panama, mainly from U.S. bases within the
then-Canal Zone, to oust dictator and international drug trafficker Manuel
Noriega. American forces quickly overwhelmed the Panamanian Defense Forces,
Noriega was captured on January 3, 1990 and imprisoned in the U.S. and a new
government was installed. Post–Cold War era (1991–2001). Persian Gulf War
(1990–1991). The Persian Gulf War was a conflict between Iraq and a coalition
force of 34 nations led by the United States. The lead up to the war began with
the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait in August 1990 which was met with immediate
economic sanctions by the United Nations against Iraq. The coalition commenced
hostilities in January 1991, resulting in a decisive victory for the U.S. led
coalition forces, which drove Iraqi forces out of Kuwait with minimal coalition
deaths. Despite the low death toll, over 180,000 US veterans would later be
classified as "permanently disabled" according to the US Department of Veterans
Affairs (National Gulf War Resource Center; see also Gulf War Syndrome). The
main battles were aerial and ground combat within Iraq, Kuwait and bordering
areas of Saudi Arabia. Land combat did not expand outside of the immediate
Iraq/Kuwait/Saudi border region, although the coalition bombed cities and
strategic targets across Iraq, and Iraq fired missiles on Israeli and Saudi
cities. Before the war, many observers believed the US and its allies could win
but might suffer substantial casualties (certainly more than any conflict since
Vietnam), and that the tank battles across the harsh desert might rival those
of North Africa during World War II. After nearly 50 years of proxy wars, and
constant fears of another war in Europe between NATO and the Warsaw Pact, some
thought the Persian Gulf War might finally answer the question of which
military philosophy would have reigned supreme. Iraqi forces were battle-
hardened after 8 years of war with Iran, and they were well-equipped with late
model Soviet tanks and jet fighters, but the antiaircraft weapons were
crippled; in comparison, the US had no large-scale combat experience since its
withdrawal from Vietnam nearly 20 years earlier, and major changes in US
doctrine, equipment and technology since then had never been tested under fire.
However, the battle was one-sided almost from the beginning. The reasons for
this are the subject of continuing study by military strategists and academics.
There is general agreement that US technological superiority was a crucial
factor but the speed and scale of the Iraqi collapse has also been attributed
to poor strategic and tactical leadership and low morale among Iraqi troops,
which resulted from a history of incompetent leadership. After devastating
initial strikes against Iraqi air defenses and command and control facilities
on 17 January 1991, coalition forces achieved total air superiority almost
immediately. The Iraqi air force was destroyed within a few days, with some
planes fleeing to Iran where they were interned for the duration of the
conflict. The overwhelming technological advantages of the US, such as stealth
aircraft and infrared sights, quickly turned the air war into a "turkey shoot".
The heat signature of any tank which started its engine made an easy target.
Air defense radars were quickly destroyed by radar-seeking missiles fired from
wild weasel aircraft. Grainy video clips, shot from the nose cameras of
missiles as they aimed at impossibly small targets, were a staple of US news
coverage and revealed to the world a new kind of war, compared by some to a
video game. Over 6 weeks of relentless pounding by planes and helicopters, the
Iraqi army was almost completely beaten but did not retreat, under orders from
Iraqi President Saddam Hussein, and by the time the ground forces invaded on 24
February, many Iraqi troops quickly surrendered to forces much smaller than
their own; in one instance, Iraqi forces attempted to surrender to a television
camera crew that was advancing with coalition forces. After just 100 hours of
ground combat, and with all of Kuwait and much of southern Iraq under coalition
control, US President George H. W. Bush ordered a cease-fire and negotiations
began resulting in an agreement for cessation of hostilities. Some US
politicians were disappointed by this move, believing Bush should have pressed
on to Baghdad and removed Hussein from power; there is little doubt that
coalition forces could have accomplished this if they had desired. Still, the
political ramifications of removing Hussein would have broadened the scope of
the conflict greatly, and many coalition nations refused to participate in such
an action, believing it would create a power vacuum and destabilize the region.
Following the Persian Gulf War, to protect minority populations, the US,
Britain, and France declared and maintained no-fly zones in northern and
southern Iraq, which the Iraqi military frequently tested. The no-fly zones
persisted until the 2003 invasion of Iraq, although France withdrew from
participation in patrolling the no-fly zones in 1996, citing a lack of
humanitarian purpose for the operation. Somalia. US troops participated in a UN
peacekeeping mission in Somalia beginning in 1992. By 1993 the US troops were
augmented with Rangers and special forces with the aim of capturing warlord
Mohamed Farrah Aidid, whose forces had massacred peacekeepers from Pakistan.
During a raid in downtown Mogadishu, US troops became trapped overnight by a
general uprising in the Battle of Mogadishu. Eighteen American soldiers were
killed, and a US television crew filmed graphic images of the body of one
soldier being dragged through the streets by an angry mob. Somali guerrillas
paid a staggering toll at an estimated 1,000–5,000 total casualties during
the conflict. After much public disapproval, American forces were quickly
withdrawn by President Bill Clinton. The incident profoundly affected US
thinking about peacekeeping and intervention. The book "Black Hawk Down" was
written about the battle, and was the basis for the later movie of the same
name. Haiti. Operation Uphold Democracy (September 19, 1994 – March 31, 1995)
was an intervention designed to reinstate the elected President Jean-Bertrand
Aristide, who was reported to have died in office during the bombing of the
presidential palace. The operation was effectively authorized by the 31 July
1994 United Nations Security Council Resolution 940. Yugoslavia. During the war
in Yugoslavia in the early 1990s, the US operated in Bosnia and Herzegovina as
part of the NATO-led multinational implementation force (IFOR) in "Operation
Joint Endeavour" . The USA was one of the NATO member countries who bombed
Yugoslavia between March 24 and June 9, 1999 during the Kosovo War and later
contributed to the multinational force KFOR. War on Terrorism (2001–present).
The War on Terrorism is a global effort by the governments of several countries
(primarily the United States and its principal allies) to neutralize
international terrorist groups (primarily radical Islamist terrorist groups,
including al-Qaeda) and ensure that rogue nations no longer support terrorist
activities. It has been adopted as a response to the September 11, 2001 attacks
on the United States. Afghanistan. The intervention in Afghanistan (Operation
Enduring Freedom – Afghanistan) to depose that country's Taliban government
and destroy training camps associated with al-Qaida is understood to have been
the opening, and in many ways defining, campaign of the broader War on
Terrorism. The emphasis on Special Operations Forces (SOF), political
negotiation with autonomous military units, and the use of proxy militaries
marked a significant change from prior U.S. military approaches. Philippines.
In January 2002, the U.S. sent more than 1,200 troops (later raised to 2,000)
to assist the Armed Forces of the Philippines in combating terrorist groups
linked to al-Qaida, such as Abu Sayyaf, under Operation Enduring Freedom -
Philippines. Operations are taking place mostly in the Sulu Archipelago, where
terrorists and other groups are active. The majority of troops provide
logistics; however, many are Special Forces troops that are training and
assisting in combat operations against the terrorist groups. Iraq. After the
lengthy Iraq disarmament crisis culminated with an American demand that Iraqi
President Saddam Hussein leave Iraq, which was refused, a coalition led by the
United States and the United Kingdom fought the Iraqi army in the 2003 invasion
of Iraq. Approximately 250,000 United States troops, with support from 45,000
British, 2,000 Australian and 200 Polish combat forces, entered Iraq primarily
through their staging area in Kuwait. (Turkey had refused to permit its
territory to be used for an invasion from the north.) Coalition forces also
supported Iraqi Kurdish militia, estimated to number upwards of 50,000. After
approximately three weeks of fighting, Hussein and the Ba'ath Party were
forcibly removed, followed by 9 years of military presence by the United States
and the coalition fighting alongside the newly elected Iraqi government against
various insurgent groups. Libyan intervention. As a result of the Libyan civil
war, the United Nations enacted United Nations Security Council Resolution
1973, which imposed a no-fly zone over Libya, and the protection of civilians
from the forces of Muammar Gaddafi. The United States, along with Britain,
France and several other nations, committed a coalition force against Gaddafi's
forces. On 19 March, the first U.S. action was taken when 114 Tomahawk missiles
launched by US and UK warships destroyed shoreline air defenses of the Gaddafi
regime. The U.S. continued to play a major role in Operation Unified Protector,
the NATO-directed mission that eventually incorporated all of the military
coalition's actions in the theater. Throughout the conflict however, the U.S.
maintained it was playing a supporting role only and was following the UN
mandate to protect civilians, while the real conflict was between Gaddafi's
loyalists and Libyan rebels fighting to depose him. During the conflict,
American drones were also deployed.
