Modern warfare Modern warfare, although present in every historical period of
military history, is generally used to refer to the concepts, methods and
technologies that have come into use during and after the Second World War and
the Korean War. The concepts and methods have assumed more complex forms of the
19th- and early-20th-century antecedents, largely due to the widespread use of
highly advanced information technology, and modern armies must modernize
constantly to preserve their battleworthiness. Although total war was thought
to be the form of international conflicts from the experience of the French
Revolutionary Wars to the Second World War, the term no longer describes
warfare in which countries or nations use all of their resources to destroy
another country's or nation's organized ability to engage in war. The practice
of total war which had been in use for over a century, as a form of war policy,
has been changed dramatically with greater awareness of tactical, operational
and strategic battle information. War in modern times has been the inclusion of
civilians and civilian infrastructure as targets in destroying a country's
ability to engage in war. The targeting of civilians developed from two
distinct theories. The first theory was that if enough civilians were killed,
factories could not function. The second theory was that if civilians were
killed, the country would be so demoralized that it would have no ability to
wage further war. However UNICEF reports that civilian fatalities are down from
20 percent prior to 1900 AD to less than 5 percent of fatalities in the wars
beginning in the 1990s. With the advent of nuclear weapons, the concept of
full-scale war carries the prospect of global annihilation, and as such
conflicts since WWII have by definition been "low intensity" conflicts,
typically in the form of proxy wars fought within local regional confines,
using what are now referred to as "conventional weapons," typically combined
with the use of asymmetric warfare tactics and applied use of intelligence.
More recently the US Department of Defense introduced a concept of Battlespace
as the integrated information management of all significant factors that impact
on combat operations by armed forces for the military theatre of operations,
including information, air, land, sea and space. It includes the environment,
factors and conditions that must be understood to successfully apply combat
power, protect the force, or complete the mission. This includes enemy and
friendly forces; facilities, weather and terrain within the operational areas
and areas of interest. Types. Some argue that the changing forms of three-
dimensional warfare represents nothing more than an evolution of earlier
technology. Asymmetric. A military situation in which two belligerents of
unequal strength interact and take advantage of their respective strengths and
weaknesses. This interaction often involves strategies and tactics outside the
bounds of conventional warfare, often referred to as terrorism. Biological.
Biological warfare, also known as germ warfare, is the use of any organism
(bacteria, virus or other disease-causing organism) or toxin found in nature,
as a weapon of war. It is meant to incapacitate or kill an adversary. It may
also be defined as the employment of biological agents to produce casualties in
man or animals and damage to plants or material; or defense against such
employment. Chemical. Chemical warfare is warfare (associated military
operations) using the toxic properties of chemical substances to kill, injure
or incapacitate an enemy. Electronic. Electronic warfare refers to mainly non-
violent practices used chiefly to support other areas of warfare. The term was
originally coined to encompass the interception and decoding of enemy radio
communications, and the communications technologies and cryptography methods
used to counter such interception, as well as jamming, radio stealth and other
related areas. Over the later years of the 20th century and early years of the
21st century this has expanded to cover a wide range of areas: the use of,
detection of and avoidance of detection by radar and sonar systems, computer
hacking, etc. Fourth generation. Fourth generation warfare (4GW) is a concept
defined by William S. Lind and expanded by Thomas X. Hammes, used to describe
the decentralized nature of modern warfare. The simplest definition includes
any war in which one of the major participants is not a state but rather a
violent ideological network. Fourth Generation wars are characterized by a
blurring of the lines between war and politics, soldier and civilian, conflict
and peace, battlefield and safety. While this term is similar to terrorism and
asymmetric warfare, it is much narrower. Classical insurgencies and the Indian
Wars are examples of Pre-Modern War, not 4GW. Fourth generation warfare usually
has the insurgency group or non-state side trying to implement their own
government or reestablish an old government over the one currently running the
territory. The blurring of lines between state and non-state is further
complicated in a democracy by the power of the media. Ground. Ground warfare
involves three types of combat units, Infantry, Armor and Artillery. Infantry
in modern times would consist of Mechanized infantry and Airborne forces.
Usually having a type of rifle or sub-machine gun, an infantryman is the basic
unit of an army. Armored warfare in modern times involves a variety of Armored
fighting vehicles for the purpose of battle and support. Tanks or other armored
vehicles (such as armored personnel carriers or tank destroyers) are slower,
yet stronger hunks of metal. They are invulnerable to enemy machine gun fire
but prone to rocket infantry, mines, and aircraft so are usually accompanied by
infantry. In urban areas, because of smaller space, an armored vehicle is
exposed to hidden enemy infantry but as the so called "Thunder Run" at Baghdad
in 2003 showed, armored vehicles can play a critical role in urban combat. In
rural areas, an armored vehicle does not have to worry about hidden units
though muddy and damp terrain have always been a factor of weakness for Armored
tanks and vehicles. Artillery in contemporary times, is distinguished by its
large calibre, firing an explosive shell or rocket, and being of such a size
and weight as to require a specialized mount for firing and transport. Weapons
covered by this term include "tube" artillery such as the howitzer, cannon,
mortar, and field gun and "rocket" artillery. The term "artillery" has
traditionally not been used for projectiles with internal guidance systems,
even though some artillery units employ surface-to-surface missiles. Recent
advances in terminal guidance systems for small munitions has allowed large
calibre shells to be fitted with precision guidance fuses, blurring this
distinction. Guerrilla. Guerrilla warfare is defined as fighting by groups of
irregular troops (guerrillas) within areas occupied by the enemy. When
guerrillas obey the laws of conventional warfare they are entitled, if
captured, to be treated as ordinary prisoners of war; however, they are often
executed by their captors. The tactics of guerrilla warfare stress deception
and ambush, as opposed to mass confrontation, and succeed best in an irregular,
rugged, terrain and with a sympathetic populace, whom guerrillas often seek to
win over or dominate by propaganda, reform, and terrorism. Guerrilla warfare
has played a significant role in modern history, especially when waged by
Communist liberation movements in Southeast Asia (most notably in the Vietnam
War) and elsewhere. Guerrilla fighters gravitate toward weapons which are
easily accessible, low in technology and low in cost. A typical arsenal of the
modern guerrilla would include the AK-47, RPGs and Improvised explosive
devices. The guerrilla doctrines' main disadvantage is the inability to access
more advanced equipment due to economic, influence, and accessibility issues.
They must rely on small unit tactics involving hit and run. This situation
leads to low intensity warfare, asymmetrical warfare and war among the people.
The rules of Guerrilla warfare are to fight a little and then to retreat.
Intelligence. Propaganda Propaganda is an ancient form of disinformation
concerted with sending a set of messages aimed at influencing the opinions or
behavior of large numbers of people. Instead of impartially providing
information, propaganda in its most basic sense presents information in order
to influence its audience. The most effective propaganda is often completely
truthful, but some propaganda presents facts selectively to encourage a
particular synthesis, or gives loaded messages in order to produce an emotional
rather than rational response to the information presented. The desired result
is a change of the cognitive narrative of the subject in the target audience.
Psychological Psychological warfare had its beginnings during the campaigns of
Genghis Khan through the allowance of certain civilians of the nations, cities,
and villages to flee said place, spreading terror and fear to neighboring
principalities. Psychological actions have the primary purpose of influencing
the opinions, emotions, attitudes, and behavior of hostile foreign groups in
such a way as to support the achievement of national objectives. Information
Made possible by the widespread use of the electronic media during the Second
World War, Information warfare is a kind of warfare where information and
attacks on information and its system are used as a tool of warfare. Some
examples of this type of warfare are electronic "sniffers" which disrupt
international fund-transfer networks as well as the signals of television and
radio stations. Jamming such signals can allow participants in the war to use
the stations for a misinformation campaign. Naval. Naval warfare takes place on
the high seas (blue water navy). Usually, only large, powerful nations have
competent blue water or deep water navies. Modern navies primarily use aircraft
carriers, submarines, frigates, cruisers, and destroyers for combat. This
provides a versatile array of attacks, capable of hitting ground targets, air
targets, or other seafaring vessels. Most modern navies also have a large air
support contingent, deployed from aircraft carriers. In World War II, small
craft (motor torpedo boats variously called PT boats, MTBs, MGBs,
"Schnellbooten", or MAS-boats) fought near shore. This developed in the Vietnam
War into riverine warfare (brown water navy), in intertidal and river areas.
Irregular warfare makes this sort of combat more likely in the future. Network-
centric. Network-centric warfare is essentially a new military doctrine made
possible by the Information Age. Weapons platforms, sensors and command and
control centers are being connected through high-speed communication networks.
The doctrine is related to the Revolution in Military Affairs debate. The
overall network which enables this strategy in the United States military is
called the Global Information Grid. Nuclear. Nuclear war is a type of warfare
which relies on nuclear weapons. There are two types of warfare in this
category. In a limited nuclear war, a small number of weapons are used in a
tactical exchange aimed primarily at opposing military forces. In a full-scale
nuclear war, large numbers of weapons are used in an attack aimed at entire
countries. This type of warfare would target both military bases and civilians.
Space. Space warfare is warfare that occurs outside the Earth's atmosphere. No
wars have been fought here yet. The weapons would include Orbital weaponry and
Space weapons. High value outer space targets would include satellites and
weapon platforms. Notably no real weapons exist in space yet, though ground-to-
space missiles have been successfully tested against target satellites.
