Mongol Empire The Mongol Empire (Mongolian: "Mongol-yn Ezent Güren"; Cyrillic:
Монголын эзэнт гүрэн) existed during the 13th and 14th
centuries A.D., and was the largest contiguous land empire in human history.
Beginning in the Central Asian steppes, it eventually stretched from Eastern
Europe to the Sea of Japan, covering large parts of Siberia in the north and
extending southward into Southeast Asia, the Indian subcontinent, the Iranian
plateau, and the Middle East. At its greatest extent it spanned , covered an
area of , 16% of the Earth's total land area, and held sway over a population
of 100 million. The Mongol Empire emerged from the unification of Mongol and
Turkic tribes of historical Mongolia under the leadership of Genghis Khan.
Genghis Khan was proclaimed ruler of all Mongols in 1206. The empire grew
rapidly under his rule and then under the rule of his descendants, who sent
invasions in every direction. The vast transcontinental empire which connected
the east with the west with an enforced "Pax Mongolica" allowed trade,
technologies, commodities and ideologies to be disseminated and exchanged
across Eurasia. The empire began to split as a result of wars over succession,
as the grandchildren of Genghis Khan disputed whether the royal line should
follow from Genghis's son and initial heir Ögedei, or one of his other sons
such as Tolui, Chagatai, or Jochi. The Toluids prevailed after a bloody purge
of Ögedeid and Chagataid factions, but disputes continued even among the
descendants of Tolui. When one Great Khan died, rival "kurultai" councils would
simultaneously elect different successors, such as the brothers Ariq Böke and
Kublai, they were both elected and then not only had to defy each other, but
also deal with challenges from descendants of other of Genghis's sons. Kublai
successfully took power, but civil war ensued, as Kublai sought,
unsuccessfully, to regain control of the Chagatayid and Ögedeid families. By
the time of Kublai's death in 1294, the Mongol Empire had fractured into four
separate khanates or empires, each pursuing its own separate interests and
objectives: the Golden Horde khanate in the northwest, the Chagatai Khanate in
the west, the Ilkhanate in the southwest, and the Yuan Dynasty based in modern-
day Beijing. In 1304, the three western khanates briefly accepted the nominal
suzerainty of the Yuan Dynasty, but when it was overthrown by the Han Chinese
Ming Dynasty in 1368, the Mongol Empire finally dissolved. Name. What is
referred to in English as the Mongol Empire was called the "Ikh mongol uls"
(Great Mongolian Nation). In the 1240s, Genghis's descendant Güyük Khan wrote
a letter to Pope Innocent IV which used the preamble, "Dalai (great/oceanic)
Khagan of the great Mongol state (ulus)". After the succession war between
Kublai Khan and his brother Ariq Böke, Ariq limited Kublai's real power to the
eastern part of the empire, Kublai officially issued an imperial edict on
December 18, 1271 to name the country "Great Yuan" ("Dai Yuan", or "Dai On
Ulus") to establish the Yuan Dynasty. Some sources state that the full
Mongolian name was "Dai Ön Yehe Monggul Ulus". History. Pre-empire context.
The area around Mongolia, Manchuria, and parts of North China had been
controlled by the Liao Dynasty since the 10th century. In 1125, the Jin Dynasty
founded by the Jurchens overthrew the Liao Dynasty, and attempted to gain
control over former Liao territory in Mongolia. The Jin Dynasty rulers, known
as the Golden Kings, successfully resisted in the 1130s the Khamag Mongol
confederation, ruled at the time by Khabul Khan, great grandfather of Temujin
(Genghis Khan). The Mongolian plateau was occupied mainly by five powerful
tribal confederations ("khanlig"): Kereit, Khamag Mongol, Naiman, Mergid and
Tatar. The Jin emperors, following a policy of divide and rule, encouraged
disputes among the tribes, especially between the Tatars and Mongols, in order
to keep the nomadic tribes distracted by their own battles, and thereby away
from themselves. Khabul's successor was Ambaghai Khan, who was betrayed by the
Tatars, handed to the Jurchen and executed. The Mongols retaliated by raiding
the frontier, resulting in a failed Jurchen counter-attack in 1143. In 1147,
the Jin somewhat changed their policy, signing a peace treaty with the Mongols
and withdrawing a score of forts. The Mongols then resumed attacks on the
Tatars to avenge the death of their late khan, opening a long period of active
hostilities. The Jin and Tatar armies defeated the Mongols in 1161. Genghis
Khan. Known during his childhood as Temujin, Genghis Khan was the son of a
Mongol chieftain. He suffered a difficult childhood, and when his young wife
Börte was kidnapped by a rival tribe, Temujin united the nomadic, previously
ever-rivaling Mongol-Turkic tribes under his rule through political
manipulation and military might. His most powerful allies were his father's
friend, Kereyd chieftain Wang Khan Toghoril, and Temujin's childhood "anda"
(blood brother) Jamukha of the Jadran clan. With their help, Temujin defeated
the Merkit tribe, rescued his wife Börte, and then went on to defeat the
Naimans and Tatars. Temujin forbade looting and raping of his enemies without
permission, and implemented a policy of sharing spoils with the Mongol warriors
and their families, instead of giving all to the aristocrats. He thus held the
Khan title. These policies brought him into conflict with his uncles, who were
also legitimate heirs to the throne, they regarded Temujin not as leader but
merely an insolent usurper. This controversy spread to his generals and other
associates, and some Mongols who had previously been allies with him broke
their allegiance. War ensued, but Temujin and the forces still loyal to him
prevailed, and from 1203–1205 destroyed all the remaining rival tribes and
brought them under his sway. In 1206, Temujin was crowned as the Khaghan of the
"Yekhe Mongol Ulus" (Great Mongol Nation) at a "Kurultai" (general assembly/
council). It was there that he assumed the title of "Genghis Khan" (universal
leader) instead of one of the old tribal titles such as Gur Khan or Tayang
Khan, and marked the start of the Mongol Empire. Early organization. Genghis
Khan innovated many ways of organizing his army, dividing it into decimal
subsections of arbans (10 people), zuuns (100), myangans (1000) and tumens
(10,000). The "Kheshig" or the Imperial Guard was founded and divided into day
("khorchin", "torghuds") and night guards ("khevtuul"). He rewarded those who
had been loyal to him and placed them in high positions, placing them as heads
of army units and households, even though many of his allies had been from very
low-rank clans. Compared to the units he gave to his loyal companions, those
assigned to his own family members were quite few. He proclaimed a new law of
the empire, "Ikh Zasag" or "Yassa", and codified everything related to the
everyday life and political affairs of the nomads at the time. He forbade the
selling of women, theft of other's properties, fighting between the Mongols,
and the hunting of animals during the breeding season. He appointed his adopted
brother Shigi-Khuthugh supreme judge ("jarughachi"), ordering him to keep
records of the empire. In addition to laws regarding family, food and army,
Genghis also decreed religious freedom and supported domestic and international
trade. He exempted the poor and the clergy from taxation. Thus, Muslims,
Buddhists and Christians from Manchuria, North China, India and Persia joined
Genghis Khan long before his foreign conquests. He also encouraged literacy,
adopting the Uyghur script which would form the Uyghur-Mongolian script of the
empire, and he ordered the Uyghur Tatatunga, who had previously served the khan
of Naimans, to instruct his sons. Genghis quickly came into conflict with the
Jin Dynasty of the Jurchens and the Western Xia of the Tanguts in northern
China. Towards the West, under the provocation of the Muslim Caliphate
Khwarezmid Empire, he moved into Central Asia as well, devastating Transoxiana
and the eastern Persia, then raiding into Kievan Rus' (a predecessor state of
Russia, Belarus and Ukraine) and the Caucasus. Before his death, Genghis Khan
divided his empire among his sons and immediate family, making the Mongol
Empire the joint property of the entire imperial family who, along with the
Mongol aristocracy, constituted the ruling class. Expansion under Ögedei. As
previously stated the Mongol Empire started in Central Asia, with the
unification of Mongol and Turkic tribes. Under the leadership of Genghis Khan,
the empire expanded westwards across Asia into the Middle East, Rus, and
Europe; southward into India and China; and eastward as far as the Korean
Peninsula, and into Southeast Asia. Genghis Khan died in 1227, by which point
the Mongol Empire ruled from the Pacific Ocean to the Caspian Sea – an empire
twice the size of the Roman Empire and Muslim Caliphate. Genghis had stated
that his heir should be his third son, the charismatic Ögedei. The regency was
originally held by Ögedei's younger brother Tolui, until Ögedei's formal
election at the "kurultai" in 1229. Among his first actions, Ögedei sent
troops to subjugate the Bashkirs, Bulgars, and other nations in the Kipchak-
controlled steppes. In the east, Ögedei's armies re-established Mongol
authority in Manchuria, crushing the Eastern Xia regime and Water Tatars. In
1230, the Great Khan personally led his army in the campaign against the Jin
Dynasty (China). Ögedei's general Subutai captured Emperor Wanyan Shouxu's
capital, Kaifeng in 1232. In 1234, three armies commanded by Ögedei's sons
Kochu and Koten, as well as the Tangut general Chagan, invaded southern China.
With the assistance of the Song Dynasty, the Mongols finished off the Jin in
1234. In the West, Ögedei's general Chormaqan destroyed Jalal ad-Din
Mingburnu, the last shah of the Khwarizmian Empire. The small kingdoms in
Southern Persia voluntarily accepted Mongol supremacy. In East Asia, there were
a number of Mongolian campaigns into Goryeo Korea, but Ögedei's attempt to
annex the Korean Peninsula met with little success. The king of Goryeo, Gojong,
surrendered but revolted and massacred Mongol "darughachis" (overseers), and
then moved his imperial court from Gaeseong to Ganghwa Island. As the empire
grew, Ögedei established a Mongol capital at Karakorum in northwestern
Mongolia. Meanwhile, in an offensive action against the Song Dynasty, Mongol
armies captured Siyang-yang, the Yangtze and Sichuan, but did not secure their
control over the conquered sites. The Song generals were able to recapture
Siyang-yang from the Mongols in 1239. After the sudden death of Ögedei's son
Kochu in Chinese territory, the Mongols withdrew from southern China, although
Kochu's brother Prince Koten invaded Tibet right after their withdrawal.
Another grandson of Genghis Khan, Batu Khan, overran the countries of the
Bulgars, the Alans, the Kypchaks, Bashkirs, Mordvins, Chuvash, and other
nations of the southern Russian steppe. By 1237, the Mongols began encroaching
upon their first Russian principality, Ryazan. After a 3 day-siege using heavy
attacks, the Mongols captured the city and massacred its inhabitants, then
proceeded to destroy the army of the Grand principality of Vladimir at the Sit
River. The Mongols captured the Alania capital, Maghas, in 1238. By 1240, all
Rus’ lands including Kiev had fallen to the Asian invaders except for a few
northern cities. Mongol troops under Chormaqan in Persia connected his invasion
of Transcaucasia with the invasion of Batu and Subutai, forced the Georgian and
Armenian nobles to surrender as well. Despite the military successes, strife
continued within the Mongol ranks. Batu's relations with Güyük, Ögedei's
eldest son, and Büri, the beloved grandson of Chagatai Khan, remained tense,
and worsened during Batu's victory banquet in southern Russia, nevertheless
Güyük and Buri couldn´t do anything to harm Batu's position as long as his
uncle Ögedei was still alive. Meanwhile, Ögedei continued with Mongol
invasions into the Indian subcontinent, temporarily investing Uchch, Lahore and
Multan of the Delhi Sultanate and stationing a Mongol overseer in Kashmir,
though the invasions into India eventually failed and were forced to drive
back. In northeastern Asia, Ögedei agreed to settle conflicts with Goryeo by
making it a client state and sent Mongolian princesses to wed Goryeo princes.
He then reinforced his "keshig" with the Koreans through both diplomacy and
military force. The advance into Europe continued with Mongol invasions of
Poland, Hungary and Transylvania. When the western flank of the Mongols
plundered Polish cities, a European alliance between the Poles, the Moravians,
and the Christian military orders of the Hospitallers, Teutonic Knights and the
Templars assembled sufficient forces to halt, although briefly, the Mongol
advance at Legnica. The Hungarian army, their Croatian allies and the Templar
Knights were beaten by Mongols at the banks of Sajo River on April 11, 1241.
After their victories over European Knights at Legnica and Muhi, Mongol armies
quickly advanced across Bohemia, Serbia, Babenberg Austria and into the Holy
Roman Empire, but before Batu's forces could continue into Vienna and northern
Albania, news of Ögedei's death in December 1241 brought a halt to the
invasion. As was customary in Mongol military tradition, all princes of
Genghis's line had to attend the "kurultai" to elect a successor. Batu and his
western Mongol army withdrew from Central Europe the next year. Post-Ögedei
power struggles. Following the Great Khan Ögedei's death in 1241, and before
the next "kurultai", Ögedei's widow Töregene took over the empire. She
persecuted her husband's Khitan and Muslim officials, giving high positions to
her own allies instead. She built palaces, cathedrals and social structures on
an imperial scale, supporting religion and education. She was able to win over
most Mongol aristocrats to support Ögedei's son Güyük. But Batu, ruler of
the Golden Horde, refused to come to the "kurultai", claiming he was ill and
the Mongolian climate was too harsh for him. The resulting stalemate lasted
more than four years, and further destabilized the unity of the empire. When
Genghis Khan's youngest brother Temüge threatened Töregene to seize the
throne, Güyük came to Karakorum to try and secure his position. Batu
eventually agreed to send his brothers and generals to the "kurultai" which
Töregene convened in 1246. Güyük by this time was ill and alcoholic, but his
campaigns in Manchuria and Europe gave him the kind of stature necessary for a
Great Khan. He was duly elected at a ceremony attended by Mongols and foreign
dignitaries from both within and without the empire—leaders of vassal
nations, and representatives from Rome and other entities, who came to the
"kurultai" to show their respects and negotiate diplomacy. Güyük took steps
to reduce corruption, announcing that he would continue the policies of his
father Ögedei, not Töregene. He punished Töregene's supporters, except
governor Arghun the Elder. He also replaced young Qara Hülëgü, the khan of
the Chagatai Khanate, with his favorite cousin Yesü Möngke to assert his
newly conferred powers. He restored his father's officials to their former
positions and was surrounded by the Uyghur, Naiman and Central Asian officials,
favoring Han Chinese commanders who helped his father's conquest of Northern
China. He continued military operations in Korea, advanced into Song China in
the south and Iraq in the west, and ordered an empire-wide census. Güyük also
divided the Sultanate of Rum between Izz-ad-Din Kaykawus and Rukn ad-Din Kilij
Arslan, though Kaykawus disagreed with this decision. Not all parts of the
empire respected Güyük's election. The Hashshashins, former Mongol allies
whose Grand Master Hasan Jalalud-Din had offered his submission to Genghis Khan
in 1221, angered Güyük by refusing to submit, instead murdering Mongol
generals in Persia. Güyük appointed his best friend's father Eljigidei as
chief commander of the troops in Persia, and gave them the task of both
reducing the strongholds of the Assassins a Muslim mouvement, and conquering
the Abbasids in the center of the Islamic world, Iran and Iraq. In 1248,
Güyük raised more troops and suddenly marched westwards from the Mongol
capital of Karakorum. The reasoning was unclear: some sources wrote that he
sought to recuperate his personal property Emyl; others suggested that he might
have been moving to join Eljigidei to conduct a full-scale conquest of the
Middle East, or possibly to make a surprise attack on his rival cousin Batu
Khan in Russia. Suspicious of Güyük's motives, Sorghaghtani Beki, the widow
of Genghis's son Tolui, secretly warned her nephew Batu of Güyük's approach.
Batu had himself been traveling eastwards at the time, possibly to pay homage,
or perhaps with other plans in mind. Before the forces of Batu and Güyük met
though, Güyük, sick and worn out by travel, died en route at Qum-Senggir in
Eastern Turkestan, possibly a victim of poison. Güyük's widow Oghul Qaimish
stepped forward to take control of the empire, but she lacked the skills of her
mother-in-law Töregene, and her young sons Khoja and Naku and other princes
challenged her authority. To decide on a new Great Khan, Batu called a
"kurultai" on his own territory in 1250. As it was far from the Mongolian
heartland, members of the Ögedeid and Chagataid families refused to attend.
The "kurultai" offered the throne to Batu, but he rejected it, claiming he had
no interest in the position. He instead nominated Möngke, a grandson of
Genghis of his son Tolui lineage. Möngke was leading a Mongol army in Russia,
Northern Caucasus and Hungary. The pro-Tolui faction rose up and supported
Batu's choice, and Möngke was elected, though given the "kurultai's" limited
attendance and location, it was of questionable validity. Batu sent Möngke
under the protection of his brothers, Berke and Tukhtemur, and his son Sartaq
to assemble a more formal "kurultai" at Kodoe Aral in the heartland. The
supporters of Möngke invited Oghul Qaimish and other main Ögedeid and
Chagataid princes to attend the "kurultai", but they refused each time. The
Ögedeid and Chagataid princes refused to accept a descendant of Genghis's son
Tolui as leader, demanding that only descendants of Genghis's son Ögedei could
be Great Khan. Toluid reformation. When Möngke's mother Sorghaghtani and their
cousin Berke organized a second "kurultai" on July 1, 1251, the assembled
throng proclaimed Möngke Great Khan of the Mongol Empire. This marked a major
shift in the leadership of the empire, transferring power from the descendants
of Genghis's son Ögedei to the descendants of Genghis's son Tolui. The
decision was acknowledged by a few of the Ögedeid and Chagataid princes, such
as Möngke's cousin Kadan and the deposed khan Qara Hülëgü, but one of the
other legitimate heirs, Ögedei's grandson Shiremun, sought to topple Möngke.
Shiremun moved with his own forces towards the emperor's nomadic palace with a
plan for an armed attack, but Möngke was alerted by his falconer of the plan.
Möngke ordered an investigation of the plot, which led to a series of major
trials all across the empire. Many members of the Mongol elite were found
guilty and put to death, with estimates ranging from 77–300, though princes
of Genghis's royal line were often exiled rather than executed. Möngke
eliminated the Ögedeid and the Chagatai families' estates and shared the
western part of the empire with his ally Batu Khan. After the bloody purge,
Möngke ordered a general amnesty for prisoners and captives, but ever after,
the power of the Great Khan's throne remained firmly with the descendants of
Genghis's son Tolui. Möngke was a serious man who followed the laws of his
ancestors and avoided alcoholism. He was tolerant of outside religions and
artistic styles, which led to the building of foreign merchants' quarters,
Buddhist monasteries, mosques, and Christian churches in the Mongol capital. As
construction projects continued, Karakorum was adorned with Chinese, European
and Persian architecture. One famous example was a large silver tree with
cleverly designed pipes which dispensed various drinks. The tree, topped by a
triumphant angel, was crafted by Guillaume Boucher, a Parisian goldsmith.
Although he had a strong Chinese contingent, Möngke relied heavily on Muslim
and Mongol administrators, and launched a series of economic reforms to make
government expenses more predictable. His court limited government spending and
prohibited nobles and troops from abusing civilians or issuing edicts without
authorization. He commuted the contribution system into a fixed poll tax which
was collected by imperial agents and forwarded to units in need. His court also
tried to lighten the tax burden on commoners by reducing tax rates. Along with
the reform of the tax system, he reinforced the guards at the postal relays and
centralized control of monetary affairs. Möngke also ordered an empire-wide
census in 1252 which took several years to complete, not being finished until
Novgorod in the far northwest was counted in 1258. In another move to
consolidate his power, Möngke assigned his brothers Hulagu and Kublai to rule
Persia and Mongol-held China. In the southern part of the empire, he continued
his predecessors' struggle against the Song Dynasty. In order to outflank the
Song from three directions, Möngke dispatched Mongol armies under his brother
Kublai to Yunnan, and under his uncle Iyeku to subdue Korea and pressure the
Song from that direction as well. Kublai conquered the Dali Kingdom in 1253,
and Möngke's general Qoridai stabilized his control over Tibet, inducing
leading monasteries to submit to Mongol rule. Subutai's son, Uryankhadai,
reduced neighboring peoples of Yunnan to submission and beat the Trần Dynasty
in northern Vietnam into temporary submission in 1258. After stabilizing the
empire's finances, Möngke once again sought to expand its borders. At
"kurultais" in Karakorum in 1253 and 1258 he approved new invasions of the
Middle East and south China. Möngke put Hulagu in overall charge of military
and civil affairs in Persia, and appointed Chagataids and Jochids to join
Hulagu's army. The Muslims from Qazvin denounced the menace of the Nizari
Ismailis, a heretical sect of Shiites. The Mongol Naiman commander Kitbuqa
began to assault several Ismaili fortresses in 1253, before Hulagu deliberately
advanced in 1256. Ismaili Grand Master Rukn ud-Din surrendered in 1257 and was
executed. All of the Ismaili strongholds in Persia were destroyed by Hulagu's
army in 1257 though Girdukh held out until 1271. The center of the Islamic
Empire at the time was Baghdad, which had held power for 500 years but was
suffering internal divisions. When its caliph al-Mustasim refused to submit to
the Mongols, Baghdad was besieged and captured by the Mongols in 1258, an event
considered as one of the most catastrophic events in the history of Islam, and
sometimes compared to the rupture of the Kaaba. With the destruction of the
Abbasid Caliphate, Hulagu had an open route to Syria and moved against the
other Muslim powers in the region. His army advanced towards Ayyubid-ruled
Syria, capturing small local states en route. The sultan Al-Nasir Yusuf of the
Ayyubids refused to show himself before Hulagu; however, he had accepted Mongol
supremacy two decades earlier. When Hulagu headed further west, the Armenians
from Cilicia, the Seljuks from Rum and the Christian realms of Antioch and
Tripoli submitted to Mongol authority, joining the Mongols in their assault
against the Muslims. While some cities surrendered without resisting, others
such as Mayafarriqin fought back; their populations were massacred and the
cities were sacked. Meanwhile, in the northwestern portion of the empire,
Batu's successor and younger brother Berke sent punitive expeditions to
Ukraine, Belarus, Lithuania and Poland. Dissension began brewing between the
northwestern and southwestern sections of the Mongol Empire, as Batu suspected
that Hulagu's invasion of Western Asia would result in the elimination of
Batu's own predominance there. Disintegration. Dispute over succession. In the
southern part of the empire, Möngke Khan himself led his army to complete the
conquest of China. Military operations were generally successful, but
prolonged, so the forces did not withdraw to the north as was customary when
the weather turned hot. Disease ravaged the Mongol forces with bloody
epidemics, and Möngke died there on August 11, 1259. This event began a new
chapter of history for the Mongols, as again a decision needed to be made on a
new Great Khan. Mongol armies across the empire withdrew from their campaigns
to once again convene for a new "kurultai". Möngke's brother Hulagu broke off
his successful military advance into Syria, withdrawing the bulk of his forces
to Mughan and leaving only a small contingent under his general Kitbuqa. The
opposing forces in the region, the Christian Crusaders and Muslim Mamluks, both
recognizing that the Mongols were the greater threat, took advantage of the
weakened state of the Mongol army and engaged in an unusual passive truce with
each other. In 1260, the Mamluks advanced from Egypt, being allowed to camp and
resupply near the Christian stronghold of Acre, and engaged Kitbuqa's forces
just north of Galilee, at the Battle of Ain Jalut. The Mongols were defeated,
and Kitbuqa executed. This pivotal battle marked the western limit for Mongol
expansion, as the Mongols were never again able to make any serious military
advances farther than Syria. In a separate part of the empire, another brother
of Hulagu and Möngke, Kublai, heard of the Great Khan's death at the Huai in
China. Rather than returning to the capital though, he continued his advance
into the Wuchang area of China, near the Yangtze River. Their younger brother
Ariqboke took advantage of the absence of Hulagu and Kublai, and used his
position at the capital to win the title of Great Khan for himself, with
representatives of all the family branches proclaimed him as the leader at the
"kurultai" in Karakorum. When Kublai learned of this, he summoned his own
"kurultai" at Kaiping, where virtually all the senior princes and great noyans
resident in North China and Manchuria supported his own candidacy over that of
Ariqboke. Civil war. Battles ensued between the armies of Kublai and those of
his brother Ariqboke, which included forces still loyal to Möngke's previous
administration. Kublai's army easily eliminated Ariqboke's supporters, and
seized control of the civil administration in southern Mongolia. Further
challenges took place from their cousins, the Chagataids. Kublai sent Abishka,
a Chagataid prince loyal to him, to take charge of Chagatai's realm. But
Ariqboke captured and then executed Abishka, having his own man Alghu crowned
there instead. Kublai's new administration blockaded Ariqboke in Mongolia to
cut off food supplies, causing a famine. Karakorum fell quickly to Kublai, but
Ariqboke rallied and re-took the capital in 1261. In the southwestern
Ilkhanate, Hulagu was loyal to his brother Kublai, but clashes with their
cousin Berke, the ruler of the Golden Horde in the northwestern part of the
empire, began in 1262. The suspicious deaths of Jochid princes in Hulagu's
service, unequal distribution of war booties and Hulagu's massacres of the
Muslims increased the anger of Berke, who considered supporting a rebellion of
the Georgian Kingdom against Hulagu's rule in 1259–1260. Berke also forged an
alliance with the Egyptian Mamluks against Hulagu, and supported Kublai's rival
claimant, Ariqboke. Hulagu died on February 8, 1264. Berke sought to take
advantage of this and invade Hulagu's realm, but died himself along the way,
and a few months later, Alghu Khan of the Chagatai Khanate died as well. Kublai
named Hulagu's son Abaqa as a new Ilkhan, and Abaqa sought foreign alliances,
such as attempting to form a Franco-Mongol alliance with the Europeans against
the Egyptian Mamluks. To lead the Golden Horde, Kublai nominated Batu's
grandson Möngke Temür. Ariqboqe surrendered to Kublai at Shangdu on August
21, 1264. In the south, after the fall of Xiangyang in 1273, the Mongols sought
the final conquest of the Song Dynasty in South China. In 1271, Kublai renamed
the new Mongol regime in China as the Yuan Dynasty, and sought to sinicize his
image as Emperor of China in order to win the control of the millions of
Chinese. Kublai moved his headquarters to Dadu, the genesis for what later
became the modern city of Beijing, although his establishment of a capital
there was a controversial move to many Mongols who accused him of being too
closely tied to Chinese culture. But the Mongols were eventually successful in
their campaigns against China, and the Chinese Song imperial family surrendered
to the Yuan in 1276, making the Mongols the first non-Chinese people to conquer
all of China. Kublai used his base to build a powerful empire, creating an
academy, offices, trade ports and canals, and sponsoring arts and science.
Mongol records list 20,166 public schools created during his reign. Having
achieved actual or nominal dominion over much of Eurasia, and having seen his
successful conquest of China, Kublai was in a position to look beyond China.
However, his costly invasions of Burma, Annam, Sakhalin and Champa secured only
the vassal status of those countries. Mongol invasions of Japan (1274 and 1280)
and Java (1293) failed. Nogai and Konchi, the khan of the White Horde,
established friendly relations with the Yuan Dynasty and the Ilkhanate.
Political disagreement between contending branches of the family over the
office of Great Khan continued, but the economic and commercial success of the
Mongol Empire continued despite the squabbling. Political struggles. Major
changes occurred in the Mongol Empire in the late 1200s. Kublai Khan, after
having conquered all of China and established the Yuan Dynasty, died in 1294,
and was succeeded by his grandson Temür Khan, who continued Kublai's policies.
The Ilkhanate remained loyal to the Yuan court but endured its own power
struggle, in part because of a dispute with the growing Islamic factions within
the southwestern part of the empire. When Ghazan took the throne of the
Ilkhanate in 1295, he formally accepted Islam as his own religion, marking a
turning point in Mongol history after which Mongol Persia became more and more
Islamic. Despite this though, Ghazan continued to strengthen ties with Temür
Khan and the Yuan Dynasty in the east. It was politically useful to advertise
the Great Khan's authority in the Ilkhanate, because the Golden Horde in Russia
had long made claims on nearby Georgia. Within four years, Ghazan began sending
tributes to the Yuan court, appealed to other khans to accept Temür Khan as
their overlord, and oversaw an extensive program of cultural and scientific
interaction between the Ilkhanate and the Yuan Dynasty in the following
decades. Ghazan's faith may have been Islamic, but he continued his
ancestors’ war with the Egyptian Mamluks, and consulted with his old
Mongolian advisers in his native tongue. He defeated the Mamluk army at the
Battle of Wadi al-Khazandar in 1299, but was only briefly able to occupy Syria,
due to distracting raids from the Chagatai Khanate, under its "de facto" ruler
Kaidu, who was at war with both the Ilkhans and the Yuan Dynasty. Struggling
for influence within the Golden Horde, Kaidu sponsored his own candidate
Kobeleg against Bayan (r. 1299–1304), the khan of the White Horde. Bayan,
after receiving military support from the Mongols in Russia, requested
assistance from both the Great Khan Temür and the Ilkhanate to organize a
unified attack against Kaidu's forces. Temür was amenable, and enlarged
counterattacks against Kaidu a year later. After a bloody battle with Temür's
armies near Zawkhan River in 1301, the old valiant Kaidu died, and was
succeeded by Duwa. In spite of his conflicts with Kaidu and Duwa, Yuan emperor
Temür established a tributary relationship with the war-like Shan brothers
after his series of military operations against Thailand from 1297 to 1303.
This was to mark the end of the southern expansion of the Mongols. Some Mongols
sought to decrease internal strife, and unify under Temür. Duwa initiated a
peace proposal and persuaded the Ögedeids that "Let we Mongols stop shedding
blood of each other. It is better to surrender to Khagan Temür". In 1304, all
khanates approved a peace treaty, and accepted Temür's supremacy. Duwa was
challenged by Kaidu's son Chapar, but with the assistance of Temür, Duwa
defeated the Ögedeids. Tokhta of the Golden Horde, also seeking a general
peace, sent 20,000 men to buttress the Yuan frontier. After Tokhta's death in
1312 though, he was succeeded by Ozbeg (r. 1313–41), who seized the throne of
the Golden Horde and persecuted non-Muslim Mongols. The Yuan's influence on the
Horde was largely reversed and border clashes between Mongol states resumed.
Ayurbawda Khan's envoys backed Tokhta's son against Ozbeg. In the Chagatai
Khanate, Esen Buqa I (r. 1309-1318) was enthroned as khan after suppressing a
sudden rebellion by Ögedei's descendants and driving Chapar into exile. The
Yuan and Ilkhanid armies eventually attacked the Chagatai Khanate. Realizing
economic benefits and the Genghisid legacy, Ozbeg reopened friendly relations
with the Yuan in 1326, and strengthened ties with the Muslim world as well,
building mosques and other elaborate places such as baths. By the second decade
of the 14th century, Mongol invasions had further decreased. In 1323, Abu Said
Khan (r. 1316-35) of the Ilkhanate signed a peace treaty with Egypt. At his
request, the Yuan court awarded his custodian Chupan the title of commander-in-
chief of all Mongol khanates. But Chupan's reputation could not save his life
in 1327. A new civil war erupted in the Yuan Dynasty in 1327-1328, with
Chagatai khan Eljigidey (r. 1326–29) supporting Kusala, the Yuan Khagan
Khayisan's son, as Great Khan. Kusala was elected on August 30, 1329. Fearing
Chagataid influence on the Yuan, Tugh Temür's (1304–1332) Kypchak commander
poisoned him, and took power for himself. In order to be accepted by other
khanates as the sovereign of Mongol world, Tugh Temür, who had a good
knowledge of Chinese language and history and was also a creditable poet,
calligrapher, and painter, sent Genghisid princes and descendants of other
notable Mongol generals to the Chagatai Khanate, Ilkhan Abu Said and Ozbeg. In
response to the emissaries, they all agreed to send tribute each year. Tugh
Temür also gave lavish presents and an imperial seal to Eljigidey to mollify
his anger. The Kypchak and the Alans became even more powerful at the court of
the Yuan than had been seen since Temür's reign. Pope John XXII was presented
a memorandum from the eastern church describing their Pax Mongolica: "...Khagan
is one of the greatest monarchs and all lords of the state, e.g. the king of
Almaligh (Chagatai Khanate), emperor Abu Said and Uzbek Khan, are his subjects,
saluting his holiness to pay their respects. These 3 monarchs send their
overlord leopards, camels, falcons as well as precious jewelries every year.
... They acknowledge him as their absolute supreme lord.". With the relative
stability ("Pax Mongolica") brought to the region by the Mongol conquests,
international trade and cultural exchanges flourished between Asia and Europe.
The communications between the Yuan Dynasty in China and Ilkhanate in Persia
further encouraged the trade and commerce between the east and the west.
Patterns of Yuan royal textiles could be found on the opposite side of the
empire adorning Armenian decorations; trees and vegetables were transplanted
across the empire; and technological innovations spread from Mongol dominions
towards the West. Fall. With the death of Ilkhan Abu Said Bahatur in 1335, the
Mongol rule in Persia fell into political anarchy. A year later his successor
was killed by an Oirat governor and the Ilkhanate was divided between the
Suldus, the Jalayir, Qasarid Togha Temür (d. 1353) and Persian warlords.
Taking advantage of the chaos, the Georgians pushed the Mongols out of their
own territory, and the Uyghur commander Eretna established an independent state
(Ertenids) in Anatolia in 1336. Following the downfall of their Mongol masters,
the all-time loyal vassal, the Armenian Kingdom of Cilicia, received escalating
threats from the Mamluks, and were eventually overrun. Along with the
dissolution of the Mongol Ilkhanate in Persia, Mongol rulers in China and the
Chagatai Khanate were also in turmoil. Plagues such as the Black Death, which
certainly started in the Mongol dominions and then spread to Europe, added to
the confusion. Disease devastated all the khanates, cutting off commercial ties
and killing off millions. By the end of the 14th century, it may have taken
70–100 million lives in Africa, Asia and Europe. As the power of the Mongols
declined, chaos erupted everywhere as non-Mongol leaders struggled for their
own influence. The Golden Horde lost all of its western dominions (including
modern Belarus and Ukraine) to Poland and Lithuania from 1342 to 1369. Muslim
and non-Muslim princes in the Chagatai Khanate warred with each other from
1331–1343, and the Chagatai Khanate disintegrated when non-Genghisid warlords
set up their own puppet khans in Transoxiana and Moghulistan. Janibeg Khan (r.
1342–1357) briefly reasserted Jochid dominance over the Chaghataids to
restore their former glory. Demanding submission from an offshoot of the
Ilkhanate in Azerbaijan, he boasted that "today three uluses are under my
control". However, rival families of the Jochids began fighting for the throne
of the Golden Horde after the assassination of his successor Berdibek Khan in
1359. The last Yuan ruler Toghan Temür (r. 1333–70) was powerless to
regulate those troubles because the empire had nearly reached its end. His
court's unbacked currency had entered a hyperinflationary spiral and the Han-
Chinese people revolted due to the Yuan's harsh restrictions. In the 1350s
Gongmin of Goryeo successfully pushed Mongolian garrisons back and exterminated
the family of Toghan Temür Khan's empress while Tai Situ Changchub Gyaltsen
managed to eliminate the Mongol influence in Tibet. Increasingly isolated from
their subjects, the Mongols quickly lost most of China to the rebellious Ming
forces in 1368 and fled to their homeland Mongolia. After the overthrow of the
Yuan Dynasty, the Golden Horde lost touch with Mongolia and China, while the
two main parts of the Chagatai Khanate were defeated by Timur (Tamerlane)
(1336–1405). The Golden Horde broke into smaller Turkic-hordes that declined
steadily in power through four long centuries. Among them, the khanate's shadow
Great Horde survived until 1502, when one of its successors, the Crimean
Khanate, sacked Sarai. The Yuan remnants, known as Northern Yuan, continued to
rule Mongolia until 1635 when the semi-nomadic Manchus from Manchuria defeated
them. The Khalkha under the Genghisids and their former subjects, the Oirat
Mongols, lost their independence to the Qing Dynasty in 1691 and 1755
respectively, and the remnants of the Crimean Khanate were annexed by the
Russian Empire in 1783. Military setup. The number of troops mustered by the
Mongols is the subject of some scholarly debate, but was at least 105,000 in
1206. The Mongol military organization was simple but effective, based on the
decimal system. The army was built up from squads of ten men each, called an
"arbat"; ten "arbat"s constituted a company of one hundred, called a "zuut";
ten "zuut"s made a regiment of one thousand called "myanghan" and ten
"myanghan"s would then constitute a division of ten thousand ("tumen"). The
Mongols were most famous for their horse archers, but troops armed with lances
were equally skilled, and the Mongols recruited other military talents from the
cities they conquered. With experienced Chinese engineers and bombardier corps
who were experts in building trebuchets, Xuanfeng catapults and other machines,
the Mongols could lay siege to fortified positions, sometimes building
machinery on the spot using available local resources. Forces under the command
of the Mongol Empire were trained, organized, and equipped for mobility and
speed. Mongol soldiers were more lightly armored than many of the armies they
faced, but able to make up for it with maneuverability. Each Mongol warrior
would usually travel with multiple horses, allowing him to quickly switch to a
fresh mount as needed. In addition, soldiers of the Mongol army functioned
independently of supply lines, considerably speeding up army movement. Skillful
use of couriers enabled these armies to maintain contact with each other and
their leadership. Discipline was inculcated during a "nerge" (traditional
hunt), as reported by Juvayni. These hunts were distinctive from hunts in other
cultures where they were the equivalent to small unit actions. Mongol forces
would spread out in a line, surround an entire region, and then drive all of
the game within that area together. The goal was to let none of the animals
escape and slaughter them all. Another advantage of the Mongols was their
ability to traverse large distances even in unusual cold winters; for instance,
frozen rivers led them like highways to large urban centers on their banks. In
addition to siege engineering, the Mongols were also adept at river-work,
crossing the river Sajó in spring flood conditions with thirty thousand
cavalry soldiers in a single night during the battle of Mohi (April, 1241) to
defeat the Hungarian king Béla IV. Similarly, in the attack against the Muslim
Khwarezmshah, a flotilla of barges was used to prevent escape on the river.
Traditionally known for their prowess with ground forces, the Mongols rarely
used naval power, with a few exceptions. In the 1260s and 1270s they used
seapower while conquering the Song Dynasty of China, though they were unable to
mount successful seaborne campaigns against Japan. Around the Eastern
Mediterranean, their campaigns were almost exclusively land-based, with the
seas being controlled by the Crusader and Mamluk forces. All military campaigns
were preceded by careful planning, reconnaissance and gathering of sensitive
information relating to enemy territories and forces. The success, organization
and mobility of the Mongol armies permitted them to fight on several fronts at
once. All adult males up to the age of 60 were eligible for conscription into
the army, a source of honor in their tribal warrior tradition. Society. Law and
governance. The Mongol Empire was governed by a code of law devised by Genghis,
called "Yassa", meaning "order" or "decree". A particular canon of this code
was that those of rank shared much of the same hardship as the common man. It
also imposed severe penalties – e.g., the death penalty was decreed if one
mounted soldier following another did not pick up something dropped from the
mount in front. Penalties were also decreed for rape and to some extent for
murder. On the whole, the tight discipline made the Mongol Empire extremely
safe and well-run; European travelers were amazed by the organization and
strict discipline of the people within the Mongol Empire. Under "Yassa", chiefs
and generals were selected based on merit. Religious tolerance was guaranteed,
and thievery and vandalizing of civilian property was strictly forbidden. The
empire was governed by a non-democratic parliamentary-style central assembly,
called "Kurultai", in which the Mongol chiefs met with the Great Khan to
discuss domestic and foreign policies. "Kurultais" were also convened for the
selection of each new Great Khan. Genghis was very tolerant of other religions,
and never persecuted people on religious grounds. This was associated with
their culture and progressive thought (Roger Bacon). Some historian of the 20th
century thought that it was a good military strategy, the occasion in which he
was at war with Sultan Muhammad of Khwarezm, other Islamic leaders did not join
the fight against Genghis — it was instead seen as a non-holy war between two
individuals. Throughout the empire, trade routes and an extensive postal system
("yam") were created. Many merchants, messengers and travelers from China, the
Middle East and Europe used the system. Genghis Khan also created a national
seal, encouraged the use of a written alphabet in Mongolia, and exempted
teachers, lawyers, and artists from taxes, although taxes were heavy on all
other subjects of the empire. At the same time, any resistance to Mongol rule
was met with massive collective punishment. Cities were destroyed and their
inhabitants slaughtered if they defied Mongol orders. Religions. Mongols were
highly tolerant of most religions, to the extent of sponsoring several at the
same time. At the time of Genghis Khan, virtually every religion had found
converts, from Buddhism to Christianity and Manichaeism to Islam. To avoid
strife, Genghis Khan set up an institution that ensured complete religious
freedom, though he himself was a shamanist. Under his administration, all
religious leaders were exempt from taxation, and from public service. Initially
there were few formal places of worship, because of the nomadic lifestyle.
However, under Ögedei (1186–1241), several building projects were undertaken
in the Mongol capital of Karakorum. Along with palaces, Ögedei built houses of
worship for the Buddhist, Muslim, Christian, and Taoist followers. The dominant
religions at that time were Shamanism, Tengrism and Buddhism, although
Ögedei's wife was a Nestorian Christian. Eventually, three of the four
principal khanates embraced Islam. Arts and literature. The oldest surviving
literary work in the Mongolian language is "The Secret History of the Mongols",
which was written for the royal family sometime after Genghis Khan's death in
1227. It is the most significant native account of Genghis's life and
genealogy, covering his origins and childhood, through to the establishment of
the Mongol Empire and the reign of his son, Ögedei. Another classic from the
empire is the "Jami' al-tawarikh", or "Universal History". It was commissioned
in the early 14th century by the Ilkhan Abaqa Khan, as a way of documenting the
entire world's history, to help establish the Mongols' own cultural legacy.
With hundreds of illustrated pages, it was effectively one of the first written
histories of the world. The Mongols also appreciated the visual arts, though
their taste in portraiture was strictly focused on portraits of their horses,
rather than of people. Mail system. The Mongol Empire had an ingenious and
efficient mail system for the time, often referred to by scholars as the Yam,
which had lavishly furnished and well guarded relay posts known as "örtöö"
setup all over the Mongol Empire. The "yam" system would be replicated later in
the United States, in the form of the Pony Express. A messenger would typically
travel from one station to the next, either receiving a fresh, rested horse, or
relaying the mail to the next rider to ensure the speediest possible delivery.
The Mongol riders regularly covered per day, better than the fastest record set
by the Pony Express some 600 years later. Genghis and his successor Ögedei
built a wide system of roadways, one of which carved the Altai Range. After his
enthronement, Ögedei further organized the road system, ordering the Chagatai
Khanate and Golden Horde to link up roads in western parts of the Mongol
Empire. In order to reduce pressure on households, he set up relay stations
with attached households every . Anyone with paiza was allowed to stop there
for re-mounts and specified rations, while those carrying military identities
used the Yam even without a paiza. When the Great Khan died in Karakorum, news
reached the Mongol forces under Batu Khan in Central Europe within 4–6 weeks
thanks to the Yam. Kublai Khan, the founder of the Yuan Dynasty, built special
relays for high officials, as well as ordinary relays which had hostels. During
Kublai's reign, the Yuan communication system consisted of some 1,400 postal
stations, which used 50,000 horses, 8,400 oxen, 6,700 mules, 4,000 carts, and
6,000 boats. In Manchuria and southern Siberia, the Mongols still used dogsled
relays for the yam. In the Ilkhanate, Ghazan restored the declining relay
system in the Middle East on a restricted scale. He constructed some hostels
and decreed that only imperial envoys could receive a stipend. The Jochids of
the Golden Horde financed their relay system by a special yam tax. Silk Road.
The Mongols had a strong history of supporting merchants and trade. Genghis
Khan had encouraged foreign merchants early in his career, even before uniting
the Mongols. Merchants provided him with information about neighboring
cultures, served as diplomats and official traders for the Mongols, and were
essential for many needed goods, since the Mongols produced little of their
own. Mongols sometimes provided capital for merchants and sent them far afield,
in an "ortoq" (merchant partner) arrangement. As the empire grew, any merchants
or ambassadors with proper documentation and authorization received protection
and sanctuary as they traveled through Mongol realms. Well-traveled and
relatively well-maintained roads linked lands from the Mediterranean basin to
China, greatly increasing overland trade and resulting in some dramatic stories
of those who travelled through what would come be known as the famed Silk Road.
Marco Polo is a famous western explorer who traveled east along the Silk Road,
and the Chinese Mongol monk Rabban Bar Sauma made a comparably epic journey
along the Road who ventured from his home of Khanbaliq (Beijing) to as far as
Europe. And European missionaries, like William of Rubruck, also traveled to
the Mongol court to convert believers to their cause, or went as papal envoys
(sent on behalf of the pope) to correspond with Mongol rulers in an attempt to
secure a Franco-Mongol alliance. It was rare, however, for anyone to journey
the full length of Silk Road. Instead, merchants moved products like a bucket
brigade, goods being traded from one middleman to another, moving from China
all the way to the West; the goods moved over such long distances reached
extravagant prices. After Genghis, the merchant partner business continued to
flourish under his successors Ögedei and Güyük. Merchants brought clothing,
food, information, and other provisions to the imperial palaces, and in return
the Great Khans gave the merchants tax exemptions, and allowed them to use the
official relay stations of the Mongol Empire. Merchants also served as tax
farmers in China, Russia and Iran. If the merchants were attacked by bandits,
losses were made up from the imperial treasury. Policies changed under the
Great Khan Möngke. Because of money laundering and overtaxing, he attempted to
limit abuses and sent imperial investigators to supervise the "ortoq"
businesses. He decreed all merchants must pay commercial and property taxes,
and he paid off all drafts drawn by high ranking Mongol elites from the
merchants. This policy continued in the Yuan Dynasty. The fall of the Mongol
Empire in the 14th century led to the collapse of the political, cultural, and
economic unity along the Silk Road. Turkic tribes seized the western end of the
Silk Road trade routes from the decaying Byzantine Empire, and sowed the seeds
of a Turkic culture that would later crystallize into the Ottoman Empire under
the Sunni faith. In the East, the native Chinese overthrew the Yuan Dynasty in
1368, launching their own Ming Dynasty and pursuing a policy of economic
isolationism. Legacy. The Mongol Empire had a lasting impact, unifying large
regions, some of which (such as eastern and western Russia and the western
parts of China) remain unified today, albeit under different rulership. The
Mongols, except the main population, might have been assimilated into local
populations after the fall of the empire, and some of these descendants adopted
local religions — for example, the eastern khanates largely adopted Buddhism,
and the western khanates adopted Islam, largely under Sufi influence. According
to some interpretations, Genghis Khan's conquests caused wholesale destruction
on an unprecedented scale in certain geographical regions, and therefore led to
some changes in the demographics of Asia, such as the mass migration of the
Iranian tribes of Central Asia into modern-day Iran. The Islamic world was also
subject to massive changes as a result of Mongol invasions. The population of
the Iranian plateau suffered from widespread disease and famine, resulting in
the deaths of up to three-quarters of its population, possibly 10 to 15 million
people. Historian Steven Ward estimates that Iran's population did not again
reach its pre-Mongol levels until the mid-20th century. Non-military
achievements of the Mongol Empire included the introduction of a writing
system, a Mongol alphabet based on the Uighur characters, that is still used
today in Inner Mongolia. All conditions in the Mongol empire for women were
mitigated by women´s right to divorce, and their discouragement of foot-
binding, however Chinese Nationalist women continued to bind their feet. They
had the right to divorce, discouraged by Confucianism, but encouraged by the
Mongols as the Jasa specially ordained commerce to be for women. Women warriors
existed such as Chatulun, and as were reported by an abbot, and women were
sometimes in commanding roles as well during the mass executions following the
end of pages. The influence of the Mongol Empire may prove to be even more
direct — Zerjal et al. identify a Y-chromosomal lineage present in about 8%
of the men in a large region of Asia (or about 0.5% of the men in the world).
The paper suggests that the pattern of variation within the lineage is
consistent with a hypothesis that it originated in Mongolia about 1,000 years
ago. Such a spread would be too rapid to have occurred by diffusion, and must
therefore be the result of selection. The authors propose that the lineage is
carried by likely male line descendants of Genghis Khan, and that it has spread
through social selection. In addition to the khanates and other descendants,
the Mughal royal family of South Asia are also descended from Genghis Khan:
Babur's mother was a descendant — whereas his father was directly descended
from Timur (Tamerlane). The word ""Mughol"" is an Arabic word for Mongol.
