Normans The Normans (in French: "" ; in Latin ") were the people who gave their
name to Normandy, a region in northern France. They were descended from Norse
Viking conquerors of the territory and the native population of Frankish and
Gallo-Roman stock. Their identity emerged initially in the first half of the
10th century, and gradually evolved over succeeding centuries. They played a
major political, military, and cultural role in medieval Europe and even the
Near East. They were famed for their martial spirit and eventually for their
Christian piety. They quickly adopted the Romance language of the land they
settled, their dialect becoming known as Norman or Norman-French, an important
literary language. The Duchy of Normandy, which they formed by treaty with the
French crown, was one of the great fiefs of medieval France. The Normans are
famed both for their culture, such as their unique Romanesque architecture, and
their musical traditions, as well as for their military accomplishments and
innovations. Norman adventurers established a kingdom in Sicily and southern
Italy by conquest, and a Norman expedition on behalf of their duke, William the
Conqueror, led to the Norman Conquest of England. Norman influence spread from
these new centres to the Crusader States in the Near East, to Scotland and
Wales in Great Britain, and to Ireland. Etymology. The English name "Normans"
comes from the French words "Normans" / "Normanz", plural of "Normant", modern
French "normand", which is itself borrowed from Old Low Franconian "Nortmann"
"Northman" or directly from Old Norse "Norðmaðr", Latinized in "Nortmannus"
(recorded in Medieval Latin, 9th century) to mean "Norseman" or "Viking". In
modern Scandinavian languages, their cognates for "Norman" (Danish "nordmand",
Swedish "norrman", Norwegian "nordmann", Icelandic "norðmand") mean
"Norwegian". Characteristics. Malaterra in Peter Gunn, "Normandy: Landscape
with Figures". Their quick adaptability expressed itself in the shrewd Norman
willingness to take on local men of talent, to marry the high-born local women;
confidently illiterate Norman masters used the literate clerks of the church
for their own purposes. Now Bohemund was such as, to put it briefly, had never
before been seen in the land of the Romans, be he either of the barbarians or
of the Greeks (for he was a marvel for the eyes to behold, and his reputation
was terrifying). Let me describe the barbarian's appearance more particularly
– he was so tall in stature that he overtopped the tallest by nearly one
cubit, narrow in the waist and loins, with broad shoulders and a deep chest and
powerful arms. And in the whole build of the body he was neither too slender
nor overweighted with flesh, but perfectly proportioned and, one might say,
built in conformity with the canon of Polycleitus... His skin all over his body
was very white, and in his face the white was tempered with red. His hair was
yellowish, but did not hang down to his waist like that of the other
barbarians; for the man was not inordinately vain of his hair, but had it cut
short to the ears. Whether his beard was reddish, or any other colour I cannot
say, for the razor had passed over it very closely and left a surface smoother
than chalk... His blue eyes indicated both a high spirit and dignity. Normandy.
The Duchy of Normandy was founded by the 10th century Norse leader Rollo, in
the former kingdom of Neustria, part of the Kingdom of France. Geographically,
it had no natural unit and was previously merely an administrative structure.
This was almost equivalent to the old church province of Rouen, that reproduced
itself the Roman administrative structure of "Gallia Lugdunensis II" (part of
the former "Gallia Lugdunensis"). At first its population did not really differ
from the one of Picardy or the neighbouring Paris region, considered as
"Frankish". However Viking settlers had begun arriving in the 880s, divided
between two main colonies in the east (Roumois and pays de Caux around the low
Seine valley) and another one in the west (Cotentin Peninsula), separated by
traditionnal "pagii", where the population remains about the same with almost
no foreign settlers. The Viking contingents who raided, and ultimately settled
Normandy and some parts of the Atlantic coast, included Danes, Norwegians,
Hiberno-Norse, Orkney Vikings, as well as Anglo-Danes from the English Danelaw,
under Viking control. In the course of the 10th century, the initial
destructive incursions of Norse war bands into the rivers of France evolved
into permanent encampments that included women and chattel. The pagan culture
was substituted by the Christian faith and Gallo-Romance language of the local
people. The small groups of Vikings that settled there adopted the language and
culture of the French majority into their own customs to create a unique
"Norman" culture. In Normandy, they adopted the growing feudal doctrines of the
rest of northern France, and worked them, both in Normandy and in England, into
a functional hierarchical system. The Norman warrior class was new and
different from the old French aristocracy, most of whom could trace their
families back to the Franks of Carolingian times. Most knights remained poor
and land-hungry; by 1066, Normandy had been exporting fighting horsemen for
more than a generation. Knighthood before the time of the Crusades held little
social status, and simply indicated a professional warrior wealthy enough to
own a war horse. Many Normans of France and Britain would eventually serve as
avid Crusaders. The Norman language was forged by the adoption of the
indigenous oïl language by a Norse-speaking ruling class, and developed into
the regional language which survives today. Conquests. In Italy. Opportunistic
bands of Normans successfully established a foothold far to the south of Italy.
Probably the result of returning pilgrims' stories, the Normans entered the
Mezzogiorno as warriors in 1017, at the latest. In 999, according to Amatus of
Montecassino, pilgrims returning from Jerusalem called in at the port of
Salerno, when a Saracen attack occurred. The Normans fought so valiantly that
Prince Guaimar IV begged them to stay, but they refused and instead offered to
tell others back home of the prince's request. William of Apulia tells that, in
1016, pilgrims to the shrine of the Archangel Michael at Monte Gargano were met
by Melus of Bari, a Lombard freedom-fighter, who persuaded them to return with
more warriors to help throw off the Byzantine rule, which they did. The two
most prominent families to arrive in the Mediterranean were descendants of
Tancred of Hauteville and the Drengots, of whom Rainulf Drengot received the
county of Aversa, the first Norman toehold in the south, from Duke Sergius IV
of Naples in 1030. The Hautevilles achieved princely rank by proclaiming Prince
Guaimar IV of Salerno "Duke of Apulia and Calabria". He promptly awarded their
elected leader, William Iron Arm, with the title of count with his capital of
Melfi. Soon the Drengots had attained unto the principality of Capua, and the
Emperor Henry III had legally ennobled the Hauteville leader, Drogo, as "dux et
magister Italiae comesque Normannorum totius Apuliae et Calabriae" in 1047.
From these bases, the Normans eventually captured Sicily and Malta from the
Moslem Saracens, under the famous Robert Guiscard, a Hauteville, and his young
brother Roger the Great Count. Roger's son, Roger II, was crowned king in 1130
(exactly one century after Rainulf was "crowned" count) by Pope Anacletus II.
The kingdom of Sicily lasted until 1194, when it fell to the Hohenstaufens
through marriage. The Normans left their mark however in the many castles, such
as the Iron Arm's fortress at Squillace, and cathedrals, such as Roger II's at
Cefalù, which dot the landscape and give a wholly distinct architectural
flavour to accompany its unique history. Institutionally, the Normans combined
the administrative machinery of the Byzantines, Arabs, and Lombards with their
own conceptions of feudal law and order to forge a unique government. Under
this state, there was great religious freedom, and alongside the Norman nobles
existed a meritocratic bureaucracy of Jews, Muslims, and Christians, both
Catholic and Orthodox. In Byzantium. Soon after the Normans first began to
enter Italy, they entered the Byzantine Empire, and then Armenia against the
Pechenegs, Bulgars, and especially Seljuk Turks. The Norman mercenaries first
encouraged to come to the south by the Lombards to act against the Byzantines
soon fought in Byzantine service in Sicily. They were prominent alongside
Varangian and Lombard contingents in the Sicilian campaign of George Maniaces
of 1038–40. There is debate whether the Normans in Greek service were mostly
or at all from Norman Italy, and it now seems likely only a few came from
there. It is also unknown how many of the "Franks", as the Byzantines called
them, were Normans and not other Frenchmen. One of the first Norman mercenaries
to serve as a Byzantine general was Hervé in the 1050s. By then however, there
were already Norman mercenaries serving as far away as Trebizond and Georgia.
They were based at Malatya and Edessa, under the Byzantine duke of Antioch,
Isaac Komnenos. In the 1060s, Robert Crispin led the Normans of Edessa against
the Turks. Roussel de Bailleul even tried to carve out an independent state in
Asia Minor with support from the local population, but he was stopped by the
Byzantine general Alexius Komnenos. Some Normans joined Turkish forces to aid
in the destruction of the Armenians vassal-states of Sassoun and Taron in far
eastern Anatolia. Later, many took up service with the Armenian state further
south in Cilicia and the Taurus Mountains. A Norman named Oursel led a force of
"Franks" into the upper Euphrates valley in northern Syria. From 1073 to 1074,
8,000 of the 20,000 troops of the Armenian general Philaretus Brachamius were
Normans — formerly of Oursel — led by Raimbaud. They even lent their
ethnicity to the name of their castle: Afranji, meaning "Franks." The known
trade between Amalfi and Antioch and between Bari and Tarsus may be related to
the presence of Italo-Normans in those cities while Amalfi and Bari were under
Norman rule in Italy. Several families of Byzantine Greece were of Norman
mercenary origin during the period of the Comnenian Restoration, when Byzantine
emperors were seeking out western European warriors. The Raoulii were descended
from an Italo-Norman named Raoul, the Petraliphae were descended from a Pierre
d'Aulps, and that group of Albanian clans known as the Maniakates were
descended from Normans who served under George Maniaces in the Sicilian
expedition of 1038. Robert Guiscard ultimately drove out the Byzantines from
southern Italy. Having obtained pope Gregory VII's consent and acting as his
vassal, Robert continued his campaign in conquering the Balkan peninsula as a
foothold for western feudal lords and the Catholic Church. After allying
himself with Croatia and the Catholic cities of Dalmatia, in the year 1081 an
army of 30,000 men in 300 ships landed in the southern shores of Albania,
capturing Valona, Kanina, Jericho (Orikumi), reaching Butrint after numerous
pillages. They joined the fleet that had previously conquered Corfu. The
Normans attacked Dyrrachium from land and sea, devastating everything along the
way. Under these harsh circumstances, the locals accepted emperor Alexius I
Comnenus' call to join forces with the Byzantines against the Normans who
besieged Dyrrachium. The Albanian forces could not take part in the ensuing
battle, because it had started too early, before their arrival. Immediately
before the battle the Venetian fleet had secured a victory in the coast
surrounding the city. Forced to retreat, Alexius ceded the command to a high
Albanian official named Comiscortes in the service of Byzantium. The city's
garrison resisted until February 1082, when Dyrrachium was betrayed to the
Normans by the Venetian and Amalfitan merchants who had settled in the city.
The Normans were now free to penetrate in the hinterland; they took Ioannina,
some minor cities in Southwestern Macedonia, Thessaly and appeared before the
gates of Thessalonica. Dissension among the high ranks coerced the Normans to
retreat in Italy; they lost Dyrrachium, Valona and Butrint in 1085 after the
death of Robert. A few years after the First Crusade, in 1107, the Normans
under the command of Bohemond, Robert's son, landed in Valona and besieged
Dyrrachium using the most sophisticated military equipment of the time, but to
no avail. Meanwhile, they occupied Petrela, the citadel of Mili at the banks of
the river Deabolis, Gllavenica (Ballsh), Kanina and Jericho. This time, the
Albanians sided with the Normans, dissatisfied by the heavy taxes the
Byzantines had imposed upon them. With their help, the Normans secured the
Arbanon passes and opened their way to Dibra. The lack of supplies, disease and
Byzantine resistance forced Bohemond to retreat from his campaign and sign a
peace treaty with the Byzantines in the city of Deabolis. The further decline
of Byzantine state-of-affairs paved the road to a third attack in 1185, when a
large Norman army invaded Dyrrachium, owing to the betrayal of high Byzantine
officials. Some time later, Dyrrachium—one of the most important naval bases
of the Adriatic—fell again to Byzantine hands. In England. The Normans were
in contact with England from an early date. Not only were their original Viking
brethren still ravaging the English coasts, they occupied most of the important
ports opposite England across the Channel. This relationship eventually
produced closer ties of blood through the marriage of Emma, sister of Duke
Richard II of Normandy, and King Ethelred II of England. Because of this,
Ethelred fled to Normandy in 1013, when he was forced from his kingdom by Sweyn
Forkbeard. His stay in Normandy (until 1016) influenced him and his sons by
Emma, who stayed in Normandy after Cnut the Great's conquest of the isle. When
finally Edward the Confessor returned from his father's refuge in 1041, at the
invitation of his half-brother Harthacnut, he brought with him a Norman-
educated mind. He also brought many Norman counsellors and fighters, some of
whom established an English cavalry force. This concept never really took root,
but it is a typical example of the attitudes of Edward. He appointed Robert of
Jumièges archbishop of Canterbury and made Ralph the Timid earl of Hereford.
He invited his brother-in-law Eustace II, Count of Boulogne to his court in
1051, an event which resulted in the greatest of early conflicts between Saxon
and Norman and ultimately resulted in the exile of Earl Godwin of Wessex. In
1066, Duke William II of Normandy conquered England killing King Harold II at
the Battle of Hastings. The invading Normans and their descendants replaced the
Anglo-Saxons as the ruling class of England. The nobility of England were part
of a single French-speaking culture and many had lands on both sides of the
channel. Early Norman kings of England were, as Dukes of Normandy, vassals to
the King of France. They may not have necessarily considered England to be
their most important holding (although it brought the title of King—an
important status symbol). King Richard I (the Lionheart) is often thought to
epitomise a medieval English King, but he only spoke French and spent more time
in Aquitaine or on Crusade than in England. Eventually, the Normans merged with
the natives, combining languages and traditions. In the course of the Hundred
Years' War, the Norman aristocracy often identified themselves as English. The
Anglo-Norman language became distinct from the French language, something that
was the subject of some humour by Geoffrey Chaucer. The Anglo-Norman language
was eventually absorbed into the Anglo-Saxon language of their subjects (see
Old English) and influenced it, helping (along with the Norse language of the
earlier Anglo-Norse settlers and the Latin used by the church) the development
of Middle English which would gain much vocabulary of French origin. In
Ireland. The Normans had a profound effect on Irish culture and history after
their invasion at Bannow Bay in 1169. Initially the Normans maintained a
distinct culture and ethnicity. Yet, with time, they came to be subsumed into
Irish culture to the point that it has been said that they became "more Irish
than the Irish themselves." The Normans settled mostly in an area in the east
of Ireland, later known as the Pale, and also built many fine castles and
settlements, including Trim Castle and Dublin Castle. Both cultures intermixed,
borrowing from each other's language, culture and outlook. Norman descendants
today can be recognised by their surnames. Names such as French, (De) Roche,
D'Arcy and Leacy are particularly common in the southeast of Ireland,
especially in the southern part of County Wexford where the first Norman
settlements were established. Other Norman names such as Furlong predominate
there. Another common Norman-Irish name was Morell (Murrell) derived from the
French Norman name Morel. Other names beginning with Fitz (from the Norman for
son) indicate Norman ancestry. These included Fitzgerald, FitzGibbons (Gibbons)
dynasty, and Fitzmaurice. In Scotland. One of the claimants of the English
throne opposing William the Conqueror, Edgar Atheling, eventually fled to
Scotland. King Malcolm III of Scotland married Edgar's sister Margaret, and
came into opposition to William who had already disputed Scotland's southern
borders. William invaded Scotland in 1072, riding as far as Abernethy where he
met up with his fleet of ships. Malcolm submitted, paid homage to William and
surrendered his son Duncan as a hostage, beginning a series of arguments as to
whether the Scottish Crown owed allegiance to the King of England. Normans came
into Scotland, building castles and founding noble families who would provide
some future kings, such as Robert the Bruce as well as founding some of the
Scottish clans. King David I of Scotland, whose elder brother Alexander I had
married Sybilla of Normandy, was instrumental in introducing Normans and Norman
culture to Scotland, part of the process some scholars call the "Davidian
Revolution". Having spent time at the court of Henry I of England (married to
David's sister Maud of Scotland), and needing them to wrestle the kingdom from
his half-brother Máel Coluim mac Alaxandair, David had to reward many with
lands. The process was continued under David's successors, most intensely of
all under William the Lion. The Norman-derived feudal system was applied in
varying degrees to most of Scotland. Scottish families of the names Bruce,
Ramsay, Fraser, Ogilvie, Montgomery, Sinclair, Pollock, Douglas and Gordon to
name but a few, and including the later royal House of Stewart, can all be
traced back to Norman ancestry. In Wales. Even before the Norman Conquest of
England, the Normans had come into contact with Wales. Edward the Confessor had
set up the aforementioned Ralph as earl of Hereford and charged him with
defending the Marches and warring with the Welsh. In these original ventures,
the Normans failed to make any headway into Wales. Subsequent to the Conquest,
however, the Marches came completely under the dominance of William's most
trusted Norman barons, including Bernard de Neufmarché, Roger of Montgomery in
Shropshire and Hugh Lupus in Cheshire. These Normans began a long period of
slow conquest during which almost all of Wales was at some point subject to
Norman interference. Norman words, such as "baron" ("barwn"), first entered
Welsh at that time. On Crusade. The legendary religious zeal of the Normans was
exercised in religious wars long before the First Crusade carved out a Norman
principality in Antioch. They were major foreign participants in the
Reconquista in Iberia. In 1018, Roger de Tosny travelled to the Iberian
Peninsula to carve out a state for himself from Moorish lands, but failed. In
1064, during the War of Barbastro, William of Montreuil led the papal army and
took a huge booty. In 1096, Crusaders passing by the siege of Amalfi were
joined by Bohemond of Taranto and his nephew Tancred with an army of Italo-
Normans. Bohemond was the "de facto" leader of the Crusade during its passage
through Asia Minor. After the successful Siege of Antioch in 1097, Bohemond
began carving out an independent principality around that city. Tancred was
instrumental in the conquest of Jerusalem and he worked for the expansion of
the Crusader kingdom in Transjordan and the region of Galilee. Anglo-Norman
conquest of Cyprus. The conquest of Cyprus by the Anglo-Norman forces of the
Third Crusade opened a new chapter in the history of the island, which would be
under Western European domination for the following 380 years. Although not
part of a planned operation, the conquest had much more permanent results than
initially expected. In April 1191 Richard Cœur de Lion, with a large fleet,
left Messina in order to reach Acre. But a storm dispersed the fleet. After
some searching, it was discovered that the boat carrying his sister and his
fiancée Berengaria was anchored on the south coast of Cyprus, together with
the wrecks of several other ships, including the treasure ship. Survivors of
the wrecks had been taken prisoner by the island's despot Isaac Komnenos. On 1
May 1191, Richard's fleet arrived in the port of Limassol on Cyprus. He ordered
Isaac to release the prisoners and the treasure. Isaac refused, so Richard
landed his troops and took Limassol. Various princes of the Holy Land arrived
in Limassol at the same time, in particular Guy de Lusignan. All declared their
support for Richard provided that he support Guy against his rival Conrad of
Montferrat. The local barons abandoned Isaac, who considered making peace with
Richard, joining him on the crusade, and offering his daughter in marriage to
the person named by Richard. But Isaac changed his mind and tried to escape.
Richard then proceeded to conquer the whole island, his troops being led by Guy
de Lusignan. Isaac surrendered and was confined with silver chains, because
Richard had promised that he would not place him in irons. By 1 June, Richard
had conquered the whole island. His exploit was well publicized and contributed
to his reputation; he also derived significant financial gains from the
conquest of the island. Richard left for Acre on 5 June, with his allies.
Before his departure, he named two of his Norman generals, Richard de Camville
and Robert de Thornham, as governors of Cyprus. While in Limassol, Richard
married Berengaria of Navarre, first-born daughter of King Sancho VI of
Navarre. The wedding was held on 12 May 1191 at the Chapel of St. George and it
was attended by Richard's sister Joan, whom he had brought from Sicily. The
marriage was celebrated with great pomp and splendor. Among other grand
ceremonies was a double coronation: Richard caused himself to be crowned King
of Cyprus, and Berengaria Queen of England and Queen of Cyprus as well. The
rapid Anglo-Norman conquest proved more important than it seemed. The island
occupied a key strategic position on the maritime lanes to the Holy Land, whose
occupation by the Christians could not continue without support from the sea.
Shortly after the conquest, Cyprus was sold to the Knights Templar and it was
subsequently acquired, in 1192, by Guy de Lusignan and became a stable feudal
kingdom. It was only in 1489 that the Venetians acquired full control of the
island, which remained a Christian stronghold until the fall of Famagusta in
1571. Culture. Architecture. The Normans' architecture typically stands out as
a new stage in the architectural history of the regions which they subdued.
They spread a unique Romanesque idiom to England and Italy and the
encastellation of these regions with keeps in their north French style
fundamentally altered the military landscape. Their style was characterised by
rounded arches (particularly over windows and doorways) and massive
proportions. In Italy, the Normans incorporated elements of the Islamic,
Lombard, and Byzantine architecture into their own, initiating a style known as
Sicilian Romanesque. In England, the period of Norman architecture immediately
succeeds that of the Anglo-Saxon and precedes the Early Gothic. Visual arts. In
the visual arts, the Normans did not have the rich and distinctive traditions
of the cultures they conquered. However, in the early 11th century the dukes
began a programme of church reform, encouraging the Cluniac reform of
monasteries and patronising intellectual pursuits, especially the proliferation
of scriptoria and the reconstitution of a compilation of lost illuminated
manuscripts. The church was utilised by the dukes as a unifying force for their
disparate duchy. The chief monasteries taking part in this "renaissance" of
Norman art and scholarship were Mont-Saint-Michel, Fécamp, Jumièges, Bec,
Saint-Ouen, Saint-Evroul, and Saint-Wandrille. These centres were in contact
with the so-called "Winchester school", which channeled a pure Carolingian
artistic tradition to Normandy. In the final decade of the eleventh and the
first of 12th century, Normandy experienced a golden age of illustrated
manuscripts, but it was brief and the major scriptoria of Normandy ceased to
function after the midpoint of the century. The Wars of Religion in the 16th
century and French Revolution in the eighteenth successively destroyed much of
what existed in the way of the architectural and artistic remnant of this
Norman creativity. The first, by their violence, caused the wanton destruction
of many Norman edifices; and the second, by its assault on religion, caused the
purposeful destruction of religious objects of any type and by its
destabilisation of society resulted in rampant pillaging. By far the most
famous work of Norman art is the Bayeux Tapestry, which is not a tapestry but a
work of embroidery. It was commissioned by Odo, the Bishop of Bayeux and first
Earl of Kent, employing natives from Kent who were learned in the Nordic
traditions imported in the previous half century by the Danish Vikings. In
Britain, Norman art primarily survives as stonework or metalwork, such as
capitals and baptismal fonts. In southern Italy, however, Norman artwork
survives plentifully in forms strongly influenced by its Greek, Lombard, and
Arab forebears. Of the royal regalia preserved in Palermo, the crown is
Byzantine in style and the coronation cloak is of Arab craftsmanship with
Arabic inscriptions. Many churches preserve sculptured fonts, capitals, and
more importantly mosaics, which were common in Norman Italy and drew heavily on
the Greek heritage. Lombard Salerno was a centre of ivorywork in the 11th
century and this continued under Norman domination. Finally should be noted the
intercourse between French Crusaders traveling to the Holy Land who brought
with them French artefacts with which to gift the churches at which they
stopped in southern Italy amongst their Norman cousins. For this reason many
south Italian churches preserve works from France alongside their native
pieces. Music. Normandy was the site of several important developments in the
history of classical music in the 11th century. Fécamp Abbey and Saint-Evroul
Abbey were centres of musical production and education. At Fécamp, under two
Italian abbots, William of Volpiano and John of Ravenna, the system of denoting
notes by letters was developed and taught. It is still the most common form of
pitch representation in English- and German-speaking countries today. Also at
Fécamp, the staff, around which neumes were oriented, was first developed and
taught in the 11th century. Under the German abbot Isembard, La Trinité-du-
Mont became a centre of musical composition. At Saint Evroul, a tradition of
singing had developed and the choir achieved fame in Normandy. Under the Norman
abbot Robert de Grantmesnil, several monks of Saint-Evroul fled to southern
Italy, where they were patronised by Robert Guiscard and established a Latin
monastery at Sant'Eufemia. There they continued the tradition of singing.
