Ottoman invasion of Otranto In 1480 and 1481 the city and fort of Otranto, in
Apulia, southern Italy, were held by Ottoman troops. Attack. On July 28, 1480,
an Ottoman fleet of 128 ships of which 28 were galleys arrived near the
Neapolitan city of Otranto in the region Apulia. Possibly these troops came
from the siege of Rhodes. On July 29 the garrison and the citizens retreated to
the citadel, the Castle of Otranto. On 11 August this was taken by the
invaders. According to Christian historiography a raid was held to round up all
male citizens. Archbishop Stefano Agricoli and others were killed in the
cathedral, while Bishop Stephen Pendinelli and the garrison commander, count
Francesco Zurlo, were sawed in two alive. On August 12, 800 citizens who
refused to convert to Islam were taken to the Hill of the Minerva and beheaded.
Some of the remains of the 800 martyrs are today stored in Otranto cathedral
and in the church of Santa Caterina a Formiello in Naples. The cathedral is
said to have been used as a stable after that. This version has come under
severe criticism. From the Turkish side it is disputed that large-scale
executions took place; the bones to be found in the Cathedral of Otranto are
claimed to be actually those of fighters killed during the Turkish invasion.
Italian researchers, on the other hand, conclude that some acts of terror were
committed by the Turkish invaders to create panic among the Italians around
Otranto. In August, 70 ships of the fleet attacked Vieste. On September 12, the
Monastero di San Nicholas di Casole, which accommodated one of the richer
libraries of Europe, was destroyed. In October 1480, the coastal cities of
Lecce, Taranto and Brindisi were attacked. Because of lack of food Gedik Ahmed
Pasha returned with most of his troops to Albania, leaving a garrison of 800
infantry and 500 cavalry behind to defend Otranto. It was assumed he would
return after the winter. Response. Since it was only 28 years after the fall of
Constantinople, there was some fear that Rome would suffer the same fate. Plans
were made for the Pope and citizens of Rome to evacuate the city. Pope Sixtus
IV repeated his 1471 call for a crusade. Several Italian city-states, Hungary
and France responded positively to this. The Republic of Venice did not, as it
had signed an expensive peace treaty with the Ottomans in 1479. In 1481 an army
was raised by king Ferdinand I of Naples to be led by his son Alphonso II of
Naples. A contingent of troops was provided by king Matthias Corvinus of
Hungary. Counterattack. The city was besieged starting May 1, 1481. On May 3
the Sultan of the Ottoman Empire, Mehmed II, died, with ensuing quarrels about
his succession. This possibly prevented the sending of Ottoman reinforcements
to Otranto. So in the end the Turkish occupation of Otranto ended by
negotiation with the Christian forces, permitting the Turks to withdraw to
Albania. However, quite a few of them were still taken captives when the
Christian troops occupied Otranto again. Aftermath. The number of citizens,
said to have been about 20,000 (a figure very much disputed by recent
research), had decreased to 8,000. Out of fear of another attack, many of these
left the city.
