Periodization Periodization is the attempt to categorize Universal History or
divide time into named blocks. The result is a descriptive abstraction that
provides a useful handle on periods of time with relatively stable
characteristics. However, determining the precise beginning and ending to any
"period" is often a matter of debate. General. To the extent that history is
continuous and ungeneralizable, all systems of periodization are more or less
arbitrary. Yet without named periods, however clumsy or imprecise, past time
would be nothing more than scattered events without a framework to help us
understand them. Nations, cultures, families, and even individuals, each with
their different remembered histories, are constantly engaged in imposing
overlapping, often unsystematized, schemes of temporal periodization;
periodizing labels are continually challenged and redefined. One historian may
write a new history of the Renaissance in Europe; another may claim that there
was no such thing as the European Renaissance. Periodization was used since
before any of us could remember and it is often subjective. Usage. Not only
will periodizing blocks inevitably overlap, they will often seemingly conflict
with or contradict one another. Some have a cultural usage ("the Gilded Age"),
others refer to prominent historical events ("the Inter-War years:
1918–1939"), yet others are defined by decimal numbering systems ("the
1960s", "the 17th century"). Other periods are named from influential or
talismanic individuals ("the Victorian Era", "the Edwardian Era", "the
Napoleonic Era"). Some of these usages will also be geographically specific.
This is especially true of periodizing labels derived from individuals or
ruling elites, such as the Jacksonian Era in America, the Meiji Era in Japan,
or the Merovingian Period in France. Cultural terms may also have a limited
reach. Thus the concept of the "Romantic period" may be meaningless outside of
Europe and European-influenced cultures. Likewise, "the 1960s", though
technically applicable to anywhere in the world according to Common Era
numbering, has a certain set of specific cultural connotations in certain
countries. For this reason it may be possible to say such things as "The 1960s
never occurred in Spain." This would mean that the sexual revolution,
counterculture, youth rebellion and so on never developed during that decade in
Spain's conservative Roman Catholic culture and under Francisco Franco's
authoritarian regime. Likewise it is possible to claim, as the historian Arthur
Marwick has, that "the 1960s" began in the late 1950s and ended in the early
1970s. His reason for saying this is that the cultural and economic conditions
that define the "meaning" of the period covers more than the accidental fact of
a 10 year block beginning with the number 6. This extended usage is termed the
"long 1960s". This usage derives from other historians who have adopted labels
such as "the long 19th century" (1789–1914) to reconcile arbitrary decimal
chronology with meaningful cultural and social phases. Similarly, an Eighteenth
Century may run 1714–1789. Eric Hobsbawm has also argued for what he calls
"the short twentieth century", encompassing the period from the First World War
through to the end of the Cold War. Similar problems attend other labels. Is it
possible to use the term "Victorian" outside of Britain? It sometimes is used
when it is thought that its connotations usefully describe the politics,
culture and economic conditions characteristic of the last two-thirds of the
nineteenth century. Nevertheless periodizing terms often have negative or
positive connotations that may affect their usage. This includes "Victorian",
which often negatively suggests sexual repression and class conflict. Other
labels such as "Renaissance" have strongly positive characteristics. As a
result, these terms sometimes extend in meaning. Thus the "English Renaissance"
is virtually identical in meaning to the "Elizabethan Period". However the
"Carolingian Renaissance" is said to have occurred during the reign of the
Frankish king Charlemagne. There is a space of approximately seven hundred
years between these two renaissances. Other examples include the "American
Renaissance" of the 1820s-60s, referring mainly to literature, and the "Harlem
Renaissance" of the 1920s, referring mainly to literature but also to music and
the visual arts. Because of these various positive and negative connotations,
some periods are luckier than others regarding their names, although this can
lead to problems such as the ones outlined above. The conception of a "rebirth"
of Classical Latin learning is first credited to an Italian poet Petrarch, the
father of Humanism, a term that was not coined until the 19th century, but the
conception of a rebirth has been in common use since Petrarch's time. The
dominant usage of the word "Renaissance" refers to the cultural changes that
occurred in Italy that culminated in the High Renaissance around 1500. This
concept applies dominantly to the visual arts, referring to the work of
Michelangelo, Raphael, and Leonardo da Vinci. Secondarily it is applied to
other arts, but it is disputed whether it is useful to describe a phase in
economic, social and political history. Most professional historians (defined
as paying members of organizations devoted to the propagation of history in
higher education, like the American Historical Association) now refer to the
historical periods commonly known as the Renaissance and the Reformation as
"the Early Modern Period". There is a gradual change in the courses taught and
books published to correspond to the change in period nomenclature, which in
part reflects differences between social history and cultural history. The new
nomenclature suggests a broader geographical coverage and a growing attention
to the relationships between Europe and the wider world. The timeframe is also
slightly different, in that "Renaissance" tends to refer to events over a
generally earlier period than "Early Modern". Notable periods. The term Middle
Ages also derives from Petrarch. He was comparing his own period to the Ancient
or Classical world, seeing his time as a time of rebirth after a dark
intermediate period, the Middle Ages. The idea that the Middle Ages was a
"middle" phase between two other large scale periodizing concepts, Ancient and
Modern, still persists. It can be sub-divided into the Early, High and Late
Middle Ages. The term Dark Ages is no longer in common use among modern
scholars because of the difficulty of using it neutrally, though some writers
have attempted to retain it and divest it of its negative connotations. The
term "Middle Ages" and especially the adjective "medieval" can also have a
negative ring in colloquial use ("the barbaric treatment of prisoners in such-
and-such a prison is almost medieval") but this does not carry over into
academic terminology. However, other terms, such as Gothic architecture, used
to refer to a style typical of the High Middle Ages have largely lost the
negative connotations they initially had, acquiring new meanings over time (see
Gothic architecture and Goth subculture). The Gothic and the Baroque were both
named during subsequent stylistic periods when the preceding style was
unpopular. The word "Gothic" was applied as a pejorative term to all things
Northern European and, hence, barbarian, probably first by Giorgio Vasari.
Vasari is also credited with first using the term "Renaissance" ("rinascita"),
the period during which he was art historian, artist, and architect. Giorgio
Vasari coined the term "Gothic" in an effort to describe, particularly
architecture, that he found objectionable, supposedly saying "it is as if the
Goths built it". The word "baroque" (probably) was used first in late 18th
century French about the irregular natural pearl shape and later about an
architectural style "perceived" to be "irregular" in comparison to the highly
regular Neoclassical architecture of that time. Subsequently these terms have
become purely descriptive, and have largely lost negative connotations.
However, the term "Baroque" as applied to art (for example Rubens) refers to a
much earlier historical period than when applied to music (Händel, Bach). This
reflects the difference between stylistic histories "internal" to an art form
and the "external" chronological history beyond it. In many cases people living
through a period are unable to identify themselves as belonging to the period
that historians may later assign to them. This is partly because they are
unable to predict the future, and so will not be able to tell whether they are
at the beginning, middle or end of a period. Another reason may be that their
own sense of historical development may be determined by religions or
ideologies that differ from those used by later historians. It is important to
recognise the difference between self-defined historical periods, and those
that historians defined later. At the beginning of the 20th century there was a
general belief that culture, politics and history were entering a new
era—that the new century would also be a new era in human experience. This
belief was repeated at the beginning of the 21st century, though in a very
different way. Other cultural and historical phases have only been described
many years, or even centuries, later. Origins of periodization. The origins of
periodization is very old and first became part of the Western tradition in the
myths of Ancient Greece and The Bible. Virgil spoke of a distant Golden Age and
recurrent cycles of history. The Bible outlines a narrative of history from
Creation to the End of time. One Biblical periodization scheme commonly used in
the Middle Ages was Saint Paul's theological division of history in to three
ages: the first before the age of Moses (under nature); the second under Mosaic
law (under law); the third in the age of Christ (under grace). But perhaps the
most widely discussed periodization scheme of the Middle Ages was the Six Ages
of the World, where every age was a thousand years counting from Adam to the
present, with the present time (in the Middle Ages) being the sixth and final
stage. Periodization of origins. It is easy to confuse the origins of
periodization with the periodization of origins. The periodization of origins
is an attempt to classify time periods in the distant past for which there is
no direct record. As stated above, any sort of periodization is subject to
qualifications and contentions that should not be taken lightly. Periodization
of origins has its own challenges apart from, say, periodizations that rely on
text, which are subtle and philosophically complex. One method for
periodization of the distant past, as in Anthropology, is to rely on events,
such as the invention of some tool or the origins of language, which are known
to exist, but about which little is known in detail.
