Prehistoric warfare Prehistoric warfare refers to war conducted in the era
before writing, and before the establishments of large social entities like
states. Historical warfare sets in with the standing armies of Bronze Age
Sumer, but prehistoric warfare may be studied in some societies at much earlier
dates. When humans first began fighting wars is a matter of debate among
anthropologists and historians. The answer to this question is dependent on the
definition of "war" itself. Endemic warfare. Of the tribal societies still in
existence today, some lead lives of great violence, frequently raiding
neighboring groups and seizing territory, women, and goods from others by
force. Other groups, such as the Bushmen of the Kalahari, live in societies
with no warfare and very little murder. What is common among those groups that
remain and fight frequently is that warfare is highly ritualized, with a number
of taboos and practices in place that limit the number of casualties and the
duration of a conflict, a situation known as endemic warfare. Among tribal
societies engaging in endemic warfare, conflict may escalate to actual warfare
every generation or so, for various reasons such as population pressure or
conflict over resources, but also for no readily understandable reason.
Paleolithic. It is hypothesized that in the earliest hunter-gatherer societies
of "Homo erectus", population density was probably low enough to avoid armed
conflict. The development of the throwing-spear, together with ambush hunting
techniques, made potential violence between groups very costly, dictating
conflict avoidence, groups moving apart as far as possible to alleviate
resource competition. This behaviour would have facilitated the migration out
of Africa of "H. erectus" some 1.8 million years ago as a natural consequence
of conflict avoidance. This period of "Paleolithic warlessness" would then have
persisted until well after the appearance of "Homo sapiens" some 0.2 million
years ago, and probably ended only with a shift in societal organization in the
Upper Paleolithic. At this stage, the mobilization of all male group members in
a raiding party (as opposed to a hunting party) for the purpose of dawn raids
on another group's sleeping quarters shifts the tactical advantage from
defenders to attackers, capitalizing on the advantages of surprise and
numerical superiority. Of the many cave paintings from the Upper Paleolithic,
none depict people attacking other people. There is no known archaeological
evidence of large scale fighting until well into the Aurignacian. Upper
paleolithic. The first archaeological record of what could be a prehistoric
battle is at a Mesolithic site known as Cemetery 117. It was determined to be
about 14,340 to 13,140 years old and located on the Nile near the Egypt-Sudan
border. It contains a large number of bodies, many with arrowheads embedded in
their skeletons, which indicates that they may have been the casualties of a
battle. Some question this conclusion by arguing that the bodies may have
accumulated over many decades, and may even be evidence of the murder of
trespassers rather than actual battles. Nearly half of the bodies are female,
and this fact also causes some to question the argument for large-scale
warfare. Beginning around 12,000 BC, combat was transformed by the development
of bows, maces, and slings. The bow seems to have been the most important
weapon in the development of early warfare, in that it enabled attacks to be
launched with far less risk to the attacker when compared to the risk involved
in the use of mêlée combat weaponry. While there are no cave paintings of
battles between men armed with clubs, the development of the bow is concurrent
with the first known depictions of organized warfare consisting of clear
illustrations of two or more groups of men attacking each other. These figures
are arrayed in lines and columns with a distinctly garbed leader at the front.
Some paintings even portray still-recognizable tactics like flankings and
envelopments. Warfare originated independently in other parts of the world as
late as 4,000 years ago. Neolithic. The Neolithic was a period in the
development of human technology that is traditionally considered to begin with
the rise of farming and ending when metal tools became widespread. Although the
Neolithic occurred at different times in different places around the globe,
evidence exists that there was warfare during this time period. Compared to the
subsequent Bronze and Iron Ages, the Neolithic is characterized by small towns,
stone versus metal technology, and a lack of social hierarchy. Towns are
generally unfortified and built in areas difficult to defend. Skeletal and
burial remains do not generally indicate the presence of warfare. Further
evidence of Neolithic warfare is evident in the Talheim Death Pit in Talheim,
Neckar (Germany) where archaeologists believe a massacre of a rival tribe was
conducted approximately 7500 years ago. Approximately 34 people were bound and
predominantly killed by a blow to the left temple. The Talheim site is one of
the earliest indications of warfare in Neolithic Europe The Māori of New
Zealand are notable for the thousands of fortifications constructed to enhance
a group's standing in the near continuous fighting on their islands in the
South Pacific. In an era before siege weapons had been developed to a high
level of technological complexity, and when attackers had limited supplies and
time to spend engaged in battles, fortifications seem to have been a successful
method of securing a population and livestock against invaders, though the
fields and homes would likely be pillaged by the attackers. These substantial
fortifications show that there was considerable social organization in the
societies of prehistoric peoples. This is indirect corollary evidence for them
also having been capable of conducting organized warfare. Bronze Age. The onset
of the Chalcolithic (Copper Age) saw the introduction of copper daggers, axes,
and other items. For the most part these were far too expensive and malleable
to be efficient weapons. They are considered by many scholars to have been
largely ceremonial implements. It was with the development of bronze that edged
metal weapons became commonplace. Military conquests expanding city states
under Egyptian control. Babylonia and later Assyria built empires in
Mesopotamia while the Hittite Empire ruled much of Anatolia. Chariots appear in
the 20th century BC, and become central to warfare in the Ancient Near East
from the 17th century BC. The Hyksos and Kassite invasions mark the transition
to the Late Bronze Age. Ahmose I defeated the Hyksos and re-established
Egyptian control of Nubia and Canaan, territories again defended by Ramesses II
at the Battle of Kadesh, the greatest chariot battle in history. The raids of
the Sea Peoples and the renewed disintegration of Egypt in the Third
Intermediate Period marks the end of the Bronze Age. Iron Age. Early Iron Age
events like the Dorian invasion, Greek colonialism and their interaction with
Phoenician and Etruscan forces lie within the prehistoric period. Germanic
warrior societies of the Migration period engaged in endemic warfare (see also
Thorsberg moor). Anglo-Saxon warfare lies on the edge of historicity, its study
relying primarily on archaeology with the help of only fragmentary written
accounts. References. حروب_ما_قبل_التاريخ
