Primary source Primary sources are original materials. Information for which
the writer has no personal knowledge is not primary, although it may be used by
historians in the absence of a primary source. In the study of history as an
academic discipline, a primary source (also called original source or evidence)
is an artifact, a document, a recording, or other source of information that
was created at the time under study. It serves as an original source of
information about the topic. Similar definitions are used in library science,
and other areas of scholarship. In journalism, a primary source can be a person
with direct knowledge of a situation, or a document created by such a person.
Primary sources are distinguished from secondary sources, which cite, comment
on, or build upon primary sources, though the distinction is not a sharp one.
Generally, accounts written after the fact with the benefit of hindsight
primary are secondary. A secondary source may also be a primary source
depending on how it is used. "Primary" and "secondary" are relative terms, with
sources judged primary or secondary according to specific historical contexts
and what is being studied. The significance of source classification. History
and historiography. The delineation of sources as primary and secondary first
arose in the historiography, as historians attempted to identify and classify
the sources of historical writing. In scholarly writing, an important objective
of classifying sources is to determine the independence and reliability of
sources. In contexts such as historical writing, it is almost always advisable
to use primary sources if possible, and that "if none are available, it is only
with great caution that author may proceed to make use of secondary sources."
Sreedharan believes that primary sources have the most direct connection to the
past, and that they "speak for themselves" in ways that cannot be captured
through the filter of secondary sources. Many scholars have commented on the
difficulty in producing secondary source narratives from the "raw data" which
makes up the past. Historian/philosopher Hayden White has written extensively
on the ways in which the rhetorical strategies by which historians construct
narratives about the past, and what sorts of assumptions about time, history,
and events are embedded in the very structure of the historical narrative. In
any case, the question of the exact relation between "historical facts" and the
content of "written history" has been a topic of discussion among historians
since at least the 19th century, when much of the modern profession of history
came into being. As a general rule, modern historians prefer to go back to
primary sources, if available, as well as seeking new ones, because primary
sources, whether accurate or not, offer new input into historical questions,
and most modern history revolves around heavy use of archives for the purpose
of finding useful primary sources. On the other hand, most undergraduate
research projects are limited to secondary source material. Other fields. In
scholarly writing, the objective of classifying sources is to determine the
independence and reliability of sources. Though the terms "primary source" and
"secondary source" originated in historiography as a way to trace the history
of historical ideas, they have been applied to many other fields. For example,
these ideas may be used to trace the history of scientific theories, literary
elements, and other information that is passed from one author to another. In
scientific literature, a primary source is the original publication of a
scientist's new data, results, and theories. In political history, primary
sources are documents such as official reports, speeches, pamphlets, posters,
or letters by participants, official election returns, and eyewitness accounts.
In the history of ideas or intellectual history, the main primary sources are
books, essays and letters written by intellectuals; these intellectuals may
include historians, whose books and essays are therefore considered primary
sources for the intellectual historian, though they are secondary sources in
their own topical fields. A study of cultural history could include fictional
sources such as novels or plays. In a broader sense primary sources also
include artifacts like photographs, newsreels, coins, paintings or buildings
created at the time. Historians may also take archaeological artifacts and oral
reports and interviews into consideration. Written sources may be divided into
three main types. In the study of historiography, when the study of history is
itself subject to historical scrutiny, a secondary source becomes a primary
source. For a biography of a historian, that historian's publications would be
primary sources. Documentary films can be considered a secondary source or
primary source, depending on how much the filmmaker modifies the original
sources. "Primary Sources: what are they?", Lafayette College Library Finding
primary sources. Although many documents that are primary sources remain in
private hands, the usual location for them is an archive. These can be public
or private. Documents relating to one area are usually spread over a large
number of different archives. These can be distant from the original source of
the document. For example, the Huntington Library in California houses a large
number of documents from the United Kingdom. In the US, digital copies of
primary sources can be retrieved from a number of places. The Library of
Congress maintains several online Digital Collections where they can be
retrieved. Examples of these are American Memory and the Prints and Photographs
Online Catalog (PPOC). The National Archives and Records Administration also
has such a tool, called Access to Archival Databases (AAD). In the UK, the
National Archives provides a consolidated search of its own catalogue and a
wide variety of other archives listed on the Access to Archives index. Digital
copies of various classes of documents at the National Archives (including
wills) are available from DocumentsOnline. Most of the available documents
relate to England and Wales. Some digital copies of primary sources are
available from the National Archives of Scotland. Many County Record Offices
collections are included in Access to Archives, while others have their own on-
line catalogues. Many County Record Offices will supply digital copies of
documents. In the Republic of Ireland, available digital documents include the
censuses of 1901 and 1911 which are available from the National Archives of
Ireland. In Australia, the National Archives of Australia has digitised a
number of classes of records and will produce digitised copies of suitable
documents on demand. Using primary sources. History as an academic discipline
is based on primary sources, as evaluated by the community of scholars, who
report their findings in books, articles and papers. Arthur Marwick says
"Primary sources are absolutely fundamental to history." Ideally, a historian
will use all available primary sources created by the people involved, at the
time being studied. In practice some sources have been destroyed, while others
are not available for research. Perhaps the only eyewitness reports of an event
may be memoirs, autobiographies, or oral interviews taken years later.
Sometimes the only evidence relating to an event or person in the distant past
was written or copied decades or centuries later. Manuscripts that are sources
for classical texts can be copies of documents, or fragments of copies of
documents. This is a common problem in classical studies, where sometimes only
a summary of a book or letter has survived. Potential difficulties with primary
sources have the result that history is usually taught in schools using
secondary sources. Historians studying the modern period with the intention of
publishing an academic article prefer to go back to available primary sources
and to seek new (in other words, forgotten or lost) ones. Primary sources,
whether accurate or not, offer new input into historical questions and most
modern history revolves around heavy use of archives and special collections
for the purpose of finding useful primary sources. A work on history is not
likely to be taken seriously as scholarship if it only cites secondary sources,
as it does not indicate that original research has been done. However, primary
sources – particularly those from before the 20th century – may have hidden
challenges. "Primary sources, in fact, are usually fragmentary, ambiguous and
very difficult to analyse and interpret." Obsolete meanings of familiar words
and social context are among the traps that await the newcomer to historical
studies. For this reason, the interpretation of primary texts is typically
taught as part of an advanced college or postgraduate history course, although
advanced self-study or informal training is also possible. In journalism,
education, and other fields, these are sometimes known as the five Ws – , , ,
and Strengths and weaknesses of primary sources. In many fields and contexts,
such as historical writing, it is almost always advisable to use primary
sources if possible, and that "if none are available, it is only with great
caution that author may proceed to make use of secondary sources." In addition,
primary sources avoid the problem inherent in secondary sources, where each new
author may distort and put their own spin on the findings of prior cited
authors. However, a primary source is not necessarily more of an authority or
better than a secondary source. There can be bias and other tactic used to
twist historical information. Participants and eyewitnesses may misunderstand
events or distort their reports (deliberately or unconsciously) to enhance
their own image or importance. Such effects can increase over time, as people
create a narrative that may not be accurate. For any source, primary or
secondary, it is important for the researcher to evaluate the amount and
direction of bias. As an example, a government report may be an accurate and
unbiased description of events, but it can be censored or altered for
propaganda or cover-up purposes. The facts can be distorted to present the
opposing sides in a negative light. Barristers are taught that evidence in a
court case may be truthful, but it may be distorted to support (or oppose) the
position of one of the parties. Classifying sources. Many sources can be
considered either primary and secondary, depending on the context in which they
are examined. Moreover, the distinction between "primary" and "secondary"
sources is subjective and contextual, so that precise definitions are difficult
to make. Investigative journalism, for example, is a primary source of
information. A book review, when it contains the opinion of the reviewer about
the book rather than a summary of the book, becomes a primary source. If a
historical text discusses old documents to derive a new historical conclusion,
it is considered to be a primary source for the new conclusion. Examples in
which a source can be both primary and secondary include an obituary or a
survey of several volumes of a journal counting the frequency of articles on a
certain topic. Whether a source is regarded as primary or secondary in a given
context may change, depending upon the present state of knowledge within the
field. For example, if a document refers to the contents of a previous but
undiscovered letter, that document may be considered "primary", since it is the
closest known thing to an original source; but if the letter is later found, it
may then be considered "secondary" In some instances, the reason for
identifying a text as the "primary source" may devolve from the fact that no
copy of the original source material exists, or that it is the oldest extant
source for the information cited. Alternatively, when a printed version of a
document is made from an electronic version, the electronic version may be
termed the primary document. Whether a source is primary also depends on its
age. For example, encyclopedias are generally considered tertiary sources, but
Pliny's "Naturalis Historia", originally published in the 1st century, is a
primary source for information about the Roman era. Forgeries. Historians must
occasionally contend with forged documents, purporting to be primary sources.
These forgeries have usually been constructed with a fraudulent purpose, such
as promulgating legal rights, supporting false pedigrees, or promoting
particular interpretations of historic events. The investigation of documents
to determine their authenticity is diplomatics. For centuries, Popes used the
forged Donation of Constantine to bolster the secular power of the Papacy.
Among the earliest forgeries are false Anglo-Saxon Charters, a number of 11th
and 12th century forgeries produced by monasteries and abbeys to support a
claim to land where the original document had been lost or never existed. One
particularly unusual forgery of a primary source was perpetrated by Sir Edward
Dering, who placed false monumental brasses in a parish church. In 1986, Hugh
Trevor-Roper "authenticated" the Hitler diaries, which were later proved to be
forgeries. Recently, forged documents have been placed within the UK National
Archives in the hope of establishing a false provenance. However, historians
dealing with recent centuries rarely encounter forgeries of any importance.
