Secondary source In scholarship, a secondary source is a document or recording
that relates or discusses information originally presented elsewhere. A
secondary source contrasts with a primary source, which is an original source
of the information being discussed; a primary source can be a person with
direct knowledge of a situation, or a document created by such a person.
Secondary sources involve generalization, analysis, synthesis, interpretation,
or evaluation of the original information. "Primary" and "secondary" are
relative terms, and some sources may be classified as primary or secondary,
depending on how it is used. An even higher level, the tertiary source, such as
an encyclopedia or dictionary, resembles a secondary source in that it contains
analysis, but attempts to provide a broad introductory overview of a topic.
Classification. Many sources can be considered either primary or secondary,
depending on the context in which they are used. Moreover, the distinction
between "primary" and "secondary" sources is subjective and contextual, so that
precise definitions are difficult to make. For example, if a historical text
discusses old documents to derive a new historical conclusion, it is considered
to be a primary source for the new conclusion, but a secondary source of
information found in the old documents. Other examples in which a source can be
both primary and secondary include an obituary or a survey of several volumes
of a journal counting the frequency of articles on a certain topic. Whether a
source is regarded as primary or secondary in a given context may change,
depending upon the present state of knowledge within the field. For example, if
a document refers to the contents of a previous but undiscovered letter, that
document may be considered "primary", since it is the closest known thing to an
original source, but if the letter is later found, it may then be considered
"secondary". Attempts to map or model scientific and scholarly communication
need the concepts of primary, secondary and further "levels". One such model is
the UNISIST model of information dissemination. Within such a model these
concepts are defined in relation to each other, and the acceptance of this way
of defining the concepts are connected to the acceptance of the model. Some
other modern languages use more than one word for the English word "source".
German usually uses "Sekund채rliteratur" ("secondary literature") for secondary
sources for historical facts, leaving "Sekund채rquelle" ("secondary source") to
historiography. A "Sekund채rquelle" is a source which can tell about a lost
"Prim채rquelle" ("primary source"), such as a letter quoting from minutes which
are no longer known to exist, so cannot be consulted by the historian. In
science and technology. In the sciences, a review article or meta-analysis are
both examples of a secondary source. A book review that contains the judgment
of the reviewer about the book is a primary source for the reviewer's opinion,
and a secondary source for the contents of the book. A summary of the book
within a review is a secondary source. Some academic journals only publish
reviews. A report of an experiment conducted by the author can be considered a
primary sources information. A survey of previous work in the field in a
primary peer-reviewed source is secondary source information. This vastly
increases the amount of secondary source information available when there are
few reviews in a field. Health sciences. In a medical research, primary source
materials are defined as "original research papers written by the scientists
who actually conducted the study." An example of primary source material is the
Purpose, Methods, and Results sections of a research paper (in IMRAD style) in
a scientific journal by the authors who conducted the study. Examples of
secondary source materials include a summary of the literature in the
Introduction of a scientific paper published in a journal, a description of
what is known about a disease or treatment in a chapter in a reference book, or
a synthesis written to review available literature. Some scientific document
search engines, such as PubMed, allow users to limit their searches to reviews
and meta-analyses. Secondary sources can help trace the history of scientific
and mathematical ideas, including who is credited as the original source of the
idea. Library and information science. In library and information sciences,
secondary sources are generally regarded as those sources that summarize or add
commentary to primary sources in the context of the particular information or
idea under study. Mathematics. An important use of secondary sources in the
field of mathematics has been to make difficult mathematical ideas and proofs
from primary sources more accessible to the public; in other sciences tertiary
sources are expected to fulfill the introductory role. In humanities and
history. Secondary sources in history and humanities are usually books or
scholarly journal, from the perspective of a later interpreter, especially by a
later scholar. In the humanities, a peer reviewed article is always a secondary
source. The delineation of sources as primary and secondary first arose in the
field of historiography, as historians attempted to identify and classify the
sources of historical writing. In scholarly writing, an important objective of
classifying sources is to determine the independence and reliability of
sources. In original scholarly writing, historians rely on primary sources,
read in the context of the scholarly interpretations. Following the Rankean
model established by German scholarship in the 19th century, historians make
heavy use of archives of primary sources. On the other hand, most undergraduate
research projects rely chiefly on secondary source material, with perhaps
snippets of primary sources. Law. In the legal field, source classification is
important because the persuasiveness of a source usually depends upon its
history. Primary sources may include cases, constitutions, statutes,
administrative regulations, and other sources of binding legal authority, while
secondary legal sources may include books, articles, and encyclopedias. Legal
writers usually prefer to cite primary sources because only primary sources are
authoritative and precedential, while secondary sources are only persuasive at
best. Family history. "A secondary source is a record or statement of an event
or circumstance made by a non-eyewitness or by someone not closely connected
with the event or circumstances, recorded or stated verbally either at or
sometime after the event, or by an eye-witness at a time after the event when
the fallibility of memory is an important factor." Consequently, according to
this definition, a first hand account written long after the event "when the
fallibility of memory is an important factor" is a secondary source, even
though it may be the first published description of that event.
Autobiographies. An autobiography can be a secondary source in history or the
humanities when used for information about topics other than its subject. For
example, many first hand accounts of events in World War I written in the post-
war years were influenced by the then prevailing perception of the war which
was significantly different from contemporary opinion.
