Seventh Crusade The Seventh Crusade was a crusade led by Louis IX of France
from 1248 to 1254. Approximately 800,000 bezants were paid in ransom for King
Louis who, along with thousands of his troops, was captured and defeated by the
Egyptian army led by the Ayyubid Sultan Turanshah supported by the Bahariyya
Mamluks led by Faris ad-Din Aktai, Baibars al-Bunduqdari, Qutuz, Aybak and
Qalawun. Background. In 1244, the Khwarezmians, recently displaced by the
advance of the Mongols, took Jerusalem on their way to ally with the Egyptian
Mamluks. This returned Jerusalem to Muslim control, but the fall of Jerusalem
was no longer an earth-shattering event to European Christians, who had seen
the city pass from Christian to Muslim control numerous times in the past two
centuries. This time, despite calls from the Pope, there was no popular
enthusiasm for a new crusade. Pope Innocent IV and Frederick II, Holy Roman
Emperor continued the papal-imperial struggle. Frederick had captured and
imprisoned clerics on their way to the First Council of Lyon, and in 1245 he
was formally deposed by Innocent IV. Pope Gregory IX had also earlier offered
King Louis' brother, count Robert of Artois, the German throne, but Louis had
refused. Thus, the Holy Roman Emperor was in no position to crusade. Béla IV
of Hungary was rebuilding his kingdom from the ashes after the devastating
Mongol invasion of 1241. Henry III of England was still struggling with Simon
de Montfort and other problems in England. Henry and Louis were not on the best
of terms, being engaged in the Capetian-Plantagenet struggle, and while Louis
was away on crusade the English king signed a truce promising not to attack
French lands. Louis IX had also invited King Haakon IV of Norway to crusade,
sending the English chronicler Matthew Paris as an ambassador, but again was
unsuccessful. The only man interested in beginning another crusade therefore
was Louis IX, who declared his intent to go East in 1245. Fighting. France was
perhaps the strongest state in Europe at the time, as the Albigensian Crusade
had brought Provence into Parisian control. Poitou was ruled by Louis IX's
brother Alphonse of Poitiers, who joined him on his crusade in 1245. Another
brother, Charles I of Anjou, also joined Louis. For the next three years Louis
collected an ecclesiastical tenth (mostly from church tithes), and in 1248 he
and his approximately 15,000-strong army that included 3,000 knights, and 5,000
crossbowmen sailed on 36 ships from the ports of Aigues-Mortes, which had been
specifically built to prepare for the crusade, and Marseille. Louis IX's
financial preparations for this expedition were comparatively well organized,
and he was able to raise approximately 1,500,000 "livres tournois". However,
many nobles who joined Louis on the expedition had to borrow money from the
royal treasury, and the crusade turned out to be very expensive. They sailed
first to Cyprus and spent the winter on the island, negotiating with various
other powers in the east; the Latin Empire set up after the Fourth Crusade
asked for his help against the Byzantine Empire of Nicaea, and the Principality
of Antioch and the Knights Templar wanted his help in Syria, where the Muslims
had recently captured Sidon. Nonetheless, Egypt was the object of his crusade,
and he landed in 1249 at Damietta on the Nile. Egypt would, Louis thought,
provide a base from which to attack Jerusalem, and its wealth and supply of
grain would keep the crusaders fed and equipped. On June 6 Damietta was taken
with little resistance from the Egyptians, who withdrew further up the Nile.
The flooding of the Nile had not been taken into account, however, and it soon
grounded Louis and his army at Damietta for six months, where the knights sat
back and enjoyed the spoils of war. Louis ignored the agreement made during the
Fifth Crusade that Damietta should be given to the Kingdom of Jerusalem, now a
rump state in Acre, but he did set up an archbishopric there (under the
authority of the Latin Patriarch of Jerusalem) and used the city as a base to
direct military operations against the Muslims of Syria. The fifteenth century
Muslim historian al-Maqrizi portrays Louis IX as sending a letter to as-Salih
Ayyub that said : In March 1250 Louis finally tried to return to Damietta, but
he was taken captive at the of Battle of Fariskur where his army was
annihilated. Louis fell ill with dysentery, and was cured by an Arab physician.
In May he was ransomed for 800,000 bezants, half of which was to be paid before
the King left Egypt, with Damietta also being surrendered as a term in the
agreement. Upon this, he immediately left Egypt for Acre, one of few remaining
crusader possessions in Syria. Aftermath. Louis made an alliance with the
Mamluks, who at the time were rivals of the Sultan of Damascus, and from his
new base in Acre began to rebuild the other crusader cities, particularly Jaffa
and Saida. Although the Kingdom of Cyprus claimed authority there, Louis was
the "de facto" ruler. In 1254 Louis' money ran out, and his presence was needed
in France where his mother and regent Blanche of Castile had recently died.
Before leaving he established a standing French garrison at Acre, the capital
of the Kingdom of Jerusalem after the loss of Jerusalem, at the expense of the
French crown, it remained there until the fall of Acre in 1291. His crusade was
a failure, but he was considered a saint by many, and his fame gave him an even
greater authority in Europe than the Holy Roman Emperor. In 1270 he attempted
another crusade, though it too would end in failure. The history of the Seventh
Crusade was written by Jean de Joinville, who was also a participant, Matthew
Paris and many Muslim historians. Literary response. The failure of the Seventh
Crusade engendered several poetic responses from the Occitan troubadours.
Austorc d'Aorlhac, composing shortly after the Crusade, was surprised that God
would allow Louis IX to be defeated, but not surprised that some Christians
would therefore convert to Islam. In a slightly later poem, "D'un sirventes
m'es gran voluntatz preza", Bernart de Rovenac attacks both James I of Aragon
and Henry III of England for neglecting to defend "their fiefs" that the "rei
que conquer Suria" ("king who conquered Syria") had possessed. The "king who
conquered Syria" is a mocking reference to Louis, who was still in Syria (1254)
when Bernart was writing, probably in hopes that the English and Aragonese
kings would take advantage of the French monarch's absence. Bertran d'Alamanon
criticized Charles of Anjou's neglect of Provence in favor of crusading. He
wrote one of his last works, which bemoans Christendom's decline overseas,
between the Seventh and Eighth Crusades (1260–1265).
