Spain under the Restoration The Restoration was the name given to the period
that began on 29 December 1874 after the First Spanish Republic ended with the
restoration of the monarchy under Alfonso XII after a coup d'état by Martinez
Campos, and ended on 14 April 1931 with the proclamation of the Second Spanish
Republic. After almost a whole century of political instability and many civil
wars, the aim of the Restoration was to create a new political system, which
ensured stability by the practice of "turnismo". This was the deliberate
rotation of the Liberal and Conservative parties in the government, so no
sector of the bourgeoisie felt isolated, and excluded all other parties from
the system. This was achieved by electoral fraud. Opposition to the system came
from republicans, socialists, anarchists, Basque and Catalan nationalists, and
Carlists. Reign of Alfonso XII and the Regency of Maria Christina
(1874–1898). The "pronunciamiento" by Martinez Campos established Alfonso XII
as king, marking the end of the First Spanish Republic. After this, the
Constitution of 1876 was written and enforced during the whole restoration.
This constitution established Spain as a constitutional monarchy with a
bicameral legislature (Cortes Generales), consisting of an upper house
(Senate), and a lower house (Congress of Deputies). This constitution gave the
King the power to name Senators, and to revoke laws if he wanted to, and he was
also given the title of Commander-in-chief of the army. These years were marked
by economic prosperity. Spain's economy was quite behind those of the other
European countries, and during these years, the modernization of the country
took place on a large scale. On most fronts, production was increased, and
national products increased due to extreme protectionist measures. The two
parties alternated in the government in a controlled process known as "el turno
pacífico": the Liberal Party led by Sagasta and the Conservative Party led by
Canovas del Castillo. The "caciques", local powerful men, were used to
manipulate election results and because of this, resentment to the system
slowly built up over time, and important nationalist movements in Catalonia,
Galicia and the Basque Country, as well as unions, started to form. Reign of
Alfonso XIII and crisis of the system (1898–1923). In 1898 Spain lost its
last major overseas colonies (Cuba, Guam, Puerto Rico, and the Philippines) in
the Spanish–American War. The rapid collapse was perceived as a disaster in
Spain, undermining the credibility of both the government and associated
ideologies and almost led to a military coup d'état led by Camilo Polavieja.
This was the start of the system's weakening, giving oxygen to all manner of
conflicting opposition movements at a local and national level. The failed
attempts to conquer Morocco (Melilla War) caused great discontent at home and
ended up in a revolt in Barcelona, known as the Semana Tragica, in which the
lower classes of Barcelona backed by the anarchists, communists, and
republicans, revolted against what they considered the unjust methods of
recruiting soldiers. The government declared a state of war and sent the army
to crush the revolt, causing over a hundred deaths and the execution of
Francisco Ferrer. The socialist Unión General de Trabajadores (UGT) and the
anarchist union Confederación Nacional del Trabajo (CNT) decided to initiate a
general strike across the country that failed because the unions could only
mobilize urban workers. The problems in Morocco worsened as an army of natives
attacked the Spanish army. They were taken by surprise and, due to the skill of
the Moroccan chieftain, Abd-Al-Krim, virtually annihilated the Spanish army
almost all the way to Melilla in the Battle of Annual. This defeat was due to
improper planning and was blamed on the top military officers, causing great
discontent among the military, who felt misunderstood, because they had been
directed to advance into the interior without adequate resources to occupy the
difficult territory. Primo de Rivera's dictatorship (1923–1930). The military
discontent, the fear of anarchist terrorism or a proletarian revolution, and
the rise of nationalisms ended up causing great agitation amongst the civilians
and the military. On 13 September 1923, Miguel Primo de Rivera, Captain General
of Catalonia at that time, orchestrated a coup d'état, after emitting a
manifesto blaming the problems of Spain on the parliamentary system. Alfonso
XIII backed the General, and named him Prime Minister. He proceeded to suspend
the Constitution, and assume absolute powers as a dictator, abolishing all
other parties. He created the Unión Patriótica Española which was meant to
be the sole legal party. During this time, he greatly increased government
spending in business and public services, which caused his government to go
bankrupt. He lost the support of the military, and faced serious health
problems. Opposition to his regime was so great that Alfonso XIII stopped
supporting him and forced him to resign in January 1930. The final year
(1930–1931). Alfonso XIII, in an attempt to return gradually to the previous
system and restore his prestige, called on General Dámaso Berenguer to form a
government. This failed utterly, as the King was considered a supporter of the
dictatorship, and more and more political forces called for the establishment
of a republic. Berenguer resigned and the King gave the government to Admiral
Aznar. Aznar called for local elections on 12 April 1931 in order to satisfy
the democrats and republicans, to replace the dictatorship's local governments
and to gradually re-introduce the restoration. Although the monarchists had not
lost all their support, the republican and socialist parties won a major
victory. Street riots ensued, calling for the removal of the monarchy. The army
declared that they would not defend the King and on 14 April he fled Spain. The
Second Spanish Republic was immediately established under a provisional
government led by Niceto Alcalá-Zamora.
