Sui Dynasty The Sui Dynasty (589–618 CE) and in the undertaking of other
construction projects, including the reconstruction of the Great Wall. Weakened
by costly and disastrous military campaigns against Goguryeo (in modern day
Korea) which ended with the defeat of Sui in the early seventh century, the
dynasty disintegrated through a combination of popular revolts, disloyalty, and
assassination. History. Emperor Wen and the founding of the Sui Dynasty. When
the Northern Zhou Dynasty defeated the Northern Qi Dynasty in 577 CE, this was
the culminating moment and ultimate advantage for the northern Chinese to face
south. The southern dynasties had lost hope in conquering the north, and the
situation of conquest from north-to-south was only delayed in 523 with civil
war. The Sui Dynasty began when Emperor Wen's daughter became the Empress
Dowager of Northern Zhou, with her stepson as the new emperor. After crushing
an army disused in the eastern provinces as the prime minister of Zhou, Emperor
Wen took the throne by force and proclaimed himself emperor. In a bloody purge,
he had fifty-nine princes of the Zhou royal family eliminated yet nevertheless
became known as the 'Cultured Emperor' (581 - 604 CE). Emperor Wen abolished
the anti-Han policies of Zhou and reclaimed his Han surname of Yang. Having won
the support of Confucian scholars who had powered previous Han dynasties
(abandoning the nepotism and corruption of the nine-rank system), Emperor Wen
initiated a series of reforms aimed at strengthening his empire for the wars
that would reunify China. In his campaign for southern conquest, Emperor Wen
assembled thousands of boats to confront the naval forces of the Chen Dynasty
on the Yangtze River. The largest of these ships were very tall, having five
layered decks and the capacity for 800 passengers. They were outfitted with six
50-foot-long booms that were used to swing and damage enemy ships, or to pin
them down so that Sui marine troops could use act-and-board techniques. Besides
employing Xianbei and other Chinese ethnic groups for the fight against Chen,
Emperor Wen also employed the service of aborigines from southeastern Sichuan,
a people that Sui had recently conquered. In 588 CE, the Sui had amassed
518,000 troops along the northern bank of the Yangtze River, stretching from
Sichuan to the Pacific Ocean. Meanwhile, the Chen Dynasty was collapsing and
could not withstand such an assault. By 589 CE, Sui troops entered Jiankang
(Nanjing) and the last emperor of the southern Chen dynasty surrendered. The
city was razed to the ground, while Sui troops escorted Chen nobles back north,
where the northern aristocrats became fascinated with everything the south had
to provide culturally and intellectually. Although Emperor Wen was famous for
bankrupting the state treasury with warfare and construction projects, he made
many improvements to infrastructure during his early reign. He established
granaries as sources of food and as a means to regulate market prices from the
taxation of crops, much like the earlier Han Dynasty. Emperor Yang of Sui.
Emperor Yang of Sui gained the throne after his father's death, possibly by
murder. He further extended the empire but unlike his father he did not seek to
gain support from the nomads. Instead, he restored Confucian education and the
Confucian examination system for bureaucrats. By supporting educational
reforms, he lost the support of the nomads. He also started many expensive
construction projects such as the Grand Canal of China, and became embroiled in
several costly wars. Between these policies, invasions into China from Turkic
nomads, and his growing life of decadent luxury at the expense of the
peasantry, he lost public support and was eventually assassinated by his own
ministers. Both Emperors Wen and Yang sent military expeditions into Vietnam as
Annam in northern Vietnam had been incorporated into the Chinese empire over
600 years earlier during the Han Dynasty (202 BC - 220 CE). However the ancient
Kingdom of Champa in southern Vietnam became a major counterpart to Chinese
invasions to its north. According to Ebrey, Walthall, and Palais, these
invasions became known as the Linyi-Champa Campaign (602-605 CE). The Hanoi
area formerly held by the Han and Jin dynasties was easily recovered from the
local ruler in 602. A few years later the Sui army pushed farther south and was
attacked by troops on war elephants from Champa in southern Vietnam. The Sui
army feigned retreat and dug pits to trap the elephants, lured the Champan
troops to attack then used crossbows against the elephants causing them to turn
around and trample their own soldiers. Although Sui troops were victorious many
succumbed to disease as northern soldiers did not have immunity to tropical
diseases such as malaria. Goguryeo-Sui wars. The biggest factor that led to the
downfall of Sui Dynasty was a series of massive expeditions into the Korean
Peninsula to invade Goguryeo, one of the Three Kingdoms of Korea. The Sui
Dynasty's second emperor, Emperor Yang conscripted many soldiers for the
campaign. This army was so enormous it recorded in historical texts that it
took 30 days for all the armies to exit their last rallying point near
Shanhaiguan before invading Korea. In one instance the soldiers—both
conscripted and paid—listed over 3000 warships, up to 1.15 million infantry,
50,000 cavalry, 5000 artillery, and more. There were as many supporting
laborers and an exorbitant military budget that included mounds of equipment
and rations (most of which never reached the Chinese vanguard, as they were
captured by Goguryeo armies already). The army stretched to 1000 "li" or about
410 kilometers across rivers and valleys, over mountains and hills. In all four
main campaigns, the military conquest ended in failure. Many Sui soldiers were
defeated by the prominent army leader Eulji Mundeok of Goguryeo - in prominent
battles such as The Battle of Salsu River. According to the Book of Tang, of
the 305,000 Chinese troops, only 2,700 returned to China (although the Tang was
known to have exaggerated the failures of their predecessors to justify their
own rule). Fall. One great accomplishment was rebuilding the Great Wall of
China, but this, along with other large projects, strained the economy and
angered the resentful workforce employed. During the last few years of the Sui
Dynasty, the rebellion that rose against it took many of China's able-bodied
men from rural farms and other occupations, which in turn damaged the
agricultural base and the economy further. Men would deliberately break their
limbs in order to avoid military conscription, calling the practice "propitious
paws" and "fortunate feet." In the year 642, Emperor Taizong of Tang made an
effort to eradicate this practice by issuing a decree of a stiffer punishment
for those who were found to deliberately injure and heal themselves. Although
the Sui Dynasty was relatively short (581-618 CE), much was accomplished during
its tenure. The Grand Canal was one of the main accomplishments. It was
extended north from the Hangzhou region across the Yangzi to Yangzhou and then
northwest to the region of Luoyang. The eventual fall of the Sui dynasty was
due to the many losses in Southern Manchuria and North Korea. It was after
these defeats and losses that the country was left in ruins and rebels soon
took control of the government. Emperor Yang was assassinated in 618. I had
gone South after being defeated by Korea and was killed by his advisors.
Meanwhile, in the North, aristocrat Li Yuan (李淵) held an uprising after
which he ended up ascending the throne to become Emperor Gaozu of Tang. This
was the start of the Tang Dynasty, one of the most-noted dynasties in Chinese
history. Buddhism. Buddhism was popular during the Six Dynasties period that
preceded the Sui dynasty, spreading from India through Kushan Afghanistan into
China during the Late Han period. Buddhism gained prominence during the period
when central political control was limited. Buddhism created a unifying
cultural force that uplifted the people out of war and into the Sui Dynasty. In
many ways, Buddhism was responsible for the rebirth of culture in China under
the Sui Dynasty. Emperor Wen and his empress had converted to Buddhism to
legitimize imperial authority over China and the conquest of Chen. The emperor
presented himself as a Cakravartin king, a Buddhist monarch who would use
military force to defend the Buddhist faith. In the year 601 CE, Emperor Wen
had relics of the Buddha distributed to temples throughout China, with edicts
that expressed his goals, "all the people within the four seas may, without
exception, develop enlightenment and together cultivate fortunate karma,
bringing it to pass that present existences will lead to happy future lives,
that the sustained creation of good causation will carry us one and all up to
wondrous enlightenment". Ultimately, this act was an imitation of the ancient
Mauryan Emperor Ashoka of India.
