Third Crusade The Third Crusade (1189–1192), also known as the Kings'
Crusade, was an attempt by European leaders to reconquer the Holy Land from
Saladin (Ṣalāḥ ad-Dīn Yūsuf ibn Ayyūb). It was largely successful, but
fell short of its ultimate goal—the reconquest of Jerusalem. After the
failure of the Second Crusade, the Zengid dynasty controlled a unified Syria
and engaged in a conflict with the Fatimid rulers of Egypt, which ultimately
resulted in the unification of Egyptian and Syrian forces under the command of
Saladin, who employed them to reduce the Christian states and to recapture
Jerusalem in 1187. Spurred by religious zeal, Henry II of England and Philip II
of France ended their conflict with each other to lead a new crusade (although
Henry's death in 1189 put the English contingent under the command of Richard
Lionheart instead). The elderly Holy Roman Emperor Frederick Barbarossa
responded to the call to arms, and led a massive army across Anatolia, but
drowned in a river in Asia Minor on June 10, 1190, before reaching the Holy
Land. His death caused the greatest grief among the German Crusaders. Most of
his discouraged troops left to go home. After driving the Muslims from Acre,
Frederick's successor Leopold V of Austria and Philip left the Holy Land in
August 1191. Saladin failed to defeat Richard in any military engagements, and
Richard secured several more key coastal cities. Nevertheless, on September 2,
1192, Richard finalized a treaty with Saladin by which Jerusalem would remain
under Muslim control, but which also allowed unarmed Christian pilgrims and
merchants to visit the city. Richard departed the Holy Land on October 9. The
successes of the Third Crusade would allow the Crusaders to maintain a
considerable kingdom based in Cyprus and the Syrian coast. However, its failure
to recapture Jerusalem would lead to the call for a Fourth Crusade six years
later. Saladin's conquests. Shawar was executed for his alliances with the
Christian forces, and Shirkuh succeeded him as vizier of Egypt. In 1169,
Shirkuh died unexpectedly after only weeks of rule. Shirkuh's successor was his
nephew, Salah ad-Din Yusuf, commonly known as Saladin. Nur ad-Din died in 1174,
leaving the new empire to his 11-year old son, As-Salih. It was decided that
the only man competent enough to uphold the jihad against the Franks was
Saladin, who became sultan of both Egypt and Syria, and the founder of the
Ayyubid dynasty. Amalric also died in 1174, leaving Jerusalem to his 13-year
old son, Baldwin IV. Although Baldwin suffered from leprosy, he was an
effective and active military commander, defeating Saladin at the battle of
Montgisard in 1177, with support from Raynald of Châtillon, who had been
released from prison in 1176. Later, he forged an agreement with Saladin to
allow free trade between Muslim and Christian territories. Raynald also raided
caravans throughout the region. He expanded his piracy to the Red Sea by
sending galleys not only to raid ships, but to assault the city of Mecca
itself. These acts enraged the Muslim world, giving Raynald a reputation as the
most hated man in the Middle East. Baldwin IV died in 1185 and the kingdom was
left to his nephew Baldwin V, whom he had crowned as co-king in 1183. Raymond
III of Tripoli again served as regent. The following year, Baldwin V died
before his ninth birthday, and his mother Princess Sybilla, sister of Baldwin
IV, crowned herself queen and her husband, Guy of Lusignan, king. It was at
this time that Raynald, once again, raided a rich caravan and had its travelers
thrown in prison. Saladin demanded that the prisoners and their cargo be
released. The newly crowned King Guy appealed to Raynald to give in to
Saladin's demands, but Raynald refused to follow the king's orders. Siege of
the Kingdom of Jerusalem. It was this final act of outrage by Raynald which
gave Saladin the opportunity he needed to take the offensive against the
kingdom. He laid siege to the city of Tiberias in 1187. Raymond advised
patience, but King Guy, acting on advice from Raynald, marched his army to the
Horns of Hattin outside of Tiberias. The Frankish army, thirsty and
demoralized, was destroyed in the ensuing battle. King Guy and Raynald were
brought to Saladin's tent, where Guy was offered a goblet of water because of
his great thirst . Guy took a drink and then passed the goblet to Raynald.
Saladin would not be forced to protect the treacherous Raynald by allowing him
to drink, as it was custom that if you were offered a drink, your life was
safe. When Raynald accepted the drink, Saladin told his interpreter, "say to
the King: 'it is you who have given him to drink'". Afterwards, Saladin
beheaded Raynald for past betrayals. Saladin honored tradition with King Guy;
Guy was sent to Damascus and eventually ransomed to his people, one of the few
captive crusaders to avoid execution. By the end of the year, Saladin had taken
Acre and Jerusalem. Pope Urban III is said to have collapsed and died upon
hearing the news. However, at the time of his death, the news of the fall of
Jerusalem could not yet have reached him, although he knew of the battle of
Hattin and the fall of Acre. Preparations. The new pope, Gregory VIII
proclaimed that the capture of Jerusalem was punishment for the sins of
Christians across Europe. The cry went up for a new crusade to the Holy Land.
Henry II of England and Philip II of France ended their war with each other,
and both imposed a "Saladin tithe" on their citizens to finance the venture. In
Britain, Baldwin of Exeter, the archbishop of Canterbury, made a tour through
Wales, convincing 3,000 men-at-arms to take up the cross, recorded in the
"Itinerary" of Giraldus Cambrensis. Barbarossa's crusade. The elderly Holy
Roman Emperor Frederick I Barbarossa responded to the call immediately. He took
up the Cross at Mainz Cathedral on March 27, 1188 and was the first to set out
for the Holy Land in May 1189 with an army of about 100,000 men, including
20,000 knights. An army of 2,000 men from the Hungarian prince Géza, the
younger brother of the king Béla III of Hungary also went with Barbarossa to
the Holy Land. The Byzantine Emperor Isaac II Angelus made a secret alliance
with Saladin to impede Frederick's progress in exchange for his empire's
safety. Meanwhile, the Sultanate of Rum promised Frederick safety through
Anatolia, but after much raiding Frederick lost patience and on May 18, 1190,
the German army sacked Iconium, the capital of the Sultanate of Rüm.
Nevertheless Frederick's horse slipped on June 10, 1190, while crossing the
Saleph River throwing him against the rocks. He then drowned in the river.
After this, much of his army returned to Germany, in anticipation of the
upcoming Imperial election. His son Frederick of Swabia led the remaining 5,000
men to Antioch. There, the emperor's body was boiled to remove the flesh, which
was interred in the Church of St. Peter; his bones were put in a bag to
continue the crusade. In Antioch, however, the German army was further reduced
by fever. Young Frederick had to ask the assistance of his kinsman Conrad of
Montferrat to lead him safely to Acre, by way of Tyre, where his father's bones
were buried. Richard and Philip's departure. Henry II of England died on July
6, 1189 following a defeat by his son Richard I (Lionheart) and Philip II.
Richard inherited the crown and immediately began raising funds for the
crusade. In July 1190, Richard and Philip set out jointly from Marseille,
France for Sicily. Philip II had hired a Genoese fleet to transport his army
which consisted of 650 knights, 1,300 horses, and 1,300 squires to the Holy
Land. William II of Sicily had died the previous year, and was replaced by
Tancred, who placed Joan of England—William's wife and Richard's sister—in
prison. Richard captured the capital city of Messina on October 4, 1190 and
Joan was released. Richard and Philip fell out over the issue of Richard's
marriage, as Richard had decided to marry Berengaria of Navarre, breaking off
his long-standing betrothal to Philip's half-sister Alys. Philip left Sicily
directly for the Middle East on March 30, 1191, and arrived in Tyre in mid-May.
He joined the siege of Acre on May 20. Richard did not set off from Sicily
until April 10. Shortly after setting sail from Sicily, Richard's armada of 100
ships (carrying 8,000 men) was struck by a violent storm. Several ships ran
aground, including one holding Joan, his new fiancée Berengaria, and a large
amount of treasure that had been amassed for the crusade. It was soon
discovered that Isaac Dukas Comnenus of Cyprus had seized the treasure. The
young women were unharmed. Richard entered Limassol on May 6, and met with
Isaac, who agreed to return Richard's belongings and send 500 of his soldiers
to the Holy Land. Once back at his fortress of Famagusta, Isaac broke his oath
of hospitality and began issuing orders for Richard to leave the island.
Isaac's arrogance prompted Richard to conquer the island within days. Siege of
Acre. King Guy was released from prison by Saladin in 1189. He attempted to
take command of the Christian forces at Tyre, but Conrad of Montferrat held
power there after his successful defence of the city from Muslim attacks. Guy
turned his attention to the wealthy port of Acre. He amassed an army to besiege
the city and received aid from Philip's newly arrived French army. However, it
was still not enough to counter Saladin's force, which besieged the besiegers.
In summer 1190, in one of the numerous outbreaks of disease in the camp, Queen
Sibylla and her young daughters died. Guy, although only king by right of
marriage, endeavoured to retain his crown, although the rightful heir was
Sibylla's half-sister Isabella. After a hastily arranged divorce from Humphrey
IV of Toron, Isabella was married to Conrad of Montferrat, who claimed the
kingship in her name. During the winter of 1190–91, there were further
outbreaks of dysentery and fever, which claimed the lives of Frederick of
Swabia, Patriarch Heraclius of Jerusalem, and Theobald V of Blois. When the
sailing season began again in spring 1191, Leopold V of Austria arrived and
took command of what remained of the imperial forces. Philip of France arrived
with his troops from Sicily in May. Richard arrived at Acre on June 8, 1191 and
immediately began supervising the construction of siege weapons to assault the
city. The city was captured on July 12. Richard, Philip, and Leopold quarreled
over the spoils of their victory. Richard cast down the German standard from
the city, slighting Leopold. Also, in the struggle for the kingship of
Jerusalem, Richard supported Guy, while Philip and Leopold supported Conrad,
who was related to them both. It was decided that Guy would continue to rule,
but that Conrad would receive the crown upon his death. Frustrated with Richard
(and in Philip's case, in poor health), Philip and Leopold took their armies
and left the Holy Land in August. Philip left 10,000 French crusaders in the
Holy Land and 5,000 silver marks to pay them. Despite the treaty at Acre,
Richard had the garrison (including women and children) massacred in full view
of Saladin's camp. Not one prisoner could be saved in the subsequent effort
Saladin made to rescue them by military force. Battle of Arsuf. After the
capture of Acre, Richard decided to march to the city of Jaffa, where he could
launch the attack on Jerusalem but on September 7, 1191, at Arsuf, north of
Jaffa, Saladin attacked Richard's army. Saladin attempted to lure Richard's
forces out to be easily picked off, but Richard maintained his formation until
the Hospitallers rushed in to take Saladin's right flank, while the Templars
took the left. Richard then won the battle. Regicide and negotiations.
Following his victory, Richard took Jaffa and established his new headquarters
there. He offered to begin negotiations with Saladin, who sent his brother, Al-
Adil to meet with Richard. Negotiations (which had included an attempt to marry
Richard's sister Joan to Al-Adil) failed, and Richard marched to Ascalon.
Richard's forces were halted nearly 12 times by the forces of Saladin commanded
by Ayaz al-Tawil a powerful Mamluk leader, who died in combat. Richard called
on Conrad to join him on campaign, but he refused, citing Richard's alliance
with King Guy. He too had been negotiating with Saladin, as a defence against
any attempt by Richard to wrest Tyre from him for Guy. However, in April,
Richard was forced to accept Conrad as king of Jerusalem after an election by
the nobles of the kingdom. Guy had received no votes at all, but Richard sold
him Cyprus as compensation. Before he could be crowned, Conrad was stabbed to
death by two Hashshashin in the streets of Tyre. Eight days later, Richard's
nephew Henry II of Champagne married Queen Isabella, who was pregnant with
Conrad's child. It was strongly suspected that the king's killers had acted on
instructions from Richard. In July 1192, Saladin's army suddenly attacked and
captured Jaffa with thousands of men, but Saladin had lost control of his army
because of their anger for the massacre at Acre. It was believed that Saladin
even told the Crusaders to shield themselves in the Citadel until he had
regained control of his army. On September 2, 1192, Richard and Saladin
finalized a treaty by which Jerusalem would remain under Muslim control, but
which also allowed unarmed Christian pilgrims and traders to visit the city.
Richard departed the Holy Land on October 9. Aftermath. Neither side was
entirely discontent nor satisfied with the results of the war. Though Richard
had deprived the Muslims of important coastal territories as a result of his
consistent victories over Saladin, many Christians in the Latin West felt
disappointed that he had elected not to pursue Jerusalem. Likewise, many in the
Islamic world felt disturbed that Saladin had failed to drive the Christians
out of Syria and Palestine. Trade, however, flourished throughout the Middle
East and in port cities along the Mediterranean coastline.  Richard was
arrested and imprisoned in December 1192 by Duke Leopold, who suspected him of
murdering his cousin Conrad of Montferrat, and had been offended by Richard
casting down his standard from the walls of Acre. He was later transferred to
the custody of Henry VI, Holy Roman Emperor, and it took a ransom of one
hundred and fifty thousand marks to obtain his release. Richard returned to
England in 1194 and died of a crossbow bolt wound in 1199 at the age of 41. In
1193, Saladin died of yellow fever. His heirs would quarrel over the succession
and ultimately fragment his conquests. Henry of Champagne was killed in an
accidental fall in 1197. Queen Isabella then married for a fourth time, to
Amalric of Lusignan, who had succeeded his brother Guy, positioned as King of
Cyprus. After their deaths in 1205, her eldest daughter Maria of Montferrat
(born after her father's murder) succeeded to the throne of Jerusalem.
Accounts of events surrounding the Third Crusade were written by the anonymous
authors of the "Itinerarium Peregrinorum et Gesta Regis Ricardi" (a.k.a. the
"Itinerarium Regis Ricardi"), the "Old French Continuation of William of Tyre"
(parts of which are attributed to Ernoul), and by Ambroise, Roger of Howden,
Ralph of Diceto, and Giraldus Cambrensis.
