Universal history Universal history is the presentation of the history of
humankind as a whole, as a coherent unit. It is basic to the Western tradition
of historiography, especially the Abrahamic wellspring of that tradition. A
universal chronicle or world chronicle traces history from the beginning of
written information about the past up to the present (contemporary time). As
understood by historians, universal history embraces the events of all times
and nations with the only limitation being that they should be ascertained as
to make a scientific treatment of them possible. Universal history is the
representation of general facts both of entire nations and of individuals. Its
uses are manifold. It teaches human nature and the experience of all centuries.
Universal history is commonly divided into three parts, viz. ancient, medieval,
and modern time. Historiography. The roots of historiography in the 19th
century are bound up with the concept that history written with a strong
connection to the primary sources could, somehow, be integrated with "the big
picture", i.e. to a general, universal history. For example, Leopold von Ranke,
probably the pre-eminent historian of the 19th century, founder of "Rankean
positivism," the classic mode of historiography that now stands against
postmodernism, attempted to write a Universal History at the close of his
career. The work of Oswald Spengler and Arnold J. Toynbee are two examples of
attempts to integrate primary source -based history and Universal History.
Spengler's work is more general; Toynbee created a theory that would allow the
study of "civilizations" to proceed with integration of source-based history
writing and Universal History writing. Both writers attempted to incorporate
teleological theories into general presentations of the history. Instances and
Description. Ancient examples. Ancient authors. In Greco-Roman antiquity, the
first universal history was written by Ephorus (fl. 4th century BC). This work
has been lost, but its influence can be seen in the ambitions of Polybius
(203–120 BC) and Diodorus (fl. 1st century BC) to give comprehensive accounts
of their worlds. In Leipzig are preserved five fragments dating to the 2nd
century AD and coming from a world chronicle. Its author is unknown, but was
perhaps a Christian. Later, universal history provided an influential lens on
the rise of Christianity in the Roman Empire in such works as Eusebius's
"Ecclesiastical History", Augustine's "City of God", and Orosius' "History
Against the Pagans". During the Han Dynasty (202 BCE – 220 CE) of China, Sima
Qian (145–86 BC) was the first Chinese historian to attempt a universal
history—from the earliest mythological origins of his civilization to his
present day—in his "Records of the Grand Historian". Although his generation
was the first in China to discover the existence of kingdoms in Central Asia
and India, his work did not attempt to cover the history of these regions.
Ancient history. The first five books of the Bible constitute a primary example
of such a history. To the extent that the Pentateuch presents itself as an
account of humankind as a whole, from creation to the death of Moses, it is
universal history. The story progresses according to a universal principle: the
Bible posits that the history of humankind is governed by Yawveh, and that his
will is manifest in every event that takes place. The destiny of all humankind,
according to this idea, is governed by humans' relationship with God. This idea
naturally flows into the story of the Children of Israel, whose patriarchs
conversed with God and made various covenants with Him. These covenants
governed humankind's destiny. This idea extends into the New Testament, which
posits that the sacrifice of Jesus now affects every person, and every
generation since His resurrection, into the limitless future. Medieval
examples. Western Europe. The "universal chronicle" traces history from the
beginning of the world up to the present and was an especially popular genre of
historiography in medieval Western Europe. The universal chronicle differs from
the ordinary chronicle in its much broader chronological and geographical
scope, giving, in principle, a continuous account of the progress of world
history from the creation of the world up to the author's own times, but in
practice often narrowing down to a more limited geographical range as it
approaches those times. The "Chronica" of Eusebius of Caesarea (c. 275–339)
is considered to be the starting point of this tradition. The second book of
this work consisted of a set of concordance tables ("Chronici canones") that
for the first time synchronized the several concurrent chronologies in use with
different peoples. Eusebius' chronicle became known to the Latin West through
the translation by Jerome (c. 347–420). Universal chronicles are sometimes
organized around a central ideological theme, such as the Augustinian idea of
the tension between the heavenly and the earthly state, which plays a major
role in Otto von Freising's "Historia de duabus civitatibus". In other cases,
any obvious theme may be lacking. Some universal chronicles bear a more or less
encyclopedic character, with many digressions on non-historical subjects, as is
the case with the "Chronicon" of Helinand of Froidmont. Other notable universal
chroniclers of the Medieval West include Bede (c. 672 or 673–735), the
Christherre-Chronik, Helinand of Froidmont (c. 1160—1237?), Isidore of
Seville (c. 560–636), Jans der Enikel, Matthew Paris (c. 1200-1259), Ranulf
Higdon (c. 1280-1363), Rudolf von Ems, Sigebert of Gembloux (c. 1030–1112),
Otto von Freising (c. 1114–1158), and Vincent of Beauvais (c. 1190-1264?).
The tradition of universal history can even be seen in the works of medieval
historians whose purpose may not have been to chronicle the ancient past, but
nonetheless included it in a local history of more recent times. One such
example is the "Decem Libri Historiarum" of Gregory of Tours (d. 594), where
only the first of his ten books describes creation and ancient history, while
the last six books focus on events in his own lifetime and region. While this
reading of Gregory is currently a widely accepted hypothesis in historical
circles, the central purpose of Gregory's writing is still a topic of hot
debate. Christian writers as late as Bossuet (in his "Discours sur l'histoire
universelle",1679) were still reflecting on and continuing the Medieval
tradition of universal history. Middle East. In the medieval Islamic world
(13th century), universal history in this vein was taken up by Muslim
historians such as Ta' rīkh-i jahān-gushā (History of the World Conqueror)
by Ala'iddin Ata-Malik Juvayni, Jami al-Tawarikh ("Compendium of Chronicles")
by Rashid-al-Din Hamadani (now held at the University of Edinburgh) and the
"Muqaddimah" by Ibn Khaldun. Central Asia. The Secret History of the Mongols
(1240) by unknown author, a source of the first magnitude for the social
history of the Asian Nomadic civilization based on Mongols before the
establishment of their world's greatest empire in 13 century. It contains main
historical events in vast land of Eurasia in 800 years ago. Modern examples. An
early European project was the "Universal History" of George Sale and others,
written in the mid-18th century. In the 19th century, universal histories
proliferated. Philosophers such as Kant, Schiller and Hegel, and political
philosophers such as Marx, presented general theories of history that shared
essential characteristics with the Biblical account: they conceived of history
as a coherent whole, governed by certain basic characteristics or immutable
principles. For example, Hegel presented the idea that progress in history is
actually the progress not of humankind's material existence, but of humanity's
spiritual development. Concomitantly, Hegel presented a developmental theory of
how the human spirit progresses: through the dialectic of synthesis and
antithesis. Marx's theory of dialectic materialism is essential to his general
concept of history: that the struggle to dominate the means of production
governs all historical development. "Pop" universal history. Basic ideas of
universal history are so prevalent that they are difficult to separate from
basic Western assumptions of how the world is or should be. Outside some
intellectuals, such ideas continue to predominate as core assumptions. The
teleological aspects of universal history remain entrenched. Many people
believe that the events of our world, and more specifically, the events within
the human community, are directed toward an end or tending toward an end of
some sort. 'Linear' pre-suppositions of the theory are no less prevalent. Most
people living in Western cultures conceive of time, and therefore of history,
as a line or an arrow, that is proceeding from past to future, toward some end.
In contrast to this view, Social cycle theories are among the earliest social
theories in sociology. Sociological cycle theory argues that events and stages
of society and history are generally repeating themselves in cycles. Universal
chronicles. Timeline. Ancient. Ancient history is the study of the past from
the beginning of recorded human history to the Early Middle Ages. In India, the
period includes the early period of the Middle Kingdoms, and, in China, the
time up to the Qin Dynasty is included. The Bronze Age forms part of the three-
age system. In this system, it follows the Neolithic Age in some areas of the
world. In the 24th century BC, the Akkadian Empire was founded. The First
Intermediate Period of Egypt (c. 22nd century BC) was followed by the Middle
Kingdom of Egypt between the 21st to 17th centuries BC. The Sumerian
Renaissance also developed c. 21st century BC. Around the 18th century BC, the
Second Intermediate Period of Egypt began. By 1600 BC, Mycenaean Greece
developed, the beginning of the Shang Dynasty in China emerged and there was
evidence of a fully developed Chinese writing system. Also around 1600 BC, the
beginning of Hittite dominance of the Eastern Mediterranean region is seen. The
time between the 16th to 11th centuries around the Nile is called the New
Kingdom of Egypt. Between 1550 BC and 1292 BC, the Amarna Period developed. The
Iron Age is the last principal period in the three-age system, preceded by the
Bronze Age. Its date and context vary depending on the country or geographical
region. During the 13th to 12th centuries BC, the Ramesside Period occurred in
Egypt. Around c. 1200 BC, the Trojan War was thought to have taken place. By c.
1180 BC, the disintegration of the Hittite Empire was underway. In 1046 BC, the
Zhou force, led by King Wu of Zhou, overthrows the last king of the Shang
Dynasty. The Zhou Dynasty is established in China shortly thereafter. In 1000
BC, the Mannaeans Kingdom begins in Western Asia. Around the 10th to 7th
centuries BC, the Neo-Assyrian Empire forms in Mesopotamia. In 800 BC, the rise
of Greek city-states begins. In 776 BC, the first recorded Olympic Games are
held. Medieval. The Middle Ages is a historical period following the Iron Age,
fully underway by the 5th century and lasting to the 15th century, and
preceding the early Modern Era. In Europe, the period saw the large-scale
European Migration and fall of the Western Roman Empire. In South Asia, the
middle kingdoms of India were the classical period of the region. The "Middle"
period on the Indian subcontinent lasts for some 1,500 years, and ends in the
13th century. During the late Middle Ages, several Islamic empires were
established in the Indian subcontinent. In East Asia, the Mid-Imperial China
age begins with the reunification of China and ends with China was conquered by
the Mongol Empire. The Golden Horde invaded North and West Asia and parts of
eastern Europe in the 13th century and established and maintained their khanate
until the end of the Middle Ages. The Middle Ages is the middle period in a
three-period division of history: Classic, Medieval, and Modern. The precise
dates of the beginning, culmination, and end of the Middle Ages are more or
less arbitrarily assumed according to the point of view adopted. Any hard and
fast line drawn to designate either the beginning or close of the period in
question is arbitrary. The widest limits given, viz., the irruption of the
Visigoths over the boundaries of the Roman Empire, for the beginning, and the
middle of the sixteenth century, for the close, may be taken as inclusively
sufficient, and embrace, beyond dispute, every movement or phase of history
that can be claimed as properly belonging to the Middle Ages. The Early Middle
Ages saw the continuation of trends set up in ancient history (and, for Europe,
late Antiquity). The period is usually considered to open with those migrations
of the German Tribes which led to the destruction of the Roman Empire in the
West in 375, when the Huns fell upon the Gothic tribes north of the Black Sea
and forced the Visigoths over the boundaries of the Roman Empire on the lower
Danube. A later date, however, is sometimes assumed, viz., when Odoacer deposed
Romulus Augustulus, the last of the Roman Emperors of the West, in 476.
Depopulation, deurbanization, and increased barbarian invasion was see across
the Old World. North Africa and the Middle East, once part of the Eastern Roman
Empire, became Islamic. Later in European history, the establishment of the
feudal system allowed a return to systemic agriculture. There was sustained
urbanization in northern and western Europe. During the High Middle Ages in
Europe, Christian-oriented art and architecture flourished and Crusades were
mounted to recapture the Holy Land from Muslim control. The influence of the
emerging states in Europe was tempered by the ideal of an international
Christendom. The codes of chivalry and courtly love set rules for proper
European behavior, while the European Scholastic philosophers attempted to
reconcile Christian faith and reason. During the Late Middle Ages in Europe,
the centuries of prosperity and growth came to a halt. The close of the Middle
Ages is also variously fixed; some make it coincide with the rise of Humanism
and the Renaissance in Italy, in the fourteenth century; with the Fall of
Constantinople, in 1453; with the discovery of America by Columbus in 1492; or,
again, with the great religious schism of the sixteenth century. A series of
famines and plagues, such as the medieval Great Famine and the Black Death,
reduced the population around half before the calamities in the late Middle
Ages. Along with depopulation came social unrest and endemic warfare. Western
Europe experienced serious peasant risings: the Jacquerie, the Peasants'
Revolt, and the Hundred Years' War. To add to the many problems of the period,
the unity of the Catholic Church was shattered by the Western Schism.
Collectively the events are a crisis of the Late Middle Ages. Modern. Modern
history describes the historical period after the Middle Ages. Modern history
can be further broken down into the "early modern period" and the "late modern
period" after the French Revolution and the Industrial Revolution.
"Contemporary history" describes the span of historic events that are
immediately relevant to the present time. The modern era began approximately in
the 16th century. Many major events caused Europe to change around the turn of
the 16th century, starting with the Fall of Constantinople in 1453, the fall of
Muslim Spain and the discovery of the Americas in 1492, and Martin Luther's
Protestant Reformation in 1517. In England the modern period is often dated to
the start of the Tudor period with the victory of Henry VII over Richard III at
the Battle of Bosworth in 1485. Early modern European history is usually seen
to span from the turn of the 15th century, through the Age of Reason and the
Age of Enlightenment in the 17th and 18th centuries, until the beginning of the
Industrial Revolution in the late 18th century.
