Viceroyalty of Peru Created in 1542, the Viceroyalty of Peru () was a Crown of
Castile colonial administrative district that originally contained most of
Spanish-ruled South America, governed from the capital of Lima. The Viceroyalty
of Peru was one of the two Spanish Viceroyalties in the Americas from the
sixteenth to the seventeenth centuries. However, the Spanish did not resist the
Portuguese expansion of Brazil across the meridian. The Treaty of Tordesillas
was rendered meaningless between 1580 and 1640 while Spain controlled Portugal.
The creation of Viceroyalties of New Granada and Rio de la Plata (at the
expense of Peru's territory) reduced the importance of Lima and shifted the
lucrative Andean trade to Buenos Aires, while the fall of the mining and
textile production accelerated the progressive decay of the Viceroyalty of
Peru. Eventually, the viceroyalty would dissolve, as with much of the Spanish
empire, when challenged by national independence movements at the beginning of
the nineteenth century. These movements led to the formation of the modern-day
republics of Peru, Chile, Colombia, Panama, Ecuador, Bolivia, Paraguay,
Uruguay, Argentina,Venezuela, Brazil (Rio Grande do Sul, Acre, Roraima) Guyana
and Trinidad and Tobago in the territories that at one point or another had
constituted the Viceroyalty of Peru. History. Exploration and Settlement
(1542–1643). After the Spanish conquest of Peru (1532–37), the first
Audiencia was constituted. In 1542, the Spanish created the Viceroyalty of New
Castile, that shortly afterwards would be called the Viceroyalty of Peru. In
1544, Holy Roman Emperor Charles V (King Charles I of Spain) named Blasco
Núñez Vela Peru's first viceroy, but the viceroyalty was not organized until
the arrival of Viceroy Francisco de Toledo in 1572. Toledo made an extensive
tour of inspection of the colony. Francisco de Toledo, "one of the great
administrators of human times", established the Inquisition and promulgated
laws that applied to both Indians and Spanish alike, breaking the power of the
encomenderos and reducing the old system of "mita", or forced native labor. He
improved the safety in the viceroyalty with fortifications, bridges and "la
Armada del Mar del Sur" (the Southern Fleet) against the pirates. Francisco de
Toledo also ended the indigenous state of Vilcabamba, executing the Inca Túpac
Amaru, and promoted economic development from the commercial monopoly and the
mineral extraction, mainly, from silver mines of Potosí. The Amazon Basin and
some large adjoining regions had been considered Spanish territory since the
Treaty of Tordesillas and explorations such as that by Francisco de Orellana,
but the Treaty of Tordesillas was rendered meaningless between 1580 and 1640
while Spain controlled Portugal. However, Luis Jerónimo de Cabrera, 4th Count
of Chinchón sent out the third expedition to explore the Amazon River, under
Cristóbal de Acuña. (This was part of the return leg of the expedition of
Pedro Teixeira.) Many Pacific islands were visited by Spanish ships in the
sixteenth century, but they made no effort to trade with or colonize them.
These included New Guinea (by Yñigo Ortiz de Retez in 1545), the Solomon
Islands (by Pedro Sarmiento de Gamboa in 1568) and the Marquesas Islands (by
Álvaro de Mendaña de Neira in 1595). The first Jesuit reduction to
Christianize the Indigenous population was founded in 1609, but some areas were
occupied by Brazilians as Bandeirantes gradually extended their activities
throughout much of the basin and adjoining Mato Grosso in the 17th and 18th
centuries. These groups had the advantage of remote geography and river access
from the mouth of the Amazon (which was in Portuguese territory). Meanwhile the
Spanish were barred by their laws from slaving of indigenous people, leaving
them without a commercial interest deep in the interior of the basin. One
famous attack upon a Spanish mission in 1628 resulted in the enslavement of
60,000 indigenous people. In fact as time passed they were used as a self
funding occupation force by the Portuguese authorities in what was effectively
a low level war of territorial conquest. In 1617, Francisco de Borja y Aragón
divided the government of Río de la Plata into two, Buenos Aires and Paraguay,
both dependencies of the Viceroyalty of Peru. Viceroy Borja y Aragón also
established the "Tribunal del Consulado", a special court and administrative
body for commercial affairs in the viceroyalty. Diego Fernández de Córdoba,
Marquis of Guadalcázar reformed the fiscal system and stopped the interfamily
rivalry that was bloodying the domain. Other viceroys, such as Fernando Torres,
Borja y Aragón, Fernández de Cabrera or Fernández Córdoba also expanded the
colonial navy and fortified the ports to fight against pirate attacks, as those
led by the Englishman Thomas Cavendish. Fernández de Cabrera suppressed an
insurrection of the Uru and Mapuche Indians. The last Spanish Habsburgs
(1643–1713). Viceroys had to protect the Pacific coast from French contraband
and English and Dutch pirates. They expanded the naval forces, fortified the
ports of Valdivia, Valparaíso, Arica and Callao and constructed city walls in
Lima (1686) and Trujillo (1685–1687). Nevertheless, the famous English
privateer Henry Morgan took Chagres and captured and sacked the city of Panama
in the early part of 1670. Also Peruvian forces repelled the attacks by Edward
David (1684 and 1686), Charles Wager and Thomas Colb (1708) and Woldes
(1709–1711). The Peace of Utrecht allowed the British to send ships and
merchandise to the fair at Portobello. In this period, revolts were common.
Around 1656, Pedro Bohórquez crowned himself Inca (emperor) of the Calchaquí
Indians, inciting the indigenous population to revolt. From 1665 until 1668,
the rich mineowners José and Gaspar Salcedo revolted against the colonial
government. The clergy were opposed to the nomination of prelates from Spain.
Viceroy Diego Ladrón de Guevara had to take measures against an uprising of
slaves at the hacienda of Huachipa de Lima. There were terrible earthquakes
(1655, 1687) and epidemics, too. During Baltasar de la Cueva Enríquez's
administration, the laws of the Indies were compiled. Diego de Benavides y de
la Cueva issued the "Ordenanza de Obrajes" (Ordenance of Manufactures) in 1664
and Pedro Álvarez de Toledo y Leiva introduced the "papel sellado" (literally,
sealed paper). In 1683 Melchor de Navarra y Rocafull reestablished the Lima
mint, which had been closed since 1572. Viceroy Diego Ladrón de Guevara
increased the production of silver in the mines of Potosí, and stimulated
production in other mines at San Nicolás, Cajatambo and Huancavelica. He
limited the manufacture of aguardiente from sugar cane to authorized factories,
which he taxed heavily. The Churches of Los Desamparados (1672), La Buena
Muerte and the convent of Mínimos de San Francisco de Paula were finished and
opened. The Hospital of Espiritu Santo in Lima and San Bartolomé hospital were
built. The Bourbon Reforms (1713–1806). In 1717 the Viceroyalty of New
Granada was created from the northern territories, the "Audiencias" of Bogotá,
Quito and Panamá. This viceroyalty initially lasted only until 1724, but was
reestablished permanently in 1740. With the creation of the Viceroyalty of the
Río de la Plata from southern areas that are now Argentina, Bolivia, Paraguay
and Uruguay in 1776, the Charcas and Buenos Aires "audiencias" were similarly
lost. The 256-year-old Treaty of Tordesillas was superseded by the 1750 Treaty
of Madrid which granted Portugal control of the lands it had occupied in South
America in the intervening centuries. This Portuguese occupation led to the
Guaraní War of 1756. Image:Brazil states1534.png|1534"Brazil according to the
Treaty of Tordesillas" Image:Brazil states1789.png|1789"Brazil according to the
Treaty of Madrid (1750)"  Several viceroys had scientific, political and
economic impact on the Viceroyalty. Manuel de Amat y Juniet organized an
expedition to Tahiti. Viceroy Teodoro de Croix also decentralized the
government through the creation of eight "intendencias" in the area of the
"Audiencia" of Lima, and two in the Captaincy General of Chile. Francisco Gil
de Taboada reincorporated the region of Puno into the Viceroyalty of Peru.
José de Armendáriz stimulated the production of silver and took steps against
fraud, corruption and smuggling. Amat y Juniet established the first Regulation
of Commerce and Organization of Customs rules, which led to the building of the
customshouse in Callao. Teodoro de Croix collaborated in the creation of the
"Junta Superior de Comercio" and the "Tribunal de Minería" (1786). An
earthquake demolished Lima and Callao, in 1746. Viceroy Amat y Juniet
constructed various public works in Lima, including the first bull ring. Manuel
de Guirior also improved the medical care at ten hospitals in Lima and
established a foundling home. War between Spain and Britain again broke out
(the War of Jenkins' Ear, 1739–1748). Amat y Juniet constructed the fortress
of Real Felipe in Callao in 1774. Nevertheless, throughout this period, the
Native peoples were not entirely suppressed. In the eighteenth century alone,
there were fourteen large uprisings, the most important of which were that of
Juan Santos Atahualpa in 1742, and the Sierra Uprising of Túpac Amaru II in
1780. The Comunero Revolt broke out in Paraguay from 1721 to 1732). In 1767,
the Jesuits were expelled from the colony. End of the Viceroyalty
(1806–1824). Viceroy José Fernando de Abascal y Sousa promoted educational
reforms, reorganized the army, and stamped out local rebellions. During his
administration, the Inquisition of Lima was temporarily abolished as a result
of the reforms taken by the Cortes in Spain. When the wars of independence
broke out in 1810, Peru was the center of Royalist reaction. Abascal
reincorporated the provinces of Córdoba, Potosí, La Paz, Charcas, Chile and
Quito (Ecuador) into the Viceroyalty of Peru. In 1812 occurred the great fire
of Guayaquil that destroyed half the city. Lord Cochrane, in command of the
newly created Chilean Navy, unsuccessfully attacked Guayaquil and El Callao,
but on 4 February he captured Valdivia, called at the time "The Key of the
South Seas" and the "Gibraltar of the Pacific", due to its huge fortifications.
However the viceroyalty managed to defend Chiloé Island until 1826. On
September 8, 1820, the "Expedición Libertadora" of Peru, organized mainly by
Argentinians and with some Peruvian and Chilean involvement, landed on the
beach at Paracas, near the city of Pisco, Peru. The army was under the command
of José de San Martín. After fruitless negotiations with the viceroy, San
Martín occupied the Peruvian capital of Lima on July 21, 1821. The
independence of Peru was proclaimed on July 28, 1821. Viceroy José de la Serna
e Hinojosa, still in command of a sizable military force, retired to Jauja, and
later to Cusco. On July 26, 1822, San Martín and Simón Bolívar met in
Guayaquil to define a strategy for the liberation of the rest of Peru. The
meeting was secret, and exactly what occurred is not known. However, afterwards
San Martín returned to Argentina while Bolívar prepared to launch an
offensive against the remaining royalist forces in Alto Peru. In September 1823
Bolívar arrived in Lima with Antonio José de Sucre to plan the offensive. In
February 1824 the royalists briefly regained control of Lima. Having regrouped
in Trujillo, Bolívar in June led his rebel forces south to confront the
Spanish under Field Marshal José de Canterac. The two armies met on the plains
of Junín on August 6, 1824, and the Peruvians were victorious in a battle
fought entirely without firearms. The Spanish troops subsequently evacuated
Lima for a second time. As a result of a decree of the Congress of Gran
Colombia, Bolívar turned over command of the rebel troops to Sucre on October
7, 1824. Royalist control was now reduced to a small area around the city of
Ayacucho, located in the south-central highlands. It was there that the final
battle for the independence of Peru would be fought. On 9 December 1824, the
Battle of Ayacucho, or Battle of La Quinua, took place at Pampa de La Quinua, a
few kilometers away from Ayacucho, near the town of Quinua. This battle —
between royalist (Spanish) and nationalist (republican) troops — sealed the
independence of Peru and South America. The victorious nationalist forces were
led by Antonio José de Sucre, Bolívar's lieutenant. Viceroy Serna was wounded
and taken prisoner. The Spanish army had 2,000 dead and wounded and lost 3,000
prisoners, with the remainder of the army entirely dispersed. After the battle,
Serna signed the final capitulation whereby the Spaniards agreed to leave Peru.
Serna was released soon afterwards and sailed for Europe. Spain made futile
attempts to regain its former colonies, such as at the Battle of Callao, but in
1879 it finally recognized Peru's independence. Politics. The town of Lima,
founded by Pizarro on January 18, 1535 as the "Ciudad de los Reyes" (City of
the Kings/Magi), became the seat of the new viceroyalty. As the seat of a
viceroy, who had oversight over all of Spanish South America except for
Portuguese-dominated Brazil, Lima grew into a powerful city. During the 16th,
17th and most of the 18th centuries, all of the colonial wealth of South
America created by the silver mines passed through Lima on its way to the
Isthmus of Panama and from there to Seville, Spain. The rest of the viceroyalty
dependent upon Lima in administrative matters, in a pattern that persists until
today in Peru. By the start of 18th century, Lima had become a distinguished
and aristocratic colonial capital, seat of the 250-year-old Royal and
Pontifical University of San Marcos and the chief Spanish stronghold in the
Americas. At ground level during the first century, Spanish "encomenderos"
depended on local chieftains ("curacas") to gain access to the Indian
population's tribute labor, even the most remote settlements, and therefore,
many "encomenderos" developed reciprocal, if still hierarchical, relationships
with the "curacas". By the end of the 16th century the quasi-private
"encomienda" had been replaced by the "repartimiento" system (known in Peru by
the Quechua term, "mita"), which was controlled by local crown officials.
Politically the viceroyalty was further divided into "audiencias", which were
primarily superior tribunals, but which also had administrative and legislative
functions. Each of these was responsible to the Viceroy of Peru in
administrative matters (though not in judicial ones). Audiencias further
incorporated the older, smaller divisions known as "governorships"
("gobernaciones", roughly provinces) headed by a governor. "(See, Adelantado.)"
Provinces which were under military threat were grouped into captaincies
general, such as the Kingdom of Chile (established in 1541 and established as a
Bourbon captaincy general in 1789), and which were joint military and political
commands with a certain level of autonomy. (The viceroy was captain-general of
the provinces which remained directly under his command). At the local level
there were hundreds of districts, in both Indian and Spanish areas, which were
headed by either a "corregidor" (also known as an "alcalde mayor") or a
"cabildo" (town council), both of which had judicial and administrative powers.
In the late 18th century the Bourbon dynasty began phasing out the
"corregidores" and introduced intendants, whose broad fiscal powers cut into
the authority of the viceroys, governors and "cabildos". ("See Bourbon
Reforms.") Audiencias. Later Audiencias 1783Viceryoalty of Peru, Encycloepdia
Britannica. Academic edition. 2011. The huge amounts of silver exported from
the viceroyalty of Peru and Mexico had also a deep impact on Europe where it
believed by some scholars to have caused the so-called "price revolution".
Silver mining was carried out using the mita system of unfree labour, a system
inherited from pre-Hispanic times. Silver production peaked in 1610. Once the
Viceroyalty of Peru was established, gold and silver from the Andes enriched
the conquerors, and Peru became the principal source of Spanish wealth and
power in South America. The first coins minted for Peru (and indeed for South
America) appeared between 1568 and 1570. Viceroy Manuel de Oms y de Santa Pau
was able to send back an enormous sum of money (1,600,000 pesos) to the king to
cover some of the costs of the War of the Spanish Succession. This was possible
in part because of the discovery of the mines in Caraboya. The silver from
mines at Potosí, Bolivia circulated around the world. Peruvian and other New
World silver was so plentiful that it caused inflation in Spain and a collapse
in its price. Even today, Peru and Bolivia produce much of the world's silver.
Luis Jerónimo Fernández de Cabrera prohibited direct trade between Peru and
New Spain (Mexico) and the persecution of Portuguese Jews, the principal
traders in Lima. Demographics. A census taken by the last Quipucamayoc
indicated that there were 12 million inhabitants of Inca Peru; 45 years later,
under viceroy Toledo, the census figures amounted to only 1,100,000 Indians.
While the attrition was not an organized attempt at genocide, the results were
similar, largely resulting from smallpox and other Eurasian diseases to which
the natives had no immunity. Inca cities were given Spanish Christian names and
rebuilt as Spanish towns, each centered around a plaza with a church or
cathedral facing an official residence. A few Inca cities like Cuzco retained
native masonry for the foundations of their walls. Other Inca sites, like
Huanuco Viejo, were abandoned for cities at lower altitudes more hospitable to
the Spanish. Viceroy José de Armendáriz reestablished the system whereby Inca
nobles who could prove their ancestry were recognized as hijosdalgos of
Castile. This led to a frenzy on the part of the Indigenous nobility to
legitimate their status. In the 1790s Viceroy Francisco Gil de Taboada ordered
the first official census of the population. The last cargo of black slaves in
Peru was landed in 1806. At that time an adult male slave sold for 600 pesos.
Culture. Viceroy Francisco de Borja y Aragón reorganized the University of San
Marcos and Luis Jerónimo Fernández de Cabrera founded two chairs of medicine.
In the 1710s, Viceroy Diego Ladrón de Guevara established a chair of anatomy.
Teodoro de Croix and Francisco Gil de Taboada founded anatomy centers. In 1810
the medical school of San Fernando was founded. On the death of the Peruvian
astronomer Doctor Francisco Ruiz Lozano, Viceroy Melchor Liñán y Cisneros
(with the approval of the Crown) gave mathematics a permanent position in the
University of San Marcos. Mathematics was attached to the chair of cosmography.
Doctor Juan Ramón Koening, a Belgian by birth, was named to the chair.[http://
sisbib.unmsm.edu.pe/Bibvirtual/Tesis/Ingenie/Ccente_P_E/cap2.htm]. Viceroy
Manuel de Guirior created two new chairs at the university. Luis Enríquez de
Guzmán, 9th Count of Alba de Liste founded the Naval Academy of the colony.
Francisco Gil de Taboada supported the navigation school. Teodoro de Croix
began the Botanic Garden of Lima. Francisco de Borja y Aragón also founded, in
Cuzco, the "Colegio del Príncipe" for sons of the Indigenous nobility and the
"Colegio de San Francisco" for sons of the conquistadors. Manuel de Amat y
Juniet founded the Royal College of San Carlos. The first books printed in Peru
were produced by Antonio Ricardo, a printer from Turin who settled in Lima.
Diego de Benavides y de la Cueva built the first theater in Lima. Manuel de Oms
y de Santa Pau founded a literary academy in 1709 and promoted weekly literary
discussions in the palace that attracted some of Lima's best writers. These
included the famous Criollo scholar Pedro Peralta y Barnuevo and several
Indigenous poets. Oms introduced French and Italian fashions in the
viceroyalty. The Italian musician Rocco Cerruti (1688–1760) arrived in Peru.
Francisco Gil de Taboada supported the foundation of the newspaper "El Mercurio
Peruano" in 1791 and founded the Academy of Fine Arts. Jesuit Barnabé de Cobo
(1582–1657), who explored Mexico and Peru, brought the cinchona bark from
Lima to Spain in 1632, and afterwards to Rome and other parts of Italy. In 1737
Jorge Juan y Santacilia and Antonio de Ulloa, Spanish scientists sent by the
French Academy on a scientific mission to measure a degree of meridian arc at
the equator, arrived in the colony. They also had the mission of reporting on
disorganization and corruption in the government and smuggling. Their report
was published later, under the title "Noticias Secretas de América" ("Secret
News From America"). Manuel de Guirior assisted the scientific expedition of
Hipólito Ruiz López, José Antonio Pavón and Joseph Dombey, sent to study
the flora of the viceroyalty. The expedition lasted from 1777 to 1788. Their
findings were later published as "La flora peruana y chilena" ("The Flora of
Peru and Chile"). Again a major concern was stimulating the economy, which
Guirior did by adopting liberal measures in agriculture, mining, commerce and
industry. Another French influence on science in the colony was Louis Godin,
another member of the meridian expedition. He was appointed "cosmógrafo mayor"
by Viceroy Mendoza.[http://www.chimpum-callao.com/historia/manso.html] The
duties of "cosmógrafo mayor" included publishing almanacs and sailing
instructions. Another French scientist in Peru at this time was Charles Marie
de La Condamine. The Balmis Expedition arrived in Lima on May 23, 1806. At the
same time these viceroys adopted rigorous measures to suppress the thought of
the Encyclopedists and revolutionaries in the United States and France. In
1671, Saint Rose of Lima was canonized by Pope Clement X. Rose was the first
native-born American to become a Catholic saint. Pope Benedict XIII elevated
another two important Peruvian saints, Toribio Alfonso de Mogrovejo and
Francisco de Solano. Diego Quispe Tito was a famous artist before the age of
Independence.
