Weimar Republic The Weimar Republic ( ) is the name given by historians to the
federal republic and parliamentary representative democracy established in 1919
in Germany to replace the imperial form of government. It was named after
Weimar, the city where the constitutional assembly took place. Following World
War I, the republic emerged from the German Revolution in November 1918. In
1919, a national assembly was convened in Weimar, where a new constitution for
the German Reich was written, then adopted on 11 August of that same year. The
ensuing period of liberal democracy lapsed in the early 1930s, leading to the
ascent of the nascent Nazi Party and Adolf Hitler in 1933. The legal measures
taken by the Nazi government in February and March 1933, commonly known as
"Gleichschaltung" ("coordination") meant that the government could legislate
contrary to the constitution. The republic nominally continued to exist until
1945, as the constitution was never formally repealed. However, the measures
taken by the Nazis in the early part of their rule rendered the constitution
irrelevant. Thus, 1933 is usually seen as the end of the Weimar Republic and
the beginning of Hitler's Third Reich. In its 14 years the Weimar Republic
faced numerous problems, including hyperinflation, political extremists (with
paramilitaries – both left and right wing), and hostility from the victors of
World War I, who tried twice to restructure Germany's reparations payments
through the Dawes Plan and the Young Plan. However, it overcame many of the
requirements of the Treaty of Versailles (Germany eventually repaid a reduced
amount of the reparations required of the treaty, with the last payment being
made on 3 October 2010), reformed the currency, and unified tax politics and
the railway system, as well as having a unique cultural impact with its art,
music and cinema. Germany continued to lead the world in science and technology
during this period. Name. Despite its political form, the new republic was
still known as "Deutsches Reich" in German. This phrase was commonly translated
into English as "German Empire", although the German word "Reich" has a broader
range of connotations than the English "empire", so the name is most often
translated to the "German Reich" in English. The English word "realm" captures
broadly the same meaning. The common short form in English remained "Germany".
The Weimar Republic was named for the location where the assembly met. The
assembly met in Weimar, Germany from February 6, 1919 to August 11, 1919. Flag
and coat of arms. After the introduction of the republic, the flag and coat of
arms of Germany were altered to reflect the political changes. The republican
tricolour is based on the flag that the Paulskirche Constitution of 1849
introduced, which was decided upon by the German National Assembly in Frankfurt
upon Main, at the peak of the German civic movement that demanded parliamentary
participation and unification of the German states. The achievements and signs
of this movement were mostly done away with after its downfall and the
political reaction. Only the tiny German Principality of Waldeck-Pyrmont upheld
the tradition and continued to use the German colours called Schwarz-Rot-Gold
in German (). These signs had remained symbols of the Paulskirche movement and
Weimar Germany wanted to express its view of being also originated in that
political movement between 1848 and 1852. However, anti-republicans opposed
this flag. While the first German Confederal Navy ("Reichsflotte")
(1848–1852) had proudly used a naval ensign based on Schwarz-Rot-Gold, the
Weimar republic navy, or "Reichsmarine" (1918–1935) insisted on using the
pre-1918 colours of the previous Kaiserliche Marine (1871–1918), which were
Black-White-Red, as did the German merchant marine. The republican coat of arms
took up the idea of the German crest established by the Paulskirche movement,
using the same charge animal, an eagle, in the same colours (black, red and
gold), but modernising its form, including a reduction of the heads from two to
one. Friedrich Ebert initially declared the official German coat of arms to be
a design by Emil Doepler (shown in the infobox above) as of 11 November 1919,
following a decision of the German government. However, in 1928 the
"Reichswappen" (Reich's coat of arms) designed by Tobias Schwab (1887–1967)
in 1926 1924 replaced it as the official emblem for the German Olympic team.
The Reichswehr adopted the new Reichswappen in 1927. Doepler's design then
became the "Reichsschild" (Reich's escutcheon) with restricted use such as
pennant for government vehicles. In 1949 the Federal Republic of Germany (West
Germany) adopted all three signs of Weimar Republic, Reichswappen, Reichsschild
and Reichsflagge as Bundeswappen, Bundesschild and Bundesflagge. November
Revolution. In October 1918, the constitution of the German Empire was reformed
to introduce a parliamentary system similar to the British, but this soon
became obsolete. On 29 October, rebellion broke out in Kiel among sailors.
There, sailors, soldiers and workers began electing worker and soldier councils
("Arbeiter"- und "Soldatenräte") modeled after the soviets of the Russian
Revolution of 1917. The revolution spread throughout Germany, and participants
seized military and civil powers in individual cities. The power takeover was
achieved everywhere without loss of life and control was firmly in the hands of
the largest political party, the social democrats. Nevertheless, the rebellion
caused great fear in the establishment and in the middle classes because of the
Soviet Russia connotation of the councils. For the supporters of a monarchy,
the country seemed to be on the verge of a communist revolution. On 7 November,
the revolution had reached Munich, causing King Ludwig III of Bavaria to flee.
Groener, a self-appointed military expert in the MSPD was sent to Kiel to
prevent any further unrest and took on the task of controlling the mutinous
sailors and their supporters in the Kiel barracks. The sailors and soldiers,
inexperienced in matters of revolutionary combat, welcomed Groener as an
experienced politician and allowed him to negotiate a settlement, thus defusing
the initial anger of the revolutionaries in uniform. At the time, the
traditional political representation of the working class, the Social
Democratic Party, was divided into two major factions: one group, the
Independent Social Democrats called for immediate peace negotiations and
favoured a socialist system of industrial control. To keep their influence, the
remaining Majority Social Democrats (MSPD), who supported the war efforts and a
parliamentary system, decided to make use of their support at grass roots and
put themselves at the front of the movement, and on 7 November, demanded that
Kaiser Wilhelm II abdicate. When he refused, Prince Max of Baden simply
announced that he had done so and frantically attempted to establish a regency
under another member of the House of Hohenzollern. On 9 November 1918, the
"German Republic" was proclaimed by MSPD member Philipp Scheidemann at the
"Reichstag" building in Berlin, to the fury of Friedrich Ebert and James
Mitchell, the leaders of the MSPD, who thought that the question of monarchy or
republic should be answered by a national assembly. Two hours later, a "Free
Socialist Republic" was proclaimed, away, at the "Berliner Stadtschloss". The
proclamation was issued by Karl Liebknecht, co-leader (with Rosa Luxemburg) of
the communist Spartakusbund (Spartacist League), a group of a few hundred
supporters of the Russian revolution that had allied itself with the USPD in
1917. On 9 November, in a legally questionable act, "Reichskanzler" Prince Max
of Baden transferred his powers to Friedrich Ebert, who, shattered by the
monarchy's fall, reluctantly accepted. In view of the mass support for more
radical reforms among the workers's councils a coalition government called
"Council of People's Commissioners" ("Rat der Volksbeauftragten") was
established, consisting of three MSPD and three USPD members. Led by Ebert for
the MSPD and Hugo Haase for the USPD it sought to act as a provisional cabinet
of ministers. But the power question was unanswered. Although the new
government was confirmed by the Berlin worker and soldier council, it was
opposed by the Spartacist League. Ebert called for a National Congress of
Councils, which took place from 16 to 20 December 1918, and in which the MSPD
had the majority. Thus, Ebert was able to institute elections for a provisional
National Assembly that would be given the task of writing a democratic
constitution for parliamentary government, marginalizing the movement that
called for a socialist republic (see below). On 11 November, an armistice was
signed at Compiègne by German representatives. It effectively ended military
operations between the Allies and Germany. It amounted to German capitulation,
without any concessions by the Allies; the naval blockade would continue until
complete peace terms were agreed. From November 1918 to January 1919, Germany
was governed by the Council of People's Commissioners, under the leadership of
Ebert and Haase. It issued a large number of decrees that radically shifted
German policies. It introduced the eight-hour workday, domestic labour reform,
works councils, agricultural labour reform, right of civil-service
associations, local municipality social welfare relief (split between "Reich"
and States) and important national health insurance, re-instatement of
demobilised workers, protection from arbitrary dismissal with appeal as a
right, regulated wage agreement, and universal suffrage from 20 years of age in
all types of elections—local and national. To ensure his fledgling government
maintained control over the country, Ebert made an agreement with the OHL
(supreme army command), now led by Ludendorff's successor General Wilhelm
Groener. The 'Ebert–Groener pact' stipulated that the government would not
attempt to reform the army so long as the army swore to protect the state. On
the one hand, this agreement symbolised the acceptance of the new government by
the military, assuaging concern among the middle classes; on the other hand, it
was thought contrary to working-class interests by left wing social democrats
and communists, and was also opposed by the far right who believed democracy
would make Germany weaker. The new "Reichswehr" armed forces, limited by the
Treaty of Versailles to 100,000 army soldiers and 15,000 sailors, remained
fully under the control of the German Officer Class despite its nominal re-
organisation. As in other countries, it came to the permanent split in the
social democratic movement, into the democratic SPD and the Communists. There
was no revolution because the right wing of the socialist movement, led by
Ebert and Scheideman, supported the republic they had brought into being.
Combined action on the part of the socialists was not possible without action
from the millions of workers who stood midway between the parliamentarians and
the revolutionaries wanted to strengthen the powers of the workers' councils.
The rift between the two socialist parties became final after Ebert called upon
the OHL for troops to put down another Berlin army mutiny on 23 November 1918,
in which soldiers had captured the city's garrison commander and closed off the
"Reichskanzlei" where the Council of People's Commissioners was situated. The
ensuing street fighting left several dead and injured on both sides. The USPD
leaders were outraged by what they believed was treachery by the MSPD, which,
in their view, had joined with the anti-communist military to suppress the
revolution. Thus, the USPD left the Council of People's Commissioners after
only seven weeks. In December, the split deepened when the Communist Party of
Germany (KPD) was formed out of a number of radical left-wing groups, including
the left wing of the USPD and the "Spartacist League" group. In January, the
Spartacist League and others in the streets of Berlin made more armed attempts
to establish communism, known as the Spartacist uprising. Those attempts were
put down by paramilitary "Freikorps" units consisting of volunteer soldiers.
Bloody street fights culminated in the beating and shooting deaths of Rosa
Luxemburg and Karl Liebknecht after their arrests on 15 January. With the
affirmation of Ebert, those responsible were not tried before a court martial,
leading to lenient sentences, which made Ebert unpopular among radical
leftists. The National Assembly elections took place on 19 January 1919. In
this time, the radical left-wing parties, including the USPD and KPD, were
barely able to get themselves organized, leading to a solid majority of seats
for the MSPD moderate forces. To avoid the ongoing fights in Berlin, the
National Assembly convened in the city of Weimar, giving the future Republic
its unofficial name. The Weimar Constitution created a republic under a
parliamentary republic system with the "Reichstag" elected by proportional
representation. The democratic parties obtained a solid 80% of the vote. During
the debates in Weimar, fighting continued. A Soviet republic was declared in
Munich, but was quickly put down by "Freikorps" and remnants of the regular
army. The fall of the Munich Soviet Republic to these units, many of which were
situated on the extreme right, resulted in the growth of far-right movements
and organizations in Bavaria, including Organisation Consul, the NSDAP, and
societies of exiled Russian Monarchists. Sporadic fighting continued to flare
up around the country. In eastern provinces, forces loyal to Germany's fallen
Monarchy fought the republic, while militias of Polish nationalists fought for
independence: Great Poland Uprising in Provinz Posen and three Silesian
Uprisings in Upper Silesia. Germany lost the war because the country ran out of
allies and its economic resources were running out; support among the
population began to crumble in 1916 and by mid-1918 there was support for the
war only among the die-hard monarchists and conservatives. The decisive blow
came with the entry of the United States into the conflict, which made its vast
industrial resources available to the beleaguered allies. Nevertheless, the
German armies were still on French and Belgian territory when the war ended on
11 November. In a hearing on the reasons for Germany's defeat in 1920,
Hindenburg claimed that it was the defeatism of the civilian population that
had made defeat inevitable. The die-hard nationalists then blamed the civilians
for betraying the army and the surrender. This was the "Stab-in-the-back myth"
that was unceasingly propagated by the right in the 1920s and ensured that the
monarchists and conservatives would never support the government of the
"November criminals". Treaty of Versailles. The growing postwar economic crisis
was a result of lost pre-war industrial exports, the loss of supplies in raw
materials and foodstuffs from Alsace-Lorraine, Polish districts and the
colonies, along with worsening debt balances, but above all, the result of an
exorbitant issue of promissory notes raising money to pay for the war.
Military-industrial activity had almost ceased, although controlled
demobilisation kept unemployment at around one million. The fact that the
Allies continued to blockade Germany until after the Treaty of Versailles did
not help matters, either. The allies permitted only low import levels of goods
that most Germans could not afford. After four years of war and famine, many
German workers were exhausted, physically impaired and discouraged. Millions
were disenchanted with capitalism and hoping for a new era. Meanwhile, the
currency depreciated. The currency would continue to depreciate following the
French invasion of the Ruhr. The German peace delegation in France signed the
Treaty of Versailles, accepting mass reductions of the German military, the
prospect of substantial war reparations payments to the victorious allies, and
the controversial "War Guilt Clause". Adolf Hitler later blamed the republic
and its democracy for the oppressive terms of this treaty. The Republic's first
"Reichspräsident" ("Reich President"), Friedrich Ebert of the SPD, signed the
new German constitution into law on 11 August 1919. The new post-World War I
Germany, stripped of all colonies, became 13.3% smaller in its European
territory than its imperial predecessor. Of these losses, a large proportion
consisted of provinces that were originally Polish and Alsace-Lorraine, seized
by Germany in 1870, where Germans constituted only part or a minority of local
populations despite nationalist outrage at the fragmentation of Germany. Allied
Rhineland occupation. The occupation of the Rhineland took place following the
Armistice with Germany of 11 November 1918. The occupying armies consisted of
American, Belgian, British and French forces. In 1920, under massive French
pressure, the Saar was separated from the Rhine Province and administered by
the League of Nations until a plebiscite in 1935, when the region was returned
to the German Reich. At the same time, in 1920, the districts of Eupen and
Malmedy were transferred to Belgium (see German-Speaking Community of Belgium).
Shortly after, France completely occupied the Rhineland, strictly controlling
all important industrial areas, executing workers that peacefully refused to
work. Years of crisis (1919–1923). The Republic was soon under attack from
both left- and right-wing sources. The radical left accused the ruling Social
Democrats of having betrayed the ideals of the workers' movement by preventing
a communist revolution and sought to overthrow the Republic and do so
themselves. Various right-wing sources opposed any democratic system,
preferring an authoritarian, autocratic state like the 1871 Empire. To further
undermine the Republic's credibility, some right-wingers (especially certain
members of the former officer corps) also blamed an alleged conspiracy of
Socialists and Jews for Germany's defeat in World War I. In the next five
years, the central government, assured of the support of the Reichswehr, dealt
severely with the occasional outbreaks of violence in Germany's large cities.
The left claimed that the Social Democrats had betrayed the ideals of the
revolution, while the army and the government-financed "Freikorps" committed
hundreds of acts of gratuitous violence against striking workers. The first
challenge to the Weimar Republic came when a group of communists and anarchists
took over the Bavarian government in Munich and declared the creation of the
Bavarian Soviet Republic. The uprising was brutally attacked by "Freikorps",
which consisted mainly of ex-soldiers dismissed from the army and who were
well-paid to put down forces of the Far Left. The "Freikorps" was an army
outside the control of the government, but they were in close contact with
their allies in the Reichswehr. The Kapp-Luttwitz Putsch took place on 13 March
1920: 5000 "Freikorps" soldiers occupied Berlin and installed Wolfgang Kapp (a
right-wing journalist) as chancellor. The national government fled to Stuttgart
and called for a general strike against the putsch. The strike meant that no
"official" pronouncements could be published, and with the civil service out on
strike, the Kapp government collapsed after only four days on 17 March.
Inspired by the general strikes, a workers' uprising began in the Ruhr region
when 50,000 people formed a "Red Army" and took control of the province. The
regular army and the "Freikorps" ended the uprising on their own authority. The
rebels were campaigning for an extension of the plans to nationalise major
industries and supported the national government, but the S.P.D. leaders did
not want to lend support to the growing USPD, who favoured the establishment of
a socialist regime. The repression of an uprising of S.P.D. supporters by the
reactionary forces in the "Freikorps" on the instructions of the S.P.D.
ministers was to become a major source of conflict within the socialist
movement and thus contributed to the weakening of the only group which could
have withstood the National Socialist movement. Other rebellions were put down
in March 1921 in Saxony and Hamburg. In 1922, Germany signed the Treaty of
Rapallo with the Soviet Union, which allowed Germany to train military
personnel in exchange for giving Russia military technology. This was against
the Treaty of Versailles, which limited Germany to 100,000 soldiers and no
conscription, naval forces of 15,000 men, twelve destroyers, six battleships,
and six cruisers, no submarines or aircraft. However, Russia had pulled out of
World War I against the Germans as a result of the 1917 Russian Revolution, and
was excluded from the League of Nations. Thus, Germany seized the chance to
make an ally. Walther Rathenau, the Jewish Foreign Minister who signed the
treaty, was assassinated two months later by two ultra-nationalist army
officers. Hyperinflation. In the early postwar years, inflation was growing at
an alarming rate, but the government simply printed more and more banknotes to
pay the bills. By 1923, the Republic claimed it could no longer afford the
reparations payments required by the Versailles Treaty, and the government
defaulted on some payments. In response, French and Belgian troops occupied the
Ruhr region, Germany's most productive industrial region at the time, taking
control of most mining and manufacturing companies in January 1923. Strikes
were called, and passive resistance was encouraged. These strikes lasted eight
months, further damaging the economy and the social life. The strike prevented
some goods from being produced, but one industrialist, Hugo Stinnes, was able
to create a vast empire out of bankrupt companies. Because the production costs
in Germany were falling almost hourly, the prices for German products were
unbeatable. Stinnes made sure that he was paid in dollars, which meant that by
mid-1923, his industrial empire was worth more than the entire German economy.
By the end of the year, over two hundred factories were working full-time to
produce paper for the spiralling bank note production. Stinnes' empire
collapsed when the government-sponsored inflation was stopped in November 1923.
In 1919, one loaf of bread cost 1 mark; by 1923 the same loaf of bread cost 100
billion marks. Since striking workers were paid benefits by the state, much
additional currency was printed, fueling a period of hyperinflation. The 1920s
German inflation started when Germany had no goods to trade. The government
printed money to deal with the crisis; this meant payments within Germany were
made with worthless paper money, and helped formerly great industrialists to
pay back their own loans. This also led to pay raises for workers and for
businessmen who wanted to profit from it. Circulation of money rocketed, and
soon banknotes were being overprinted to a thousand times their nominal value
and every town produced its own promissory notes; many banks & industrial firms
did the same. The value of the Papiermark had declined from 4.2 per U.S. dollar
at the outbreak of World War I to 1 million per dollar by August 1923. This led
to further criticism of the Republic. On 15 November 1923, a new currency, the
Rentenmark, was introduced at the rate of 1 trillion (1,000,000,000,000)
Papiermark for one Rentenmark, an action known as a monetary reset. At that
time, one U.S. dollar was equal to 4.2 Rentenmark. Reparation payments resumed,
and the Ruhr was returned to Germany under the Locarno Pact, which defined a
border between Germany, France and Belgium. Further pressure from the right
came in 1923 with the Beer Hall Putsch, also called the Munich Putsch, staged
by the NSDAP under Adolf Hitler in Munich. In 1920, the German Workers' Party
had become the National Socialist German Workers' Party (NSDAP), or Nazi Party,
and would become a driving force in the collapse of Weimar. Hitler named
himself chairman of the party in July 1921. On 8 November 1923, the
"Kampfbund", in a pact with Erich Ludendorff, took over a meeting by Bavarian
prime minister Gustav von Kahr at a beer hall in Munich. Ludendorff and Hitler
declared that the Weimar government was deposed and that they were planning to
take control of Munich the following day. The 3,000 rebels were thwarted by the
Bavarian authorities. Hitler was arrested and sentenced to five years in prison
for high treason, a minimum sentence for the charge. In the event, he served
less than eight months in a comfortable cell, receiving a daily stream of
visitors before his release on 20 December 1924. While in jail, Hitler dictated
"Mein Kampf", which laid out his ideas and future policies. Hitler now decided
to focus on legal methods of gaining power. Military. After the dissolution of
the Imperial army, the "Reichswehr", in 1918, Germany's military forces
consisted of irregular paramilitaries, namely the various right-wing
"Freikorps" groups composed of veterans from the war. The "Freikorps" were
formally disbanded in 1920 (although continued to exist in underground groups),
and on January 1, 1921, the "Reichswehr" (literally; "Defence of the realm")
was created. The Treaty of Versailles limited the size of the "Reichswehr" to
100 000 soldiers (consisting of seven infantry divisions and three cavalry
divisions), 10 armoured cars and a navy (the "Reichsmarine") restricted to 24
ships. No aircraft of any kind was allowed. The main advantage of this
limitation however was that the "Reichswehr" could afford to pick the best
recruits for service. However with inefficient armour and no air support, the
"Reichswehr" would have had limited combat abilities. Privates were mainly
recruited from the countryside, as it was believed that young men from the
towns were prone to socialist behaviour, which would fray the loyalty of the
privates to their conservative officers. Although technically in service of the
republic, the army was predominately officered by conservative reactionaries
who were sympathetic to right wing organizations. Hans von Seeckt, the head of
the "Reichswehr", declared that the army was not loyal to the democratic
republic, and would only defend it if it were in their interests. During the
Kapp Putsch for example, the army refused to fire upon the rebels. However, as
right wing as the army was, it hesitated to assist the Nazis, whom they mostly
viewed as thugs. The SA was the "Reichswehr's" main opponent throughout its
existence, as they saw them as a threat to their existence, and the army fired
at them during the Beerhall Putsch. Upon the establishment of the SS over the
SA in 1929, the "Reichswehr" took a softer look upon the Nazis since the SS
seemed more respectable, and openly favoured order over anarchy. In 1935,
several years after Hitler came to power, the "Reichswehr" was disbanded and
re-formed as the "Wehrmacht". Golden Era (1924–1929). Gustav Stresemann was
"Reichskanzler" for 100 days in 1923, and served as foreign minister from
1923–1929, a period of relative stability for the Weimar Republic, known in
Germany as "Goldene Zwanziger" ("Golden Twenties"). Prominent features of this
period were a growing economy and a consequent decrease in civil unrest. Once
civil stability had been restored, Stresemann began stabilising the German
currency, which promoted confidence in the German economy and helped the
recovery that was so ardently needed for the German nation to keep up with
their reparation repayments, while at the same time feeding and supplying the
nation. Once the economic situation had stabilised, Stresemann could begin
putting a permanent currency in place, called the "Rentenmark" (1924), which
again contributed to the growing level of international confidence in the
German economy. To help Germany meet reparation obligations, the Dawes Plan
(1924) was created. This was an agreement between American banks and the German
government in which the American banks lent money to German banks with German
assets as collateral to help it pay reparations. The German railways, the
National Bank and many industries were therefore mortgaged as securities for
the stable currency and the loans. Shortly after, the French and Germans agreed
that the borders between their countries would not be changed by force, which
meant that the Treaty of Versailles was being diluted by the signing countries.
Other foreign achievements were the evacuation of the Ruhr in 1925 and the 1925
Treaty of Berlin, which reinforced the Treaty of Rapallo in 1922 and improved
relations between the Soviet Union and Germany. In 1926, Germany was admitted
to the League of Nations as a permanent member, improving her international
standing and giving her the ability to veto League of Nations legislation.
However, this progress was funded by overseas loans, increasing the nation's
debts, while overall trade increased and unemployment fell. Stresemann's
reforms did not relieve the underlying weaknesses of Weimar but gave the
appearance of a stable democracy. The major weakness in constitutional terms
was the inherent instability of the coalitions. The growing dependence on
American finance was to prove dangerous, and Germany was one of the worst hit
nations in the Wall Street Crash of 1929. The 1920s saw a remarkable cultural
renaissance in Germany. During the worst phase of hyperinflation in 1923, the
clubs and bars were full of speculators who spent their daily profits so they
wouldn't lose the value the following day. Berlin intellectuals responded by
condemning the excesses of capitalism, and demand revolutionary changes on the
cultural scenery. Influenced by the brief cultural explosion in the Soviet
Union, German literature, cinema, theatre and music worlds entered a phase of
great creativity. Innovative street theatre brought plays to the public, the
cabaret scene and jazz band became very popular. According to the cliché,
modern young women were Americanised, wearing makeup, short hair, smoking and
breaking with traditional mores. The euphoria surrounding Josephine Baker in
the metropolis Berlin for instance, declared "erotic goddess" and in many ways
admired and respected, kindled further "ultramodern" sensations in the minds of
the German public. A new type of architecture taught at "Bauhaus" schools, and
Art reflected the new ideas of the time, with artists such as George Grosz
being fined for defaming the military and for blasphemy. Artists in Berlin were
influenced by other contemporary progressive cultural movements, such as the
Impressionist and Expressionist painters in Paris, as well as the Cubists.
Likewise, American progressive architects were admired. Many of the new
buildings built during this era followed a straight-lined, geometrical style.
Examples of the new architecture include the Bauhaus Building by Gropius,
Grosses Schauspielhaus, and the Einstein Tower. Not everyone, however, was
happy with the changes taking place in Weimar culture. Conservatives and
reactionaries feared that Germany was betraying her traditional values by
adopting popular styles from abroad, particularly the U.S. Hollywood
popularised American film, while New York became the global capital of fashion.
Germany was more susceptible to Americanisation, because of the close economic
links brought about by the Dawes plan. In 1929, three years after receiving the
1926 Nobel Peace Prize, Stresemann died of a heart attack at age 51. When
stocks on the New York Stock Exchange crashed in October, the inevitable knock-
on effects on the German economy brought the "Golden Twenties" to an abrupt
end. Decline (1930–1933). Economic instability. In 1929, the onset of the
depression in the United States of America produced a severe shock wave in
Germany. The economy was supported by the granting of loans through the Dawes
Plan (1924) and the Young Plan (1929). When American banks withdrew their loans
to German companies the onset of severe unemployment could not be stopped by
conventional economic measures. Unemployment grew rapidly and in September 1930
a political earthquake shook the republic to its foundations. The NSDAP entered
the Reichstag with 19% of the popular vote and made the fragile coalition
system by which every chancellor had governed, unworkable. The last years of
the Weimar Republic were stamped by even more political instability than in the
previous years. The administrations of Chancellors Brüning, Papen, Schleicher
and Hitler (from 30 January to 23 March 1933) governed through presidential
decree, rather than through consultation with the "Reichstag" (the German
parliament). The finance expert Heinrich Brüning was appointed as successor of
Chancellor Müller by "Reichspräsident" Paul von Hindenburg on 29 March 1930,
after months of political lobbying by General Kurt von Schleicher on behalf of
the military. The new government was expected to lead a political shift towards
conservatism, based on the emergency powers granted to the "Reichspräsident"
by the constitution, since it had no majority support in the "Reichstag". After
a bill to reform the Reich's finances was opposed by the "Reichstag",
Hindenburg established the bill as an emergency decree based on Article 48 of
the constitution. On 18 July, the bill was again invalidated by a slim majority
in the "Reichstag" with the support of the SPD, KPD, the (then small) NSDAP and
DNVP. Immediately afterwards, Brüning submitted to the "Reichstag" the
president's decree that it would be dissolved. The "Reichstag" general
elections on 14 September resulted in an enormous political shift: 18.3% of the
vote went to the Nazis, five times the percentage compared to 1928. It was no
longer possible to form a pro-republican majority in the "Reichstag", not even
a Grand Coalition of all major parties except the KPD, NSDAP and DNVP. This
encouraged the supporters of the Nazis to force their claim to power by
increasing organization of public demonstrations and paramilitary violence
against rival paramilitary groups. From 1930–1932, Brüning tried to reform
the devastated state without a majority in Parliament, governing with the help
of the President's emergency decrees. During that time, the Great Depression
reached its low point. In line with conservative economic theory that less
government spending would spur economic growth, Brüning drastically cut state
expenditures, including in the social sector. He expected and accepted that the
economic crisis would, for a while, deteriorate before things would improve.
Among others, the "Reich" completely halted all public grants to the obligatory
unemployment insurance (which had been introduced only in 1927), which resulted
in higher contributions by the workers and fewer benefits for the unemployed.
The bulk of German capitalists and land-owners originally supported the
conservative experiment: not from any personal liking for Brüning, but
believing the conservatives would best serve their interests. But as the mass
of the working class and middle classes turned against Brüning, more of the
great capitalists and landowners declared themselves in favour of his
opponents—Hitler and Hugenberg. By late 1931, conservatism as a movement was
dead, and the time was coming when Hindenburg and the "Reichswehr" would drop
Brüning and come to terms with Hugenberg and Hitler. Although Hindenburg
disliked Hugenberg and despised Hitler, he was no less a supporter of the sort
of anti-democratic counter-revolution represented by the DNVP and NSDAP. On 30
May 1932, Brüning resigned after no longer having Hindenburg's support. Five
weeks earlier, Hindenburg had been re-elected "Reichspräsident" with
Brüning's active support, running against Hitler (the president was directly
elected by the people while the "Reichskanzler" was not). The Von Papen deal.
Hindenburg then appointed Franz von Papen as new "Reichskanzler". Von Papen
lifted the ban on the NSDAP's SA paramilitary, imposed after the street riots,
in an unsuccessful attempt to secure the backing of Hitler. Von Papen was
closely associated with the industrialist and land-owning classes, and pursued
an extreme Conservative policy along Hindenburg's lines. He appointed as
"Reichswehr" Minister Kurt von Schleicher, and all the members of the new
cabinet were of the same political opinion as Hindenburg. This government was
expected to assure itself of the co-operation of Hitler. Since the Republicans
were not yet ready to take action, the Communists did not want to support the
republic, and the Conservatives had shot their political bolt, Hitler and
Hugenberg were certain to achieve power. Elections of July 1932. Because most
parties opposed the new government, von Papen had the "Reichstag" dissolved and
called for new elections. The general elections on 31 July 1932 yielded major
gains for the KPD and the NSDAP (the Nazis), who won 37.2% of the vote,
supplanting the Social Democrats as the largest party in the "Reichstag". The
new question was what part the now immense Nazi Party would play in the
Government of the country. The Nazi party owed its huge increase to growing
support from middle-class people, whose traditional parties were swallowed up
by the Nazi Party. The millions of radical adherents at first forced the Party
towards the Left. They wanted a renewed Germany and a new organisation of
German society. The left of the Nazi party strove desperately against any drift
into the train of such capitalist and feudal reactionaries. Therefore Hitler
refused ministry under Papen, and demanded the chancellorship for himself, but
was rejected by Hindenburg on 13 August 1932. There was still no majority in
the "Reichstag" for any government; as a result, the "Reichstag" was dissolved
and elections took place once more in the hope that a stable majority would
result. Cabinet Schleicher. The 6 November 1932 elections yielded 33.1% for the
Nazis, two million voters fewer than in the previous election. Franz von Papen
stepped down and was succeeded by General Kurt von Schleicher as
"Reichskanzler" on 3 December. Schleicher, a political army officer, had
developed in an atmosphere of semi-obscurity and intrigue that encompassed the
Republican military policy. He had for years been in the camp of those
supporting the Conservative counter-revolution. Schleicher's bold and
unsuccessful plan was to build a majority in the "Reichstag" by uniting the
trade unionist left wings in the various parties, including that of the Nazis
led by Gregor Strasser. This did not prove successful either. In this brief
Presidential Dictatorship entr'acte, Schleicher took the role of 'Socialist
General', and entered into relations with the Christian Trade Unions, the left-
wing members of the Nazi party and even with the Social Democrats. Schleicher
planned for a sort of labour government under his Generalship. But the
"Reichswehr" officers were not prepared for this, the working class had a
natural distrust of their future allies, and great capitalists and landowners
did not like the plans. The SPD and KPD could have achieved success building on
a Berlin transport strike. Hitler learned from von Papen that the general had
no authority to abolish the "Reichstag" parliament, whereas any majority of
seats did. The cabinet (under a previous interpretation of Article 48) ruled
without a sitting Reichstag, which could vote only for its own dissolution.
Hitler also learned that all past crippling Nazi debts were to be relieved by
German big business. On 22 January, Hitler's efforts to persuade Oskar von
Hindenburg (the President's son) included threats to bring criminal charges
over estate taxation irregularities at the President's Neudeck estate (although
extra were soon allotted to Hindenburg's property). Outmaneuvered by von Papen
and Hitler on plans for the new cabinet, and having lost Hindenburg's
confidence, Schleicher asked for new elections. On 28 January, von Papen
described Hitler to Paul von Hindenburg as only a minority part of an
alternative, von Papen-arranged government. The four great political movements,
the SPD, KPD, Centre, and the Nazis were in opposition. On 29 January, Hitler
and von Papen thwarted a last-minute threat of an officially sanctioned
"Reichswehr" takeover, and on 30 January 1933 Hindenburg accepted the new
Papen-Nationalist-Hitler coalition with the Nazis holding only three of 11
Cabinet seats. Later that day, the first cabinet meeting was attended by only
two political parties, representing a minority in the "Reichstag": The Nazis
and the DNVP led by Alfred Hugenberg (196 + 52 seats). Eyeing the Catholic
Centre Party's 70 (+ 20 BVP) seats, Hitler refused their leader's demands for
constitutional "concessions" (amounting to protection) and planned for
dissolution of the "Reichstag". Hindenburg, despite his misgivings about the
Nazis' goals and about Hitler as a person, reluctantly agreed to Papen's theory
that, with Nazi popular support on the wane, Hitler could now be controlled as
chancellor. This date, dubbed by the Nazis as the "Machtergreifung" (seizure of
power) by Nazi propaganda, is commonly seen as the beginning of Nazi Germany.
However, the phase of German history in which the democratic principles of the
constitution and personal liberty came to an end, was the appointment of
Brüning as Chancellor by Hindenburg. Hitler's chancellorship (1933). Hitler
was sworn in as Chancellor on the morning of 30 January 1933 in what some
observers later described as a brief and indifferent ceremony. By early
February, a mere week after Hitler's assumption of the chancellorship, the
government had begun to clamp down on the opposition. Meetings of the left-wing
parties were banned and even some of the moderate parties found their members
threatened and assaulted. Measures with an appearance of legality suppressed
the Communist Party in mid-February and included the plainly illegal arrests of
"Reichstag" deputies. The Reichstag Fire on 27 February was blamed by Hitler's
government on the Communists. Hitler used the ensuing state of emergency to
obtain the assent of President von Hindenburg to issue the Reichstag Fire
Decree the following day. The decree invoked Article 48 of the Weimar
Constitution and "indefinitely suspended" a number of constitutional
protections of civil liberties, allowing the Nazi government to take swift
action against political meetings, arresting and killing the Communists. Hitler
and the Nazis exploited the German state's broadcasting and aviation facilities
in a massive attempt to sway the electorate, but this election yielded a scant
majority of 16 seats for the coalition. At the "Reichstag" elections, which
took place on 5 March, the NSDAP obtained 17 million votes. The Communist,
Social Democrat and Catholic Centre votes stood firm. This was the last multi-
party election until the end of the Third Reich 12 years later and the last
all-German election for 57 years. Hitler addressed disparate interest groups,
stressing the necessity for a definitive solution to the perpetual instability
of the Weimar Republic. He now blamed Germany's problems on the Communists,
even threatening their lives on 3 March. Former Chancellor Heinrich Brüning
proclaimed that his Centre Party would resist any constitutional change and
appealed to the President for an investigation of the "Reichstag" fire.
Hitler's successful plan was to induce what remained of the now Communist-
depleted Reichstag to grant him, and the Government, the authority to issue
decrees with the force of law. The hitherto Presidential Dictatorship hereby
was to give itself a new legal form. On 15 March, the first cabinet meeting was
attended by the two coalition parties, representing a minority in the
"Reichstag": The Nazis and the DNVP led by Alfred Hugenberg (196 + 52 seats).
According to the Nuremberg Trials, this cabinet meeting's first order of
business was how at last to achieve the complete counter-revolution by means of
the constitutionally allowed Enabling Act, requiring ⅔ parliamentary
majority. This Act would, and did, lead Hitler and the NSDAP toward his goal of
unfettered dictatorial powers. Hitler cabinet meeting in mid-March. At the
meeting of the new cabinet on 15 March, Hitler introduced the Enabling Act,
which would have authorised the cabinet to enact legislation without the
approval of the "Reichstag". Meanwhile, the only remaining question for the
Nazis was whether the Catholic Centre Party ("Zentrum") would support the
Enabling Act in the "Reichstag", thereby providing the ⅔ majority required to
ratify a law that amended the constitution. Hitler expressed his confidence to
win over the Centre's votes. Hitler is recorded at the Nuremberg Trials as
being sure of eventual Centre Party Germany capitulation and thus rejecting of
the DNVP's suggestions to "balance" the majority through further arrests, this
time of Social Democrats. Hitler however assured his coalition partners that
arrests would resume after the elections and, in fact, some 26 SPD Social
Democrats were physically removed. After meeting with Centre leader Monsignor
Ludwig Kaas and other Centre Trade Union leaders daily and denying them a
substantial participation in the government, negotiation succeeded in respect
of guarantees towards Catholic civil-servants and education issues. At the last
internal Centre meeting prior to the debate on the Enabling Act, Kaas expressed
no preference or suggestion on the vote, but as a way of mollifying opposition
by Centre members to the granting of further powers to Hitler, Kaas somehow
arranged for a letter of constitutional guarantee from Hitler himself prior to
his voting with the centre "en bloc" in favor of the Enabling Act. This
guarantee was not ultimately given. Kaas, the party's chairman since 1928, had
strong connections to the Vatican Secretary of State, later Pope Pius XII. In
return for pledging his support for the act, Kaas would use his connections
with the Vatican to set in train and draft the Holy See's long desired
"Reichskonkordat" with Germany (only possible with the co-operation of the
Nazis). Ludwig Kaas is considered along with von Papen as being one of the two
most important political figures in the creation of a National Socialist
dictatorship. Enabling Act negotiations. On 20 March, negotiation began between
Hitler and Frick on one side and the Catholic Centre Party ("Zentrum")
leaders—Kaas, Stegerwald and Hackelsburger on the other. The aim was to
settle on conditions under which Centre would vote in favor of the Enabling
Act. Because of the Nazis' narrow majority in the "Reichstag", Centre's support
was necessary to receive the required two-thirds majority vote. On 22 March,
the negotiations concluded; Hitler promised to continue the existence of the
German states, agreed not to use the new grant of power to change the
constitution, and promised to retain "Zentrum" members in the civil service.
Hitler also pledged to protect the Catholic confessional schools and to respect
the concordats signed between the Holy See and Bavaria (1924), Prussia (1929)
and Baden (1931). Hitler also agreed to mention these promises in his speech to
the "Reichstag" before the vote on the Enabling Act. The ceremonial opening of
the "Reichstag" on 21 March was held at the Garrison Church in Potsdam, a
shrine of Prussianism, in the presence of many Junker landowners and
representatives of the imperial military caste. This impressive and often
emotional spectacle—orchestrated by Joseph Goebbels—aimed to link Hitler's
government with Germany's imperial past and portray National Socialism as a
guarantor of the nation's future. The ceremony helped convince the "old guard"
Prussian military elite of Hitler's homage to their long tradition and, in
turn, produced the relatively convincing view that Hitler's government had the
support of Germany's traditional protector—the Army. Such support would
publicly signal a return to conservatism to curb the problems affecting the
Weimar Republic, and that stability might be at hand. In a cynical and
politically adroit move, Hitler bowed in apparently respectful humility before
President and Field Marshal von Hindenburg. Passage of the Enabling Act. The
"Reichstag" convened on 23 March 1933, and in the midday opening, Hitler made a
historic speech, appearing outwardly calm and conciliatory. Hitler presented an
appealing prospect of respect towards Christianity by paying tribute to the
Christian faiths as "essential elements for safeguarding the soul of the German
people". He promised to respect their rights and declared his government's
"ambition is a peaceful accord between Church and State" and that he hoped "to
improve our friendly relations with the Holy See." This speech aimed especially
at the future recognition by the named Holy See and therefore to the votes of
the Centre Party addressing many concerns Kaas had voiced during the previous
talks. Kaas is considered to have had a hand therefore in the drafting of the
speech. Kaas is also reported as voicing the Holy See's desire for Hitler as
bulwark against atheistic Russian nihilism previously as early as May 1932.
Hitler promised that the Act did not threaten the existence of either the
"Reichstag" or the "Reichsrat", that the authority of the President remained
untouched and that the Länder would not be abolished. Of course, all the
promises would be broken soon enough, but they served their purpose. During an
adjournment, the other parties (notably the Centre) met to discuss their
intentions. In the debate prior to the vote on the Enabling Act, Hitler
orchestrated the full political menace of his paramilitary forces like the
storm troopers in the streets to intimidate reluctant "Reichstag" deputies into
approving the Enabling Act. The Communists' 81 seats had been empty since the
"Reichstag" Fire Decree and other lesser known procedural measures, thus
excluding their anticipated "No" votes from the balloting. Otto Wels, the
leader of the Social Democrats, whose seats were similarly depleted from 120 to
below 100, was the only speaker to defend democracy and in a futile but brave
effort to deny Hitler the ⅔ majority, he made a speech critical of the
abandonment of democracy to dictatorship. At this, Hitler could no longer
restrain his wrath. In his retort to Wels, Hitler abandoned earlier pretence at
calm statesmanship and delivered a characteristic screaming diatribe, promising
to exterminate all Communists in Germany and threatening Wels' Social Democrats
as well. He did not even want their support for the bill. "Germany will become
free, but not through you," he shouted. Meanwhile Hitler's promised written
guarantee to Monsignor Kaas was being typed up, it was asserted to Kaas, and
thereby Kaas was persuaded to silently deliver the Centre bloc's votes for the
Enabling Act anyway. The Act—formally titled the "Act for the Removal of
Distress from People and Reich"—was passed by a vote of 441 to 94. Only the
SPD had voted against the Act. Every other member of the "Reichstag", whether
from the largest or the smallest party, voted in favor of the Act. It went into
effect the following day, 24 March. Aftermath. The passage of the Enabling Act
of 1933 is widely considered to mark the end of the Weimar Republic and the
beginning of the Third Reich. It empowered the cabinet to legislate without the
approval of Reichstag or the President, and to enact laws that were contrary to
the constitution. Before the March 1933 elections Hitler had persuaded
Hindenburg to promulgate the Reichstag Fire Decree using Article 48, which
empowered the government to restrict "the rights of habeas corpus [...] freedom
of the press, the freedom to organize and assemble, the privacy of postal,
telegraphic and telephonic communications" and legalised search warrants and
confiscation "beyond legal limits otherwise prescribed". This was intended to
forestall any action against the government by the Communists. Hitler used the
provisions of the Enabling Act to pre-empt possible opposition to his
dictatorship from other sources, in which he was mostly successful. The process
of bringing all major organisations into line with Nazi principles and into the
service of the state was called "Gleichschaltung". "Gleichschaltung" is usually
translated as "coordination", but sometimes as "forcible coordination". It is a
compound word, consisting of "gleich", meaning "alike", and "schaltung", which
means "switching". The NSDAP meant to imply a particular mechanical meaning of
the word: a certain means of wiring an electrical generator and electric
motors, so that when the generator is made to turn at a given speed or turned
to a certain angle, each motor connected to it will also turn at that speed, or
to the same angle—in other words, synchronization. The NSDAP was thought of
as the generator, and other civil groups as motors wired to it. Hitler's
cabinet issued many decrees for the purpose of "Gleichschaltung" in the weeks
following the passage of the Act. It removed Jews from the civil service (at
Hindenburg's request, an exception was made for Jews who had served at the
front during World War I). It banned all trade unions and eventually outlawed
all other political parties. After the exiled SPD published its new weekly
"Neuer Vorwarts" in Prague, Hitler banned the party, confiscating its assets
and abolishing its parliamentary representation, by decree of 22 June. However,
opposition was frequently not addressed by legislation at all. The process of
"Gleichschaltung" was often voluntary, or in any event not mandated by a formal
decree. Most other parties had dissolved before being officially banned: the
NSDAP's coalition partner, the DNVP, dissolved on 27 June, one day after
Hugenberg's resignation from the cabinet. The "Staatspartei" (formerly the DDP)
dissolved itself on 28 June and the DVP on 29 June. On 4–5 July, the Catholic
parties (the BVP and the Centre) also wound up. By the time the formal decree
banned the creation of new parties, there were none left except the NSDAP.
Kershaw p. 469. Willing "Gleichschaltung" was termed "Selbstgleichschaltung" or
"self-coordination". There was a rush to join the NSDAP, overrunning the
party's ability to process applications: on 1 May, the party announced that it
was suspending the admission of new members. The party's membership had
increased to 2.5 million, from about 900,000 at the end of January. Many
prominent intellectuals allied themselves with the new government: the
country's most famous philosopher, Martin Heidegger and its most prominent
constitutional scholar, Carl Schmitt, spoke in favour of it, and Heidegger
became the sponsor of a manifesto of German professors pledging allegiance to
"Adolf Hitler and the National Socialist State." Lists were prepared of writers
whose works were unacceptable in the "New Order", including Freud, Einstein and
Brecht. On the evening of 10 May, under the leadership of the German Students'
Association and without substantial protest by the university faculties, some
20,000 volumes were burned at Berlin's Opernplatz. The Reichswehr had, however,
remained mostly untouched by "Gleichschaltung". It was not until Hindenburg's
death in August 1934 that all military personnel swore an oath of loyalty
directly to Hitler, instead of to the constitution. Thereafter, the military
came under gradually increasing pressure to align itself with NSDAP ideology,
but it never entirely capitulated. Likewise, the holdings of industrialists and
aristocratic "Junker" landowners remained for the most part untouched, whilst
the administrative and judicial machinery was only very slightly tampered with.
The Nazi efforts to "co-ordinate" the Christian churches (both Roman Catholic
and Protestant) were mostly unsuccessful, and were largely abandoned. However,
the churches as a whole did not present any serious opposition to Hitler.
Aftermath. The constitution of 1919 was never formally repealed, but the
Enabling Act meant that it was a dead letter. The Enabling Act itself was
breached by Hitler on three occasions in 1934: Article 2 of the act stated that
'Laws enacted by the government of the Reich may deviate from the constitution
as long as they do not affect the institutions of the Reichstag and the
Reichsrat. The rights of the President remain undisturbed.' The powers of the
Länder (states) were transferred to the central government, rendering the
"Reichsrat" obsolete. A month later, the "Reichsrat" itself was dissolved.
President von Hindenburg died in August, and Hitler appropriated the
president's powers for himself. The Enabling Act did not specify any recourse
that could be taken if the chancellor violated Article 2, and no judicial
challenge ensued. After the death of Hindenburg in 1934, the constitution was
largely forgotten, with some minor exceptions. In Hitler's 1945 political
testament (written shortly before his suicide) he appointed Admiral Karl
Doenitz to succeed him, but he named Doenitz as President rather than Fuehrer,
thereby re-establishing a constitutional office dormant since Hindenburg's
death twelve years earlier. On 30 April 1945 Doenitz formed what became known
as the Flensburg government, which controlled only a tiny area of Germany near
the Danish border, including the town of Flensburg. It was dissolved by the
Allies on 23 May. On 5 June, the Allied Berlin Declaration stated in its
preamble that the Allies assumed supreme authority with respect to Germany,
including all the powers possessed by the German Government [...] and any
state, municipal, or local government or authority. It also declared that there
was no central Government or authority in Germany capable of accepting
responsibility for the maintenance of order, the administration of the country
and compliance with the requirements of the victorious Powers. he four Allied
Governments will take such steps, including the complete disarmament and
demilitarization of Germany, as they deem requisite for future peace and
security. The Allied Representatives will impose on Germany additional
political, administrative, economic, financial, military and other requirements
arising from the complete defeat of Germany. [...] All German authorities and
the German people shall carry out unconditionally the requirements of the
Allied Representatives, and shall fully comply with all such proclamations,
orders, ordinances and instructions. These provisions, not legally challenged
by either of the subsequent German governments, meant that neither any NSDAP
decree nor the 1919 constitution held any legal force over the Allies'
administration of Germany. The 1949 Constitution of the German Democratic
Republic contained many passages that were originally part of the 1919
constitution. It was intended to be the constitution of a united Germany, and
was thus a compromise between liberal-democratic and Leninist ideologies. It
was replaced by a new, explicitly Leninist constitution in 1968, which was
substantially amended in 1974. In 1990, the GDR dissolved altogether. The Basic
Law for the Federal Republic of Germany, enacted in 1949, stated that  These
articles of the Weimar constitution (which dealt with the state's relationship
to various Christian churches) remain part of the German Basic Law. Reasons for
failure. The reasons for the Weimar Republic's collapse are the subject of
continuing debate. It may have been doomed from the beginning since even
moderates disliked it and extremists on both the left and right loathed it.
Germany had limited democratic traditions and Weimar democracy was widely seen
as chaotic. And since Weimar politicians had been blamed for the
"Dolchstoßlegende" ("Stab-in-the-back myth")—a then-widely believed theory
that Germany's surrender in World War I had been the unnecessary act of
traitors—the popular legitimacy of the government was on shaky ground. No
single reason can explain the failure of the Weimar Republic. The most commonly
asserted causes can be grouped into three categories: economic problems,
institutional problems and the roles of specific individuals. The Weimar
Republic had some of the most serious economic problems ever experienced by any
Western democracy in history. Rampant hyperinflation, massive unemployment, and
a large drop in living standards were primary factors. From 1923–1929, there
was a short period of economic recovery, but the Great Depression of the 1930s
led to a worldwide recession. Germany was particularly affected because it
depended heavily on American loans. In 1926, about 2 million Germans were
unemployed—this rose to around 6 million in 1932. Many blamed the Weimar
Republic. This was made apparent when political parties on both right and left
wanting to disband the Republic altogether made any democratic majority in
Parliament impossible. The Weimar Republic was severely affected by the Great
Depression. The economic stagnation led to increased demands on Germany to
repay the debts owed to the United States. As the Weimar Republic was very
fragile in all its existence, the depression was devastating, and played a
major role in the NSDAP's takeover. Most Germans thought the Treaty of
Versailles was a punishing and degrading document, because it forced them to
surrender resource-rich areas and pay massive amounts of compensation. These
punitive reparations caused consternation and resentment, although the actual
economic damage resulting from the Treaty of Versailles is difficult to
determine. While the official reparations were considerable, Germany ended up
paying only a fraction of them. However, the reparations did damage Germany's
economy by discouraging market loans, which forced the Weimar government to
finance its deficit by printing more currency, causing rampant hyperinflation.
In addition, the rapid disintegration of Germany in 1919, due to the return of
a disillusioned army, the rapid change from possible victory in 1918 to defeat
in 1919, and the political chaos may have caused a psychological imprint on
Germans that could lead to extreme nationalism, later epitomized and exploited
by Hitler. Most historians agree that many industrial leaders identified the
Weimar Republic with labour unions and with the Social Democrats, who had
established the Versailles concessions of 1918/1919. Although some did see
Hitler as a means to abolish the latter, the Republic was already unstable
before any industry leaders were supporting Hitler. Even those who supported
Hitler's appointment often did not support Nazism in its entirety and
considered Hitler a temporary solution in their efforts to abolish the
Republic. Industry support alone cannot explain Hitler's enthusiastic support
by large segments of the population, including many workers who had turned away
from the left. Princeton historian Harold James argues that there was a clear
link between economic decline and people turning to extremist politics.
Institutional problems. It is widely believed that the 1919 constitution had
several weaknesses, making the eventual establishment of a dictatorship likely
but it is unknown whether a different constitution could have prevented the
Third Reich. However, the 1949 West German constitution (the "Grundgesetz)" is
generally viewed as a strong response to these flaws. Role of individuals.
Brüning's economic policy from 1930–1932 has been the subject of much
debate. It caused many Germans to identify the Republic with cuts in social
spending and extremely liberal economics. Whether there were alternatives to
this policy during the Great Depression is an open question. Paul von
Hindenburg became "Reichspräsident" in 1925. Constituent states. Prior to
World War I, the constituent states of the German Empire were 22 smaller
monarchies, three republican city-states and the Imperial territory of Alsace-
Lorraine. After the territorial losses of the Treaty of Versailles and the
German Revolution of 1918–1919, the remaining states continued as republics.
The former Ernestine duchies continued briefly as republics before merging to
form the state of Thuringia in 1920, except for Saxe-Coburg, which became part
of Bavaria. These states were gradually "de facto" abolished under the Nazi
regime via the Gleichschaltung process, as the states were largely re-organised
into Gaue. However, the city-state of Lübeck was formally incorporated into
Prussia in 1937 following the Greater Hamburg Act—apparently motivated by
Hitler's personal dislike for the city. Most of the remaining states were
formally dissolved by the Allies at the end of World War II and ultimately re-
organised into the modern states of Germany.
