1984 Network Liberty Alliance 1984 Network Liberty Alliance is loose group of
software programmers, artists, social activists and radical militants,
interested in computers and networks and considering them tools to empower and
link the various actors of the social movement around the world. They are part
of the hacktivism movement. The group was formed in November 1984, during a
"debriefing" workshop of the European Peace Marches on the Hartmannswillerkopf
in Alsace, France, following the struggle against the installation of Pershing
II and SS-20 nuclear missiles in Germany (Mutlangen). From 1978 to 1985, this
European-wide peace movement had mobilized millions of citizens, protesting the
arms race, the growth of military spending and joining in the Campaign for
Nuclear Disarmament. In reference to George Orwell's novel 1984 and to the
Rebel Alliance of the movie Star Wars, the group chose the (ironic) name 1984
Network Liberty Alliance. Founders are André Gorz, French philosopher, Dov
Lerner, MIT computer graduate and disciple of Saul Alinsky, as well as Gregoire
Seither, free radio activist, Frauke Hahn who had led the woman's resistance
('Commons Women') at Greenham Common Women's Peace Camp, David Szwarc from the
Israeli Peace movement and Adama Drasiweni, computer graduate from the
University of London, future founder of N'DA, Africa's first independent
telecom company. Other members, like Australian co-founder of Indymedia Matthew
Arnison, south-African anti-apartheid militant Peter Makema and Israeli peace
activists Uri Avnery and Michel Warchawsky, joined later on. All were active in
various social movements and peace initiatives in Europe and the USA. When
Richard Stallman published the GNU Manifesto in March 1985 and called for
participation and support, Dov Lerner and Gregor Seither started organizing
regular meetings and workshops in order to train activists in the use of
information technology and gather support for the Free Software movement. Adama
Drasiweni, owner of a computer business in London, set up similar workshops in
Kibera, a giant slum outside of Nairobi, Kenya. In France, the Alliance used
the network of the Maisons de l'Informatique that had been set up under the
presidency of François Mitterrand as well as the computer labs of Paris
University, who access to academic networks and Billboard Systems. The group
ran a number of BBS, among them 'Pom-Pom', devoted to the Apple Macintosh and
'PeaceNet', an "electronic pow-wow" to help social activists and community
organizers exchange information around the world, offering free mail accounts
and file hosting services. Very soon the issues of free speech, software
patents, civil rights and surveillance became some of the major topics
addressed by the Alliance, the group being accused of hacking and fork
software. One of the BBS run by the group 'Gaia rising', was accused by the
German government of being a meeting point for radical environmental activists
as well as anarchists. The Liberty Alliance was particularly active in the
popular worldwide resistance to Multilateral Agreement on Investments (MAI) in
the mid 1990s, networking multiple groups and providing "open cyberspaces" for
activists to share information and experience. In the summer of 1998 the first
"alternative media centre" was set up in a bus in Birmingham, United Kingdom
during the Global Street Party, an international day of protest and festive
actions coinciding with the 24th G8 Summit. The alternative media centres also
provided interpretation and language services to international militant
meetings, like during the July 1999 Global Carnival against Capitalism, or J18
London, a giant rally and party in the heart of the London City, meant as a
counter-summit to the 25th G8 Summit in Köln, Germany. Members of the team
travelled to the WTO Ministerial Conference of 1999 in Seattle to set up an
alternative media centre during the WTO Ministerial Conference of 1999 protest
activity. The project joined with that of other media activists and, out of the
necessity to bypass the corporate media and report on a WTO conference but also
to show how one could bypass corporate software (Windows), the independent
media agency Indymedia was born. Language diversity and the lack of
interpreters led a number of activists to start thinking about a way to help
militants from around the world to bridge the language barrier. Three years
later, during the 27th G8 summit in Genoa, Italy, this would lead to the
creation of the Babels network of volunteer interpreters and translators for
linguistic diversity and social change. Members of the Network Liberty Alliance
have worked on social IT projects in North America (San Francisco Free Software
movement, Chicago community cybercenter), South America (Nicaragua, Guatemala,
Panama), the Middle-East (Egypt, Occupied Palestine) as well as in the Asia
Pacific region (Indonesia, Nouvelle-Calédonie, Australia, Papua Niugini) and
Africa (Malawi, Mali, Cameroon). When the Berlin Wall fell in 1989, another
member of the Alliance, Stefan Ostrowsky, transferred "NET(te) Bude" (a play on
the word NET like network, and 'Nette Bude', nice crashpad in German), a
community IT training centre to East-Berlin, thus becoming the first
'Cybercafe' behind the iron curtain.
