2006 United States immigration reform protests In 2006, millions of people
participated in protests over a proposed change to U.S. immigration policy. The
protests began in response to proposed legislation known as H.R. 4437, which
would raise penalties for Illegal immigration and classify undocumented
immigrants and anyone who helped them enter or remain in the US as felons. As
part of the wider immigration debate, most of the protests not only sought a
rejection of this bill, but also a comprehensive reform of the country's
immigration laws that included a path to citizenship for all undocumented
immigrants. A major demonstration in Chicago on March 10, 2006 estimated at
100,000 people was the initial impetus for protests throughout the country. The
largest single demonstration occurred in Los Angeles on March 25, 2006 with a
march of more than 500,000 people through downtown. The largest nationwide day
of protest occurred on April 10, 2006, in 102 cities across the country, with
350,000–500,000 in Dallas and around 300,000 in Chicago. Most of the protests
were peaceful and attracted considerable media attention. Additional protests
took place on May Day. Role of Spanish-language media. Spanish-language media
outlets, in particular Univision, Telemundo, Azteca America and various
Spanish-language radio stations across the country, in large part aided in
mobilizing people for the protests. Eddie "Piolín" Sotelo, a Spanish-language
radio personality from Los Angeles, persuaded eleven of his counterparts from
Spanish-language radio stations based in Los Angeles to also rally listeners to
attend planned protests. Controversy and backlash over flag symbolism and
protests. The initial protests caused much controversy after some protesters
waved Mexican and Central American flags instead of American flags. Various
talk-radio hosts and conservative columnists played up the contentious nature
of displaying non-U.S. flags during the protests. One particular incident
referred to involved a protest at Montebello High School in California, where a
Mexican flag was raised on a flagpole over a United States flag flying in the
distressed (or upside-down) position. As part of the backlash over the protests
and the controversy over the flag symbolism issue, a group calling themselves
"Border Guardians" burned a Mexican flag in front of the Mexican Consulate in
Tucson, Arizona, on April 9, 2006. The following day the group proceeded to
burn two Mexican flags during protest in Tucson which was estimated to have had
15,000 participants. After the police seized a student who had thrown a water
bottle at the "Border Guardians", they followed the police officers calling for
them to let the student go. As the situation escalated violence broke out and 6
were arrested with dozens being pepper-sprayed. The next day the police
arrested the leader of the Border Guardians, Roy Warden, for charges including
assault and starting a fire in a public park. Because of the controversy,
organizers of the protests encouraged protesters to leave their Mexican flags
at home, with Cardinal Roger Mahony telling Los Angeles protesters to not fly
any flag other than the United States flag because, "...they do not help us get
the legislation we need." As a result of this controversy later protests
featured fewer Mexican flags and more protesters carrying American flags. This
fact, though, did not end the controversy over the protests, with conservative
blogger Michelle Malkin questioning the statements on signs held by some
protesters, describing them as "racist" and "anti-American". In addition,
California's Oceanside Unified School District banned flags and signs from its
campuses after "Mexican flag-wavers clashed with U.S. flag-wavers." Backlash.
The "Washington Post" reported that, in the Washington D.C. suburb of Herndon,
a day labor center at which suspected undocumented immigrants gathered was
closed and its mayor and two aldermen lost reelection, in part due to
immigration concerns. Membership in the Minuteman Project increased due in part
to backlash from the protests. On May 3, responding to the May 1 boycotts, the
Minutemen embarked on a caravan across the United States in an effort to bring
attention to a perceived need for border enforcement. The caravan was expected
to reach Washington D.C. on May 12. Regarding the Tucson-based anti-immigration
movement: In 2006 the Southern Poverty Law Center wrote: "Roy Warden, 59,
emerged this spring as one of the country's most controversial, volatile, and,
many believe, dangerous characters of the anti-immigration movement."
Legislation. H.R. 4437 ("The Border Protection, Anti terrorism, and Illegal
Immigration Control Act of 2005") was passed by the United States House of
Representatives on December 16, 2005 by a vote of 239 to 182. It is also known
as the "Sensenbrenner Bill," for its sponsor in the House of Representatives,
Jim Sensenbrenner. H.R. 4437 was seen by many as the catalyst for the 2006 U.S.
immigration reform protests. Immigration Reform and Control Act of 1986
previously gave "amnesty" to 2.7 million undocumented immigrants. Proponents of
the measure, including then-President Regan, said the measure, paired with with
stricter employer rules and a better path for legal entry, would reduce illegal
immigration. The companion bill passed by the United States Senate is S. 2611,
which never passed conference committee. The House Republican leadership,
stated that it rejects S. 2611 wholly and will pass legislation that only
addresses border security. The end of the 109th Congress marked the death of
this bill. Kennedy ruling. The USA Supreme Court on June 16, 2008, per ponente
Justice Kennedy ruled (5–4) "that someone who is here illegally may withdraw
his voluntarily agreement to depart and continue to try to get approval to
remain in the United States." The lawsuit is about 2 seemingly contradictory
provisions of immigration law. One prevents deportation by voluntary departure
from the country. The other sectition allows immigrants who are here illegally
but whose circumstances changed to build their case to immigration officials,
and must remain in the US. In the case, Samson Dada, a Nigerian citizen,
overstayed beyond the expiration of his tourist visa in 1998. Immigration
authorities ordered him to leave the country as he agreed to leave voluntarily,
to allow his legal re-entry than if he had been deported. Organizations. The
following organizations mobilized from hundreds (FAIR) to millions of people
(Great American Boycott) around immigration reform in the United States during
2006. Recruiting Methods. Typically anti illegal immigration movements focus on
Grassroots recruiting tactics; the Minutemen Civil Defense Corps and Minuteman
Project use these methods to boost membership. After the 2006 immigration
reform protest membership in anti-immigration movement participation increased
by 600%. Cooperation between anti-illegal immigration groups. Anti-illegal
immigration groups often do not pursue the same agenda in the same ways;
however, they do form Coalitions when their agendas match other movements. One
of the major joint efforts that these groups engage in is access to mailing
lists for individuals who have donated money in the past to support the
movement; Federation for American Immigration Reform and Minutemen Civil
Defense Corps have shared lists of mailers with one another in recent years.
