God's chosen people (Jostein Gaarder op-ed) In August 2006, author Jostein
Gaarder created a controversy in Norway after publishing an op-ed "God's chosen
people" in the "Aftenposten", one of the country's major newspapers, in which
he compared Israel to the Taliban regime in Afghanistan, and declared that
Israel has lost its right to exist. The text is perceived by some as attacking
not only Israel and Israeli policy, but also Jews and Judaism in general, and
as an example of New antisemitism. Subsequently Gaarder clarified his views on
Israel. Specifically, he said that he does not question the Israeli right to
exist, "but not as an apartheid state". Gaarder has repeatedly dismissed
suggestions that his article was anti-Semitic. First op-ed. The piece, titled
"God's Chosen People" and written in part as a response to the Israel-Lebanon
conflict, claims that Israel's policies are founded on a religion that is
"archaic" and "warriorlike". The op-ed, which Gaarder, in an 7 August 2006 NRK
Channel 2 radio debate said was read by "countless people" and "Middle East
experts" prior to publishing, is written in the literary form of a biblical
prophecy, believed by some to be inspired by the Book of Amos. Gaarder
maintains that the predictions in the piece do not reflect a course of events
he would desire, but rather how it might turn out unless the state of Israel
changes its political course. We laugh at this people's whims, and cry over its
misdeeds. To act as God's chosen people is not only foolish and arrogant, it is
a crime against humanity. We call it racism. […] There are limits to our
patience and there are limits to our tolerance. We do not believe in divine
promises as a rationale for occupation and apartheid. We have left the Middle
Ages behind. We laugh with embarrassment at those who still believe that the
god of the flora, fauna and galaxies has chosen one particular people as his
favorite, and given them amusing stone tablets, burning bushes and a "license
to kill". In the article, Gaarder contrasts the use of religious legitimization
of war and occupation with humanistic values, quoting Albert Schweitzer:
"Humanitarianism consists of never sacrificing a human being for a cause." The
article described Judaism as "an archaic national and warlike religion",
contrasting it with the Christian idea that "Kingdom of God is compassion and
forgiveness." Furthermore, he claims that many Israelis celebrate the death of
Lebanese children, comparing this behavior to the Biblical story where the
Israelites celebrate God's plagues against Egypt. He states: "We recognize the
State of Israel of 1948 but not that of 1967. It is the state of Israel that
fails to recognize, respect, or defer to the internationally lawful Israeli
state of 1948. Israel wants more; more water and more villages", adding that
Israel already has ceased to exist. He maintains he is a friend of Jews, and
finishes his article by envisioning another exodus of Jews from Israel but
hoping that: "[... not one Israeli child lose its life. Far too many civilians
and children have been murdered already." Reactions to the article were mixed.
Some in the Norwegian Jewish community, several Jewish organizations, and many
Norwegian intellectuals criticized it as being too harsh or lopsided. Many saw
it as having been written in a literary style inappropriate for a mass medium
discussion of such a controversial topic. But many also expressed their support
for his op-ed piece, or at least what they saw as the gist of it. The op-ed was
published together with an interview of Gaarder where he explained the thoughts
behind the op-ed. When asked about what he wanted to achieve, he answered that
he actually wrote it as a wake-up call to Israel. The state of Israel, he says,
is the one state not respecting Israel as it was originally "created by the
United Nations." The op-ed is a judgement prophecy. Of course I don't mean that
Israel has no right to defend herself. What I say is no different from what the
world community has been saying through the UN resolutions. Again and again we
see Israel overreacting, says Gaarder, and stresses that he is not against
Israel as such, but that he distinguishes between the Israel of 1948 and the
one of 1967. Reactions. In numerous interviews after the publication of the op-
ed, Gaarder maintained that he is not an anti-Semite and that the piece was
never intended as an attack on the Jewish people or on Judaism. Several members
of the Norwegian Jewish community, however, said that regardless of Gaarder's
intent, the article served to legitimize deep-rooted antisemitic attitudes by
tying them in with a public opinion already hostile to Israel. Odd-Bjørn Fure,
a well-known Norwegian historian and director of the Norwegian Center for
Studies of Holocaust and Religious Minorities wrote: "[...] Gaarder uses a
language which contributes to lowering barriers in the description of Israel
and Jewish culture. [...] Gaarder has crossed a line, but I don't think he
realizes it" Three days after publishing the op-ed, Jostein Gaarder announced
his intention to "withdraw from the debate." While admitting that the style of
his op-ed was "challenging" and open to different interpretations, he felt
little would be served by his continued contribution. He maintained that the
original piece was motivated by "disgust for the war, and the wrongdoing of the
Israeli army". Gaarder also said:  Jostein Gaarder's Israeli publisher,
Schocken Publishing House, announced 9 August 2006, that it would stop
cooperating with Gaarder and no longer publish his books. In addition, Racheli
Edelman, the owner-publisher of Schocken Publishing House, is looking into
whether the op-ed could form the basis of a lawsuit against Gaarder. Schocken
changed its decision after Gaarder's Norwegian publisher Aschehoug contacted
Schocken and expressed the view that it would be "a scandal if a publisher
dropped an author because of a debate". William Nygaard, director of Aschehoug,
Gaarder's publisher in Norway, who himself was a victim of an assassination
attempt presumed to be a result of the fatwa issued against Salman Rushdie for
publishing "The Satanic Verses", expressed support for Gaarder:  The strong
attacks and accusations about anti-Semitism against Gaarder have prompted
commentators to voice criticism against what they perceive as a misuse of the
label "antisemite" against critics of Israel. Associate professor in Middle
Eastern history Hilde Henriksen Waage at the University of Oslo commented that:
"Any debate about the politics of the state of Israel drowns in accusations of
antisemitism and racism" and intimated that Gaarder would not be safe in Norway
after this op-ed. The former prime minister of Norway Kåre Willoch criticised
the attacks on Gaarder, stating that "whenever Israel's politics are
criticised, there are attempts to divert the attention from what this is really
about." Second op-ed. On 12 August 2006, Gaarder published a new op-ed piece in
the "Aftenposten". This had the title "Forsøk på klargjøring" attempt to
clarify. It has since been translated into English.
