2006 Georgian–Russian espionage controversy The 2006 Georgian–Russian
espionage controversy began when the Government of Georgia arrested four
Russian officers on charges of espionage, on September 27, 2006. The Western
and Georgian media sources report that relations between the two post-Soviet
nations have significantly deteriorated after Georgia and NATO agreed to hold
talks on closer relations. Background. Russian-Georgian relations have largely
been reported as tense after the November 2003 Rose Revolution in Georgia
brought the pro-Western reformist leader Mikheil Saakashvili to power. The 2006
gas pipeline explosions and the Russian ban of Georgian wines and mineral
waters were interpreted by many as the means of the Government of Russia's
pressure on the Georgian leadership for the country's close ties with NATO and
the United States. The recent disruption of the "Status quo ante" in the Kodori
Valley in Abkhazia led to a further downturn in the already tensed Russian-
Georgian relations. In July 2006, the Georgian police and security forces took
control of the Kodori Valley, hitherto controlled by the local Georgian
militias led by the defiant commander Emzar Kvitsiani. Georgian officials
claimed that the Russian security services were behind the 2006 Kodori crisis,
while Russian and Abkhaz authorities accused Georgia of violation of the
previous ceasefire agreements by deploying an armed force in the Valley. In
September 2006, the area was officially renamed "Upper Abkhazia" by the
Georgian government and declared to be the "temporary administrative center" of
Abkhazia until the conflict is resolved. Continuous anti-Russian statements by
the Georgian government, such as the September 2006 speech by President
Saakashvili in Poland, were interpreted by some Russian media sources as
depicting Russia as the "barbarous tribe of Huns". Timeline. On April 16, 2009
the case was brought before the European Court of Human Rights. The hearing was
for the admissibility of the State vs. State case, a rare occurrence in this
court with a ruling still pending. Reactions. On September 29, Sergey Ivanov,
Russia's Defense Minister and Vice Premier, denounced Georgia as a "bandit"
state, and accused the NATO members of arming Georgia in support to "military
solution" to the country's secessionist conflicts. Vladimir Zhirinovsky, urged
the government to exert economic and political pressure on Georgia, and
consider military intervention. On September 30, the BBC reported Foreign
Minister of Georgia Gela Bezhuashvili as saying that Georgia "expected Russia
to honour the pullout agreement" and as accusing the Russian government of
"trying to scare" Georgians. President Mikheil Saakashvili described the
Russian government's reaction to the arrests as "hysteria." President Putin
said, on October 1, Georgia's arrest of four Russian army officers for spying
was "an act of state terrorism with hostage-taking", a statement that was
downplayed by Saakashvili as "an overreaction caused by nervousness that they
have created by themselves." Meanwhile, various international organizations are
trying to defuse the diplomatic conflict between the two sides. On September
30, the European Union foreign policy chief Javier Solana spoke by telephone
with Mikheil Saakashvili, urging him to find a rapid solution and offering
assistance. The Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), to
which both Georgia and Russia belong, appealed, on October 1, for both sides to
open a dialogue and seek a peaceful solution to the dispute. The OSCE Chairman-
in-Office Karel De Gucht said he was ready to travel to the region if needed
and assist the conflicting sides to reduce the tensions. On October 16, the
Russian newspaper "Versiya" published an interview with the Georgian Defense
Minister, Irakli Okruashvili where the minister stated that Russia "would lose
if the quarrel between the two countries escalates into a shooting war". On the
same day Yury Baluyevsky, the Chief of Staff of the Russian Armed Forces,
responded that Russia does not plan a war with Georgia and warned about the
"consequences of the provocation by the brash politician". The next day the
Georgian Ministry of Defense denied that Defense Minister Irakli Okruashvili
was interviewed by the Russian newspaper and called the information "another
provocation coinciding with the visit of NATO officials to Moscow." Russian
newspaper asserted that the interview it published was genuine and the audio
recording of the conversation between the reporter Ruslan Gorevoy and
Okruashvili is available. On September 17, Estonia's parliament passed a
declaration in support of "strengthening democracy in Georgia" and condemning
"the endeavours by the Russian Federation to suppress Georgia's intentions by
using economic sanctions and threats of force." Deportations. The deportation
of Georgian immigrants from Russia amid the ongoing diplomatic crisis also
aroused much controversy. According to Russian authorities, more than half of
the Georgians in the country are working illegally. Following the Russian
crackdown on Georgian-owned alleged criminal businesses and the tightening of
visa criteria for Georgians, on October 6, 2006, about 136 Georgians accused of
"immigration offences" were flown back to Georgia on board a Russian cargo
plane. Several deportees, however, showed valid passports and Russian entry
visas, as reported by Reuters. In Georgia, the process of deportation and
crackdown on allegedly illegal Georgian businesses in Moscow was described as
“ethnic cleansing.” Vice-president of the Federal Migration Service of
Russia, Mikhail Tyurkin, said that immigrants "head home, to their mothers and
children" and termed the mission "humanitarian." The Russian authorities are
also claimed to have begun targeting ethnic Georgian celebrities living in
Moscow, including the famed Georgian-Russian fiction novelist Grigory
Chkhartishvili better known by his penname Boris Akunin. Akunin commented on
the Russian radio station "Echo of Moscow" that his publisher had been
questioned by tax authorities over the writer's finances. "I didn't think I
would live to see ethnic cleansing in Russia," he said. On October 6, the
influential Russian human rights organization, Memorial condemned both sides of
the dispute, accusing the government of Russia of "racial discrimination," and
Georgia of "irresponsible policies." On October 7, a minor unsanctioned rally
organized by opposition youth activists in support of the Georgians was
dispersed and more than a dozen of its participants detained by Moscow police.
