Abalone Alliance The Abalone Alliance (1977–1985) was a nonviolent civil
disobedience group formed to shut down the Pacific Gas and Electric Company's
Diablo Canyon Power Plant near San Luis Obispo on the central California coast
in the United States. They modeled their affinity group-based organizational
structure after the Clamshell Alliance which was then protesting the Seabrook
Nuclear Power Plant in coastal New Hampshire. The group of activists took the
name "Abalone Alliance" referring to the tens of thousands of wild California
Red Abalone that were killed in 1974 in Diablo Cove when the unit's plumbing
had its first hot flush. The Abalone Alliance staged blockades and occupations
at the Diablo Canyon Power Plant site between 1977 and 1984. Nearly two
thousand people were arrested during a two-week blockade in 1981, exceeding
Seabrook as the largest number arrested at an anti-nuclear protest in the
United States. History. The Diablo Canyon controversy started in 1963 when PG&E
scrapped its attempt to build the Bodega Bay Nuclear Power Plant at Bodega
Head, 71 miles north of San Francisco. The Bodega struggle started in 1958, but
was opposed by a group led by a University of California professor and young
Sierra Club activist named David Pessonen. This was the first anti-nuclear
power campaign in the US. The main reason that the facility wasn't built was
due its location less than 1,000 feet from the fault zone that struck San
Francisco in 1906. Rather than face public opposition at Diablo Canyon, PG&E
approached the Sierra Club's president and cut a deal with certain board
members where Diablo would be chosen rather than the Nipomo Dunes area. The
wife of the Sierra Club president, who worked out the deal, would then be
elected to PG&E's board of directors. As part of the plan, the decision was
made when Sierra Club board member Martin Litton was out of the country, the
only member who knew of Diablo's history and importance. The board was flown
down to see the site in Frank Sinatra's Lear Jet with Danny Kaye on board
providing entertainment. Kaye would later become opposed to nuclear power. The
Sierra Club president forbade any chapter from opposing Diablo Canyon, so The
San Luis Obispo Chapter formed the Shoreline Preservation Conference to oppose
the construction on the grounds that the area had been proposed as a state
park, was a sacred Chumash Indian site, had some of the largest oak trees on
the West Coast, was located on the second-to-last coastal wilderness area in
California, and could be sitting on the fault that lightly shook Santa Barbara
in a 1927 earthquake. The internal dispute over Diablo Canyon was a primary
reason for the split-up of the Sierra Club, that led to the formation of
Friends of the Earth by David Brower. In 1965, the Shoreline Preservation
Conference demanded that regulators investigate the danger of faults near the
proposed site, but was ignored. In 1972 a Los Angeles reporter discovered a
report by Shell Oil Company geologists completed prior construction of Diablo
Canyon Power Plant of the existence of the Hosgri Fault 2½ miles offshore from
the facility. As a result of the discovery, regulators forced PG&E to redesign
and reinforce the facility. Diablo Canyon protests. During the late 1970s, the
Abalone Alliance organized protests in San Luis County and regularly picketed
PG&E offices across the state. The Alliance published a newspaper, "It's About
Times", which provided a forum for activist debate. Separate groups within the
Abalone coalition "developed their own foci and protest styles". On August 7,
1977, 1,500 people demonstrated at the gate of Diablo Canyon, resulting in 47
arrests. The next year, 5,000 people rallied and 487 were arrested. On
September 10, 1981, the Abalone Alliance occupied the site, leading to 1,960
arrests. Nearly 30,000 people showed up in support. At the end of the ten-day
action, a 25-year-old engineer discovered a mirror image reversal in the
seismic blueprints. PG&E was forced spend $3 billion and three additional years
of repairs before reopening. Anti-War Activists Daniel Ellsberg and Tom Hayden,
activist stars like Ed Asner, Martin Sheen, Martin Landau, Blythe Danner, Patti
Davis, Robin Williams, Lily Tomlin, Harrison Ford, Carrie Fisher, Marsha Mason,
John Belushi, Jane Fonda and Robert Blake and performers such as Jackson
Browne, Bonnie Raitt, Crosby, Stills, Nash & Young, The Eagles, Linda Ronstadt,
Peter Yarrow, Holly Near, Joan Baez, Dan Fogelberg, Bruce Springsteen and the E
Street Band, James Taylor, Carly Simon, Chaka Khan, The Doobie Brothers, Jesse
Colin Young, Stevie Wonder, Gil Scott-Heron, Stevie Nicks, Tom Petty, Poco,
Wavy Gravy, Warren Zevon and others joined the anti-nuclear concerts, protests
and larger movement - which included a series of concerts at Madison Square
Garden through Musicians United for Safe Energy, as well as 'Peace Sunday' at
the Rose Bowl (with over 100,000 in attendance) and multiple 'Survival Sundays'
held at the Hollywood Bowl both through the Alliance for Survival, a Los
Angeles based Abalone Alliance affiliate. A number of the high profile
participants were included in the arrests at Diablo and the mass jailings were
described as a "tornado of talent". Jackson Browne defending his civil
disobedience at a San Luis Obispo courthouse after his arrest for trespassing
at the blockade (“I consider my actions to be patriotic”). In 1984, the
Alliance organized the Peoples Emergency Response Plan, where affinity groups
blockaded at the Diablo Gates over a four-month period. In late 1981, Alliance
activists primarily from Davis and Sonoma, along with local opposition held an
eight-day sit-in at the State Capitol, encouraging then-Governor Jerry Brown to
use emergency powers to shut down the Rancho Seco Nuclear Generating Station.
The plant was closed by a public vote in 1989, a decade before its operating
license was to expire. Other Alliance activists went on to form the Livermore
Action Group, the Vandenberg Action Coalition, Environmental Defense Center,
the Lenten Desert Experience at the Nevada Test Site and Musicians United for
Safe Energy. At its peak, there were over 60 groups who were affiliated with
the Alliance, including Greenpeace and Alliance for Survival. The group was hit
with one of the first known SLAPP suits in U.S. history, where the Pacific
Legal Foundation and San Luis Obispo County attempted to legally obtain the
names of all members and supporters, demanding that they pay for the costs of
the 1981 blockade. The suit lasted nearly five years, before being withdrawn
just before going before the U.S. Supreme Court. The Mothers for Peace filed a
legal challenge with the D.C. Circuit Court in an attempt to stop the operation
of Diablo Canyon but was denied in November 1984. In January 1985, NRC
Commissioner Asselstine leaked a copy of the NRC's secret transcripts to KRON-
TV in San Francisco, documenting how the NRC had illegally licensed Diablo
Canyon without properly reviewing evacuation plans as previously required. The
Mothers then reopened their challenge based on the leaked NRC transcripts.
Judge Robert Bork of the DC Court took the lead in denying the appeal April 25,
1986. Bork claimed that to look at the leaked transcripts would be judicial
activism. Diablo Canyon opens. The Diablo Canyon reactors were originally
estimated to cost just over $300 million when PG&E was first given permission
to construct the facility. When finally opened in 1985, construction costs were
$5.8 billion and financing costs nearly an additional $7 billion. After the
1981 blueprint mirror image mistake was discovered, the reactor's construction
costs stood at $2.1 billion. PG&E permission to go ahead with operation was
reversed by the NRC and the company was required to go through a major review
and rebuild. PG&E was unable to find further financing from any source to
continue construction, until president Ronald Reagan ordered the United States
Environmental Protection Agency to give the company nearly $2.5 billion in
loans. The controversy did not come to a close until December 1988 when the
California Public Utilities Commission gave PG&E a $54 billion 30-year, cost
plus rate contract to operate Diablo Canyon Power Plant. It has been considered
the most controversial nuclear power plant in U.S. history because of its
location 2½ miles offshore from the Hosgri Fault.] Films. Dark Circle, Dir.
Chris Beaver, Ruth Landy and Judy Irving, 1982, won the Grand Prize at the
Sundance Film Festival in 1983 as well as a Emmy Award for "Outstanding
Individual Achievement in News and Documentary" in 1990. A Question of Power,
Dir. David L. Brown, Prod. by David L. Brown, Tom Anderson and Jane Kinzler,
1986 No Nukes Dir. Daniel Goldberg, Anthony Potenza Prod. Julian Schlossberg,
1980
