Absentee ballot An absentee ballot is a vote cast by someone who is unable or
unwilling to attend the official polling station. Numerous methods have been
devised to facilitate this. Increasing the ease of access to absentee ballots
are seen by many as one way to improve voter turnout, though some countries
require that a valid reason, such as infirmity or travel, be given before a
voter can participate in an absentee ballot. Methods. Postal voting. In a
postal vote, the ballot papers are posted out to the voter – usually only on
request – who must then fill them out and return them, often with some form
of certification by a witness and their signature to prove their identity.
Proxy voting. To cast a proxy vote, the user appoints someone as their "proxy",
by authorizing them to cast or secure their vote in their stead. The proxy must
be trusted by the voter, as in a secret ballot there is no way of verifying
that they voted for the correct candidate. In an attempt to solve this, it is
not uncommon for people to nominate an official of their chosen party as their
proxy. Internet voting. Corporations and organizations routinely use Internet
voting to elect officers and Board members and for other proxy elections.
Internet voting systems have been used privately in many modern nations and
publicly in the United States, France, the UK, Switzerland and Estonia. Several
cantons (Geneva, Neuchâtel and Zürich) have run pilot programs to allow
citizens to vote via the Internet since 2001. or by SMS. Approval of the pilot
experience has led to the expansion of the program to include an additional
canton and Swiss living abroad. voters obtain their passwords to access the
ballot through the postal service. Most voters in Estonia can cast their vote
in local and parliamentary elections, if they want to, via the Internet, as
most of those on the electoral roll have access to an e-voting system. It has
been assisted by the fact that most Estonians carry a national identity card
equipped with a computer-readable microchip and it is these cards which they
use to get access to the online ballot. All a voter needs is a computer, an
electronic card reader, their ID card and its PIN, and they can vote from
anywhere in the world. Estonian e-votes can only be cast during the days of
advance voting. On Election Day itself people have to go to polling stations
and fill in a paper ballot. Texas law allows American astronauts who cannot
vote in person and are unable to vote via absentee ballot such as those aboard
the International Space Station and Mir space station cast their ballots
electronically, via email, from orbit since 1997. Ballots are sent via secure
email to the Johnson Spaceflight Center and then passed on to the astronauts'
home counties in Texas. Absentee ballot examples. Australia. In addition to
postal votes as described above, in Australia the term "absentee ballot" refers
to the procedure used when a voter attends a voting place which is not in the
electoral district in which they are registered to vote. Instead of marking the
ballot paper and putting it in the ballot box, the voter's ballot paper is
placed in an envelope and then it is sent by the voting official to the voter's
home district to be counted there. Germany. In all German elections, postal
votes are available on demand. The requirement for an excuse has been removed
in 2008 for elections on the federal level. India. As of now, India does not
have an absentee ballot system for all citizens. In a restricted sense, The
Representation of the People Act-1950 (RPA) section 20(8) allows people such as
people on polling duty and serving in armed forces to vote in absentia through
postal means. Section 20 of the RPA-1950 disqualifies a non-resident Indian
(NRI) from getting his/her name registered in the electoral rolls.
Consequently, it also prevents an NRI from casting his/her vote in elections to
the Parliament and to the State Legislatures. In August 2010, Representation of
the People (Amendment) Bill-2010 which allows voting rights to NRI's was passed
in both Lok Sabha with subsequent gazette notifications on Nov 24, 2010. With
this NRI's will now be able to vote in Indian elections but have to be
"physically present" at the time of voting. Recently several civic society
organizations have urged the government to amend the RPA act to allow NRI's and
people on the move to cast their vote through absentee ballot system. Republic
of Ireland. In the Republic of Ireland, postal votes are only available in a
restricted set of circumstances. The Irish constitution requires a secret
ballot and the courts have interpreted this quite narrowly. Postal votes are
available to people who by reason of their occupation cannot vote normally.
They are also available to students living away from home, to people with
disabilities, to prisoners (since January 2007), and to long term residents of
hospitals, nursing homes and other similar institutions. Israel. Israel does
not have an absentee ballot system for all citizens. Absentee ballots are
restricted to soldiers, prisoners, sailors, overseas diplomats, disabled
persons and hospitalized people. The votes are not cast directly but placed in
a double envelope with identifying information and counted directly by the
elections committee only after verifying that the voter has not voted at his
official polling station. Most absentee ballots are cast the day of the
elections in alternate polling stations. Early voting is limited to civil
servants overseas. There is no postal voting. Netherlands. In the Netherlands,
liberalised proxy voting is available. Voters can authorise someone else to
cast their ballot without having to go through a registration procedure. Voters
can cast a maximum of 2 proxy votes along with their own ballot. Postal ballots
and Internet voting are only available to Dutch citizens living abroad, or
having occupational duties abroad on election day. Philippines. As provided by
the Overseas Absentee Voting Act, absentee voting in Philippine elections is
only available in certain circumstances, such as Overseas Filipino Workers or
other migrants. Votes must be cast in person at select polling places, such as
a consulate office. There are mail-in written ballots only in select countries.
Local absentee voting as pursuant to Republic Act No. 7166 and Executive Order
No. 157 is only available for members of the Armed Forces of the Philippines
and the Philippine National Police and government personnel on duty on election
day. The absentee voting in both overseas and local is still manual vote
counting system. Recently, absentee voting in Hong Kong and Singapore was done
through the optical scan voting due to COMELEC Resolution No. 8806 in the last
general elections in 2010. Absentee voters can only vote in positions elected
by the entire electorate: the president, vice president, senators and party-
list representatives. Switzerland. Swiss federal law allows postal voting in
all federal elections and referenda, and all cantons also allow it for cantonal
ballot issues. All voters receive their personal ballot by mail and may either
cast it at a polling station or mail it back. Thailand. Absentee ballot started
in Thailand first time in the 2000 general election. It is promulgated
according to a provision in the 1997 constitution. The absentee ballot can be
cast within Thailand and in foreign countries, where Thailand has diplomatic
missions. Voters can cast the absentee ballot in 2 cases: (1) those who have
their household registration in their constituency but will not be at their
constituency on the election day, and wish to cast their vote in advance; and
(2) those who physically reside in other locations out of their constituency at
least 90 days prior to the election day, and will not be able to travel back to
their constituency on the election day. In both cases, voters wishing to cast
their absentee ballot must register with the election committee 30 days in
advance prior to the general election date. Voters within Thailand can cast
their vote either at the designated district offices for absentee voting in
their provinces or through mail. Likewise, voters in overseas can register to
vote with the Thai missions in their country of residence or send the ballot to
them by mail. The absentee voting date is normally designated a week ahead of
the general election date. United Kingdom. In all United Kingdom elections,
postal votes are available on demand – no reason must be given – although a
vote rigging scandal involving postal votes marred the 2005 Birmingham local
election. United States. In the United States, an absentee ballot is a ballot
that the voter records and casts at a location other than the designated
polling station on Election Day. Typically these ballots are mailed, though
some states provide provisions for emailing ballots, faxing ballots, or
delivering them in person to a designated location. Typically a voter must
request an absentee ballot at least a week before the election occurs. Each
State's Secretary of State or Director of Elections is in charge of the
election process, including voter registration and absentee ballot requests.
Balloting materials may be sent via the United States Postal Service without
prepayment of postage for members of the Armed Forces, members of the U.S.
Merchant Marine and U.S. citizens residing outside the territorial limits of
the United States and the District of Columbia and their spouses. Absentee
voting by mail is allowed with no excuse in 28 states, and with an excuse in
22. No-excuse permanent absentee voting is allowed in 4 states. Contrary to the
map at left, Wisconsin allows no-excuse early voting. Early voting in person is
allowed with no excuse required in 31 U.S. states, with an excuse in 3, and not
at all in 16. The District of Columbia requires an excuse for both early voting
and absentee voting. Voters (usually) mark their ballots, which may be an
optically read ballot marked with a pen or pencil, or may be a punched card
ballot. They then mail the ballot to the state, or may bring the ballot in
person to a designated location. Each state has different laws regulating when
absentee ballots must be counted, and who does the counting. Most states count
absentee ballots on Election Day which can continue for several days after. The
latest deadline is 10 days after Election day (for Washington, D.C., and for
overseas absentee ballots sent to Florida.) American citizens who are overseas,
including active members of the military, are covered by the Uniformed and
Overseas Citizens Absentee Voting Act that, among other things, provides for a
Federal Write-In Absentee Ballot which may be used in place of absentee ballots
provided under state laws. The Federal Voting Assistance Program is a
government program that assists such voters and exercises other authority under
this act. This has been supplemented by the Military and Overseas Voter
Empowerment Act. Pacific Northwest. Voting in the states of Oregon and
Washington are unique in regards to the rest of the nation, in that voting is
conducted entirely by mail. Oregon. Ballots in Oregon are mailed to all
registered voters, who are then supposed to fill out the ballot and either mail
it back to the elections official or bring it to a drop box. The term "absentee
ballot" in Oregon refers to mailing the ballot to the county elections
official, and not merely to receiving the ballot in the mail. As with most
states, Oregon residents must register in advance to be able to vote via
absentee ballot. Washington. Like Oregon, the State of Washington conducts all
elections via vote-by-mail. Originally, absentee ballots in Washington were
mailed prior to election day to those voters who contacted their local county
by indicating that they would be unable to vote at their local polling place on
election day. In 1993, the state began allowing all voters to vote by mail on a
permanent basis. Since that time, voting by mail had gained in popularity, and
the term "absentee ballot" had become synonymous with voting by mail. According
to the Secretary of State, in 2006, over 88% of all voters cast votes using the
vote-by-mail method. By then, many counties had made the switch to conducting
their elections entirely by mail. The state's two largest counties (in terms of
number of voters), King and Pierce, were the last two counties in the state to
switch to all-mail voting. When the King County Council approved the switch in
2009, the county became the largest in the nation, in terms of number of
voters, where elections are conducted entirely by mail. Pierce County's
resistance to making the change led to action by the Washington State
Legislature in 2011 that required the county to be in line with the rest of the
state, thus making the entire state a "vote-by-mail" state. Many counties
provide drop boxes throughout the county to allow voters to drop off their
ballot on or prior to election day, rather than paying postage by sending it
through the mail. Ballots returned by mail need only be postmarked by election
date, resulting in ballots being received by election officials over several
days following an actual election. California. California's Secretary of State
has reported that in every general election since 1993, between 20% and 30% of
ballots cast have been absentee ballots. Maine. In the state of Maine, any
voter may cast an absentee ballot and is not required to give a reason. They
must fill out an application, available from the Secretary of State or their
town clerk, and turn it in by hand or mail. They are then given or mailed a
ballot, which must be returned to the town clerk by hand or by mail before the
polls close on Election Day. Absentee Ballot applications are available at
http://www.maine.gov/sos/cec/elec/absent.htm. Ballots may be requested up to
three months before an election. The ballots are available 30 to 45 days before
an election. Maine voters can find their town at http://www.maine.gov/sos/cec/
elec/clerk.htm. Maryland. Any registered Maryland voter may vote by absentee
ballot. Voters are not required to provide a reason for voting via absentee
ballot. South Dakota. Any registered South Dakota voter may vote by absentee
ballot. Absentee ballots are available for primary and general elections six
weeks prior to the election. Absentee ballots for city and school elections are
available several weeks prior to the election. To receive a ballot by mail, a
voter must file a written application for an absentee ballot with the person in
charge of the election. The application must be mailed or hand delivered to the
person in charge of the election. The application cannot be submitted by fax.
The voter's signature on the application must be notarized or witnessed by an
official who will deliver the ballot to the voter. An application for a ballot
by authorized messenger must be received by the person in charge of the
election before 3:00 p.m. the day of the election. The voter must sign a
statement on the absentee ballot envelope prior to returning the ballot. All
voted ballots must be returned to the person in charge of the election in time
to be delivered to the appropriate polling place prior to the closing of the
polls. Texas. In 1997 the Texas legislature passed a bill allowing residents to
cast absentee ballots from space, because of the presence of the NASA Johnson
Space Center and the astronauts that live in the Houston metropolitan area.
