Abstention Abstention is a term in election procedure for when a participant in
a vote either does not go to vote (on election day) or, in parliamentary
procedure, is present during the vote, but does not cast a ballot. Abstention
must be contrasted with "blank vote", in which a voter casts a ballot willfully
made invalid by marking it wrongly or by not marking anything at all. A "blank
(or white) voter" has voted, although his vote may be considered a spoilt vote,
depending on each legislation, while an abstaining voter hasn't voted. Both
forms (abstention and blank vote) may or may not, depending on the
circumstances, be considered as protest vote. An abstention may be used to
indicate the voting individual's ambivalence about the measure, or mild
disapproval that does not rise to the level of active opposition. Abstention
can also be used when someone has a certain position about an issue, but since
the popular sentiment supports the opposite, it might be not be politically
expedient to vote according to his or her conscience. A person may also abstain
when they do not feel adequately informed about the issue at hand, or has not
participated in relevant discussion. In parliamentary procedure, a member may
be required to abstain in the case of a real or perceived conflict of interest.
Abstentions do not count in tallying the vote negatively or positively; when
members abstain, they are in effect attending only to contribute to a quorum.
White votes, however, may be counted in the total of votes, depending on the
legislation. Active abstention. An active abstention can occur where a voter
votes in a way that balances out their vote as if they had never voted. This
has occurred many times in the House of Commons of the United Kingdom. During a
division (a process where a yes/no vote occurs to agree or disagree to a
motion), a Member of Parliament may actively abstain by voting both "yes" and
"no". This is effectively the same as not voting at all, as the outcome will
not be changed by the active abstention. However in the House of Lords of the
United Kingdom, active abstention is not possible as a Lord voting both ways
will be removed from the list of votes. In another manner, an intentionally
spoilt vote could be interpreted as an active abstention. This is where a voter
turns up to an election and invalidates the ballot paper in some way. Because
of the nature of an abstention, only intentionally spoiled ballots could be
counted as an active abstention. International and national procedures. In the
United Nations Security Council, representatives of the five countries holding
a veto power (the United States, United Kingdom, France, Russia and the
People's Republic of China) sometimes abstain rather than vetoing a measure
about which they are less than enthusiastic, particularly if the measure
otherwise has broad support. By convention, their abstention does not block the
measure, despite the wording of Article 27.3 of the United Nations Charter. If
a majority of members of the United Nations General Assembly or one of its
committees abstain on a measure, then the measure fails. In the Council of the
European Union, an abstention on a matter decided by unanimity has the effect
of a "yes" vote; on matters decided by qualified majority it has an effect of a
"no" vote. In the United States House of Representatives and many other
legislatures, members may vote "present" rather than for or against a bill or
resolution, which has the effect of an abstention. In the United States Senate,
the Presiding Officer calls each Senator's name alphabetically, and, if
abstaining, the Senator must give a reason for the abstention. Members may
decline to vote, in committee or on the floor, on any matter which he or she
believes would be a conflict of interest. Abstention campaigns. There have been
a number of instances around the world where popular movements have boycotted
elections. In South Africa, there is a strong presence of abstention campaigns
that make the structural argument that no political party truly represents the
poor. The "No Land! No House! No Vote!" Campaign which was started by the
Landless Peoples Movement in 2004, is the largest of such campaigns. These
campaigns have been met with significant repression. In 1999, a human rights
activist was convicted in Belarus for calling not to participate in the local
elections he considered to be undemocratic. In 2004, UN Human Rights Committee
has found the conviction to violate freedom of expression. Other social
movements and civil society organisations in other parts of the world also have
similar campaigns or non-voting preferences. These include the Naxalites in
India, the Zapatista Army of National Liberation in Mexico and various
anarchist and left communist oriented movements. In Mexico's mid term 2009
elections there was strong support for 'Nulo' - a campaign to vote for no one.
In India poor people's in movements Singur, Nandigram and Lalgarh have rejected
parliamentary politics (as well as the NGO and Maoist alternatives). There have
also been no vote campaigns in Canada and Spain. In September 2011, the "New
York Times" argued that there was a growing "scorn for voting" around the
world.
