Acceptance Acceptance in human psychology is a person's assent to the reality
of a situation, recognizing a process or condition (often a negative or
uncomfortable situation) without attempting to change it, protest, or exit. The
concept is close in meaning to 'acquiescence', derived from the Latin
'acquiēscere' (to find rest in). Acceptance is fundamental to the core dogma
of most Abrahamic religions, the word "Islam" can be translated as
"acceptance", "surrender" or "voluntary submission" and Christianity is based
upon the "acceptance" of Jesus of Nazareth as the "Christ" and could be
compared to some Eastern religious concepts such as Buddhist mindfulness.
Religions and psychological treatments often suggest the path of acceptance
when a situation is both disliked and unchangeable, or when change may be
possible only at great cost or risk. "Acceptance" may imply only a lack of
outward, behavioral attempts at possible change, but the word is also used more
specifically for a felt or hypothesized cognitive or emotional state.
Definition. The term acceptance is defined as a noun, in which it shows to have
three different meanings. The first is known as the act of taking or receiving
something offered. For example, if someone is giving you a gift and you receive
it, then you have accepted the gift; therefore, having acceptance. Another
definition of acceptance has to deal with positive welcome; favor and
endorsement. In which, a person could like someone and, have acceptance for
them due to their approval of that person. The third description of acceptance
is that it can be act of believing or assenting. Acceptance - "An express act
or implication by conduct that manifests assent to the terms of an offer in a
manner invited or required by the offer so that a binding contract is formed.
The exercise of power conferred by an offer by performance of some act. The act
of a person to whom something is offered of tendered by another, whereby the
offered demonstrates through an act invited by the offer an intention of
retaining the subject of the offer." (Chirelstein, 2001) This definition
overlaps with the definition of the quality known as "toleration". Acceptance
and tolerance are not synonyms. E. Tolle (Power of Now, etc.) defines
acceptance as a "this is it" response to anything occurring in any moment of
life. There, strength, peace and serenity are available when one stops
struggling to resist, or hang on tightly to what is so in any given moment.
What do I have right now? Now what I am I experiencing? The point is, can one
be sad when one is sad, afraid when afraid, silly when silly, happy when happy,
judgmental when judgmental, overthinking when overthinking, serene when serene,
etc. Types. It should be recognised, before any breakdown to types, that
acceptance is treating what happens, the actual event which is the outcome of
all the combined previous events, as on balance the best outcome. Acceptance
typically contains the concept of approval; it is important to note that the
psychospiritual use of the term infers a "non-judgmental" mindset. Acceptance
is contrasted with "resistance", but that term has strong political and
psychoanalytic connotations not applicable in many contexts. By groups and by
individuals, acceptance can be of various events and conditions in the world;
individuals may also accept elements of their own thoughts, feelings, and
personal histories. For example, psychotherapeutic treatment of a person with
depression or anxiety could involve fostering acceptance "either" for whatever
personal circumstances may give rise to those feelings "or" for the feelings
themselves. (Psychotherapy could also involve lessening an individual's
acceptance of various situations.) Notions of acceptance are prominent in many
faiths and meditation practices. For example, Buddhism's first noble truth,
"All life is suffering", invites people to accept that suffering is a natural
part of life. The term "Kabbalah" means literally acceptance. Minority groups
in society often describe their goal as "acceptance", wherein the majority will
not challenge the minority's full participation in society. A majority may be
said (at best) to "tolerate" minorities when it confines their participation to
certain aspects of society. Acceptance is the fifth stage of the Kübler-Ross
model (commonly known as the "stages of dying"). "The Big Book of Alcoholics
Anonymous" describes the importance of acceptance in the treatment of
alcoholism. It states that acceptance can be used to resolve situations where a
person feels disturbed by a "person, place, thing or situation -- some fact of
my life -- is unacceptable to me". It claims that an alcoholic person cannot
find serenity until that person accepts that "nothing happens in God's world by
mistake" and that the condition of alcoholism must be accepted as a given.
Acceptance (12 Step definition).. To believe as fact... Self acceptance. Self
acceptance is being loving and happy with who you are "now". It’s an
agreement with yourself to appreciate, validate, accept and support who you are
at this moment. For example, think of acceptance of yourself like being okay
with your house right now. One day you might want a bigger house or you have
this dream house in your mind, but there are advantages to your smaller home
now. So you can be happy with the house you have now and still dream of your
bigger house as a reality later. Self acceptance leads to a new life with new
possibilities that did not exist before because you were caught up in the
struggle against reality. People have trouble accepting themselves because of a
lack of motivation. Some have the misconception that if you are happy with
yourself you won’t change things about yourself. This isn’t true; you
don’t have to be unhappy with yourself to know and actively change things you
don’t like. Acceptance could be called the first step in change. Social
acceptance. Social acceptance affects children, teenagers and adults. It also
can affect people of all ages with mental disabilities because social
acceptance determines many decisions people make in life. Children and
teenagers tend do a lot of things to try to be accepted among friends, also
known as peer pressure. Peer pressure determines sometimes how they do their
hair and decides what clothes they wear. It also determines what they are
willing to do to as far as smoking, drinking, swearing and much more, to be
accepted by those whose friendship they value. Adults do some of the same
things out of the desire for the acceptance and approval of their friends. To
be one of the group, they might do some of the same things like drinking,
swearing or taking drugs just to fit in. They base fashion on the latest tips
from magazines and fashion experts. Social acceptance could be defined as the
fact that most people, in order to fit in with others, attempt to look and act
like them. Or sometimes it is a term that refers to the ability to accept, or
to tolerate differences and diversity in other people or groups of people. When
it comes to mental disabilities, social acceptance plays a big role in
recovery. Social acceptance is important because many people don't understand
mental illness so they don't know how to embrace their friends or other people
who have a disease, leaving these people with feelings of not being accepted in
groups of friends. Conditional or qualified. A type of acceptance that requires
modification(s) of the conditions before the final acceptance is made. For
example, a contract that needs to be accepted from two parties may be adjusted
or modified so that it fits both parties’ satisfactions. A person has been
made an offer that they are willing to agree as long as some changes are made
in its terms or that some conditions or event occurs. A business contract that
is made from the business to the employer, both parties may change and modify
the contract until both parties agree or accept the details in the business
contract. Expressed. A type of acceptance that involves making an and
unambiguous acceptance of the set conditions. For example, a person clearly and
explicitly agrees to an offer. They accept the terms without any changes. A
person agrees to pay a draft that is presented for payment. Implied. A type of
acceptance that is not clearly expressed, but an intent to consent to the
presented conditions is made. For example, acceptance is implied by
demonstrating any act indicates a person's assent to the proposed bargain. A
lady selects an item in a department store and pays the cashier for it. The
lady has indicated that she has agreed to the department stores owner's offer
to sell the item for the price stated on the price tag. Beliefs. Within
Christian beliefs acceptance is characterized as forgiveness. In the Muslim
community, acceptance of Allah as their higher being is similar to people that
are considered Christian and how they accept God as their higher being (Bates,
2002) . As for Judaism it has showed to have some similar beliefs in that they
accept the Ten Commandments as a way to live and have a good and fulfilling
life (Mcdowell and Stewart, 1983). Beliefs can be used in different ways to be
related to acceptance especially in everyday life although beliefs may be more
based on religion. Beliefs and acceptance overlap, however, they can be very
diverse. The acceptance of ones beliefs is important to show commitment and
structure of ones life. Not only is it vital for survival it is a utility that
is used in everyday relationships. For a single person to be accepted from a
friend of theirs has shown to have an impact on an individual’s self-esteem
and well being. In fact, without the acceptance, it could lead to a host of
psychological issues.
