Acclamation An acclamation, in its most common sense, is a form of election
that does not use a ballot. "Acclamation" or "acclamatio" can also signify a
kind of ritual greeting and expression of approval in certain social contexts
in ancient Rome. Voting. The most frequent type of acclamation is a voice vote,
in which the voting group is asked who favors and who opposes the proposed
candidate. In the event of a lack of opposition, the candidate is considered
elected. This form of election is most commonly associated with papal elections
(see Acclamation in papal elections), though this method was discontinued by
Pope John Paul II's apostolic constitution "Universi Dominici Gregis". It is
also sometimes found in the context of parliamentary decisions, or United
States presidential nominating conventions (where it is often used to nominate
the running mate and incumbent Presidents). It is a famous tradition at the
University of St Andrews Union Debating Society, which is the oldest in the
world, to take the minutes as read each week by oral acclamation. In Canada, a
candidate for a parliamentary, legislative or municipal position is said to be
elected by acclamation if he or she has no opponents for the seat, an
eventuality that rarely occurs except for legislative elections in the northern
territories and municipal elections. The last instance of an acclamation in an
election to the Canadian House of Commons was in 1957 when George Henry Doucett
was acclaimed in a by-election following the death of his predecessor William
Gourlay Blair. Just two months before, Chesley William Carter had been the last
person to be acclaimed in a general election. In the Northwest Territories
riding of Inuvik Boot Lake, the incumbent Floyd Roland was returned by
acclamation in two consecutive elections - 2003 and 2007. Religion. In
liturgical Christian Churches, the Acclamations are the opening sentences at
the beginning of the Eucharist. In ancient Rome. Acclamations were ritual
verbal expressions of approval and benediction in public (like gladiatorial
games) and private life. The departure and return of imperial magistrates was,
for example, accompanied by acclamation. In the later Roman Empire, essions of
goodwill were reserved for the emperor and certain relatives, who were greeted
in this manner during public appearances on special occasions such as their
birthdays. By the 4th century AD, acclamations were compulsory for high-level
imperial officials.
