Accountancy Accountancy is the process of communicating financial information
about a business entity to users such as shareholders and managers. The
communication is generally in the form of financial statements that show in
money terms the economic resources under the control of management; the art
lies in selecting the information that is relevant to the user and is reliable.
The principles of accountancy are applied to business entities in three
divisions of practical art, named accounting, bookkeeping, and auditing. The
American Institute of Certified Public Accountants (AICPA) defines accountancy
as "the art of recording, classifying, and summarizing in a significant manner
and in terms of money, transactions and events which are, in part at least, of
financial character, and interpreting the results thereof." Accounting is
thousands of years old; the earliest accounting records, which date back more
than 7,000 years, were found in Mesopotamia (Assyrians). The people of that
time relied on primitive accounting methods to record the growth of crops and
herds. Accounting evolved, improving over the years and advancing as business
advanced. Early accounts served mainly to assist the memory of the
businessperson and the audience for the account was the proprietor or record
keeper alone. Cruder forms of accounting were inadequate for the problems
created by a business entity involving multiple investors, so double-entry
bookkeeping first emerged in northern Italy in the 14th century, where trading
ventures began to require more capital than a single individual was able to
invest. The development of joint stock companies created wider audiences for
accounts, as investors without firsthand knowledge of their operations relied
on accounts to provide the requisite information. This development resulted in
a split of accounting systems for internal (i.e. management accounting) and
external (i.e. financial accounting) purposes, and subsequently also in
accounting and disclosure regulations and a growing need for independent
attestation of external accounts by auditors. Today, accounting is called "the
language of business" because it is the vehicle for reporting financial
information about a business entity to many different groups of people.
Accounting that concentrates on reporting to people inside the business entity
is called management accounting and is used to provide information to
employees, managers, owner-managers and auditors. Management accounting is
concerned primarily with providing a basis for making management or operating
decisions. Accounting that provides information to people outside the business
entity is called financial accounting and provides information to present and
potential shareholders, creditors such as banks or vendors, financial analysts,
economists, and government agencies. Because these users have different needs,
the presentation of financial accounts is very structured and subject to many
more rules than management accounting. The body of rules that governs financial
accounting in a given jurisdiction is called Generally Accepted Accounting
Principles, or GAAP. Other rules include International Financial Reporting
Standards, or IFRS, or US GAAP. Theory. The basic accounting equation is assets
= liabilities + equity. This is the Statement of Financial Position (It is the
new name of Balance Sheet according to IFRS). The foundation for the balance
sheet begins with the income statement, which is revenues - expenses = net
income or net loss. This is followed by the retained earnings statement, which
is beginning retained earnings + net income + additional capital(capital
contribution) - dividends/drawings = ending retained earnings. Etymology. The
word "Accountant" is derived from the French word , which took its origin from
the Latin word . The word was formerly written in English as "Accomptant", but
in process of time the word, which was always pronounced by dropping the "p",
became gradually changed both in pronunciation and in orthography to its
present form (see also "comptroller"). History. Token accounting in ancient
Mesopotamia. The earliest accounting records were found amongst the ruins of
ancient Babylon, Assyria and Sumeria, which date back more than 7,000 years.
The people of that time relied on primitive accounting methods to record the
growth of crops and herds. Because there is a natural season to farming and
herding, it is easy to count and determine if a surplus had been gained after
the crops had been harvested or the young animals weaned. The invention of a
form of bookkeeping using clay tokens represented a huge cognitive leap for
mankind. Accounting in the Roman Empire. The "Res Gestae Divi Augusti" (Latin:
"The Deeds of the Divine Augustus") is a remarkable account to the Roman people
of the Emperor Augustus' stewardship. It listed and quantified his public
expenditure, which encompassed distributions to the people, grants of land or
money to army veterans, subsidies to the "aerarium" (treasury), building of
temples, religious offerings, and expenditures on theatrical shows and
gladiatorial games. It was not an account of state revenue and expenditure, but
was designed to demonstrate Augustus' munificence. The significance of the "Res
Gestae Divi Augusti" from an accounting perspective lies in the fact that it
illustrates that the executive authority had access to detailed financial
information, covering a period of some forty years, which was still retrievable
after the event. The scope of the accounting information at the emperor's
disposal suggests that its purpose encompassed planning and decision-making.
The Roman historians Suetonius and Cassius Dio record that in 23 BC, Augustus
prepared a "rationarium" (account) which listed public revenues, the amounts of
cash in the "aerarium" (treasury), in the provincial "fisci" (tax officials),
and in the hands of the "publicani" (public contractors); and that it included
the names of the freedmen and slaves from whom a detailed account could be
obtained. The closeness of this information to the executive authority of the
emperor is attested by Tacitus' statement that it was written out by Augustus
himself. Records of cash, commodities, and transactions were kept scrupulously
by military personnel of the Roman army. An account of small cash sums received
over a few days at the fort of Vindolanda circa 110 AD shows that the fort
could compute revenues in cash on a daily basis, perhaps from sales of surplus
supplies or goods manufactured in the camp, items dispensed to slaves such as
"cervesa" (beer) and "clavi caligares" (nails for boots), as well as
commodities bought by individual soldiers. The basic needs of the fort were met
by a mixture of direct production, purchase and requisition; in one letter, a
request for money to buy 5,000 "modii" (measures) of "braces" (a cereal used in
brewing) shows that the fort bought provisions for a considerable number of
people. The Heroninos Archive is the name given to a huge collection of papyrus
documents, mostly letters, but also including a fair number of accounts, which
come from Roman Egypt in 3rd century AD. The bulk of the documents relate to
the running of a large, private estate is named after Heroninos because he was
"phrontistes" (Koine Greek: manager) of the estate which had a complex and
standarised system of accounting which was followed by all its local farm
managers. Each administrator on each sub-division of the estate drew up his own
little accounts, for the day-to-day running of the estate, payment of the
workforce, production of crops, the sale of produce, the use of animals, and
general expenditure on the staff. This information was then summarized as
pieces of papyrus scroll into one big yearly account for each particular
sub‚Äîdivision of the estate. Entries were arranged by sector, with cash
expenses and gains extrapolated from all the different sectors. Accounts of
this kind gave the owner the opportunity to take better economic decisions
because the information was purposefully selected and arranged. Simple
accounting is mentioned in the Christian Bible (New Testament) in the Book of
Matthew, in the Parable of the Talents. Islamic accounting and algebra. The
Islamic law of inheritance (Sura 4, ayah 11) defines exactly how the estate is
calculated after death of an individual. The power of testamentary disposition
is basically limited to one-third of the net estate (i.e. the assets remaining
after the payment of funeral expenses and debts), providing for every member of
the family by allotting fixed shares not only to wives and children, but also
to fathers and mothers. The complexity of this law served as an impetus behind
the development of algebra (Arabic: "al-jabr") by the Persian mathematician
Muhammad ibn M≈´sƒÅ al-KhwƒÅrizmƒ´ and other medieval Islamic mathematicians.
KhwƒÅrizmƒ´'s "The Compendious Book on Calculation by Completion and Balancing"
(Arabic: "Hisab al-jabr w'al-muqabala", Baghdad, c. 825) devoted a chapter on
the solution to the Islamic law of inheritance using linear equations. In the
12th century, Latin translations of al-KhwƒÅrizmƒ´'s "Book of Addition and
Subtraction According to the Hindu Calculation" (Arabic:"KitƒÅb al-Jam ø wa-l-
tafrƒ´q bi-·∏•isƒÅb al-Hind") on the use of Indian numerals, introduced the
decimal positional number system to the Western world. The development of
mathematics and accounting was intertwined during the Renaissance. Mathematics
was in the midst of a period of significant development in the late 15th
century. Hindu-Arabic numerals and algebra were introduced to Europe from Arab
mathematics at the end of the 10th century by the Benedictine monk Gerbert of
Aurillac, but it was only after Leonardo Pisano (also known as Fibonacci) put
commercial arithmetic, Hindu-Arabic numerals, and the rules of algebra together
in his Liber Abaci in 1202 that Hindu-Arabic numerals became widely used in
Italy. Luca Pacioli and double-entry bookkeeping. When medieval Europe moved to
a monetary economy in the 13th century, sedentary merchants depended on
bookkeeping to oversee multiple simultaneous transactions financed by bank
loans. One important breakthrough took place around that time: the introduction
of double-entry bookkeeping, which is defined as any bookkeeping system in
which there was a debit and credit entry for each transaction, or for which the
majority of transactions were intended to be of this form. The historical
origin of the use of the words 'debit' and 'credit' in accounting goes back to
the days of single-entry bookkeeping in which the chief objective was to keep
track of amounts owed by customers (debtors) and amounts owed to creditors.
'Debit,' is Latin for 'he owes' and 'credit' Latin for 'he trusts'. The
earliest extant evidence of full double-entry bookkeeping is the Farolfi ledger
of 1299-1300. Giovanno Farolfi & Company were a firm of Florentine merchants
whose head office was in N√Æmes who also acted as moneylenders to the
Archbishop of Arles, their most important customer. The oldest discovered
record of a complete double-entry system is the "Messari" (Italian:
Treasurer's) accounts of the city of Genoa in 1340. The "Messari" accounts
contain debits and credits journalised in a form, and contain balances carried
forward from the preceding year, and therefore enjoy general recognition as a
double-entry system. Luca Pacioli's ""Summa de Arithmetica, Geometria,
Proportioni et Proportionalit√ "" (early Italian: "Review of Arithmetic,
Geometry, Ratio and Proportion") was first printed and published in Venice in
1494. It included a 27-page treatise on bookkeeping, ""Particularis de Computis
et Scripturis"" (Latin: "Details of Calculation and Recording"). It was written
primarily for, and sold mainly to, merchants who used the book as a reference
text, as a source of pleasure from the mathematical puzzles it contained, and
to aid the education of their sons. It represents the first known printed
treatise on bookkeeping; and it is widely believed to be the forerunner of
modern bookkeeping practice. In "Summa Arithmetica", Pacioli introduced symbols
for plus and minus for the first time in a printed book, symbols that became
standard notation in Italian Renaissance mathematics. "Summa Arithmetica" was
also the first known book printed in Italy to contain algebra. Although Luca
Pacioli did not invent double-entry bookkeeping, his 27-page treatise on
bookkeeping contained the first known published work on that topic, and is said
to have laid the foundation for double-entry bookkeeping as it is practiced
today. Even though Pacioli's treatise exhibits almost no originality, it is
generally considered as an important work, mainly because of its wide
circulation, it was written in the vernacular Italian language, and it was a
printed book. According to Pacioli, accounting is an ad hoc ordering system
devised by the merchant. Its regular use provides the merchant with continued
information about his business, and allows him to evaluate how things are going
and to act accordingly. Pacioli recommends the Venetian method of double-entry
bookkeeping above all others. Three major books of account are at the direct
basis of this system: the "memoriale" (Italian: memorandum), the "giornale"
(Journal), and the "quaderno" (ledger). The ledger is considered as the central
one and is accompanied by an alphabetical index. Pacioli's treatise gave
instructions in how to record barter transactions and transactions in a variety
of currencies ‚Äì both of which were far more common than they are today. It
also enabled merchants to audit their own books and to ensure that the entries
in the accounting records made by their bookkeepers complied with the method he
described. Without such a system, all merchants who did not maintain their own
records were at greater risk of theft by their employees and agents: it is not
by accident that the first and last items described in his treatise concern
maintenance of an accurate inventory. The nature of double-entry can be grasped
by recognizing that this system of bookkeeping did not simply record the things
merchants traded so that they could keep track of assets or calculate profits
and losses; instead as a system of writing, double-entry produced effects that
exceeded transcription and calculation. One of its social effects was to
proclaim the honesty of merchants as a group; one of its epistemological
effects was to make its formal precision based on a rule bound system of
arithmetic seem to guarantee the accuracy of the details it recorded. Even
though the information recorded in the books of account was not necessarily
accurate, the combination of the double entry system's precision and the
normalizing effect that precision tended to create, produced the impression
that books of account were not only precise, but accurate as well. Instead of
gaining prestige from numbers, double entry bookkeeping helped confer cultural
authority on numbers. Double entry accounting means that each transaction
requires the use of at least two accounts. Accounting in the internet era. In
the IETF RFCs the act of accounting is usually defined as "the act of
collecting information on resource usage for the purpose of trend analysis,
auditing, billing, or cost allocation". For example when a user uses a
connectivity service paid with a pay-per-view approach the accounting process
is based on a metering of the resource usage by the user (usually time spent
with an active connection or the amount of data transferred using that
connection). The accounting is hence the recording of this connectivity service
"consumption" for subsequent charging of the service itself. Accounting
scandals. The year 2001 witnessed a series of financial information frauds
involving Enron Corporation, auditing firm Arthur Andersen, the
telecommunications company WorldCom, Qwest and Sunbeam, among other well-known
corporations. These problems highlighted the need to review the effectiveness
of accounting standards, auditing regulations and corporate governance
principles. In some cases, management manipulated the figures shown in
financial reports to indicate a better economic performance. In others, tax and
regulatory incentives encouraged over-leveraging of companies and decisions to
bear extraordinary and unjustified risk. The Enron scandal deeply influenced
the development of new regulations to improve the reliability of financial
reporting, and increased public awareness about the importance of having
accounting standards that show the financial reality of companies and the
objectivity and independence of auditing firms. In addition to being the
largest bankruptcy reorganization in American history, the Enron scandal
undoubtedly is the biggest audit failure. It involved a financial scandal of
Enron Corporation and their auditors Arthur Andersen, which was revealed in
late 2001. The scandal caused the dissolution of Arthur Andersen, which at the
time was one of the five largest accounting firms in the world. After a series
of revelations involving irregular accounting procedures conducted throughout
the 1990s, Enron filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection in December 2001.
One consequence of these events was the passage of Sarbanes‚ÄìOxley Act in
2002, as a result of the first admissions of fraudulent behavior made by Enron.
The act significantly raises criminal penalties for securities fraud, for
destroying, altering or fabricating records in federal investigations or any
scheme or attempt to defraud shareholders. Another example of corporate fraud
was the case of Australian telecommunications company One-tel. The financial
manager, Jodee Rich, was subsequently charged with fraud and spent several
years in jail after fraudulently misrepresenting the company's financial
position to encourage investment by some of Australia's richest people,
including James Packer and Lachlan Murdoch. When it collapsed in 2001, One-tel
lost its shareholders more than 920 million dollars.
