Accounting reform Accounting reform is an expansion of accounting rules that
goes beyond the realm of financial measures for both individual economic
entities and national economies. It is advocated by those who consider the
focus of the present standards and practices wholly inadequate to the task of
measuring and reporting the activity, success, and failure of modern
enterprise, including government. Real debate concerns concepts such as whether
to report transactions, such as asset acquisitions, at their cost or at their
current market values. The former, traditional approach, appeals for its
reliability, but can quickly lose its relevance due to inflation and other
factors; the latter, increasingly common approach, is appealing for its
relevance, but is less reliable due to the need to use subjective measures.
Accounting standards setters such as the International Accounting Standards
Board attempt to strike a balance between relevance and reliability. Business.
Limited reforms within professional management circles have led in the past to
activity-based costing, economic value added, and risk measures. Not only do
most businesses raise capital based on numbers derived from current standards,
there are extensive lobbying efforts by the accounting industry to keep those
standards roughly as they are: complex, loopholed, and unable to be applied or
audited easily by laymen. Heads of the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission
since the 1980s have consistently complained that this lobbying makes it
impossible for them to apply meaningful reform, even in the wake of accounting
scandals, e.g. that which felled Arthur Andersen in 2002. National economies.
Any comprehensive scheme of accounting reform is a major professional and
academic enterprise; Typically it requires examination of the role of each of
the fundamental factors of production, an analysis of capital indicating how
many types there are and how each supports each factor of a production process.
A comprehensive scheme that would affect, for instance, the United Nations
standards for national accounts, the rules of the Bank for International
Settlements, or listing requirements on the major stock exchanges, would have
to defend any change against critics that advocated lesser reforms - making it
extraordinarily difficult to achieve simultaneous consent. Marilyn Waring, who
deeply criticized the UN account system for systematically under-valuing the
social and economic contributions of women, stated also that she had to read
literally an entire room full of books in order even to understand the
standards applied today. It seems unlikely that most advocates of reform have
the stamina to do so, nor the background required to debate each issue with
economists or accountants that build their careers on the detailed extension
and improvement of standards that already exist. Most critics considered reform
prospects bleak. The critique from ecological economics was even more
fundamental, claiming that most means of measuring well-being indicated that
the developed nations were in a state of "uneconomic growth" through the 1980s
and 1990s, due mostly to failures of measurement, most or all of which could be
tracked back to the practice of using the Gross National Product as a means of
making money supply decisions. This is perhaps the most obvious and widely-held
critique of current national accounting and economic growth reporting systems -
the creators of the GNP and GDP measures themselves advise against its use as a
single measure of economic growth - but politicians and press typically do so
without caveat nor apology. Robert Costanza, Paul Hawken, Amory Lovins and
others who advocate a consistent global system for valuing natural capital,
note that failures in this area are particularly grim: promoting extinction,
loss of biodiversity, climate change and destructive weather for the sake of
such "growth". John McMurtry characterized this as "the cancer stage of
capitalism". For giving importance to natural capital in accounting, we can
study from this small example For example, you have made building where were
large number of trees. You cut all the trees and you made your building. You
should show the amount of loss of natural capital with this. You have to show
how much loss of living place of birds, animals and oxygen. In accounting every
should be counted and planning for securing natural capital should be done.
What makes "economic sense" under current standards, they argue, is in fact
leading to ecological catastrophe, social conflict, and economic chaos.
Governments. One barrier to accounting reform are governments themselves. They
have the authority to determine what are accepted accounting principles, while
using questionable accounting practices themselves. Governments, for example,
pay off operating costs with longer-term debt and thus overstate budgetary
surpluses or conceal operating deficits. This is not unlike the allegedly
fraudulent practices of some corporations.
