Activism industry The activism industry consists of organizations and
individuals engaged in activism, defined as involvement in action for the
purposes of bringing about change on a funded or contract basis. Activism is
often undertaken in a "full-time" capacity, whereby organizations and
individuals formally classify the activity as "core business". The number of
organizations who employ people to perform this work is sufficiently large,
hence why "activism" is now a job classification. Movements across the
political spectrum can be described as activist in nature. Many organizations
whose primary activity is activism may be defined as being nonprofit
organizations or non-governmental organizations. Most activist organizations do
no manufacturing of goods. The term "activism industry" has often been used to
refer to the practice of outsourcing canvassing fundraising operations.
However, activist organizations engage in other activities as well. Lobbying,
or the influencing of decisions made by government, is another activist tactic.
Many groups have designated staff assigned specifically for lobbying purposes.
In the United States, lobbying is regulated by the federal government. Activism
in capitalist societies. In capitalist societies, when civil liberties are
present, full-time activists can be employed on wages. Additionally, volunteer
activists may support themselves by working full time or part time. Most
governments encourage public support of non-profit organizations by granting
some form of tax relief for donations to charitable organizations, sometimes
including donations of time and money. Governments may attempt to deny these
benefits to activists by restricting the political activity of tax-exempt
organizations. This can be controversial because the line between political
activity, and educational or religious activity, is not always clear. Free
societies rarely have explicit restrictions on political activism; however,
many forms of activism involve committing other crimes, such as aggravated
trespassing. Forced activism. Reports have emerged regarding powerful
organizations, such as government bureaucracies and large corporations, as well
as reports regarding the history of organized activism for the promotion of
their own interests. In addition to these claims, is a belief that on occasion,
employees of the organizations and others have been coerced participants.
