Active measures Active Measures () were a form of political warfare conducted
by the Soviet security services (Cheka, OGPU, NKVD, KGB) to influence the
course of world events, "in addition to collecting intelligence and producing
politically correct assessment of it". Active measures ranged "from media
manipulations to "special actions" involving various degrees of violence". They
were used both abroad and domestically. They included disinformation,
propaganda, counterfeiting official documents, assassinations, and political
repression, such as penetration in churches, and persecution of political
dissidents. Active measures included the establishment and support of
international front organizations (e.g. the World Peace Council); foreign
communist, socialist and opposition parties; wars of national liberation in the
Third World; and underground, revolutionary, insurgency, criminal, and
terrorist groups. The intelligence agencies of Eastern Bloc states also
contributed to the program, providing operatives and intelligence for
assassinations and other types of covert operations. Retired KGB Maj. Gen. Oleg
Kalugin described active measures as "the heart and soul of Soviet
intelligence": "Not intelligence collection, but subversion: active measures to
weaken the West, to drive wedges in the Western community alliances of all
sorts, particularly NATO, to sow discord among allies, to weaken the United
States in the eyes of the people of Europe, Asia, Africa, Latin America, and
thus to prepare ground in case the war really occurs." Active measures was a
system of special courses taught in the Andropov Institute of KGB situated at
SVR headquarters in Yasenevo, near Moscow. The head of "active measures
department" was Yuri Modin, former controller of the Cambridge Five spy ring.
Supporting political movements. GRU alone spent more than $1 billion for
propaganda and peace movements against Vietnam War, which was a "hugely
successful campaign and well worth the cost", according to the allegations of
GRU defector Stanislav Lunev. He claimed that "the GRU and the KGB helped to
fund just about every antiwar movement and organization in America and abroad".
According to Oleg Kalugin, "the Soviet intelligence was really unparalleled.
... The KGB programs -- which would run all sorts of congresses, peace
congresses, youth congresses, festivals, women's movements, trade union
movements, campaigns against U.S. missiles in Europe, campaigns against neutron
weapons, allegations that AIDS... was invented by the CIA... all sorts of
forgeries and faked material -- targeted at politicians, the academic
community, at the public at large." According to Sergei Tretyakov, "The KGB was
responsible for creating the entire nuclear winter story to stop the Pershing
missiles." Tretyakov says that from 1979 the KGB wanted to prevent the United
States from deploying the missiles in Western Europe and that, directed by Yuri
Andropov, they used the Soviet Peace Committee, a government organization, to
organize and finance demonstrations in Europe against US bases. He claims that
misinformation based on a faked "doomsday report" by the Soviet Academy of
Sciences about the effect of nuclear war on climate was distributed to peace
groups, the environmental movement and the journal "Ambio", which carried a key
article on the topic in 1982. Installing and undermining governments. After
World War II Soviet security organizations played key role in installing puppet
Communist governments in Eastern Europe, the People's Republic of China, North
Korea, and later Afghanistan. Their strategy included mass political
repressions and establishment of subordinate secret services in all occupied
countries Some of the active measures were undertaken by the Soviet secret
services against their own governments or Communist rulers. Russian historians
Anton Antonov-Ovseenko and Edvard Radzinsky suggested that Joseph Stalin was
killed by associates of NKVD chief Lavrentiy Beria, based on the interviews of
a former Stalin's body guard and circumstantial evidence. According to
Yevgeniya Alabts allegations, Chief of the KGB Vladimir Semichastny was among
the plotters against Nikita Khrushchev in 1964. KGB chairman Yuri Andropov
reportedly struggled for power with Leonid Brezhnev. Soviet coup attempt of
1991 against Mikhail Gorbachev was organized by KGB chairman Vladimir
Kryuchkov. Gen. Viktor Barannikov, then the former State Security head, became
one of the leaders of uprising against Boris Yeltsin during Russian
constitutional crisis of 1993. Current Russian security organization FSB
allegedly works to undermine governments of Baltic states and Georgia. During
2006 Georgian-Russian espionage controversy several Russian GRU officers were
accused by Georgian authorities of preparations to commit sabotage and
terrorist acts. Puppet rebel forces. Trust operation. In "Trust Operation"
(1921–1926), the State Political Directorate (OGPU) set up a fake anti-
Bolshevik underground organization, "Monarchist Union of Central Russia". The
main success of this operation was luring Boris Savinkov and Sidney Reilly into
the Soviet Union, where they were arrested and executed. Basmachi revolt.
During the Basmachi Revolt in Central Asia, special military detachments were
masqueraded as Basmachi forces and received support from British and Turkish
intelligence services. Operations of these detachments facilitated collapse of
Basmachi movement and led to assassination of Enver Pasha. Post World War II
counter-insurgency operations. Following World War II, various partisan
organisations in the Baltic States, Poland and Western Ukraine (including some
previous collaborators of Germany) fought for independence of their countries
against the Soviet forces. Many NKVD agents were sent to join and penetrate the
independence movements. Many puppet rebel forces were created by the NKVD and
permitted to attack local Soviet authorities to gain credibility and exfiltrate
senior NKVD agents to the West. Political assassinations. The highest-ranking
Soviet Bloc intelligence defector, Lt. Gen. Ion Mihai Pacepa claimed to have
had a conversation with Nicolae Ceauşescu, who told him about "ten
international leaders the Kremlin killed or tried to kill": Laszlo Rajk and
Imre Nagy from Hungary; Lucreţiu Pătrăşcanu and Gheorghe Gheorghiu-Dej from
Romania; Rudolf Slánský and Jan Masaryk from Czechoslovakia; the Shah of
Iran; Muhammad Zia-ul-Haq, President of Pakistan; Palmiro Togliatti from Italy;
John F. Kennedy; and Mao Zedong. Pacepa provided some other claims, such as a
plot to kill Mao Zedong with the help of Lin Biao organized by the KGB and
alleged that "among the leaders of Moscow’s satellite intelligence services
there was unanimous agreement that the KGB had been involved in the
assassination of President Kennedy." The second President of Afghanistan
Hafizullah Amin was killed by KGB Alpha Group in Operation Storm-333.
Presidents of the unrecognized Chechen Republic of Ichkeria organized by
Chechen separatists including Dzhokhar Dudaev, Zelimkhan Yandarbiev, Aslan
Maskhadov, and Abdul-Khalim Saidullaev were killed by FSB and affiliated
forces. Other widely publicized cases are murders of Russian communist Leon
Trotsky and Bulgarian writer Georgi Markov. There were also allegations that
the KGB was behind the assassination attempt against the Pope John Paul II in
1981. The Italian Mitrokhin Commission, headed by senator Paolo Guzzanti (Forza
Italia), worked on the Mitrokhin Archives from 2003 to March 2006. In a draft
report, senator Guzzanti revived the "Bulgarian connection" theory concerning
Mehmet Ali Agca's 1981 assassination attempt against the Pope John Paul II.
Guzzanti declared that "beyond any reasonable doubt "the KGB was behind the
assassination attempt against the Pope John Paul II in 1981 The commission
draft report has no bearing on any judicial investigations, which have long
been closed. The Italian draft report said Soviet military intelligence - and
not the KGB - was responsible. In Russia, Foreign Intelligence Service
spokesman Boris Labusov called the accusation "absurd." The Italian Mitrokhin
commission received criticism during and after its existence. It was closed in
March 2006 without any proof brought to its various controversial allegations,
including the claim that Romano Prodi, former and current Prime minister of
Italy and former President of the European Commission was the "KGB's man in
Europe." One of the informer of Guzzanti, Mario Scaramella, has been arrested
for defamation and arms trade end of 2006. Guerrilas. Promotion of guerrilla
organizations worldwide. Soviet secret services have been described as "the
primary instructors of guerrilas worldwide" According to Ion Mihai Pacepa, KGB
General Aleksandr Sakharovsky once said: "In today’s world, when nuclear arms
have made military force obsolete, terrorism should become our main weapon." He
also claimed that "Airplane hijacking is my own invention". Lt. General Ion
Mihai Pacepa described operation "SIG" (“Zionist Governments”) that was
devised in 1972, to turn the whole Islamic world against Israel and the United
States. KGB chairman Yury Andropov allegedly explained to Pacepa that The
following liberation organizations have been allegedly established by the KGB:
PLO, National Liberation Army of Bolivia (created in 1964 with help from
Ernesto Che Guevara); the National Liberation Army of Colombia (created in 1965
with help from Cuba), Democratic Front for the Liberation of Palestine in 1969,
and the Secret Army for Liberation of Armenia in 1975.
