Actuary An actuary is a business professional who deals with the financial
impact of risk and uncertainty. Actuaries provide expert assessments of
financial security systems, with a focus on their complexity, their
mathematics, and their mechanisms . Actuaries mathematically evaluate the
probability of events and quantify the contingent outcomes in order to minimize
financial losses associated with uncertain undesirable events. Since many
events, such as death, cannot be avoided, it is helpful to take measures to
minimize their financial impact when they occur. These risks can affect both
sides of the balance sheet, and require asset management, liability management,
and valuation skills. Analytical skills, business knowledge and understanding
of human behavior and the vagaries of information systems are required to
design and manage programs that control risk . The profession has consistently
ranked as one of the most desirable in various studies over the years. In 2006,
a study by "U.S. News & World Report" included actuaries among the 25 Best
Professions that it expects will be in great demand in the future . In 2010, a
study published by job search website CareerCast ranked actuary as the #1 job
in the United States . The study used five key criteria to rank jobs:
environment, income, employment outlook, physical demands and stress. In 2012,
the same study ranked the profession as the second best job . Disciplines.
Actuaries' insurance disciplines include life; health; pensions, annuities, and
asset management; social welfare programs; property; casualty; general
insurance; and reinsurance. Life, health, and pension actuaries deal with
mortality risk, morbidity, and consumer choice regarding the ongoing
utilization of drugs and medical services risk, and investment risk. Products
prominent in their work include life insurance, annuities, pensions, mortgage
and credit insurance, short and long term disability, and medical, dental,
health savings accounts and long term care insurance. In addition to these
risks, social insurance programs are greatly influenced by public opinion,
politics, budget constraints, changing demographics and other factors such as
medical technology, inflation and cost of living considerations . Casualty
actuaries, also known as non-life or general insurance actuaries, deal with
risks that can occur to people or property other than risks related to the life
or health of a person. Products prominent in their work include auto insurance,
homeowners insurance, commercial property insurance, workers’ compensation,
title insurance, malpractice insurance, products liability insurance, directors
and officers liability insurance, environmental and marine insurance, terrorism
insurance and other types of liability insurance. Reinsurance products have to
accommodate all of the previously mentioned products, and in addition have to
reflect properly the increasing long term risks associated with climate change,
cultural litigiousness, acts of war, terrorism and politics . Both major
classes of actuaries are also called upon for their expertise in enterprise
risk management . This can involve dynamic financial analysis, stress testing,
the formulation of corporate risk policy, and the setting up and running of
corporate risk departments . Actuaries are also involved in other areas of the
financial services industry, and can be involved in managing corporate credit,
company evaluations, and tool development . History. Need for insurance. The
basic requirements of communal interests gave rise to risk sharing since the
dawn of civilization. For example, people who lived their entire lives in a
camp had the risk of fire, which would leave their band or family without
shelter. After basic exchange came into existence, more complex forms developed
beyond a basic barter economy, and new forms of risk manifested. Merchants
embarking on trade journeys bore the risk of losing goods entrusted to them,
their own possessions, or even their lives. Intermediaries developed to
warehouse and trade goods, and they often suffered from financial risk. The
primary providers in any extended families or household always ran the risk of
premature death, disability or infirmity, leaving their dependents to starve.
Credit procurement was difficult if the lender worried about repayment in the
event of the borrower's death or infirmity. Alternatively, people sometimes
lived too long from a financial perspective, exhausting their savings, if any,
or becoming a burden on others in the extended family or society . Early
attempts. In the ancient world there was not always room for the sick,
suffering, disabled, aged, or the poor—these were often not part of the
cultural consciousness of societies . Early methods of protection, aside from
the normal support of the extended family, involved charity; religious
organizations or neighbors would collect for the destitute and needy. By the
middle of the 3rd century, 1,500 suffering people were being supported by
charitable operations in Rome . Charitable protection is still an active form
of support to this very day . However, receiving charity is uncertain and is
often accompanied by social stigma. Elementary mutual aid agreements and
pensions did arise in antiquity . Early in the Roman empire, associations were
formed to meet the expenses of burial, cremation, and monuments—precursors to
burial insurance and friendly societies. A small sum was paid into a communal
fund on a weekly basis, and upon the death of a member, the fund would cover
the expenses of rites and burial. These societies sometimes sold shares in the
building of columbāria, or burial vaults, owned by the fund—the precursor to
mutual insurance companies . Other early examples of mutual surety and
assurance pacts can be traced back to various forms of fellowship within the
Saxon clans of England and their Germanic forbears, and to Celtic society .
Non-life insurance started as a hedge against loss of cargo during sea travel.
Anecdotal reports of such guarantees occur in the writings of Demosthenes, who
lived in the 4th century BCE . The earliest records of an official non-life
insurance policy come from Sicily, where there is record of a fourteenth
century contract to insure a shipment of wheat . In 1350, Lenardo Cattaneo
assumed "all risks from act of God, or of man, and from perils of the sea" that
may occur to a shipment of wheat from Sicily to Tunis up to a maximum of 300
florins. For this he was paid a premium of eighteen per cent . In current
terminology, this would be an ocean marine contract for a rate-on-line of 18%.
Development of theory. The 17th century was a period of extraordinary advances
in mathematics in Germany, France, and England. At the same time there was a
rapidly growing desire and need to place the valuation of personal risk on a
more scientific basis. Independently from each other, compound interest was
studied and probability theory emerged as a well understood mathematical
discipline. Another important advance came in 1662 from a London draper named
John Graunt, who showed that there were predictable patterns of longevity and
death in a defined group, or cohort, of people, despite the uncertainty about
the future longevity or mortality of any one individual person. This study
became the basis for the original life table. It was now possible to set up an
insurance scheme to provide life insurance or pensions for a group of people,
and to calculate with some degree of accuracy how much each person in the group
should contribute to a common fund assumed to earn a fixed rate of interest.
The first person to demonstrate publicly how this could be done was Edmond
Halley. In addition to constructing his own life table, Halley demonstrated a
method of using his life table to calculate the premium someone of a given age
should pay to purchase a life-annuity . Early actuaries. James Dodson’s
pioneering work on the level premium system led to the formation of the Society
for Equitable Assurances on Lives and Survivorship (now commonly known as
Equitable Life) in London in 1762. This was the first life insurance company to
use premium rates which were calculated scientifically for long-term life
policies, using Dodson’s work. The company still exists, though it has run
into difficulties recently. After Dodson’s death in 1757, Edward Rowe Mores
took over the leadership of the group that eventually became the Society for
Equitable Assurances in 1762. It was he who specified that the chief official
should be called an ‘actuary’ . Previously, the use of the term had been
restricted to an official who recorded the decisions, or ‘acts’, of
ecclesiastical courts, in ancient times originally the secretary of the Roman
senate, responsible for compiling the Acta Senatus . Other companies which did
not originally use such mathematical and scientific methods most often failed
or were forced to adopt the methods pioneered by Equitable . Development of the
modern profession. In the 18th and 19th centuries, computational complexity was
limited to manual calculations. The actual calculations required to compute
fair insurance premiums are rather complex. The actuaries of that time
developed methods to construct easily used tables, using sophisticated
approximations called commutation functions, to facilitate timely, accurate,
manual calculations of premiums . Over time, actuarial organizations were
founded to support and further both actuaries and actuarial science, and to
protect the public interest by ensuring competency and ethical standards .
However, calculations remained cumbersome, and actuarial shortcuts were
commonplace. Non-life actuaries followed in the footsteps of their life
compatriots in the early 20th century. In the United States, the 1920 revision
to workers' compensation rates took over two months of around-the-clock work by
day and night teams of actuaries . In the 1930s and 1940s, however, rigorous
mathematical foundations for stochastic processes were developed . Actuaries
could now begin to forecast losses using models of random events instead of
deterministic methods. Computers further revolutionized the actuarial
profession. From pencil-and-paper to punchcards to microcomputers, the modeling
and forecasting ability of the actuary has grown exponentially . Another modern
development is the convergence of modern financial theory with actuarial
science . In the early 20th century, actuaries were developing many techniques
that can be found in modern financial theory, but for various historical
reasons, these developments did not achieve much recognition . However, in the
late 1980s and early 1990s, there was a distinct effort for actuaries to
combine financial theory and stochastic methods into their established models .
Today, the profession, both in practice and in the educational syllabi of many
actuarial organizations, combines tables, loss models, stochastic methods, and
financial theory , but is still not completely aligned with modern financial
economics . Responsibilities. Actuaries use skills in mathematics, economics,
computer science, finance, probability and statistics, and business to help
businesses assess the risk of certain events occurring and to formulate
policies that minimize the cost of that risk. For this reason, actuaries are
essential to the insurance and reinsurance industry, either as staff employees
or as consultants; to other businesses, including sponsors of pension plans;
and to government agencies such as the Government Actuary’s Department in the
UK or the Social Security Administration in the US. Actuaries assemble and
analyze data to estimate the probability and likely cost of the occurrence of
an event such as death, sickness, injury, disability, or loss of property.
Actuaries also address financial questions, including those involving the level
of pension contributions required to produce a certain retirement income and
the way in which a company should invest resources to maximize its return on
investments in light of potential risk. Using their broad knowledge, actuaries
help design and price insurance policies, pension plans, and other financial
strategies in a manner which will help ensure that the plans are maintained on
a sound financial basis . Traditional employment. On both the life and casualty
sides, the classical function of actuaries is to calculate premiums and
reserves for insurance policies covering various risks. Premiums are the amount
of money the insurer needs to collect from the policyholder in order to cover
the expected losses, expenses, and a provision for profit. Reserves are
provisions for future liabilities and indicate how much money should be set
aside now to reasonably provide for future payouts. If you inspect the balance
sheet of an insurance company, you will find that the liability side consists
mainly of reserves. On the casualty side, this analysis often involves
quantifying the probability of a loss event, called the frequency, and the size
of that loss event, called the severity. Further, the amount of time that
occurs before the loss event is also important, as the insurer will not have to
pay anything until after the event has occurred. On the life side, the analysis
often involves quantifying how much a potential sum of money or a financial
liability will be worth at different points in the future. Since neither of
these kinds of analysis are purely deterministic processes, stochastic models
are often used to determine frequency and severity distributions and the
parameters of these distributions. Forecasting interest yields and currency
movements also plays a role in determining future costs, especially on the life
side. Actuaries do not always attempt to predict aggregate future events.
Often, their work may relate to determining the cost of financial liabilities
that have already occurred, called retrospective reinsurance, or the
development or re-pricing of new products. Actuaries also design and maintain
products and systems. They are involved in financial reporting of companies’
assets and liabilities. They must communicate complex concepts to clients who
may not share their language or depth of knowledge. Actuaries work under a
strict code of ethics that covers their communications and work products, but
their clients may not adhere to those same standards when interpreting the data
or using it within different kinds of businesses. Non-traditional employment.
Many actuaries are general business managers or financial officers. They
analyze business prospects with their financial skills in valuing or
discounting risky future cash flows, and many apply their pricing expertise
from insurance to other lines of business. Some actuaries act as expert
witnesses by applying their analysis in court trials to estimate the economic
value of losses such as lost profits or lost wages. There has been a recent
widening of the scope of the actuarial field to include investment advice and
asset management. Further, there has been a convergence from the financial
fields of risk management and quantitative analysis with actuarial science.
Now, actuaries also work as risk managers, quantitative analysts, or investment
specialists. Even actuaries in traditional roles are now studying and using the
tools and data previously in the domain of finance . One of the latest
developments in the industry, insurance securitization, requires both the
actuarial and finance skills . Another field in which actuaries are becoming
more prominent is that of Enterprise Risk Management, for both financial and
non-financial corporations . For example, the Basel II accord for financial
institutions, and its analogue, the Solvency II accord for insurance companies,
requires such institutions to account for operational risk separately and in
addition to credit, reserve, asset, and insolvency risk. Actuarial skills are
well suited to this environment because of their training in analyzing various
forms of risk, and judging the potential for upside gain, as well as downside
loss associated with these forms of risk . Remuneration. The credentialing and
examination procedure for becoming a fully qualified actuary can be intensely
demanding. Consequently, the profession remains very small throughout the
world. As a result, actuaries are in high demand, and they are highly paid for
the services they render . In the UK, where there are approximately 9,000 fully
qualified actuaries, typical post-university starting salaries range between
GBP £25,300 and £35,000 and successful more experienced actuaries can earn
well in excess of £100,000 a year . Credentialing and exams. Becoming a fully
credentialed actuary requires passing a rigorous series of professional
examinations, usually taking several years in total. In some countries, such as
Denmark, most study takes place in a university setting . In others, such as
the U.S., most study takes place during employment through a series of
examinations (, ). In the UK, and countries based on its process, there is a
hybrid university-exam structure . Exam support. As these qualifying exams are
rigorous, support is usually available to people progressing through the exams.
Often, employers provide paid on-the-job study time and paid attendance at
seminars designed for the exams . Also, many companies which employ actuaries
have automatic pay raises or promotions when exams are passed. As a result,
actuarial students have strong incentives for devoting adequate study time
during off-work hours. A common rule of thumb for exam students is that, for
the Society of Actuaries examinations, roughly 400 hours of study time are
necessary for each four-hour exam . Thus, thousands of hours of study time
should be anticipated over several years, assuming no failures . In practice,
as the historical passing percentages remain below 50% for these exams, the
“travel time” to credentialing is extended and more study time is needed.
This process resembles formal schooling, so that actuaries who are sitting for
exams are still called “students” or “candidates” despite holding
important positions with substantial responsibilities. Fictional actuaries. Due
to the low public-profile of the job, some of the most recognizable actuaries
to the general public happen to be characters in movies. Many actuaries were
unhappy with the stereotypical portrayals of these actuaries as unhappy, math-
obsessed and socially inept people; others have claimed that the portrayals are
close to home, if a bit exaggerated .
