Affinity group An Affinity group is usually a small group of activists (usually
from 3-20) who work together on direct action. Affinity groups are organized in
a non-hierarchical manner, usually using consensus decision making, and are
often made up of trusted friends. They provide a method of organization that is
flexible and decentralized. Affinity groups can be based on a common ideology
(e.g., anarchism, pacifism), a shared concern for a given issue (e.g., anti-
nuclear, anti-war) or a common activity, role or skill (e.g., legal support,
medical aid, black blocs). Affinity groups may have either open or closed
membership, although the latter is far more common. History. Although Affinity
groups are a natural way for humans to organize and are, in that sense, as old
as humanity, the origin of Affinity groups, in the current context, dates back
to 19th century Spain. It was the favourite way of organization by Spanish
anarchists ("grupos de afinidad"), and had their base in the tertulias or in
the local groups. Affinity groups appeared again in the U.S. anti-war movement
of the 1960s and 1970s. The term was used by Ben Morea and the group Black
Mask. Later, anti-war activists on college campuses organized around their
interests or backgrounds -- religious, gender, ethnic group, etc. They became
popular in the 1970s in the anti-nuclear movement in the United States and
Europe. The 30,000 person occupation and blockade of the Ruhr nuclear power
station in Germany in 1969 was organized on the Affinity group model. Today,
the structure is used by many different activists: animal rights,
environmental, anti-war, and anti-globalization, to name some examples. The
1999 protests in Seattle which shut down the WTO Ministerial Conference of 1999
included coordinated organization by many clusters of Affinity groups.
Organization. External. By definition, Affinity groups are autonomous. Co-
ordinated effort and co-operation amongst several Affinity groups, however, is
often achieved by using a loose form of confederation. Internal. Affinity
groups tend to be loosely organized, however there are some formal roles or
positions that commonly occur. A given Affinity group may have all, some or
none of these positions. They may be permanent or temporary and the group may
opt to take turns in these roles, or assign one role to one person.
