African socialism African socialism is a belief in sharing economic resources
in a "traditional" African way, as distinct from classical socialism. Many
African politicians of the 1950s and 1960s professed their support for African
socialism, although definitions and interpretations of this term varied
considerably. This is because African socialism has not been the product of one
single thinker. One example of a definition of African socialism was phrased as
a metaphor by de Graft Johnson, from the University of Ghana in 1962. His
definition of African socialism was that “the principle of the State as a
father, which is the basis of socialism, is what we have here in our clans or
tribes which are in fact extended families. In our society, the collective
wealth of the extended family is used for the welfare of the family as a whole.
The extended families take on the functions of social insurance, and if a
member of the family falls into debt, all the others help him to pay it; if he
is ill, they look after him; if there is a bright boy in the family whom the
immediate parents cannot afford to educate, the others help in educating him.
Property, especially land, often belongs to the whole extended family. There
are abuses in the extended family system, but its basic pattern, when enlarged
to embrace the state, is virtually what is meant by socialism.” Origins and
themes. As many African countries gained independence during the 1960s, some of
these newly formed governments rejected the ideas of capitalism in favour of a
more afrocentric economic model. Advocates of African socialism claimed that it
was not the opposite of capitalism nor a response to it, but something
completely different. Julius Nyerere of Tanzania, Léopold Senghor of Senegal,
Kwame Nkrumah of Ghana and Sékou Touré of Guinea, were the main architects of
African Socialism according to William H. Friedland and Carl G. Rosberg Jr.
editors of the book "African Socialism." Common principles of various versions
of African socialism were: economic development guided by a large public
sector, incorporating the African identity and what it means to be African, and
the avoidance of the development of social classes within society. Senghor
claimed that “Africa’s social background of tribal community life not only
makes socialism natural to Africa but excludes the validity of the theory of
class struggle,” thus making African socialism, in all of its variations,
different from Marxism and European socialist theory Ujamaa. The Concept of
Ujamaa formed the basis of Julius Nyerere's social and economic development
policies in Tanzania after Tanganyika gained independence from its colonial
power Britain in 1961 and its union with Zanzibar to form Tanzania in 1964. The
word Ujamaa comes from the Swahili word for extended family or familyhood and
is distinguished by several key characteristics, namely that a person becomes a
person through the people or community. In 1967, President Nyerere published
his development blueprint, which was titled the Arusha Declaration, in which
Nyerere pointed out the need for an African model of development. That formed
the basis of African socialism for Tanzania. The Arusha Declaration sparked
international discussions and debates about African socialism in the academic
and economic world. However, according to the BBC, "while he united his nation
and made major advances in the fields of health and education," Julius
Nyerere's African socialist "Ujamaa" collectives "proved disastrous for
Tanzania's economy".
