African Plate The African Plate is a tectonic plate which includes the
continent of Africa, as well as oceanic crust which lies between the continent
and various surrounding ocean ridges. Boundaries. The westerly side is a
divergent boundary with the North American Plate to the north and the South
American Plate to the south forming the central and southern part of the Mid-
Atlantic Ridge. The African plate is bounded on the northeast by the Arabian
Plate, the southeast by the Indo-Australian Plate, the north by the Eurasian
Plate and the Anatolian Plate, and on the south by the Antarctic Plate. All of
these are divergent or spreading boundaries with the exception of the northern
boundary with the Eurasian Plate (except for a short segment near the Azores,
the Terceira Rift). Components. The African Plate includes several cratons,
stable blocks of old crust with deep roots in the subcontinental lithospheric
mantle, and less stable terranes, which came together to form the African
continent during the assembly of the supercontinent Pangea around 550 million
years ago. The cratons are, from south to north, the Kalahari craton, Congo
craton, Tanzania craton and West African craton. The cratons were widely
separated in the past, but came together during the Pan-African orogeny and
stayed together when Gondwana split up. The cratons are connected by orogenic
belts, regions of highly deformed rock where the tectonic plates have engaged.
The Saharan Metacraton has been tentatively identified as the remains of a
craton that has become detached from the subcontinental lithospheric mantle,
but alternatively may consist of a collection of unrelated crustal fragments
swept together during the Pan-African orogeny. In some areas, the cratons are
covered by sedimentary basins, such as the Tindouf basin, Taoudeni basin and
Congo basin, where the underlying archaic crust is overlaid by more recent
Neoproterozoic sediments. The plate includes shear zones such as the Central
African Shear Zone (CASZ) where, in the past, two sections of the crust were
moving in opposite directions, and rifts such as the Anza trough where the
crust was pulled apart, and the resulting depression filled with more modern
sediment. Modern movements. The African Plate is rifting in the eastern
interior along the East African Rift. This rift zone separates the Nubian Plate
to the west from the Somali Plate to the east. One hypothesis proposes the
existence of a mantle plume beneath the Afar region, while an opposing
hypothesis asserts that the rifting is merely a zone of maximum weakness where
the African Plate is deforming as plates to its east are moving rapidly
northward. The African Plate's speed is estimated at around per year. It has
been moving over the past 100 million years or so in a general northeast
direction. This is drawing it closer to the Eurasian Plate, causing subduction
where oceanic crust is converging with continental crust (e.g. portions of the
central and eastern Mediterranean). In the western Mediterranean, the relative
motions of the Eurasian and African plates produce a combination of lateral and
compressive forces, concentrated in a zone known as the Azores-Gibraltar Fault
Zone. Along its northeast margin, the African Plate is bounded by the Red Sea
Rift where the Arabian Plate is moving away from the African Plate. The New
England hotspot in the Atlantic Ocean has probably created a short line of mid
to late-Tertiary age seamounts on the African Plate but appears to be currently
inactive.
