Aggregate demand In macroeconomics, aggregate demand (AD) is the total demand
for final goods and services in the economy (Y) at a given time and price
level. It is the amount of goods and services in the economy that will be
purchased at all possible price levels. This is the demand for the gross
domestic product of a country when inventory levels are static. It is often
called effective demand, though at other times this term is distinguished. It
is often cited that the aggregate demand curve is downward sloping because at
lower price levels a greater quantity is demanded. While this is correct at the
microeconomic, single good level, at the aggregate level this is incorrect. The
aggregate demand curve is in fact downward sloping as a result of three
distinct effects: Pigou's wealth effect, the Keynes' interest rate effect and
the Mundell-Fleming exchange-rate effect. Components. An aggregate demand curve
is the sum of individual demand curves for different sectors of the economy.
The aggregate demand is usually described as a linear sum of four separable
demand sources. where These four major parts, which can be stated in either
'nominal' or 'real' terms, are: In sum, for a single country at a given time,
aggregate demand (D or AD) = C + Ip + G + (X-M). These macrovariables are
constructed from varying types of microvariables from the price of each, so
these variables are denominated in (real or nominal) currency terms. Aggregate
demand curves. Understanding of the aggregate demand curve depends on whether
it is examined based on changes in demand as income changes, or as price
change. Aggregate demand-aggregate supply model. Sometimes, especially in
textbooks, "aggregate demand" refers to an entire demand curve that "looks"
like that in a typical Marshallian supply and demand diagram. Thus, that we
could refer to an "aggregate quantity demanded" (Yd = C + Ip + G + NX in real
or inflation-corrected terms) at any given aggregate average price level (such
as the GDP deflator), P. In these diagrams, typically the Yd rises as the
average price level (P) falls, as with the AD line in the diagram. The main
theoretical reason for this is that if the nominal money supply (Ms) is
constant, a falling P implies that the real money supply (Ms/P)rises,
encouraging lower interest rates and higher spending. This is often called the
"Keynes effect." Carefully using ideas from the theory of supply and demand,
aggregate supply can help determine the extent to which increases in aggregate
demand lead to increases in real output or instead to increases in prices
(inflation). In the diagram, an increase in any of the components of AD (at any
given P) shifts the AD curve to the right. This increases both the level of
real production (Y) and the average price level (P). But different levels of
economic activity imply different mixtures of output and price increases. As
shown, with very low levels of real gross domestic product and thus large
amounts of unemployed resources, most economists of the Keynesian school
suggest that most of the change would be in the form of output and employment
increases. As the economy gets close to potential output (Y*), we would see
more and more price increases rather than output increases as AD increases.
Beyond Y*, this gets more intense, so that price increases dominate. Worse,
output levels greater than Y* cannot be sustained for long. The AS is a "short-
term" relationship here. If the economy persists in operating above potential,
the AS curve will shift to the left, making the increases in real output
transitory. At low levels of Y, the world is more complicated. First, most
modern industrial economies experience few if any falls in prices. So the AS
curve is unlikely to shift down or to the right. Second, when they do suffer
price cuts (as in Japan), it can lead to disastrous deflation. Debt. In words:
what you spend is what you earn, plus what you borrow: if you spend $110 and
earned $100, then you must have net borrowed $10; conversely if you spend $90
and earn $100, then you have net savings of $10, or have reduced debt by $10,
for net change in debt of –$10. If debt grows or shrinks slowly as a
percentage of GDP, its impact on aggregate demand is small; conversely, if debt
is significant, then changes in the dynamics of debt growth can have
significant impact on aggregate demand. Change in debt is tied to the "level"
of debt: if the overall debt level is 10% of GDP and 1% of loans are not
repaid, this impacts GDP by 1% of 10% = 0.1% of GDP, which is statistical
noise. Conversely, if the debt level is 300% of GDP and 1% of loans are not
repaid, this impacts GDP by 1% of 300% = 3% of GDP, which is significant: a
change of this magnitude will generally cause a recession. Similarly, changes
in the repayment rate (debtors paying down their debts) impact aggregate demand
in proportion to the level of debt. Thus, as the level of debt in an economy
grows, the economy becomes more sensitive to debt dynamics, and credit bubbles
are of macroeconomic concern. Since write-offs and savings rates both spike in
recessions, both of which result in shrinkage of credit, the resulting drop in
aggregate demand can worsen and perpetuate the recession in a vicious cycle.
This perspective originates in, and is intimately tied to, the debt-deflation
theory of Irving Fisher, and the notion of a credit bubble (credit being the
flip side of debt), and has been elaborated in the Post-Keynesian school. If
the overall level of debt is rising each year, then aggregate demand exceeds
Income by that amount. However, if the level of debt stops rising and instead
starts falling (if "the bubble bursts"), then aggregate demand falls short of
income, by the amount of net savings (largely in the form of debt repayment or
debt writing off, such as in bankruptcy). This causes a sudden and sustained
drop in aggregate demand, and this shock is argued to be the proximate cause of
a class of economic crises, properly financial crises. Indeed, a fall in the
level of debt is not necessary – even a "slowing" in the rate of debt growth
causes a drop in aggregate demand (relative to the higher borrowing year).
These crises then end when credit starts growing again, either because most or
all debts have been repaid or written off, or for other reasons as below. From
the perspective of debt, the Keynesian prescription of government deficit
spending in the face of an economic crisis consists of the government net
"dis"-saving (increasing its debt) to compensate for the shortfall in private
debt: it replaces private debt with public debt. Other alternatives include
seeking to restart the growth of private debt ("reflate the bubble"), or slow
or stop its fall; and debt relief, which by lowering or eliminating debt stops
credit from contracting (as it cannot fall below zero) and allows debt to
either stabilize or grow – this has the further effect of redistributing
wealth from creditors (who write off debts) to debtors (whose debts are
relieved). Criticisms. Austrian theorist Henry Hazlitt argued that aggregate
demand is a meaningless concept in economic analysis. Friedrich Hayek, another
Austrian theorist, argued that Keynes' study of the aggregate relations in an
economy is fallacious, as recessions are caused by micro-economic factors.
