Agricultural policy Agricultural policy describes a set of laws relating to
domestic agriculture and imports of foreign agricultural products. Governments
usually implement agricultural policies with the goal of achieving a specific
outcome in the domestic agricultural product markets. Outcomes can involve, for
example, a guaranteed supply level, price stability, product quality, product
selection, land use or employment. Agriculture policy concerns. Poverty
reduction. Agriculture remains the largest single contributor to the
livelihoods of the 75% of the world's poor who live in rural areas. Encouraging
agricultural growth is therefore an important aspect of agricultural policy in
the developing world. In addition, a recent Natural Resource Perspective paper
by the Overseas Development Institute found that good infrastructure, education
and effective information services in rural areas were necessary to improve the
chances of making agriculture work for the poor. Biosecurity. Avian influenza.
Use of animal vaccines can create new viruses that kill people and cause flu
pandemic threats. H5N1 is an example of where this might have already occurred.
According to the CDC article "H5N1 Outbreaks and Enzootic Influenza" by Robert
G. Webster et al.:"Transmission of highly pathogenic H5N1 from domestic poultry
back to migratory waterfowl in western China has increased the geographic
spread. The spread of H5N1 and its likely reintroduction to domestic poultry
increase the need for good agricultural vaccines. In fact, the root cause of
the continuing H5N1 pandemic threat may be the way the pathogenicity of H5N1
viruses is masked by co-circulating influenza viruses or bad agricultural
vaccines." Dr. Robert Webster explains: "If you use a good vaccine you can
prevent the transmission within poultry and to humans. But if they have been
using vaccines now China for several years, why is there so much bird flu?
There is bad vaccine that stops the disease in the bird but the bird goes on
pooping out virus and maintaining it and changing it. And I think this is what
is going on in China. It has to be. Either there is not enough vaccine being
used or there is substandard vaccine being used. Probably both. It’s not just
China. We can’t blame China for substandard vaccines. I think there are
substandard vaccines for influenza in poultry all over the world." In response
to the same concerns, Reuters reports Hong Kong infectious disease expert Lo
Wing-lok indicating that vaccines have to take top priority. Julie Hall, who is
in charge of the WHO's outbreak response in China, claimed that China's
vaccinations might be masking the virus. The BBC reported that Dr Wendy
Barclay, a virologist at the University of Reading, UK said: "The Chinese have
made a vaccine based on reverse genetics made with H5N1 antigens, and they have
been using it. There has been a lot of criticism of what they have done,
because they have protected their chickens against death from this virus but
the chickens still get infected; and then you get drift - the virus mutates in
response to the antibodies - and now we have a situation where we have five or
six 'flavours' of H5N1 out there." Bovine spongiform encephalopathy. Bovine
spongiform encephalopathy (BSE), commonly known as "mad cow disease", is a
fatal, neurodegenerative disease of cattle, which infects by a mechanism that
surprised biologists upon its discovery in the late 20th century. In the UK,
the country worst affected, 179,000 cattle were infected and 4.4 million killed
as a precaution. The disease can be transmitted to human beings who eat or
inhale material from infected carcasses. In humans, it is known as new variant
Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease (vCJD or nvCJD), and by June 2007, it had killed 165
people in Britain, and six elsewhere with the number expected to rise because
of the disease's long incubation period. Between 460,000 and 482,000 BSE-
infected animals had entered the human food chain before controls on high-risk
offal were introduced in 1989. A British inquiry into BSE concluded that the
epidemic was caused by feeding cattle, who are normally herbivores, the remains
of other cattle in the form of meat and bone meal (MBM), which caused the
infectious agent to spread. The origin of the disease itself remains unknown.
The current scientific view is that infectious proteins called prions developed
through spontaneous mutation, probably in the 1970s, and there is a possibility
that the use of organophosphorus pesticides increased the susceptibility of
cattle to the disease. The infectious agent is distinctive for the high
temperatures it is able to survive; this contributed to the spread of the
disease in Britain, which had reduced the temperatures used during its
rendering process. Foot-and-mouth disease. Foot-and-mouth disease is a highly
contagious and sometimes fatal viral disease of cattle and pigs. It can also
infect deer, goats, sheep, and other bovids with cloven hooves, as well as
elephants, rats, and hedgehogs. Humans are affected only very rarely. FMD
occurs throughout much of the world, and while some countries have been free of
FMD for some time, its wide host range and rapid spread represent cause for
international concern. In 1996, endemic areas included Asia, Africa, and parts
of South America. North America, Australia, New Zealand and Japan have been
free of FMD for many years. Most European countries have been recognized as
free, and countries belonging to the European Union have stopped FMD
vaccination. Infection with foot-and-mouth disease tends to occur locally, that
is, the virus is passed on to susceptible animals through direct contact with
infected animals or with contaminated pens or vehicles used to transport
livestock. The clothes and skin of animal handlers such as farmers, standing
water, and uncooked food scraps and feed supplements containing infected animal
products can harbor the virus as well. Cows can also catch FMD from the semen
of infected bulls. Control measures include quarantine and destruction of
infected livestock, and export bans for meat and other animal products to
countries not infected with the disease. Because FMD rarely infects humans but
spreads rapidly among animals, it is a much greater threat to the agriculture
industry than to human health. Farmers around the world can lose huge amounts
of money during a foot-and-mouth epidemic, when large numbers of animals are
destroyed and revenues from milk and meat production go down. One of the
difficulties in vaccinating against FMD is the huge variation between and even
within serotypes. There is no cross-protection between serotypes (meaning that
a vaccine for one serotype won't protect against any others) and in addition,
two strains within a given serotype may have nucleotide sequences that differ
by as much as 30% for a given gene. This means that FMD vaccines must be highly
specific to the strain involved. Vaccination only provides temporary immunity
that lasts from months to years. Therefore, rich countries maintain a policy of
banning import from all countries, not proven FMD-free by US or EU standards.
This is a point of contention. Although this disease is not dangerous to humans
and rarely fatal to otherwise healthy animals, it reduces milk and meat
production. Outbreaks can be stopped quickly if farmers and transporters are
forced to abide by existing rules. Therefore (besides temporary strong
discomfort to the animals) any outbreak in the rich world should not be much
more as a localized, cyclical economic problem. For countries with free roaming
wildlife it is nearly impossible to prove that they are entirely free of this
disease. If they try they are forced to erect nation wide fences, which
destroys wildlife migration. Because detecting and reporting of FMD have
enormously improved and sped up, almost all poor countries could now safely
create FMD-free export zones. But rich countries refuse to change the rules. In
effect, many poor tropical countries have no chance to meet current rules, so
they are still today banned from exporting meat, even if many of them are FMD-
free. The result is that if drought hits, the poor try to copy by selling their
few animals. This quickly saturates regional demand. The export ban then
destroys the value of these animals, in effect destroying the most important
coping mechanism of several hundreds of millions extremely poor households. The
rules around meat exports have been changed many times, always to accommodate
changing circumstances in rich countries, usually further reducing meat export
chances for poor countries. For that reason Kanya and many other countries find
the rules very unjust. They are however discouraged to file a formal complaint
with WTO by diplomats from rich countries. Citrus canker. Citrus canker is a
disease affecting citrus species that is caused by the bacterium "Xanthomonas
axonopodis". Infection causes lesions on the leaves, stems, and fruit of citrus
trees, including lime, oranges, and grapefruit. While not harmful to humans,
canker significantly affects the vitality of citrus trees, causing leaves and
fruit to drop prematurely; a fruit infected with canker is safe to eat but too
unsightly to be sold. The disease, which is believed to have originated in
South East Asia, is extremely persistent when it becomes established in an
area, making it necessary for all citrus orchards to be destroyed for
successful eradication of the disease. Australia, Brazil and the United States
are currently suffering from canker outbreaks. The disease can be detected in
orchards and on fruit by the appearance of lesions. Early detection is critical
in quarantine situations. Bacteria are tested for pathogenicity by inoculating
multiple citrus species with the bacterium. Simultaneously, other diagnostic
tests (antibody detection, fatty-acid profiling, and genetic procedures using
PCR) are conducted to identify the particular canker strain. Citrus canker
outbreaks are prevented and managed in a number of ways. In countries that do
not have canker, the disease is prevented from entering the country by
quarantine measures. In countries with new outbreaks, eradication programs that
are started soon after the disease has been discovered have been successful;
such programs rely on destruction of affected orchards. When eradication has
been unsuccessful and the disease has become established, management options
include replacing susceptible citrus cultivars with resistant cultivars,
applying preventive sprays of copper-based bactericides, and destroying
infected trees and all surrounding trees within an appropriate radius. The
citrus industry is the largest fresh-fruit exporting industry in Australia.
Australia has had three outbreaks of citrus canker; two were successfully
eradicated and one is ongoing. The disease was found twice during the 1900s in
the Northern Territory and was eradicated each time. During the first outbreak
in 1912, every citrus tree north of latitude 19° south was destroyed, taking
11 years to eradicate the disease. In 2004, Asiatic citrus canker was detected
in an orchard in Emerald, Queensland, and was thought to have occurred from the
illegal import of infected citrus plants. The state and federal governments
have ordered that all commercial orchards, all non-commercial citrus tress, and
all native lime trees ("C. glauca") in the vicinity of Emerald be destroyed
rather than trying to isolate infected trees. Food Security. The Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO) defines food security as
existing when "all people, at all times, have physical and economic access to
sufficient safe and nutritious food that meets their dietary needs and food
preferences for an active and healthy life". The four qualifications that must
be met for a food secure system include physical availability, economic and
physical access, appropriate utilization, and stability of the prior three
elements over time. Of the 6.7 billion people on the planet, about 2 billion
are food insecure. As the global population grows to 9 billion by 2050, and as
diets shift to emphasize higher energy products and greater overall
consumption, food systems will be subjected to even greater pressure. Climate
change presents additional threats to food security, affecting crop yields,
distribution of pests and diseases, weather patterns, and growing seasons
around the world. Food security has thus become an increasingly important topic
in agricultural policy as decision makers attempt to reduce poverty and
malnutrition while augmenting adaptive capacity to climate change. The
Commission on Sustainable Agriculture and Climate Change listed high-priority
policy actions to address food security, including integrating food security
and sustainable agriculture into global and national policies, significantly
raising the level of global investment in food systems, and developing specific
programs and policies to support the most vulnerable populations (namely, those
that are already subject to food insecurity). Policy tools. An agricultural
subsidy is a governmental subsidy paid to farmers and agribusinesses to manage
the agricultural industry as one part of the various methods a government uses
in a mixed economy. The conditions for payment and the reasons for the
individual specific subsidies varies with farm product, size of farm, nature of
ownership, and country among other factors. Enriching peanut farmers for
political purposes, keeping the price of a staple low to keep the poor from
rebelling, stabilizing the production of a crop to avoid famine years,
encouraging diversification and many other purposes have been suggested as the
reason for specific subsidies. Price floors or price ceilings set a minimum or
maximum price for a product. Price controls encourage more production by a
price floor or less production by a price ceiling. A government can erect trade
barriers to limit the quantity of goods imported (in the case of a Quota Share)
or enact tariffs to raise the domestic price of imported products. These
barriers give preference to domestic producers. Objectives of market
intervention. National security. Some argue that nations have an interest in
assuring there is sufficient domestic production capability to meet domestic
needs in the event of a global supply disruption. Significant dependence on
foreign food producers makes a country strategically vulnerable in the event of
war, blockade or embargo. Maintaining adequate domestic capability allows for
food self-sufficiency that lessens the risk of supply shocks due to
geopolitical events. Agricultural policies may be used to support domestic
producers as they gain domestic and international market share. This may be a
short term way of encouraging an industry until it is large enough to thrive
without aid. Or it may be an ongoing subsidy designed to allow a product to
compete with or undercut foreign competition. This may produce a net gain for a
government despite the cost of interventions because it allows a country to
build up an export industry or reduce imports. It also helps to form the
nations supply and demand market. Environmental protection and land management.
Farm or undeveloped land composes the majority of land in most countries.
Policies may encourage some land uses rather than others in the interest of
protecting the environment. For instance, subsidies may be given for particular
farming methods, forestation, land clearance, or pollution abatement. Rural
poverty and poverty relief. Subsidising farming may encourage people to remain
on the land and obtain some income. This might be relevant to a third world
country with many peasant farmers, but it may also be a consideration to more
developed countries such as Poland. They have a very high unemployment rate,
much farmland and retain a large rural population growing food for their own
use. Price controls may also be used to assist poor citizens. Many countries
have used this method of welfare support as it delivers cheap food to the
poorest in urban area's without the need to assess people to give them
financial aid. This often goes at the cost of the rural poor, who then earn
less from what is often their only realistic or potential source of income:
agriculture. Because in almost all countries the rural poor are more poor then
the urban poor, cheap food policies through price controls often increase
overall poverty. The same often counts for poverty relief in the form of food
aid: Food aid (unless while during severe drought) drives small producers in
poor countries out of production. It tends to benefit lower middle class groups
(sub-urban and urban poor)at the expense of the poorest 20 percent, who as a
result remain deprived of customers. Organic farming assistance. Welfare
economics theory holds that sometimes private activities can impose social
costs upon others. Industrial agriculture is widely considered to impose social
costs through pesticide pollution and nitrate pollution. Further, agriculture
uses large amounts of water, a scarce resource Some economists argue that taxes
should be levied on agriculture, or that organic agriculture, which uses little
pesticides and experiences relatively little nitrate runoff, should be
encouraged with subsidies. In the United States, 65% of the approximately $16.5
billion in annual subsidies went to the top 10% of farmers in 2002 because
subsidies are linked to certain commodities. On the other hand, organic farming
received $5 million for help in certification and $15 million for research over
a 5-year time period. Fair trade. Some advocate Fair Trade rules to ensure that
poor farmers in developing nations that produce crops primarily for export are
not exploited or negatively impacted by trade policies, practices, tariffs, and
agreements which benefit one competitor at the expense of another - which
advocates consider a dangerous "race to the bottom" in agricultural labor and
safety standards. Opponents point out that most agriculture in developed
nations is produced by industrial corporations (agribusiness) which are hardly
deserving of sympathy, and that the alternative to exploitation is poverty
[citation?]. Fair trade steak? Much of what developing countries export to the
rich world, also comes from industrial corporations. The reason for that is,
that rich countries have put up elaborate quality demands, most of whom make no
factual health contribution Small farmers often in effect meet these demands,
but are rarely able to prove that in western standards[citation?. Therefore,
the biggest impediment to growth of small farming and therefore of fare trade
in sectors beyond coffee and banana's, is these quality demands from the rich
world[citation?]. Arguments against market intervention. Dumping of
agricultural surpluses. In international trade parlance, when a company from
country A sells a commodity below the cost of production into country B, this
is called "dumping". A number of countries that are signatories to multilateral
trade agreements have provisions that prohibit this practice. When rich
countries subsidize domestic production, excess output is often given to the
developing world as foreign aid. This process eliminates the domestic market
for agricultural products in the developing world, because the products can be
obtained for free from western aid agencies. In developing nations where these
effects are most severe, small farmers could no longer afford basic inputs and
were forced to sell their land. ""Consider a farmer in Ghana who used to be
able to make a living growing rice. Several years ago, Ghana was able to feed
and export their surplus. Now, it imports rice. From where? Developed
countries. Why? Because it's cheaper. Even if it costs the rice producer in the
developed world much more to produce the rice, he doesn't have to make a profit
from his crop. The government pays him to grow it, so he can sell it more
cheaply to Ghana than the farmer in Ghana can. And that farmer in Ghana? He
can't feed his family anymore.""(Lyle Vanclief, Former Canadian Minister of
Agriculture [1997-2003]) According to The Institute for Agriculture and Trade
Policy, corn, soybeans, cotton, wheat and rice are sold below the cost of
production, or dumped. Dumping rates are approximately forty percent for wheat,
between twenty-five and thirty percent for corn (maize), approximately thirty
percent for soybeans, fifty-seven percent for cotton, and approximately twenty
percent for rice. For example, wheat is sold for forty percent below cost.
According to Oxfam, "If developed nations eliminated subsidy programs, the
export value of agriculture in lesser developed nations would increase by 24 %,
plus a further 5.5 % from tariff equilibrium. ... exporters can offer US
surpluses for sale at prices around half the cost of production; destroying
local agriculture and creating a captive market in the process." Free trade
advocates desire the elimination of all market distorting mechanisms
(subsidies, tariffs, regulations) and argue that, as with free trade in all
areas, this will result in aggregate benefit for all. This position is
particularly popular in competitive agricultural exporting nations in both the
developed and developing world, some of whom have banded together in the Cairns
Group lobby. Canada's Department of Agriculture estimates that developing
nations would benefit by about $4 billion annually if subsidies in the
developed world were halved. Agricultural Independence. Many developing
countries do not grow enough food to feed their own populations. These nations
must buy food from other countries. Lower prices and free food save the lives
of millions of starving people, despite the drop in food sales of the local
farmers. A developing nation could use new improved farming methods to grow
more food, with the ultimate goal of feeding their nation without outside help.
New greenhouse methods, hydroponics, fertilizers, R/O Water Processors, hybrid
crops, fast-growing hybrid trees for quick shade, interior temperature control,
greenhouse or tent insulation, autonomous building gardens, sun lamps, mylar,
fans, and other cheap tech can be used to grow crops on previously unarable
land, such as rocky, mountainous, desert, and even Arctic lands. More food can
be grown, reducing dependency on other countries for food. Replacement crops
can also make nations agriculturally independent. Sugar, for example, comes
from sugar cane imported from Polynesia. Instead of buying the sugar from
Polynesia, a nation can make sugar from sugar beets, maple sap, or sweetener
from stevia plant, keeping the profits circulating within the nation's economy.
Paper and clothes can be made of hemp instead of trees and cotton. Tropical
foods won't grow in many places in Europe, but they will grow in insulated
greenhouses or tents in Europe. Soybean plant cellulose can replace plastic
(made from oil). Ethanol from farm waste or hempseed oil can replace gasoline.
Rainforest medicine plants grown locally can replace many imported medicines.
Alternates of cash crops, like sugar and oil replacements, can reduce farmers'
dependency on subsidies in both developed and developing nations. Market
interventions may increase the cost to consumers for agricultural products,
either via hidden wealth-transfers via the government, or increased prices at
the consumer level, such as for sugar and peanuts in the US. This has led to
market distortions, such as food processors using high fructose corn syrup as a
replacement for sugar. High fructose corn syrup may be an unhealthy food
additive, and, were sugar prices not inflated by government fiat, sugar might
be preferred over high fructose corn syrup in the marketplace. Developed world
cases. Overview: Europe and America. The farmer population is approximately
five percent of the total population in the E.U. and 1.7% in the U.S. The total
value of agricultural production in the E.U. amounted to 128 billion euros
(1998). About forty-nine percent of this amount was accounted for by political
measures: 37 billion euros due to direct payments and 43 billion euros from
consumers due to the artificially high price. Eighty percent of European
farmers receive a direct payment of 5,000 euros or less, while 2.2% receive a
direct payment above 50,000 euros, totaling forty percent of all direct
subsidies. The average U.S. farmer receives $16,000 in annual subsidies. Two-
thirds of farmers receive no direct payments. Of those that do, the average
amount amongst the lowest paid eighty percent was $7000 from 1995-2003. (http:/
/www.ewg.org/farm/findings.php) Subsidies are a mix of tax reductions, direct
cash payments and below-market prices on water and other inputs. Some claim
that these aggregate figures are misleading because large agribusinesses,
rather than individual farmers, receive a significant share of total subsidy
spending. The Federal Agriculture Improvement and Reform Act of 1996 reduced
farm subsidies, providing fixed payments over a period and replacing price
supports and subsidies. The Farm Security and Rural Investment Act of 2002
contains direct and countercyclical payments designed to limit the effects of
low prices and yields. In the EU, € 54 billion of subsidies are paid every
year. An increasing share of the subsidies is being decoupled from production
and lumped into the Single Farm Payment. While this has diminished the
distortions created by the Common Agricultural Policy, many critics argue that
a greater focus on the provision of public goods, such as biodiversity and
clean water, is needed. The next major reform is expected for 2014, when a new
long-term EU budget is coming into effect. Environmental programs. The U.S.
Conservation Reserve Program leases land from producers that take marginal land
out of production and convert it back to a near-natural state by planting
native grasses and other plants. See The U.S. Environmental Quality Incentives
Program subsidizes improvements which promote water conservation and other
measures. This program is conducted under a bidding process using a formula
where farmers request a certain percentage of cost share for an improvement
such as drip irrigation. Producers that offer the most environmental
improvement based on a point system for the least cost are funded first. The
process continues until that year's allocated funds are expended. See [http://
www.nrcs.usda.gov/programs/eqip/. World Trade Organization actions. In April
2004 the WTO ruled that 3-billion dollars in US cotton subsidies violate trade
agreements and that almost 50% of EU sugar exports are illegal. In 1997-2003,
US cotton exports were subsidized by an average of 48%.[http://www.iatp.org/
iatp/library/admin/uploadedfiles/
Agriculture_Export_Dumping_Booms_During_WTOs_F.pdf]The World Trade Organization
(WTO) has extracted commitments from the Philippines government, making it
lower import barriers to half their present levels over a span of six years,
and allowing in drastically increased competition from the industrialised and
heavily subsidised farming systems of North America and Europe. A recent Oxfam
report estimated that average household incomes of maize farmers will be
reduced by as much as 30% over the six years as cheap imports from the US drive
down prices in the local markets. The report estimates that in the absence of
trade restrictions, US subsidised maize could be marketed at less than half the
price of maize grown on the Philippine island of Mindanao; and that the
livelihoods of up to half a million Filipino maize farmers (out of the total
1.2 million) are under immediate threat.
