Amalgamation (race) Amalgamation is a now largely archaic term for the
intermarriage and interbreeding of different ethnicities or races. In the
English-speaking world, the term was in use into the twentieth century. In the
United States, it was partly replaced after 1863 by the term miscegenation.
While the term amalgamation could refer to the interbreeding of different white
as well as non-white ethnicities, the term miscegenation referred specifically
to the interbreeding of whites and non-whites, especially African Americans.
The term amalgamation was derived from metallurgy (see amalgam). It has been
linked to the metaphor of the melting pot, which also originated in the US, and
which described the cultural assimilation and intermarriage of different
ethnicities. The intermarriage of whites with African Americans and, to a
lesser degree, other non-whites was until recently in social disfavor in the
United States, despite the long history of informal liaisons between white men
and nonwhite women during the long years of slavery and after emancipation.
Until 1967, interracial marriages were prohibited in many US states through
anti-miscegenation laws. The concept of amalgamation was embraced in the
writings of Ellen G. White, co-founder of the Seven Day Adventist Church. In
her book titled, Spiritual Gifts Vol. 3, p 64 she says, "But if there was one
sin above another which called for the destruction of the race by the flood, it
was the base crime of amalgamation of man and beast which defaced the image of
God and caused confusion everywhere" In this quote, she defines amalgamation of
sexual intercourse between humans and animals. In the same book, Spiritual
Gifts, Vol. 4, p 75 she says, "Every species of animal which God had created
were preserved in the ark. The confused species which God did not create which
were the result of amalgamation, were destroyed by the flood." This could be
her interpretation of Genesis 6:15 where the sons of God copulated with the
women of men and produced giants. In the book of Enoch, he says the giants were
ferocious in the land that the humans could not grow enough food to feed them.
The giants ate plant life, animal life and then began to eat the humans. The
people cried out to God and he punished the fallen angels for corrupting the
human and animal species. He told the fallen angels that their offspring, the
Nephilim would be cast out of the country and they would turn on each other and
destroy themselves, however, their souls would roam the earth. Then God would
send the flood to wipe out the remaining corrupted humans and animals. Ellen
White continues by saying "since the flood, there has been amalgamation of man
and beast, as may be seen in the almost endless varieties of species of animals
and in certain races of men." Here she begins to reason that the visible
appearance of present day animals is evidence of human and animal hybrids. Then
she bends this concept to apply to a specific ethnic group and that would be
the darker complexion people. This perception worked its way into the mindset
of American slave holders who considered the Africans to be less than human.
