American Political Science Association The American Political Science
Association (APSA) is a professional association of political science students
and scholars in the United States. Founded in 1903, it publishes three academic
journals ("American Political Science Review", "Perspectives on Politics", and
"PS: Political Science & Politics"). APSA Organized Sections publish or are
associated with 15 additional journals. APSA presidents serve one-year terms:
the current president is Jane Mansbridge of Harvard University. Woodrow Wilson,
who later became president of the United States, was APSA president in 1911.
APSA has its headquarters at 1527 New Hampshire Avenue NW in Washington, D.C.,
in a historic building that was the home of Harry Garfield, son of President
James Garfield and president of the association from 1921 to 1922. APSA
administers the Centennial Center for Political Science and Public Affairs,
which provides conference and research space for scholars, and Pi Sigma Alpha,
the honor society for political science students. APSA also periodically
sponsors seminars and other events for political scientists, policymakers, the
media, and the general public. In addition to the APSA awards, the APSA
organized sections also present over 100 awards at every Annual Meeting to
recognize important research and contributions to the profession. These awards
are presented at the Association's Annual Meeting. More on Award Descriptions
and Nomination Information A key part of APSA's mission is to enable political
scientists to connect an environment conducive to teaching, research, and
practice in all fields of political science and to ensure support necessary for
the discipline to thrive. APSA conducts several annual conferences, which
provides this environment for scholars and other professionals to network and
present their work, along with other pertinent and useful resources. The APSA
Annual Meeting is among the world's largest gatherings of political scientists.
It occurs on Labor Day weekend each summer. The 2007 meeting in Chicago drew
6,900 participants. The 2009 meeting was in Toronto (September 3-6) and the
2010 meeting was in Washington, DC (September 2-5). The 2011 meeting was in
Seattle, Washington from September 1-4. The 2012 Annual Meeting in New Orleans,
Louisiana was cancelled due to Hurricane Isaac. The 2013 Annual Meeting will be
held in Chicago, Illinois from August 29-September 1. The APSA Teaching and
Learning Conference is a smaller working group conference hosting cutting-edge
approaches, techniques, and methodologies for the political science classroom.
The conference provides a forum for scholars to share effective and innovative
teaching and learning models and to discuss broad themes and values of
political science education--especially the scholarship of teaching and
learning. With funding from the Andrew W. Mellon Foundation, APSA Africa
Workshops APSA has organized political science workshops in various locations
in Africa. The first workshop was convened in Dakar, Senegal in partnership
with the West African Research Center from July 6-27, 2008. The second workshop
was convened in Accra, Ghana in partnership with the Institute of African
Studies at the University of Ghana, Legon from June 21-July 10. The 2010 APSA
residential workshop on Global Perspectives on Politics and Gender will be held
in Dar es Salaam, Tanzania. The annual residential workshops are led by a joint
U.S. and African organizing team and aimed at mid-and junior-level scholars
residing in Africa. They will enhance the capacities of political scientists
and their resources in East and West Africa while also providing a forum for
supporting their ongoing research. Each three week workshop brings together up
to 30 scholars and cover substantive issues, methodologies, and reviews of
research. Presidents of the American Political Science Association. View
Presidential Addresses, 1903-present APSA Organized Sections. APSA members may
also join the 38 membership organized sections focused around research themes
in political science. Note: the numbers above represent the official number for
the sections. The missing sections/numbers (e.g. 12) represent sections that
disbanded.
