An Act of Conscience An Act of Conscience is a 1997 documentary film by Robbie
Leppzer about the war tax resistance of Randy Kehler and Betsy Corner and
years-long struggle that ensues after the IRS seizes their home in Colrain,
Massachusetts in 1989, to recover $27,000 in unpaid taxes, penalties, and
interest. The film premiered at Sundance Film Festival and was shown on Cinemax
and the Sundance Channel. It is narrated by Martin Sheen and features cameo
appearances by activist-priest Daniel Berrigan and political folksinger Pete
Seeger. Plot. After the house is seized, the couple and their daughter refuse
to move out and Kehler is arrested on December 3, 1991, by US Marshals and IRS
agents. Community supporters move in, helping them to occupy the house. On
February 12, 1992, the still-occupied house—but not the land, which belongs
to the Valley Community Land Trust—is sold at auction to Danny Franklin and
Terry Charnesky for $5400; the IRS had failed to receive any monetary bids at
an earlier auction. The sale results in suits and countersuits between the
Franklin-Charnesky family and the Land Trust. Despite the sale of the house,
the Kehler-Corner occupiers refuse to leave. However, on April 15, 1992, while
Kehler, Corner, and their supporters are away, Franklin, Charnesky, and their
supporters move-in and occupy the house. Kehler, Corner, and their supporters
begin a lively protest and round-the-clock vigil just outside the house,
eventually even building a small wooden structure to shelter the protesters. On
May 28, 1993, the Franklin County Superior court issues an injunction against
the Kehler-Corner protests and, subsequently, several protesters are arrested
and jailed after violating the injunction. Still, the protest continues until
September, when they are finally discontinued. The battle over the house is
ended on December 31, 1993, when an out-of-court settlement is reached between
the Land Trust and the Franklin-Charnesky family, who agree to leave the house
and deed it and the land-lease to the land trust in exchange for an undisclosed
sum of money.
