To each according to his contribution To each according to his contribution is
considered by socialists and Marxist socialists as a characteristic of society
directly following the transition to socialism, but preceding the final step to
communism. This essentially means that people are rewarded based on the amount
they contribute to the social product. This principle formed the basic
definition of socialism by its pre-Marxist proponents, most notably Ricardian
socialists, social anarchists and democratic socialists. Definition and
purpose. "To each according to his contribution" was a concept espoused by many
members of the labor movement. Examples of this can be found from Ferdinand
Lassalle's and Eugen Dühring's statements to Leon Trotsky's writings. However,
it was Vladimir Lenin, inspired by Marx's writing on the subject in his
"Critique of the Gotha Programme", who claimed the principle to be a
fundamental element of socialism within Marxist theory. Libertarian socialist
thinkers, such as American anarchist Benjamin Tucker, defined socialism as a
system whereby the laborer receives the full product of his labor so to
eliminate exploitation and "unearned" income accrued to the capitalist. The
term means simply that each worker in a socialist society receives wages and
benefits according to the quantity and value of the labor that he or she
contributed. This translates into workers of high productivity receiving more
wages and benefits than workers of average productivity, and substantially more
than workers of low productivity. An extension of this principle could also be
made so that the more difficult one's job is—whether this difficulty is
derived from greater training requirements, job intensity, safety hazards,
etc.—the more one is rewarded for the labor contributed. The purpose of the
principle, as Trotsky would later state, is to promote productivity. This is
done by creating incentives to work harder, longer, and more productively. The
principle is ultimately a stowaway from capitalism that, according to Marx,
will vanish as work becomes more automated and enjoyable, and goods become
available in abundance. Elaboration in "Gotha". The principle has its roots in
the way that capitalism manages its affairs. That is, each is rewarded
according to how much he produces. Remuneration increases as the amount of
labor contributed increases. However within capitalism, the means of production
are owned by a small minority who do not produce, but rather live off the labor
of others. Socialism is said to remedy this by putting the means of production
in common hands and rewarding individuals according to their contributions. In
the "Critique of the Gotha Programme", while criticizing Lassalle's ideas, Marx
elaborates on the theory. According to Marx's analysis of the Programme,
Lassalle suggests that "the proceeds of labor belong undiminished with equal
right to all members of society". While agreeing that the citizens of a
workers' society should be rewarded according to individual contributions, Marx
claims that giving them the "full product" of their labor is impossible as some
of the proceeds will be needed to maintain infrastructure and so forth. He then
explains the nature of a communist society in its lower phase ("socialist
society"), which does not emerge from its own foundations "but, on the
contrary, just as it emerges from capitalist society; which is thus in every
respect, economically, morally, and intellectually, still stamped with the
birthmarks of the old society from whose womb it emerges". And so,
"accordingly, the individual producer receives back from society — after the
deductions have been made — exactly what he gives to it". He explains this
as: Marx says that this is rational and necessary, and that once society
advances from the lower phase of communist society and work becomes life's
prime want, distribution will occur along different lines. During the higher
phase of communism, the standard shall be "from each according to his ability,
to each according to his needs". Use by later Marxists. Lenin wrote "The State
and Revolution" to answer all the burning questions of the movement, and to
prevent Marxism from becoming tainted by "opportunists" and "reformists", as he
called them. The work is very important as it categorizes the "first phase of
communist society" as socialism, with the higher phase being communism proper.
The pamphlet also answers all questions and concerns of the Marxists of his
time by utilizing the classic works of Marxism. When he is set to describe
socialism and its economic features he turns to the authority of Marx,
especially the "Critique of the Gotha Programme". Lenin claims that socialism
will not be perfect since, as Marx said, it has emerged out of the womb of
capitalism and which is in every respect stamped with the birthmarks of the old
society. This society, socialism, will be unable to provide people with total
equality, precisely because it is still marked by capitalism. He also explains
the difference between the old society and the new as: Lenin states that such a
society is indeed socialism as it realizes the two principles of socialism "he
who does not work, neither shall he eat" and "an equal amount of products for
an equal amount of labor". Joseph Stalin and Leon Trotsky both mentioned the
term in their works.
