Anarchism in China The predominance in the late 19th century of the Nihilist
movement and anarchist communism in Russia, which borders China, was a major
source of anarchist influence on radical movements in China. The use of
assassination as a tool in the anti-Manchu movement as promoted by groups like
the Chinese Assassination Corps was similar to the widespread use of suicidal
terror attacks by Russian anti-czarist groups like The People's Will and pan-
Slavic nationalists like The Black Hand. Even though anarchism and nihilism are
distinct and separate ideologies, at that time the popular press in Europe and
China generally conflated the two. At the International Conference of Rome for
the Social Defense Against Anarchists, anarchism was defined "as any act that
used violent means to destroy the organization of society". This association
with political violence promoted an early interest in anarchism among some
Chinese radicals. Because of the lack of Chinese-language materials, however,
this early influence was very limited. Chinese student movements. The first
explicitly and recognizably anarchist presence originated in France and Japan
with the Chinese study abroad programs for the children of wealthy families
that were established after the failed Boxer Rebellion. While not accessible to
the vast majority of the population, by 1906 these programs had attracted
between five and six hundred students to Europe and about 10,000 to Japan.
Japan, especially Tokyo, was the most popular destination because of its
geographic proximity to China, its relatively affordable cost, and certain
natural affinities between the two cultures (for example, the Japanese language
uses Chinese characters extensively, facilitating communication and
livability). In Europe, Paris was particularly popular because it was
relatively cheap, the French government helped to subsidize the students, and
because France was seen as the center of Western civilization. According to
some accounts, there was also a conscious effort on the part of the Chinese
government officials who ran the program to use it to get radical students out
of the country, with the most radical students being sent to Europe and the
more moderate students going to Japan. If this is the case, then that policy
was to prove remarkably short-sighted as these foreign-educated students would
use the methods and ideologies of European socialism and anarchism to
completely transform Chinese society. It is interesting to note that in both
locations of study, anarchism quickly became the most dominant of the western
ideologies adopted by the students. In 1906, within a few months of each other,
two separate anarchist student groups would form, one in Tokyo and one in
Paris. The different locations, and perhaps also the different inclinations of
the students being sent to each location, would result in two very different
kinds of anarchism. Paris group. According to Li Shih-tseng, who was a
participant in the movement, the influences of the Paris group could be divided
into 3 main fields: radical libertarianism and anarchism; Darwinism and Social
Darwinism; and the classical Chinese philosophers. While the Paris group was
far more reluctant than their counterparts in Tokyo to equate the teachings of
Lao Tzu or the ancient Well-field system with the anarchist communism they
advocated, Li describes the group as consisting of young men who had received
excellent educations in the Chinese classical tradition. He admits that the old
thinking influenced them. The clear trend with the Paris group, however, was to
dismiss and even actively oppose any association of anarchism with traditional
culture. Tokyo group. The Tokyo group drew on the same influences but in a
different order of preference. While the Paris group was enamored of western
science and western civilization, the Tokyo group rooted its anarchism in
political traditions native to Asia. In practical terms this meant the Paris
group studied Esperanto, advocated anarcho-syndicalism, and drew heavily upon
the works of Mikhail Bakunin and Peter Kropotkin. The Tokyo group advocated a
peasant-based society built around democratically run villages organized into a
free federation for mutual aid and defense. They based their ideology on a
fusion of Taoism, Buddhism, and the Well Field System, and gave preference to
Leo Tolstoy over Kropotkin. Both groups also advocated assassination early on,
perhaps an indicator of the lasting influences of nihilism, but by 1910
conversion to anarchism was typically accompanied by the renunciation of
assassination as a tactic. Cooperation and differences. In the early 20th
century the anarchist movement was largely a western movement and the Chinese
students studying in Paris were enthusiastically supportive of anarchism
because they saw it as the most forward-thinking of all the western ideologies,
and thus the furthest removed from what they perceived as a Chinese culture
moribund by tradition. This position would repeatedly place them at odds with
the Tokyo group who saw much that was good in traditional culture, and even
argued that because China had not embraced the illusion of liberal capitalist
democracy, it might be easier for them to make the transition to anarchism than
it would be for the Europeans. These differences, however, do not mean that the
two groups did not cooperate. Because of the decentralised political structure
and emphasis on local economic and political self-determination advocated by
both groups, they were able to come to a tacit understanding that after the
revolution both systems could peacefully coexist. The conflict was essentially
one of values, priorities, and (by implication) methods for achieving the
revolution which both advocated. In particular, the conflict over the what
place, if any, traditional Chinese philosophies should play in influencing
anarchist thoughts and actions. This was a major source of friction and debate
between the two groups. The tendency for the advocates of different anarchisms
to disagree on issues but agree to cooperate is not unique to the Chinese
anarchist experience. For this reason many political scientists describe
anarchism as a movement of movements. The ideological diversity inherent in
such a movement of movements has historically been one of its great strengths
but has also repeatedly undermined attempts to shape it into a cohesive force
for social change. Comparison with European anarchists. The Chinese seem to be
the greatest lovers of things ancient, so much so that their minds have been
wholly bound by traditional customs and thus they have become enslaved by the
ancients. Over the course of the next twenty years, that emphasis on cultural
transformation would be adopted by virtually all elements of the radical
Chinese left. Its rhetoric, if not its substance, would eventually be used by
Mao Zedong to justify the Cultural Revolution. Anarchism and nationalism. In
the first phase of the movement, anarchists of both schools were generally
participants in the Nationalist movement, even though in theory they repudiated
nationalism and nation-states. Nationalist attacks. If you people know only how
to cry emptily that ‚ÄòWe want no government, no soldiers, no national
boundaries, and no State‚Äô and that you are for universal harmony, justice,
freedom, and equality, I fear that those who know only brute force and not
justice will gather their armies to divide up our land and our people.
Nationalists also argued that only by building a popular front could the
Nationalist movement defeat the Manchus and the Qing dynasties, and that in the
long run if anarchism was to have any chance to succeed it must necessarily be
preceded by a Republican system that would make China secure. Anarchist
response. The response of the Hsin Shi-Chi editors, written by Li Shih-tseng,
was threefold. First, the revolution that the anarchists advocated would be
global, simultaneous, decentralized, and spontaneous. Thus, foreign
imperialists would be too occupied with the revolutions in their home countries
to bother invading or harassing China. Secondly, they argued that having a
strong centralized coercive government had not prevented China's enemies from
attacking her in the past anyway. Finally, there was the moral point that in
the long run, tyranny is tyranny, regardless of whether it is native or
foreign. Therefore, the only logical approach for people who want freedom must
be to oppose all authority be it Manchu, Han, foreign, or native. One obvious
question in hindsight is how the Chinese anarchists could expect a global
spontaneous revolution to come about, and the answer is that the Paris group,
as did many radicals of all stripes all over the globe at that time, believed
in Revolution as something akin to a force of nature. Within the context of
their thinking, Revolution would come because it was obviously needed, and
their role was simply to prepare people for it and help them see the obvious
necessity of social change. This perspective provides important insight into
the fundamentally evolutionary nature of the movement, and explains the
movement‚Äôs focus on education instead of organization building. Results of
collaboration. The involvement of prominent Nationalist figures indicates the
role of personal relationships in the Paris groups‚Äô organizing. The
individuals who founded that group had come out of the Nationalist movement and
remained strongly tied to it by a network of close personal friendships.
Therefore, it was natural for them to attempt to include their friends in their
organizing in the hopes of winning those friends (and the influence they
possessed) over to the anarchist cause. The actual result of such collaboration
was that the anarchists, not the Nationalists, compromised their positions
since doing so allowed them to gain access to power positions in the
Nationalist government that they theoretically opposed. That same year Jing
Meijiu and Zhang Ji (another anarchist affiliated with the Tokyo group) would
both be elected to the Republican parliament. Shifu and the Guangzhou group
declared that by doing so they were traitors to the cause and proved their lack
of commitment to the movement, but both men continued to call themselves
anarchists and were active in promoting anarchism clear up to the late 1920s.
As a counter-point to such collaboration, however, there is evidence that many
more anarchists could have joined the new Nationalist government and gained
positions of power and privilege but refused to do so because doing so would
have violated their principles. As Scalapino and Yu put it ‚Äúthere can be
little doubt that many refused to play the kind of political role that was so
desperately needed in a period when trained personnel were extremely scarce
compared to the tasks at hand.‚Äù Strategic issues. Arif Dirlik argues that
these problems were indicative of lingering ambiguity in the definition of
anarchism. More accurately, the issue was one of strategy. These men considered
themselves anarchists because they were working for the long-term abolition of
capitalism, the state, and coercive authority in general. In their vision,
anarchism was a very long-term goal and not something they expected to see
realized in their lifetimes. Chiang, for instance, expected that it would take
3,000 years to bring about the revolution they dreamed of. Understanding that,
it becomes easier to see why anarchists would be tempted to campaign for and
hold political office or collaborate with sympathetic elements in the
government, since doing so would help them achieve their long term goals. This
attitude is clearly distinct from the revolutionary anarchism of Kropotkin and
Bakunin, or even of the Guangzhou group, which aimed for immediate revolution
and the creation of an anarchist society in the immediate future. This tendency
to work for long-term revolution and focus on philosophy and theory instead of
concrete organizing by some of the wealthier participants in the movement might
have been rooted in class backgrounds. The split between wealthier
philosophical anarchists, Marxists, or socialists, and working class
revolutionaries can be a common feature of revolutionary movements. Early
growth of anarchism. It was for this reason that the Paris group would declare
that education was the most important activity revolutionaries could be
involved in, and that only through educating the people could anarchism be
achieved. for example Wu Zhihui: "Education as Revolution," The New Era,
September 1908 Accordingly, they geared their activities towards education
instead of assassination or grass roots organizing (the other two forms of
activism which they condoned in theory). To these ends the Paris group would
set up a variety of student-run businesses, including a tofu factory, to fund
the studies of radical students from China who wanted an education abroad. The
students would come to work part time and study part time, thus gaining a
European education for a fraction of what it would cost otherwise; and in the
process gaining first-hand experience on what it might mean to live, work, and
study in an anarchist society. This study-abroad program would play a critical
role in infusing anarchist language and ideas into the broader nationalist and
revolutionary movements as hundreds of students participated in the program.
The approach was eminently pragmatic in that it served a real need for students
who wanted to study abroad but lacked the financial resources to do so, and it
demonstrated that anarchist organizational models based on mutual aid and
cooperation were viable alternatives to profit-driven capitalist ventures.
Despite the occasional friction, the overwhelming tendency of both the Paris
and the Tokyo groups was to assist the nationalist cause. In fact, several of
the Paris groups members were early members of the Kuomintang and became close
friends of Sun Yet-Sen. On at least two occasions Sun asked for and received
‚Äúconsiderable‚Äù economic assistance from Chang Ching-Chiang, who was
associated with the Paris group. This collaboration was understandable given
the emphasis by both the anarchists and the nationalists on the importance of
Revolutionaries working together, and because of the extreme eclecticism of Sun
Yat-Sen who stated that ‚Äúthe end goal of the three peoples principles
communism and anarchism.‚Äù It may also explain the willingness of the Paris
group to accept funding from the Nationalist government to expand their
programs during World War I some years later. Anarchism as a mass movement. By
1911 anarchism had become the driving force behind popular mobilization and had
moved beyond its initial association with relatively wealthy students studying
abroad to become a genuine revolutionary movement among the people as a whole.
There is some evidence that the grassroots workers movement which was
developing at this time enjoyed a secondary influx of anarchist ideals as
people who had been working in the United States were forced to return to China
following the passage of the Chinese Exclusion Act in 1882. This act severely
limited (but did not eliminate) the flow of Chinese workers to and from the
United States. Influence of U.S. anarchists. In the United States, anarchists
had been almost alone in the labor movement in explicitly opposing racism
against Asian and Mexican workers, and when Emma Goldman came to speak in San
Francisco in the 1890s there were several thousand Chinese workers in
attendance. Additionally, from 1908 on, many thousands of Chinese workers in
North America - particularly those working in California and the Pacific North-
West - became members of the Industrial Union, the Industrial Workers of the
World (IWW). The Wobblies (as IWW members were called) were the first American
labor union to oppose the institution of White supremacy in an organized and
deliberate fashion and to actively recruit Asians, Blacks, Latinos, and
migratory workers. Their defense of Chinese immigrants who were being subjected
to systematic harassment and discrimination won them a large base of membership
among Chinese workers, and widespread support among the Chinese community in
North America. The influence of Chinese IWW members returning to China has gone
largely unstudied, but the strong anarchist participation in the Chinese union
movement and the willing reception that they met may owe something to this
earlier relationship between Chinese workers and anarchist Revolutionaries.
Nationalist revolution of 1911. Following the Nationalist revolution of 1911
and the victory of the Revolutionary Alliance, which counted several prominent
anarchists as movement elders, anarchists throughout China had a bit more room
to engage in organizing. At the same time, Nationalist rule was by no means a
guarantee of freedom to organize for antiauthoritarians, and government
persecution was ongoing. With Nationalist goals of overthrowing the Manchu Qing
dynasty having been achieved, the main ideological opposition to anarchism came
from self-described Socialists, including the Chinese Socialist Society (CSS)
and the Left wing of the nationalist movement which ‚Äì following Sun Yet-
Sen‚Äôs lead ‚Äì called itself socialist. Jiang Kanghu, who founded the Chinese
Socialist Society in 1911, had been a contributor to the "New Era" (one of the
publications of the Paris Group), and included the abolition of the state, the
traditional family structure, and Confucian culture as planks of his parties‚Äô
platform. The main source of conflict came because the CSS wanted to retain
market relations but supplement them with a broad social safety net, since they
felt that without any incentive mechanism people would not produce anything and
the society would collapse. Other sources of friction had to do with the
CSS‚Äôs focus on building the revolution in China first, and using elected
office as a tool to do so ‚Äì both significant deviations from classical
anarchism. Jiang did not call himself an anarchist, so his party was generally
perceived as being outside the movement, despite the similarities. In 1912
Jiang's party split into two factions, the pure socialists, led by the
anarchist Buddhist monk Tai Xu, and the remains of the party led by Jiang. Liu
Shifu, who would go on to be one of the most significant figures in the
anarchist movement in mainland China founded a group in Guangzhou later that
same year, with an explicitly anarchist-communist platform. Pure Socialist. The
Pure Socialists revised platform included the complete abolition of property
and an anarchist-communist economic system. Shifu criticized them for retaining
the name ‚ÄúSocialist‚Äù but their platform was clearly anarchist so the two
groups generally considered each other comrades. The emphasis on the importance
of the Peasant struggle, which had been pioneered earlier by the Tokyo group,
would also become a major subject of discussion and organizing among Chinese
anarchists from both the Pure Socialists and the Guangzhou group in this
period. It was anarchists who first pointed to the crucial role that the
peasants must play in any serious revolutionary attempt in China, and
anarchists were the first to engage in any serious attempts to organize the
Peasants. Guangzhou group. The main base of anarchist activity in mainland
China during this phase was in Guangzhou, and the Paris and Tokyo groups
continued to have significant influence. The Pure Socialists were also strongly
involved, but because they were as much Buddhists as they were anarchists, were
more concerned with promoting virtue and less focused on immediate revolution.
By this time the Paris group had rendered their anarchism into an extremely
abstract philosophy that was more concerned with the place of the individual in
society than with the day-to-day realities of working people. This is perhaps
not surprising given the relatively wealthy backgrounds of most of the Paris
group, but it would lead to increased friction between them and their more
class-struggle oriented comrades in Guangzhou. The Guangzhou group is usually
described as being ‚Äúled‚Äù by Liu Shifu, and this is generally accurate
insofar as we understand it as leadership by example since he was never granted
any formal position or coercive authority by the group. Their most significant
contributions at this stage were the foundation of ‚Äúan alliance between
intellectuals and workers‚Äù and their propaganda work which set out to
differentiate anarchism from all the other socialisms that were gaining in
popularity; and in so doing crystallized for the first time exactly what
anarchism was. Where the Paris group had preferred to outline their ideal in
terms of negative freedoms, i.e., freedom from coercion, freedom from
tradition, etc.; the Guangzhou group used positive assertions of rights and
workers, women, peasants, and other oppressed groups to outline their vision of
an anarchist society. Noticeably absent was any mention of ethnic minorities,
since a basic part of their platform was the elimination of ethnic, racial, and
national identities in favor of an internationalist identity that placed
primary importance on loyalty to humanity as a whole, instead of to ones ethnic
or racial group. It is important to recognize that this position was formulated
in response to the primacy placed on ethnicity by the Anti-Manchu movement,
which sought to assert the illegitimacy of the Qing dynasty based in part on
the fact that its members were part of an ethnic minority out of touch with the
Han majority, a position which anarchists of all four major groups decried as
racist and unbefitting a movement that claimed to be working for liberation.
Their position, therefore, was that ethnicity-based organizing promoted Racism,
and had no place in a Revolution that sought liberation for all of humanity.
While consistent with the stance of the global anarchist movement at the time,
this position elicits mixed responses from modern anarchists, many of whom see
revolutionary potential in the struggles of oppressed ethnic and racial groups.
In terms of the Revolutionary project in China, Ward Churchill cites the
declarations of support for ethnic self-determination for China‚Äôs ethnic
minorities which the communist movement made as key to winning their movement
the support of those groups. This was to prove decisive during the later civil
war between the Communist Party of China and Chinese Nationalism. In practical
terms, the work of the movement at this stage was propaganda and organizing.
Guangzhou anarchists founded a newspaper called "Peoples Voice" and began
organizing workers, while in Taiyuan (Taiwan), Jing Meijiu - who had converted
to anarchism as part of the Tokyo group - founded an explicitly anarchafeminist
worker-run factory/school to serve as a tool to help women simultaneously earn
a living and receive an education. Paris group influence. The similarity to the
Paris groups Diligent Work and Frugal Study program is obvious. In 1912,
members of the Paris group that had returned to China established the
‚ÄúPromote Virtue Society,‚Äù whose leadership included prominent anarchists
like Li Shezeng and Nationalists like Wang Jiangwei. The focus of that society,
in keeping with the tendencies of the Paris group, was as much on virtuous and
moral personal behavior as it was on Revolutionary praxis. Their rules for
membership delineated different levels of commitment and discouraged members
from eating meat and visiting prostitutes; and concretely forbade them from
riding in Sedan chairs, taking concubines, or holding public office. While it
may be tempting to see such rules as superfluous, the evidence suggests we
should take them seriously, since most of the anarchist organizations in China
in this period included similar rules for their members. The goal was to create
a cadre of Revolutionaries who would lead by example and help create a model
for a new revolutionary culture. There are obvious parallels here to the
traditional obligation for people involved in public life to set an example and
promote virtue as well. French need for laborers. Only a few years later,
during World War I, the Paris group would take advantage of the French
Governments need for laborers to gain funding from the French and Chinese
governments to expand their work-study movement to include Chinese workers. The
students continued to come, but part of their program of education now included
holding classes and educating the thousands of Chinese workers supplementing
the French war effort. In so doing they aided one colonialist capitalist power
(albeit a republic) in its self-defense against another imperialist capitalist
power. While a small number of well-known anarchists, including Peter
Kropotkin, supported the French during World War I because they saw France as
more progressive than Germany and feared a German victory would undermine their
Revolutionary activity in France, this was definitely a minority position in
terms of the global movement. The Paris group was nothing if not pragmatic, and
since the Chinese workers were going to come one way or another, they took
advantage of the situation and used it as an opportunity to meet their enemies
short term needs while fulfilling their long-term goal of educating the
workers. The fact that they were able to get government funding for an
education program with the goal of training young people and workers in how to
become effective revolutionaries is a vindication of their tactics. Diffusion
of anarchist ideas. The practical implications of such a broad diffusion of
anarchist ideas, and the setting in which it took place, are both strong
indicators of the strong fusion of pragmatism and idealism that typified the
Paris groups activities. In any case, the increased contact with actual flesh-
and-blood workers had a profound effect on their propaganda and theory, with
labor issues suddenly becoming a much more prominent part of their platform.
Anarchism as popular movement. By 1914 anarchism had become a genuine popular
movement in China as increasing numbers of people from peasants and factory
workers to intellectuals and students became disillusioned with the Nationalist
government and its inability to realize the peace and prosperity it had
promised. A major liability that the movement had picked up along the way,
however, was the extreme diffusion of anarchist idea to the point where it was
becoming difficult to define exactly who was and who was not an anarchist. Liu
Shifu set out to remedy that situation in a series of articles in Peoples
Voice, which attacked Jiang Kanghu, Sun Yet-Sen, and the Pure Socialists. The
debates that ensued served for the first time to really crystallize what
exactly was meant by anarchism in the broad sense. These articles were
generally friendly in tone. The goal was to clearly differentiate between the
different schools of thought that were available at that time. The letters
directed at Sun Yet Sen and the Nationalists were aimed at exposing the
ambiguities of their use of the word ‚Äúsocialism‚Äù to describe their goals,
which were clearly not socialist according to any contemporary definition. The
attacks on Jiang and the CSS sought to portray their vision of revolution and
socialism as too narrow because it was focused on a single country, and to
oppose their retention of market relations as part of their platform. The
attack on the Pure Socialists was by far the mildest, with the main criticism
being that if they were anarchists then they should call themselves anarchists
and not socialists. "Peoples Voice" invited and printed responses from all
parties, and their goal seems to have been the creation of an open and
respectful debate among friends. For the next five years the movement would
grow slowly but steadily as each of the disparate groups continued their
propaganda, education, and organizing projects. In 1915 the anarchist arguments
for a Social Revolution that had originated a decade earlier with the original
Paris group would find broader acceptance in the New Culture Movement which was
pioneered by a small group of intellectuals in Beijing but spread to the rest
of the county over the next four years, until it merged into the May Fourth
movement. The New Culture Movement was not anarchist, but in its glorification
of science and extreme disdain for Confucianism and traditional culture it
extended critiques that had originated with the Paris group, and the
proliferation of anarchist thought during this period can be seen as a
confirmation of the influence anarchists had on the movement from its
foundation on. The participants saw it as a conscious attempt to create a
Chinese renaissance, and consciously sought to create and live the new culture
that they espoused. Decline in influence and the rise of Maoism. Once the
Bolsheviks in Russia had consolidated their power, they immediately sought to
expand their sphere of influence. Their interpretation of Karl Marx‚Äôs
prediction that the revolution would be global was that ‚Äì as the
vanguard¬ ‚Äì it was their role to use the resources at their disposal to
instigate and support Bolshevik-style revolutions all over the world. In
keeping with Vladimir Lenin‚Äôs doctrine on imperialism, their focus was on the
undeveloped nations, because they believed that once those nations had thrown
off imperialism, Western capitalism¬ ‚Äì deprived of the material support and
raw materials it required¬ ‚Äì would collapse. They also specifically targeted
countries with already established revolutionary movements, and China clearly
qualified. In 1919 the anarchists played a significant role in the May 4th
Movement which swept the country. It was at this time that the first Bolsheviks
started organising in China and began contacting anarchist groups for aid and
support. The anarchists, mistaking the Bolshevicks for allies & unaware of how
the Bolsheviks had subordinated the soviets to their party apparatus, helped
them set up communist study groups¬ ‚Äì many of which were originally majority
anarchist¬ ‚Äì and introduced the Bolsheviks into the Chinese labor and student
movements. Establishment of Communist Party. In 1921, with the establishing of
the Communist Party of China (CPC), the anarchist movement almost immediately
began to lose ground. Several reasons for this have been suggested. First, the
anarchists lacked the ability to coordinate activities across regions. Second,
there was a growing awareness that the Bolsheviks were Marxists, not
anarchists¬ ‚Äì which caused an immediate loss of prestige for the anarchists
who had previously claimed the success of the Russian Revolution for their own.
Third, and perhaps most critical, is the evolutionary nature of large sections
of the movement which did not expect to see their goals met any time in the
even remotely near future; this appealed less to workers who wanted immediate
change. Bolshevism and the CPC platform were immediately attractive to working
people because they offered the promise of change in the immediate future, or
even present. When the CPC entered into the First United Front with the
Kuomintang against the warlords in 1924, they gained even broader access to the
labor movement, and to mass movements in general. In a period of two years, the
CPC grew from a membership of only a few hundred to over 50,000 through their
support and assimilation of the various mass movements. Hostilities between
Chinese anarchism and Chinese communism. Where the first debates between Ou
Shenbai and Chen Duxiu, his former teacher, had been friendly, later debates
became actively hostile. As the anarchist movement rapidly shrank into
insignificance, many anarchists became increasingly desperate. A minority of
anarchists, mostly from the Paris group, had been involved in the Kuomintang
almost from its founding; but the majority of anarchists, in keeping with their
stated principles against involvement in the exercise of coercive authority,
had declined to participate in this alliance. The "Diligent Work and Frugal
Study" program was one product of this collaboration of the anarchists with
nationalists. When the Kuomintang purged the CPC from its ranks in 1927, the
small minority of anarchists who had long participated in it urged their
younger comrades to join the movement and utilize the Nationalist movement as a
vehicle to defeat the Communists and realise anarchism. This drew immediate
opposition from those anarchist groups that were still functioning. But even
those critical of this opportunism, however, eventually joined in¬ ‚Äì if only
because doing so seemed to be the only remaining chance to make their movement
relevant again and reclaim its lost momentum. The result of this last
collaboration was the creation of China's first Labor University, which was
intended to be a domestic version of the Paris groups educational program and
sought to create a new generation of Labor Intellectuals who would finally
overcome the gap between "those who work with their hands‚Äù and ‚Äúthose who
work with their minds." The university would only function for a very few years
before the Nationalist government decided they the project was to subversive to
allow it too continue and pulled funding. It had been acceptable for the
anarchists to use government funding to promote anarchism as long as they did
so in France, but when they began to do so at home, their "allies" were less
than pleased. When the KMT initiated a second wave of repression against the
few remaining mass movements, anarchists left the organization en masse and
were forced underground as hostilities between the KMT and CPC¬ ‚Äì both of
whom were hostile towards anti-authoritarians¬ ‚Äì escalated. Status today.
Overtly anarchist organizing has ceased to be a factor in modern Chinese
politics due to the heavy repression levied against anti-authoritarians by the
Maoist state since the time of the Cultural Revolution. However, as an
underground resistance movement anarchism remains influential. Libertarian
socialist and Anarchist communist currents have been particularly strong in the
anti-dictatorship movement and in China's underground labor movement. The best
known of these in the Western world is the Autonomous Beijing group, one of
several groups responsible for organizing the Tiananmen Square protests of
1989.
