Ancien Régime The Ancien Régime (, "Old Regime") was the aristocratic, social
and political system established in France from approximately the 15th century
to the 18th century under the late Valois and Bourbon dynasties. The
administrative and social structures of the Ancien Régime were the result of
years of state-building, legislative acts (like the Ordinance of Villers-
Cotterêts), internal conflicts and civil wars, but they remained a confusing
patchwork of local privilege and historic differences until the French
Revolution ended the system. Much of the medieval political centralization of
France had been lost in the Hundred Years' War, and the Valois Dynasty's
attempts at re-establishing control over the scattered political centres of the
country were hindered by the Wars of Religion. Much of the reigns of Henry IV,
Louis XIII and the early years of Louis XIV were focused on administrative
centralization. Despite, however, the notion of "absolute monarchy" (typified
by the king's right to issue lettres de cachet) and the efforts by the kings to
create a centralized state, ancien régime France remained a country of
systemic irregularities: administrative (including taxation), legal, judicial,
and ecclesiastic divisions and prerogatives frequently overlapped, while the
French nobility struggled to maintain their own rights in the matters of local
government and justice, and powerful internal conflicts (like the Fronde)
protested against this centralization. The need for centralization in this
period was directly linked to the question of royal finances and the ability to
wage war. The internal conflicts and dynastic crises of the 16th and 17th
centuries (the Wars of Religion, the conflict with the Habsburgs) and the
territorial expansion of France in the 17th century demanded great sums which
needed to be raised through taxes, such as the taille and the gabelle and by
contributions of men and service from the nobility. One key to this
centralization was the replacing of personal "clientele" systems organized
around the king and other nobles by institutional systems around the state. The
creation of the Intendants—representatives of royal power in the
provinces—did much to undermine local control by regional nobles. The same
was true of the greater reliance shown by the royal court on the "noblesse de
robe" as judges and royal counselors. The creation of regional parlements had
initially the same goal of facilitating the introduction of royal power into
newly assimilated territories, but as the parlements gained in self-assurance,
they began to be sources of disunity. Terminology. The term is French for
"Former Regime", but rendered in English as "Old (or Ancient) Regime", "Old
Order", or "Old Rule". The term dates from the Age of Enlightenment (first
appearing in print in English in 1794) and was originally pejorative in nature.
Similar to other sweeping criticisms of the past, such as the consciously
disparaging term Dark Ages for what is more commonly known as the Early Middle
Ages, "ancien regime" was not a neutral historical descriptor. It was created
by the French Revolutionaries to promote their cause, coloring pre-
revolutionary society with disapproval and implying approval of a "New Order".
The analogous term ""Antiguo Régimen"" is often used in Spanish. However,
although Spain was strongly affected by the French Revolution and its
aftermath, the break was not as sharp as in France. More generally, "ancien
régime" refers to any political and social system having the principal
features of the French Ancien Regime. Europe's other "anciens régimes" had
similar origins, but diverse fates: some eventually evolved into constitutional
monarchies, whereas others were torn down by wars and revolutions. Provinces
and administrative divisions. Territorial expansion. In the mid 15th century,
France was significantly smaller than it is today, and numerous border
provinces (such as Roussillon, Cerdagne, Conflent, Vallespir, Capcir, Calais,
Béarn, Navarre, County of Foix, Flanders, Artois, Lorraine, Alsace, Trois-
Évêchés, Franche-Comté, Savoy, Bresse, Bugey, Gex, Nice, Provence,
Dauphiné, and Brittany) were either autonomous or belonged to the Holy Roman
Empire, the Crown of Aragon or the Kingdom of Navarra; there were also foreign
enclaves, like the Comtat Venaissin. In addition, certain provinces within
France were ostensibly personal fiefdoms of noble families (like the
Bourbonnais, Marche, Forez and Auvergne provinces held by the House of Bourbon
until the provinces were forcibly integrated into the royal domain in 1527
after the fall of Charles III, Duke of Bourbon). From the late fifteenth
century up to the late seventenenth century, (and again in the 1760s) France
underwent a massive territorial expansion and an attempt to better integrate
its provinces into an administrative whole. Administration. Despite efforts by
the kings to create a centralized state out of these provinces, France in this
period remained a patchwork of local privileges and historical differences, and
the arbitrary power of the monarch (as implied by the expression "absolute
monarchy") was in fact much limited by historic and regional particularities.
Administrative (including taxation), legal (parlement), judicial, and
ecclesiastic divisions and prerogatives frequently overlapped (for example,
French bishoprics and dioceses rarely coincided with administrative divisions).
Certain provinces and cities had won special privileges (such as lower rates in
the gabelle or salt tax). The south of France was governed by written law
adapted from the Roman legal system, the north of France by common law (in 1453
these common laws were codified into a written form). The representative of the
king in his provinces and cities was the "gouverneur". Royal officers chosen
from the highest nobility, provincial and city governors (oversight of
provinces and cities was frequently combined) were predominantly military
positions in charge of defense and policing. Provincial governors — also
called "lieutenants généraux" — also had the ability of convoking
provincial parlements, provincial estates and municipal bodies. The title
"gouverneur" first appeared under Charles VI. The ordinance of Blois of 1579
reduced their number to 12, but an ordinance of 1779 increased their number to
39 (18 first-class governors, 21 second-class governors). Although in principle
they were the king's representatives and their charges could be revoked at the
king's will, some governors had installed themselves and their heirs as a
provincial dynasty. The governors were at the height of their power from the
middle of the 16th to the mid-17th century, but their role in provincial unrest
during the civil wars led Cardinal Richelieu to create the more tractable
positions of intendants of finance, policing and justice, and in the 18th
century the role of provincial governors was greatly curtailed. In an attempt
to reform the system, new divisions were created. The "recettes générales",
commonly known as "généralités", were initially only taxation districts (see
State finances below). The first sixteen were created in 1542 by edict of Henry
II. Their role steadily increased and by the mid 17th century, the
généralités were under the authority of a "intendant", and they became a
vehicle for the expansion of royal power in matters of justice, taxation and
policing. By the Revolution, there were 36 généralités; the last two were
created in 1784. Social history. France in the Ancien Régime covered a
territory of around , and supported 22 million people in 1700. At least 96% of
the population were peasants. France had the largest population in Europe, with
European Russia second at 20 million. Britain had nearly six million, Spain had
eight million, and the Austrian Habsburgs had around eight million. Russia was
the most populated European country at the time. France's lead slowly faded
after 1700, as other countries grew faster. Rural society. In the 17th century
rich peasants who had ties to the market economy provided much of the capital
investment necessary for agricultural growth, and frequently moved from village
to village (or town). Geographic mobility, directly tied to the market and the
need for investment capital, was the main path to social mobility. The "stable"
core of French society, town guildspeople and village laboureurs, included
cases of staggering social and geographic continuity, but even this core
required regular renewal. Accepting the existence of these two societies, the
constant tension between them, and extensive geographic and social mobility
tied to a market economy holds the key to a clearer understanding of the
evolution of the social structure, economy, and even political system of early
modern France. Collins (1991) argues that the Annales School paradigm
underestimated the role of the market economy; failed to explain the nature of
capital investment in the rural economy; and grossly exaggerated social
stability. Women and families. Very few women held any power—some queens did,
as did the heads of Catholic convents. In the Enlightenment the writings of
philosopher Jean Jacques Rousseau gave political program for reform of the
ancien régime, founded on a reform of domestic mores. Rousseau's conception of
the relations between private and public spheres is more unified than that
found in modern sociology. Rousseau argued that the domestic role of women is a
structural precondition for a "modern" society. Salic law prohibited women from
rule; however, the laws for the case of a regency, when the king was too young
to govern by himself, brought the queen into the center of power. The queen
could assure the passage of power from one king to another—from her late
husband to her young son—while simultaneously assuring the continuity of the
dynasty. Education for girls. Educational aspirations were on the rise and were
becoming increasingly institutionalized in order to supply the church and state
with the functionaries to serve as their future administrators. Girls were
schooled too, but not to assume political responsibility. Girls were ineligible
for leadership positions and were generally considered to have an inferior
intellect to their brothers. France had many small local schools where working-
class children - both boys and girls - learned to read, the better "to know,
love, and serve God." The sons and daughters of the noble and bourgeois elites,
however, were given quite distinct educations: boys were sent to upper school,
perhaps a university, while their sisters - if they were lucky enough to leave
the house - were sent for finishing at a convent. The Enlightenment challenged
this model, but no real alternative presented itself for female education. Only
through education at home were knowledgeable women formed, usually to the sole
end of dazzling their salons. Stepfamilies. A large proportion of children
lived in broken homes or in blended families and had to cope with the presence
of half-siblings and stepsiblings in the same residence. Brothers and sisters
were often separated during the guardianship period and some of them were
raised in different places for most of their childhood. Half-siblings and
stepsiblings lived together for rather short periods of time because of their
difference in age, their birth rank, or their gender. The lives of the children
were closely linked to the administration of their heritage: when both their
mothers and fathers were dead, another relative took charge of the guardianship
and often removed the children from a stepparent's home, thus separating half-
siblings. The experience of step-motherhood was surrounded by negative
stereotypes; the Cinderella story and many other jokes and stories made the
second wife an object of ridicule. Language, theater, popular sayings, the
position of the Church, and the writings of jurists all made stepmother a
difficult identity to take up. However, the importance of male remarriage
suggests that reconstitution of family units was a necessity and that
individuals resisted negative perceptions circulating through their
communities. Widowers did not hesitate to take a second wife, and they usually
found quite soon a partner willing to become a stepmother. For these women,
being a stepmother was not necessarily the experience of a lifetime or what
defined their identity. Their experience depended greatly on factors such as
the length of the union, changing family configuration, and financial
dispositions taken by their husbands. By a policy adopted at the beginning of
the 16th century, adulterous women during the ancien régime were sentenced to
a lifetime in a convent unless pardoned by their husbands and were rarely
allowed to remarry even if widowed. State finances. The desire for more
efficient tax collection was one of the major causes for French administrative
and royal centralization in the early modern period. The taille became a major
source of royal income. Exempted from the taille were clergy and nobles (except
for non-noble lands they held in "pays d'état", see below), officers of the
crown, military personnel, magistrates, university professors and students, and
certain cities ("villes franches") such as Paris. The provinces were of three
sorts, the "pays d'élection", the "pays d'état" and the "pays d'imposition".
In the "pays d'élection" (the longest held possessions of the French crown;
some of these provinces had had the equivalent autonomy of a "pays d'état" in
an earlier period, but had lost it through the effects of royal reforms) the
assessment and collection of taxes were trusted to elected officials (at least
originally, later these positions were bought), and the tax was generally
"personal", meaning it was attached to non-noble individuals. In the "pays
d'état" ("provinces with provincial estates"), Brittany, Languedoc, Burgundy,
Auvergne, Béarn, Dauphiné, Provence and portions of Gascony, such as Bigorre,
Comminges and the Quatre-Vallées, recently acquired provinces which had been
able to maintain a certain local autonomy in terms of taxation, the assessment
of the tax was established by local councils and the tax was generally "real",
meaning that it was attached to non-noble lands (meaning that nobles possessing
such lands were required to pay taxes on them). "Pays d'imposition" were
recently conquered lands which had their own local historical institutions
(they were similar to the "pays d'état" under which they are sometimes
grouped), although taxation was overseen by the royal intendant. Taxation
districts had gone through a variety of mutations from the 14th century on.
Before the 14th century, oversight of the collection of royal taxes fell
generally to the "baillis" and "sénéchaux" in their circumscriptions. Reforms
in the 14th and 15th centuries saw France's royal financial administration run
by two financial boards which worked in a collegial manner: the four
"Généraux des finances" (also called "général conseiller" or "receveur
général" ) oversaw the collection of taxes (taille, aides, etc.) by tax-
collecting agents ("receveurs") and the four "Trésoriers de France"
(Treasurers) oversaw revenues from royal lands (the "domaine royal"). Together
they were often referred to as "Messieurs des finances". The four members of
each board were divided by geographical circumscriptions (although the term
"généralité" isn't found before the end of the 15th century); the areas were
named Languedoïl, Languedoc, Outre-Seine-and-Yonne, and Nomandy (the latter
was created in 1449; the other three were created earlier), with the directors
of the "Languedoïl" region typically having an honorific preeminence. By 1484,
the number of généralités had increased to 6. In the 16th century, the kings
of France, in an effort to exert more direct control over royal finances and to
circumvent the double-board (accused of poor oversight) -- instituted numerous
administrative reforms, including the restructuring of the financial
administration and an increase in the number of "généralités". In 1542,
Henry II, France was divided into 16 "généralités". The number increased to
21 at the end of the 16th century, and to 36 at the time of the French
Revolution; the last two were created in 1784. The administration of the
généralités of the Renaissance went through a variety of reforms. In 1577,
Henry III established 5 treasurers ("trésoriers généraux") in each
généralité who formed a bureau of finances. In the 17th century, oversight
of the généralités was subsumed by the intendants of finance, justice and
police, and the expression "généralité" and "intendance" became roughly
synonymous. Until the late 17th century, tax collectors were called
"receveurs". In 1680, the system of the Ferme Générale was established, a
franchised customs and excise operation in which individuals bought the right
to collect the taille on behalf of the king, through 6-years adjudications
(certain taxes like the "aides" and the "gabelle" had been farmed out in this
way as early as 1604). The major tax collectors in that system were known as
the "fermiers généraux" (farmers-general in English). The taille was only one
of a number of taxes. There also existed the "taillon" (a tax for military
purposes), a national salt tax (the gabelle), national tariffs (the "aides") on
various products (wine, beer, oil, and other goods), local tariffs on
speciality products (the "douane") or levied on products entering the city (the
"octroi") or sold at fairs, and local taxes. Finally, the church benefited from
a mandatory tax or tithe called the "dîme". Louis XIV created several
additional tax systems, including the "capitation" (begun in 1695) which
touched every person including nobles and the clergy (although exemption could
be bought for a large one-time sum) and the "dixième" (1710–1717, restarted
in 1733), enacted to support the military, which was a true tax on income and
on property value. In 1749, under Louis XV, a new tax based on the "dixième",
the "vingtième" (or "one-twentieth"), was enacted to reduce the royal deficit,
and this tax continued through the remaining years of the ancien régime.
Another key source of state financing was through charging fees for state
positions (such as most members of parlements, magistrates, maître des
requêtes and financial officers). Many of these fees were quite elevated, but
some of these offices conferred nobility and could be financially advantageous.
The use of offices to seek profit had become standard practice as early as the
12th and 13th centuries. A law in 1467 made these offices unrevocable, except
through the death, resignation or forfeiture of the title holder, and these
offices, once bought, tended to become hereditary charges (with a fee for
transfer of title) passed on within families. In an effort to increase
revenues, the state often turned to the creation of new offices. Before it was
made illegal in 1521, It had been possible to leave open-ended the date that
the transfer of title was to take effect. In 1534, the "forty days rule" was
instituted (adapted from church practice), which made the successor's right
void if the preceding office holder died within forty days of the transfer and
the office returned to the state;however, a new fee, called the "survivance
jouissante" protected against the forty days rule. In 1604, Sully created a new
tax, the "paulette" or "annual tax" (1/60 of the amount of the official
charge), which permitted the title-holder to be free of the 40 day rule. The
"paulette" and the venality of offices became key concerns in the
parlementarian revolts of the 1640s (La Fronde). The state also demanded of the
church a "free gift", which the church collected from holders of eccleciastic
offices through taxes called the "décime" (roughly 1/20th of the official
charge, created under Francis I). State finances also relied heavily on
borrowing, both private (from the great banking families in Europe) and public.
The most important public source for borrowing was through the system of
"rentes sur l'Hôtel de Ville" of Paris, a kind of government bond system
offering investers annual interest. This system first came to use in 1522 under
Francis I. Until 1661, the head of the financial system in France was generally
the "surintendant des finances"; with the fall of Fouquet, this was replaced by
the lesser position of "contrôleur général des finances". Justice. Lower
courts. Justice in seigneurial lands (including those held by the church or
within cities) was generally overseen by the seigneur or his delegated
officers. Since the 15th century, much of the seigneur's legal purview had been
given to the "bailliages" or "sénéchaussées" and the "présidiaux" (see
below), leaving only affairs concerning seigeurial dues and duties, and small
affairs of local justice. Only certain seigneurs—those with the power of
"haute justice" (seigeurial justice was divided into "high" "middle" and "low"
justice) -- could enact the death penalty, and only with the consent of the
"présidiaux". Crimes of desertion, highway robbery, and mendicants (so-called
"cas prévôtaux") were under the supervision of the prévôt des maréchaux,
who exacted quick and impartial justice. In 1670, their purview was overseen by
the "présidiaux" (see below). In an effort to reduce the case load in the
parlements, certain "bailliages" were given extended powers by Henry II of
France: these were called présidiaux. The prévôts or their equivalent were
the first-level judges for non-nobles and ecclesiastics. In the exercise of
their legal functions, they sat alone, but had to consult with certain lawyers
("avocats" or "procureurs") chosen by themselves, whom, to use the technical
phrase, they "summoned to their council". The appeals from their sentences went
to the "bailliages", who also had jurisdiction in the first instance over
actions brought against nobles. "Bailliages" and "présidiaux" were also the
first court for certain crimes (so-called "cas royaux"; these cases had
formerly been under the supervision of the local seigneurs): sacrilege, lèse-
majesté, kidnapping, rape, heresy, alteration of money, sedition,
insurrections, and the illegal carrying of arms. To appeal a "bailliage's"
decisions, one turned to the regional parlements. The most important of these
royal tribunals was the prévôté and présidial of Paris, the "Châtelet",
which was overseen by the "prévôt" of Paris, civil and criminal lieutenants,
and a royal officer in charge of maintaining public order in the capital, the
Lieutenant General of Police of Paris. Superior courts. The following were
"cours souveraines", or superior courts, whose decisions could only be revoked
by "the king in his conseil" (see administration section below). The head of
the judicial system in France was the chancellor. Administration. One of the
established principles of the French monarchy was that the king could not act
without the advice of his counsel; the formula "le roi en son conseil"
expressed this deliberative aspect. The administration of the French state in
the early modern period went through a long evolution, as a truly
administrative apparatus—relying on old nobility, newer chancellor nobility
("noblesse de robe") and administrative professionals—was substituted to the
feudal clientel system. Under Charles VIII and Louis XII the king's counsel was
dominated by members of twenty or so noble or rich families; under Francis I
the number of counsellors increased to roughly 70 individuals (although the old
nobility was proportionally more important than in the previous century). The
most important positions in the court were those of the Great Officers of the
Crown of France, headed by the connétable (chief military officer of the
realm; position eliminated in 1627) and the chancellor. The royal
administration in the Renaissance was divided between a small counsel (the
"secret" and later "high" counsel) of 6 or fewer members (3 members in 1535, 4
in 1554) for important matters of state; and a larger counsel for judicial or
financial affairs. Francis I was sometimes criticized for relying too heavily
on a small number of advisors, while Henry II, Catherine de Medici and their
sons found themselves frequently unable to negotiate between the opposing Guise
and Montmorency families in their counsel. In addition to the above
administrative institutions, the king was also surrounded by an extensive
personal and court retinue (royal family, valet de chambres, guards, honorific
officers), regrouped under the name "Maison du Roi". At the death of Louis XIV,
the Regent Philippe II, Duke of Orléans abandoned several of the above
administrative structures, most notably the Secretaries of State, which were
replaced by Counsels. This system of government, called the Polysynody, lasted
from 1715-1718. Royal administration in the provinces had been the role of the
"bailliages" and "sénéchaussées" in the Middle Ages, but this declined in
the early modern period, and by the end of the 18th century, the "bailliages"
served only a judicial function. The main source of royal administrative power
in the provinces in the 16th and early 17th centuries fell to the gouverneurs
(who represented "the presence of the king in his province"), positions which
had long been held by only the highest ranked families in the realm. With the
civil wars of the early modern period, the king increasing turned to more
tractable and subservient emissaries, and this was the reason for the growth of
the provincial intendants under Louis XIII and Louis XIV. Indendants were
chosen from among the maître des requêtes. Intendants attached to a province
had jurisdiction over finances, justice and policing. By the 18th century,
royal administrative power was firmly established in the provinces, despite
protestations by local parlements. In addition to their role as appellate
courts, regional parlements had gained the privilege to register the edicts of
the king and to present the king with official complaints concerning the
edicts; in this way, they had acquired a limited role as the representative
voice of (predominantly) the magistrate class. In case of refusal on
parliament's part to register the edicts (frequently concerning fiscal
matters), the king could impose registration through a royal assize ("lit de
justice"). The other traditional representatives bodies in the realm were the
Etats généraux (created in 1302) which reunited the three estates of the
realm (clergy, nobility, the third estate) and the "États provinciaux"
(Provincial Estates). The "Etats généraux" (convoked in this period in 1484,
1560-1, 1576-7, 1588-9, 1593, 1614, and 1789) had been reunited in times of
fiscal crisis or convoked by parties malcontent with royal prerogatives (the
Ligue, the Huguenots), but they had no true power, the dissensions between the
three orders rendered them weak and they were dissolved before having completed
their work. As a sign of French absolutism, they ceased to be convoked from
1614 to 1789. The provincial estates proved more effective, and were convoked
by the king to respond to fiscal and tax policies. The Church. The French
monarchy was irrevocably linked to the Catholic Church (the formula says "la
France est la fille aînée de l'église", or "France is the eldest daughter of
the church"), and French theorists of the divine right of kings and sacerdotal
power in the Renaissance had made these links explicit: Henry IV was able to
ascend to the throne only after abjuring Protestantism. The symbolic power of
the Catholic monarch was apparent in his crowning (the king was anointed by
blessed oil in Rheims) and he was popularly believed to be able to cure
scrofula by the laying on of his hands (accompanied by the formula "the king
touches you, but God heals you"). In 1500, France had 14 archibishoprics (Lyon,
Rouen, Tours, Sens, Bourges, Bordeaux, Auch, Toulouse, Narbonne, Aix-en-
Provence, Embrun, Vienne, Arles, and Rheims) and 100 bishoprics; by the 18th
century, archbishoprics and bishoprics had expanded to a total of 139 (see List
of Ancien Régime dioceses of France). The upper levels of the French church
were made up predominantly of old nobility, both from provincial families and
from royal court families, and many of the offices had become "de facto"
hereditary possessions, with some members possessing multiple offices. In
addition to fiefs that church members possessed as seigneurs, the church also
possessed seigneurial lands in its own right and enacted justice upon them.
Other temporal powers of the church included playing a political role as the
first estate in the "États Généraux" and the "États Provinciaux"
(Provincial Assemblies) and in Provincial Conciles or Synods convoked by the
king to discuss religious issues. The church also claimed a prerogative to
judge certain crimes, most notably heresy, although the Wars of Religion did
much to place this crime in the purview of the royal courts and parliament.
Finally, abbots, cardinals and other prelates were frequently employed by the
kings as ambassadors, members of his councils (such as Richelieu and Mazarin)
and in other administrative positions. The faculty of theology of Paris (often
called the Sorbonne), maintained a censor board which reviewed publications for
their religious orthodoxy. The Wars of Religion saw this control over
censorship however pass to the parliament, and in the 17th century to the royal
censors, although the church maintained a right to petition. The church was the
primary provider of schools (primary schools and "colleges") and hospitals
("hôtel-Dieu", the Sisters of Charity) and distributor of relief to the poor
in pre-revolutionary France The Pragmatic Sanction of Bourges (1438, suppressed
by Louis XI but brought back by the États Généraux of Tours in 1484) gave
the election of bishops and abbots to the cathedral chapter houses and abbeys
of France, thus stripping the pope of effective control of the French church
and permitting the beginning of a Gallican church. However, in 1515, Francis I
signed a new agreement with Pope Leo X, the Concordat of Bologna, which gave
the king the right to nominate candidates and the pope the right of
investiture; this agreement infuriated gallicans, but gave the king control
over important ecclesiastical offices with which to benefit nobles. Although
exempted from the taille, the church was required to pay the crown a tax called
the "free gift" ("don gratuit"), which it collected from its office holders, at
roughly 1/20 the price of the office (this was the "décime", reapportioned
every five years). In its turn, the church exacted a mandatory tithe from its
parishioners, called the "dîme". The Counter-Reformation saw the French church
create numerous religious orders (such as the Jesuits) and make great
improvements on the quality of its parish priests; the first decades of the
17th century were characterized by a massive outpouring of devotional texts and
religious fervor (exemplified in Saint Francis of Sales, Saint Vincent de Paul,
etc.). Although the Edict of Nantes (1598) permitted the existence of
prostestant churches in the realm (characterized as "a state within a state"),
the next eighty years saw the rights of the Huguenots slowly stripped away,
until Louis XIV finally revoked the edict in 1685, producing a massive
emigration of Huguenots to other countries. Religious practices which veered
too close to Protestantism (like Jansenism) or to the mystical (like Quietism)
were also severely suppressed, as too libertinage or overt atheism. Although
the church came under attack in the eighteenth century by the philosophers of
the Enlightenment and recruitment of clergy and monastic orders dropped after
1750, figures show that, on the whole, the population remained a profoundly
Catholic country (absenteeism from services did not exceed 1% in the middle of
the century). At the eve of the revolution, the church possessed upwards of 7%
of the country's land (figures vary) and generated yearly revenues of 150
million livres. Gallicanism. Louis XIV supported the Gallican cause that gave
the government a greater role than the pope in choosing bishops, and gave the
government the revenues when a bishopric was vacant. There would be no
inquisition in France, and papal decrees could operate only after the
government approved them. Louis avoided schism — he wanted more royal power
over the French Church but did not want to break free of Rome. The pope
likewise recognized the "most Christian king" was a powerful ally who could not
be alienated. Monasteries. Until the French Revolution, the monastic community
constituted a central element of the economic, social, and religious life of
many localities under the Old Regime. From the end of the Wars of Religion to
the French Revolution, Menat, a Cluniac abbey dating back to 1107, ruled over
the Sioule Valley in the northwest region of the Clermont diocese. The monks
were large landholders and developed a diversified and complex set of links
with their neighbors; they received seigniorial rights, provided work to the
rural poor, and were in daily contact with notaries public, merchants, and
surgeons. While they did not directly manage the religious life of the faithful
(parish priests did that), monks did constitute a motivating force in it
through their setting up of a parish clergy, providing alms and social
services, and playing the role of intercessors. Convents. Communities of nuns
in France on the eve of Revolution had, on average, 25 members and a median age
of 48 years. Nuns were both entering the profession later and living longer
than before. In general, they had little wealth. Recruitment varied from region
to region and by convent lifestyle (active or contemplative, austere or
opulent, lower class or middle class). The nature of male and female
monasticism differed greatly in France both before and during the revolution.
Convents tended to be more isolated and less centrally controlled. This made
for greater diversity among them than among male monasteries. Reformation and
the Protestant Minority. French Protestantism, which was largely Calvinist
derived its support from the lesser nobles and trading classes. Its two main
strongholds were south west France and Normandy, but even in these districts
the Catholics were a majority. Protestantism in France was considered a grave
threat to national unity, as the Huguenot minority felt a closer affinity with
German and Dutch Calvinists than with their fellow Frenchmen. In an effort to
cement their position they often allied with French enemies. The animosity
between the two sides led to the French Wars of Religion and the tragic St.
Bartholomew's Day Massacre. The religious wars ended in 1593, when the Huguenot
Henry of Navarre (1553–1610), who was already effectively king of France
became a Catholic and was recognized by both Catholics and Protestants as King
Henry IV (reigned 1589–1610). The main provisions of the Edict of Nantes
(1598), which Henry IV had issued as a charter of religious freedoms for the
Huguenots, were as follows; first) Huguenots were allowed to hold religious
services in certain towns in each province; second) They were allowed to
control and fortify eight cities; third) Special courts were established to try
Huguenot offenders; d) Huguenots were to have equal civil rights with the
Catholics. The military privileges were incorporated in the Edict in order to
allay the fears of the minority. Over time it became clear these privileges
were open to abuse and when in 1620 the Huguenots proclaimed a constitution for
the 'Republic of the Reformed Churches of France', the Prime Minister Cardinal
Richelieu (1585–1642) invoked the full powers of the state; He captured La
Rochelle after a long siege in 1628. The subsequent Treaty of Alais left the
Huguenots their religious freedom but revoked their military freedoms.
Montpellier was among the most important of the 66 "villes de sûreté" that
the Edict of 1598 granted to the Huguenots. The city's political institutions
and the university were all handed over to the Huguenots. Tension with Paris
led to a siege by the royal army in 1622. Peace terms called for the
dismantling of the city's fortifications. A royal citadel was built and the
university and consulate were taken over by the Catholic party. Even before the
Edict of Alès (1629), Protestant rule was dead and the ville de sûreté was
no more. By 1620 the Huguenots were on the defensive, and the government
increasingly applied pressure. A series of small civil wars that broke out in
southern France between 1610 and 1635 were long considered by historians to be
regional squabbles between rival noble families. New analysis shows that these
civil wars were in fact religious in nature, remnants of the French Wars of
Religion that largely ended with the Edict of Nantes in 1598. Small wars in the
provinces of Languedoc and Guyenne show Catholic and Calvinist groups using
destruction of churches, iconoclasm, forced conversions, and the execution of
heretics as weapons of choice. Louis XIV acted more and more aggressively to
force the Huguenots to convert. At first he sent missionaries to convert them,
backed by a fund to financially reward converts to Catholicism. Then he imposed
penalties and closed their schools and excluded them from favorite professions.
Escalating the attack, he tried to forcibly re-Catholicize the Huguenots by the
employment of armed dragonnades (soldiers) to occupy and loot their houses, and
finally by the revocation (Oct. 18, 1685) of the liberal Edict of Nantes of
1598. The revocation forbade Protestant services, the children were to be
educated as Catholics, and emigration was prohibited. It proved disastrous to
the Huguenots and costly for France. It precipitated civil bloodshed, ruined
commerce, and resulted in the illegal flight from the country of about 180,000
Protestants, many of whom became intellectuals, doctors and business leaders in
Britain as well as Holland, Prussia and South Africa. 4000 went to the American
colonies. The English welcomed the French refugees, providing money from both
government and private agencies to aid their relocation. Those Huguenots who
stayed in France became Catholics and were called "new converts." Only a few
Protestant villages remained in isolated areas. Downfall. In 1789, the Ancien
Regime was violently overthrown by the French Revolution. Although France in
1785 faced economic difficulties, mostly concerning the equitability of
taxation, it was one of the richest and most powerful nations of Europe. The
French people also enjoyed more political freedom and a lower incidence of
arbitrary punishment than any of their fellow Europeans. However, Louis XVI,
his ministers, and the widespread French nobility had become immensely
unpopular. This was a consequence of the fact that peasants and, to a lesser
extent, the "bourgeoisie", were burdened with ruinously high taxes levied to
support wealthy aristocrats and their sumptuous, often gluttonous, lifestyles.
The fall of the "ancien régime" in France may be blamed, in part, on its own
rigidity. Aristocrats were confronted by the rising ambitions of the merchants,
tradesmen and prosperous farmers, who were allied with aggrieved peasants,
wage-earners and intellectuals influenced by the ideas of Enlightenment
philosophers. As the revolution proceeded, power devolved from the monarchy and
the privileged-by-birth to more-representative political bodies, like
legislative assemblies, but conflicts among the formerly allied republican
groups became the source of considerable discord and bloodshed. A growing
number of the French citizenry had absorbed the ideas of "equality" and
"freedom of the individual" as presented by Voltaire, Denis Diderot, Turgot,
and other philosophers and social theorists of the Enlightenment. The American
Revolution had demonstrated that it was possible for Enlightenment ideas about
how governance should be organized to actually be put into practice. Some
American diplomats, like Benjamin Franklin and Thomas Jefferson, had lived in
Paris where they consorted freely with members of the French intellectual
class. Furthermore, contact between American revolutionaries and the French
troops who served as anti-British mercenaries in North America helped spread
revolutionary ideals to the French people. After a time, many of the French
began to attack the undemocratic nature of their own government, push for
freedom of speech, challenge the Roman Catholic Church, and decry the
prerogatives of the nobles. Revolution was not due to a single event but to a
series of events, that together irreversibly changed the organization of
political power, the nature of society, and the exercise of individual
freedoms. Nostalgia. The reason for this affection was the perceived decline in
culture and values following the Revolution, where the aristocracy lost much of
its economic and political power to what was seen as a rich, but coarse and
materialistic bourgeoise. The theme recurs throughout nineteenth-century French
literature, with Balzac and Flaubert alike attacking the mores of the new upper
classes. To this mindset, the Ancien Régime expressed a bygone era of
refinement and grace, before the Revolution and its associated changes
disrupted the aristocratic tradition and ushered in a crude, uncertain
modernity. The historian Alexis de Tocqueville argued against this defining
narrative in his classic study, highlighting the continuities between pre- and
post- revolutionary French institutions.
