Ancient Greece Ancient Greece was a civilization belonging to a period of Greek
history that lasted from the Archaic period of the 8th to 6th centuries BC to
the end of antiquity (ca. 600 AD). Immediately following this period was the
beginning of the Early Middle Ages and the Byzantine era. Included in Ancient
Greece is the period of Classical Greece, which flourished during the 5th to
4th centuries BC. Classical Greece began with the repelling of a Persian
invasion by Athenian leadership. Because of conquests by Alexander the Great,
Hellenistic civilization flourished from Central Asia to the western end of the
Mediterranean Sea. Classical Greek culture, especially philosophy, had a
powerful influence on the Roman Empire, which carried a version of it to many
parts of the Mediterranean region and Europe, for which reason Classical Greece
is generally considered to be the seminal culture which provided the foundation
of modern Western culture. Chronology. There are no fixed or universally agreed
upon dates for the beginning or the end of Classical Antiquity. It is typically
taken to last from the 8th century BC until the 6th century AD, or for about
1,300 years. Classical Antiquity in Greece is preceded by the Greek Dark Ages
(c. 1100 ‚Äì c. 750 BC), archaeologically characterised by the protogeometric
and geometric style of designs on pottery, succeeded by the Orientalizing
Period, a strong influence of Syro-Hittite, Assyrian, Phoenician and Egyptian
cultures. Traditionally, the Archaic period of ancient Greece is taken in the
wake of this strong Orientalizing influence during the 8th century BC, which
among other things brought the alphabetic script to Greece, marking the
beginning of Greek literature (Homer, Hesiod). The Archaic period gives way to
the Classical period around 500 BC, in turn succeeded by the Hellenistic period
at the death of Alexander the Great in 323 BC. Historiography. The historical
period of ancient Greece is unique in world history as the first period
attested directly in proper historiography, while earlier ancient history or
proto-history is known by much more circumstantial evidence, such as annals or
king lists, and pragmatic epigraphy. Herodotus is widely known as the "father
of history", his "Histories" being eponymous of the entire field. Written
between the 450s and 420s BC, the scope of Herodotus' work reaches about a
century into the past, discussing 6th-century historical figures such as Darius
I of Persia, Cambyses II and Psamtik III, and alludes to some 8th-century ones
such as Candaules. Herodotus was succeeded by authors such as Thucydides,
Xenophon, Demosthenes, Plato and Aristotle. Most of these authors were either
Athenians or pro-Athenians, which is why far more is known about the history
and politics of Athens than of many other cities. Their scope is further
limited by a focus on political, military and diplomatic history, ignoring
economic and social history. History. Archaic period. In the 8th century BC,
Greece began to emerge from the Dark Ages which followed the fall of the
Mycenaean civilization. Literacy had been lost and Mycenaean script forgotten,
but the Greeks adopted the Phoenician alphabet, modifying it to create the
Greek alphabet. From about the 9th century BC written records begin to appear.
Greece was divided into many small self-governing communities, a pattern
largely dictated by Greek geography, where every island, valley and plain is
cut off from its neighbours by the sea or mountain ranges. The Lelantine War
(c.710‚Äìc.650 BC) was an ongoing conflict with the distinction of being the
earliest documented war of the ancient Greek period. It was fought between the
important poleis (city-states) of Chalcis and Eretria over the fertile
Lelantine plain of Euboea. Both cities seem to have suffered a decline as
result of the long war, though Chalcis was the nominal victor. A mercantile
class rose in the first half of the 7th century, shown by the introduction of
coinage in about 680 BC. This seems to have introduced tension to many city-
states. The aristocratic regimes which generally governed the poleis were
threatened by the new-found wealth of merchants, who in turn desired political
power. From 650 BC onwards, the aristocracies had to fight not to be overthrown
and replaced by populist tyrants. The word derives from the non-pejorative
Greek œÑœçœÅŒ±ŒΩŒΩŒøœÇ "tyrannos", meaning 'illegitimate ruler', although this
was applicable to both good and bad leaders alike. A growing population and
shortage of land also seems to have created internal strife between the poor
and the rich in many city-states. In Sparta, the Messenian Wars resulted in the
conquest of Messenia and enserfment of the Messenians, beginning in the latter
half of the 8th century BC, an act without precedent or antecedent in ancient
Greece. This practice allowed a social revolution to occur. The subjugated
population, thenceforth known as helots, farmed and laboured for Sparta, whilst
every Spartan male citizen became a soldier of the Spartan Army in a
permanently militarized state. Even the elite were obliged to live and train as
soldiers; this equality between rich and poor served to defuse the social
conflict. These reforms, attributed to the shadowy Lycurgus of Sparta, were
probably complete by 650 BC. Athens suffered a land and agrarian crisis in the
late 7th century, again resulting in civil strife. The Archon (chief
magistrate) Draco made severe reforms to the law code in 621 BC (hence
"draconian"), but these failed to quell the conflict. Eventually the moderate
reforms of Solon (594 BC), improving the lot of the poor but firmly entrenching
the aristocracy in power, gave Athens some stability. By the 6th century BC
several cities had emerged as dominant in Greek affairs: Athens, Sparta,
Corinth, and Thebes. Each of them had brought the surrounding rural areas and
smaller towns under their control, and Athens and Corinth had become major
maritime and mercantile powers as well. Rapidly increasing population in the
8th and 7th centuries had resulted in emigration of many Greeks to form
colonies in Magna Graecia (Southern Italy and Sicily), Asia Minor and further
afield. The emigration effectively ceased in the 6th century by which time the
Greek world had, culturally and linguistically, become much larger than the
area of present-day Greece. Greek colonies were not politically controlled by
their founding cities, although they often retained religious and commercial
links with them. In this period, huge economic development occurred in Greece
and also her overseas colonies which experienced a growth in commerce and
manufacturing. There was a large improvement in the living standards of the
population. Some studies estimate that the average size of the Greek household,
in the period from 800 BC to 300 BC, increased five times, which indicates a
large increase in the average income of the population. In the second half of
the 6th century, Athens fell under the tyranny of Peisistratos and then his
sons Hippias and Hipparchos. However, in 510 BC, at the instigation of the
Athenian aristocrat Cleisthenes, the Spartan king Cleomenes I helped the
Athenians overthrow the tyranny. Afterwards, Sparta and Athens promptly turned
on each other, at which point Cleomenes I installed Isagoras as a pro-Spartan
archon. Eager to prevent Athens from becoming a Spartan puppet, Cleisthenes
responded by proposing to his fellow citizens that Athens undergo a revolution:
that all citizens share in political power, regardless of status: that Athens
become a "democracy". So enthusiastically did the Athenians take to this idea
that, having overthrown Isagoras and implemented Cleisthenes's reforms, they
were easily able to repel a Spartan-led three-pronged invasion aimed at
restoring Isagoras. The advent of the democracy cured many of the ills of
Athens and led to a 'golden age' for the Athenians. Classical Greece. 5th
century. Athens and Sparta would soon have to become allies in the face of the
largest external threat ancient Greece would see until the Roman conquest.
After suppressing the Ionian Revolt, a rebellion of the Greek cities of Ionia,
Darius I of Persia, King of Kings of the Achaemenid Empire, decided to
subjugate Greece. His invasion in 490 BC was ended by the Athenian victory at
the Battle of Marathon under Miltiades the Younger. Xerxes I of Persia, son and
successor of Darius I, attempted his own invasion 10 years later, but despite
his larger army he suffered heavy casualties after the famous rearguard action
at Thermopylae and victories for the allied Greeks at the Battles of Salamis
and Plataea. The Greco-Persian Wars continued until 449 BC, led by the
Athenians and their Delian League, during which time the Macedon, Thrace, the
Aegean Islands and Ionia were all liberated from Persian influence. The
dominant position of the maritime Athenian 'Empire' threatened Sparta and the
Peloponnesian League of mainland Greek cities. Inevitably, this led to
conflict, resulting in the Peloponnesian War (431-404 BC). Though effectively a
stalemate for much of the war, Athens suffered a number of setbacks. The Plague
of Athens in 430 BC followed by a disastrous military campaign known as the
Sicilian Expedition severely weakened Athens. An estimated one-third of
Athenians died, including Pericles, their leader. Sparta was able to foment
rebellion amongst Athens's allies, further reducing the Athenian ability to
wage war. The decisive moment came in 405 BC when Sparta cut off the grain
supply to Athens from the Hellespont. Forced to attack, the crippled Athenian
fleet was decisively defeated by the Spartans under the command of Lysander at
Aegospotami. In 404 BC Athens sued for peace, and Sparta dictated a predictably
stern settlement: Athens lost her city walls (including the Long Walls), her
fleet, and all of her overseas possessions. 4th century. Greece thus entered
the 4th century under a Spartan hegemony, but it was clear from the start that
this was weak. A demographic crisis meant Sparta was overstretched, and by 395
BC Athens, Argos, Thebes, and Corinth felt able to challenge Spartan dominance,
resulting in the Corinthian War (395-387 BC). Another war of stalemates, it
ended with the status quo restored, after the threat of Persian intervention on
behalf of the Spartans. The Spartan hegemony lasted another 16 years, until,
when attempting to impose their will on the Thebans, the Spartans suffered a
decisive defeat at Leuctra in 371 BC. The Theban general Epaminondas then led
Theban troops into the Peloponnese, whereupon other city-states defected from
the Spartan cause. The Thebans were thus able to march into Messenia and free
the population. Deprived of land and its serfs, Sparta declined to a second-
rank power. The Theban hegemony thus established was short-lived; at the Battle
of Mantinea in 362 BC, Thebes lost her key leader, Epaminondas, and much of her
manpower, even though they were victorious in battle. In fact such were the
losses to all the great city-states at Mantinea that none could establish
dominance in the aftermath. The weakened state of the heartland of Greece
coincided with the Rise of Macedon, led by Philip II. In twenty years, Philip
had unified his kingdom, expanded it north and west at the expense of Illyrian
tribes, and then conquered Thessaly and Thrace. His success stemmed from his
innovative reforms to the Macedon army. Phillip intervened repeatedly in the
affairs of the southern city-states, culminating in his invasion of 338 BC.
Decisively defeating an allied army of Thebes and Athens at the Battle of
Chaeronea (338 BC), he became "de facto" hegemon of all of Greece, except
Sparta. He compelled the majority of the city-states to join the League of
Corinth, allying them to him, and preventing them from warring with each other.
Philip then entered into war against the Achaemenid Empire but was assassinated
by Pausanias of Orestis early on in the conflict. Alexander, son and successor
of Philip, continued the war. Alexander defeated Darius III of Persia and
completely destroyed the Achaemenid Empire, annexing it to Macedon and earning
himself the epithet 'the Great'. When Alexander died in 323 BC, Greek power and
influence was at its zenith. However, there had been a fundamental shift away
from the fierce independence and classical culture of the "poleis"‚Äîand
instead towards the developing Hellenistic culture. Hellenistic Greece. The
orange areas were often in dispute after 281 BC. The kingdom of Pergamon
occupied some of this area. Not shown: Indo-Greeks. The Hellenistic period
lasted from 323 BC, which marked the end of the Wars of Alexander the Great, to
the annexation of Greece by the Roman Republic in 146 BC. Although the
establishment of Roman rule did not break the continuity of Hellenistic society
and culture, which remained essentially unchanged until the advent of
Christianity, it did mark the end of Greek political independence. During the
Hellenistic period, the importance of "Greece proper" (that is, the territory
of modern Greece) within the Greek-speaking world declined sharply. The great
centers of Hellenistic culture were Alexandria and Antioch, capitals of
Ptolemaic Egypt and Seleucid Syria respectively. The conquests of Alexander had
numerous consequences for the Greek city-states. It greatly widened the
horizons of the Greeks and led to a steady emigration, particularly of the
young and ambitious, to the new Greek empires in the east. Many Greeks migrated
to Alexandria, Antioch and the many other new Hellenistic cities founded in
Alexander's wake, as far away as what are now Afghanistan and Pakistan, where
the Greco-Bactrian Kingdom and the Indo-Greek Kingdom survived until the end of
the 1st century BC. After the death of Alexander his empire was, after quite
some conflict, divided amongst his generals, resulting in the Ptolemaic Kingdom
(based upon Egypt), the Seleucid Empire (based on the Levant, Mesopotamia and
Persia) and the Antigonid dynasty based in Macedon. In the intervening period,
the poleis of Greece were able to wrest back some of their freedom, although
still nominally subject to the Macedonian Kingdom. The city-states formed
themselves into two leagues; the Achaean League (including Thebes, Corinth and
Argos) and the Aetolian League (including Sparta and Athens). For much of the
period until the Roman conquest, these leagues were usually at war with each
other, and/or allied to different sides in the conflicts between the Diadochi
(the successor states to Alexander's empire). The Antigonid Kingdom became
involved in a war with the Roman Republic in the late 3rd century. Although the
First Macedonian War was inconclusive, the Romans, in typical fashion,
continued to make war on Macedon until it was completely absorbed into the
Roman Republic (by 149 BC). In the east the unwieldy Seleucid Empire gradually
disintegrated, although a rump survived until 64 BC, whilst the Ptolemaic
Kingdom continued in Egypt until 30 BC, when it too was conquered by the
Romans. The Aetolian league grew wary of Roman involvement in Greece, and sided
with the Seleucids in the Roman-Syrian War; when the Romans were victorious,
the league was effectively absorbed into the Republic. Although the Achaean
league outlasted both the Aetolian league and Macedon, it was also soon
defeated and absorbed by the Romans in 146 BC, bringing an end to the
independence of all of Greece. Roman Greece. The Greek peninsula came under
Roman rule in 146 BC conquest of Greece after the Battle of Corinth. Macedonia
became a Roman province while southern Greece came under the surveillance of
Macedonia's praefect; however, some Greek poleis managed to maintain a partial
independence and avoid taxation. The Aegean islands were added to this
territory in 133 BC. Athens and other Greek cities revolted in 88 BC, and the
peninsula was crushed by the Roman general Sulla. The Roman civil wars
devastated the land even further, until Augustus organized the peninsula as the
province of Achaea in 27 BC. Greece was a key eastern province of the Roman
Empire, as the Roman culture had long been in fact Greco-Roman. The Greek
language served as a lingua franca in the East and in Italy, and many Greek
intellectuals such as Galen would perform most of their work in Rome.
Geography. Regions. The territory of Greece is mountainous, and as a result,
ancient Greece consisted of many smaller regions each with its own dialect,
cultural peculiarities, and identity. Regionalism and regional conflicts were a
prominent feature of ancient Greece. Cities tended to be located in valleys
between mountains, or on coastal plains, and dominated a certain area around
them. In the south lay the Peloponnese, itself consisting of the regions of
Laconia (southeast), Messenia (southwest), Elis (west), Achaia (north),
Korinthia (northeast), Argolis (east), and Arcadia (center). These names
survive to the present day as regional units of modern Greece, though with
somewhat different boundaries. Mainland Greece to the north, nowadays known as
Central Greece, consisted of Aetolia and Acarnania in the west, Locris, Doris,
and Phocis in the center, while in the east lay Boeotia, Attica, and Megaris.
Northeast lay Thessaly, while Epirus lay to the northwest. Epirus stretched
from the Ambracian Gulf in the south to the Ceraunian mountains and the Aoos
river in the north, and consisted of Chaonia (north), Molossia (center), and
Thesprotia (south). In the northeast corner was Macedonia, originally
consisting Lower Macedonia and its regions, such as Elimeia, Pieria, and
Orestis. Around the time of Alexander I of Macedon, the Argead kings of Macedon
started to expand into Upper Macedonia, lands inhabited by independent
Macedonian tribes like the Lyncestae and the Elmiotae and to the West, beyond
the Axius river, into Eordaia, Bottiaea, Mygdonia, and Almopia, regions settled
by Thracian tribes. To the north of Macedonia lay various non-Greek peoples
such as the Paeonians due north, the Thracians to the northeast, and the
Illyrians, with whom the Macedonians were frequently in conflict, to the
northwest. Chalcidice was settled early on by southern Greek colonists and was
considered part of the Greek world, while from the late 2nd millennium BC
substantial Greek settlement also occurred on the eastern shores of the Aegean,
in Anatolia. Colonies. During the Archaic period, the population of Greece grew
beyond the capacity of its limited arable land (according to one estimate, the
population of ancient Greece increased by a factor larger than ten during the
period from 800 BC to 400 BC, increasing from a population of 800,000 to a
total estimated population of 10 to 13 million). From about 750 BC the Greeks
began 250 years of expansion, settling colonies in all directions. To the east,
the Aegean coast of Asia Minor was colonized first, followed by Cyprus and the
coasts of Thrace, the Sea of Marmara and south coast of the Black Sea.
Eventually Greek colonization reached as far northeast as present day Ukraine
and Russia (Taganrog). To the west the coasts of Illyria, Sicily and Southern
Italy were settled, followed by Southern France, Corsica, and even northeastern
Spain. Greek colonies were also founded in Egypt and Libya. Modern Syracuse,
Naples, Marseille and Istanbul had their beginnings as the Greek colonies
Syracusae "(Œ£œÖœÅŒ±Œ∫ŒøœçœÉŒ±Œπ)", Neapolis "(ŒùŒµŒ¨œÄŒøŒªŒπœÇ)", Massalia "
(ŒúŒ±œÉœÉŒ±ŒªŒØŒ±)" and Byzantion "(ŒíœÖŒ∂Œ¨ŒΩœÑŒπŒøŒΩ)". These colonies played
an important role in the spread of Greek influence throughout Europe, and also
aided in the establishment of long-distance trading networks between the Greek
city-states, boosting the economy of ancient Greece. Politics and society.
Political structure. Ancient Greece consisted of several hundred more or less
independent city-states ("poleis"). This was a situation unlike that in most
other contemporary societies, which were either tribal, or kingdoms ruling over
relatively large territories. Undoubtedly the geography of Greece‚Äîdivided and
sub-divided by hills, mountains and rivers‚Äîcontributed to the fragmentary
nature of ancient Greece. On the one hand, the ancient Greeks had no doubt that
they were 'one people'; they had the same religion, same basic culture, and
same language. Furthermore, the Greeks were very aware of their tribal origins;
Herodotus was able to extensively categorise the city-states by tribe. Yet,
although these higher-level relationships existed, they seem to have rarely had
a major role in Greek politics. The independence of the "poleis" was fiercely
defended; unification was something rarely contemplated by the ancient Greeks.
Even when, during the second Persian invasion of Greece, a group of city-states
allied themselves to defend Greece, the vast majority of "poleis" remained
neutral, and after the Persian defeat, the allies quickly returned to
infighting. Thus, the major peculiarities of the ancient Greek political system
were; firstly, its fragmentary nature, and that this does not particularly seem
to have tribal origin; and secondly the particular focus on urban centres
within otherwise tiny states. The peculiarities of the Greek system are further
evidenced by the colonies that they set up throughout the Mediterranean Sea,
which, though they might count a certain Greek "polis" as their 'mother' (and
remain sympathetic to her), were completely independent of the founding city.
Inevitably smaller "poleis" might be dominated by larger neighbours, but
conquest or direct rule by another city-state appears to have been quite rare.
Instead the "poleis" grouped themselves into leagues, membership of which was
in a constant state of flux. Later in the Classical period, the leagues would
become fewer and larger, be dominated by one city (particularly Athens, Sparta
and Thebes); and often "poleis" would be compelled to join under threat of war
(or as part of a peace treaty). Even after Philip II of Macedon 'conquered' the
heartlands of ancient Greece, he did not attempt to annex the territory, or
unify it into a new province, but simply compelled most of the "poleis" to join
his own Corinthian League. Government and law. Initially many Greek city-states
seem to have been petty kingdoms; there was often a city official carrying some
residual, ceremonial functions of the king ("basileus"), e.g. the "archon
basileus" in Athens. However, by the Archaic period and the first historical
consciousness, most had already become aristocratic oligarchies. It is unclear
exactly how this change occurred. For instance, in Athens, the kingship had
been reduced to a hereditary, lifelong chief magistracy ("archon") by c. 1050
BC; by 753 BC this had become a decennial, elected archonship; and finally by
683 BC an annually elected archonship. Through each stage more power would have
been transferred to the aristocracy as a whole, and away from a single
individual. Inevitably, the domination of politics and concomitant aggregation
of wealth by small groups of families was apt to cause social unrest in many
"poleis". In many cities a tyrant (not in the modern sense of repressive
autocracies), would at some point seize control and govern according to their
own will; often a populist agenda would help sustain them in power. In a system
racked with class conflict, government by a 'strongman' was often the best
solution. Athens fell under a tyranny in the second half of the 6th century.
When this tyranny was ended, the Athenians founded the world's first democracy
as a radical solution to prevent the aristocracy regaining power. A citizens'
assembly (the "Ecclesia"), for the discussion of city policy, had existed since
the reforms of Draco in 621 BC; all citizens were permitted to attend after the
reforms of Solon (early 6th century), but the poorest citizens could not
address the assembly or run for office. With the establishment of the
democracy, the assembly became the "de jure" mechanism of government; all
citizens had equal privileges in the assembly. However, non-citizens, such as
metics (foreigners living in Athens) or slaves, had no political rights at all.
After the rise of the democracy in Athens, other city-states founded
democracies. However, many retained more traditional forms of government. As so
often in other matters, Sparta was a notable exception to the rest of Greece,
ruled through the whole period by not one, but two hereditary monarchs. This
was a form of diarchy. The Kings of Sparta belonged to the Agiads and the
Eurypontids, descendants respectively of Eurysthenes and Procles. Both dynasty
founders were believed to be twin sons of Aristodemus, a Heraclid ruler.
However, the powers of these kings was trammeled by both a council of elders
(the "Gerousia") and magistrates specifically appointed to watch over the kings
(the "Ephors"). Social structure. Only free, land owning, native-born men could
be citizens entitled to the full protection of the law in a city-state (later
Pericles introduced exceptions to the native-born restriction). In most city-
states, unlike the situation in Rome, social prominence did not allow special
rights. Sometimes families controlled public religious functions, but this
ordinarily did not give any extra power in the government. In Athens, the
population was divided into four social classes based on wealth. People could
change classes if they made more money. In Sparta, all male citizens were given
the title of equal if they finished their education. However, Spartan kings,
who served as the city-state's dual military and religious leaders, came from
two families. Slaves had no power or status. They had the right to have a
family and own property, subject to their master's goodwill and permission, but
they had no political rights. By 600 BC chattel slavery had spread in Greece.
By the 5th century BC slaves made up one-third of the total population in some
city-states. Two-fifths (some authorities say four-fifths) of the population of
Classical Athens were slaves. Slaves outside of Sparta almost never revolted
because they were made up of too many nationalities and were too scattered to
organize. Most families owned slaves as household servants and labourers, and
even poor families might have owned a few slaves. Owners were not allowed to
beat or kill their slaves. Owners often promised to free slaves in the future
to encourage slaves to work hard. Unlike in Rome, freedmen did not become
citizens. Instead, they were mixed into the population of "metics", which
included people from foreign countries or other city-states who were officially
allowed to live in the state. City-states legally owned slaves. These public
slaves had a larger measure of independence than slaves owned by families,
living on their own and performing specialized tasks. In Athens, public slaves
were trained to look out for counterfeit coinage, while temple slaves acted as
servants of the temple's deity and Scythian slaves were employed in Athens as a
police force corralling citizens to political functions. Sparta had a special
type of slaves called "helots". Helots were Messenians enslaved during the
Messenian Wars by the state and assigned to families where they were forced to
stay. Helots raised food and did household chores so that women could
concentrate on raising strong children while men could devote their time to
training as hoplites. Their masters treated them harshly (every Spartiate male
had to kill a helot as a right of passage), and helots often resorted to slave
rebellions. Education. For most of Greek history, education was private, except
in Sparta. During the Hellenistic period, some city-states established public
schools. Only wealthy families could afford a teacher. Boys learned how to
read, write and quote literature. They also learned to sing and play one
musical instrument and were trained as athletes for military service. They
studied not for a job but to become an effective citizen. Girls also learned to
read, write and do simple arithmetic so they could manage the household. They
almost never received education after childhood. Boys went to school at the age
of seven, or went to the barracks, if they lived in Sparta. The three types of
teachings were: grammatistes for arithmetic, kitharistes for music and dancing,
and Paedotribae for sports. Boys from wealthy families attending the private
school lessons were taken care of by a "paidagogos", a household slave selected
for this task who accompanied the boy during the day. Classes were held in
teachers' private houses and included reading, writing, mathematics, singing,
and playing the lyre and flute. When the boy became 12 years old the schooling
started to include sports such as wrestling, running, and throwing discus and
javelin. In Athens some older youths attended academy for the finer disciplines
such as culture, sciences, music, and the arts. The schooling ended at age 18,
followed by military training in the army usually for one or two years. A small
number of boys continued their education after childhood, as in the Spartan
agoge. A crucial part of a wealthy teenager's education was a mentorship with
an elder, which in a few places and times may have included pederastic love.
The teenager learned by watching his mentor talking about politics in the
"agora", helping him perform his public duties, exercising with him in the
gymnasium and attending symposia with him. The richest students continued their
education by studying with famous teachers. Some of Athens' greatest such
schools included the Lyceum (the so-called Peripatetic school founded by
Aristotle of Stageira) and the Platonic Academy (founded by Plato of Athens).
The education system of the wealthy ancient Greeks is also called Paideia.
Economy. At its economic height, in the 5th and 4th centuries BC, ancient
Greece was the most advanced economy in the world. According to some economic
historians, it was one of the most advanced preindustrial economies. This is
demonstrated by the average daily wage of the Greek worker which was, in terms
of wheat, about 12¬ kg. This was more than 3 times the average daily wage of an
Egyptian worker during the Roman period, about 3.75¬ kg. Warfare. At least in
the Archaic Period, the fragmentary nature of ancient Greece, with many
competing city-states, increased the frequency of conflict, but conversely
limited the scale of warfare. Unable to maintain professional armies, the city-
states relied on their own citizens to fight. This inevitably reduced the
potential duration of campaigns, as citizens would need to return to their own
professions (especially in the case of, for example, farmers). Campaigns would
therefore often be restricted to summer. When battles occurred, they were
usually set piece and intended to be decisive. Casualties were slight compared
to later battles, rarely amounting to more than 5% of the losing side, but the
slain often included the most prominent citizens and generals who led from the
front. The scale and scope of warfare in ancient Greece changed dramatically as
a result of the Greco-Persian Wars. To fight the enormous armies of the
Achaemenid Empire was effectively beyond the capabilities of a single city-
state. The eventual triumph of the Greeks was achieved by alliances of city-
states (the exact composition changing over time), allowing the pooling of
resources and division of labour. Although alliances between city-states
occurred before this time, nothing on this scale had been seen before. The rise
of Athens and Sparta as pre-eminent powers during this conflict led directly to
the Peloponnesian War, which saw further development of the nature of warfare,
strategy and tactics. Fought between leagues of cities dominated by Athens and
Sparta, the increased manpower and financial resources increased the scale, and
allowed the diversification of warfare. Set-piece battles during the
Peloponnesian war proved indecisive and instead there was increased reliance on
attritionary strategies, naval battle and blockades and sieges. These changes
greatly increased the number of casualties and the disruption of Greek society.
Athens owned one of the largest war fleets in ancient Greece. It had over 200
triremes each powered by 170 oarsmen who were seated in 3 rows on each side of
the ship. The city could afford such a large fleet-it had over 34,000 oars men-
because it owned a lot of silver mines that were worked by slaves. Culture.
Philosophy. Ancient Greek philosophy focused on the role of reason and inquiry.
In many ways, it had an important influence on modern philosophy, as well as
modern science. Clear unbroken lines of influence lead from ancient Greek and
Hellenistic philosophers, to medieval Muslim philosophers and Islamic
scientists, to the European Renaissance and Enlightenment, to the secular
sciences of the modern day. Neither reason nor inquiry began with the Greeks.
Defining the difference between the Greek quest for knowledge and the quests of
the elder civilizations, such as the ancient Egyptians and Babylonians, has
long been a topic of study by theorists of civilization. Some well known
philosophers of Ancient Greece were Plato, Socrates, and many others. They have
aided in information about ancient Greek society through writings such as The
Republic, by Plato. Literature and theatre. Ancient Greek society placed
considerable emphasis upon literature. Many authors consider the western
literary tradition to have begun with the epic poems "The Iliad" and "The
Odyssey", which remain giants in the literary canon for their skillful and
vivid depictions of war and peace, honor and disgrace, love and hatred. Notable
among later Greek poets was Sappho, who defined, in many ways, lyric poetry as
a genre. A playwright named Aeschylus changed Western literature forever when
he introduced the ideas of dialogue and interacting characters to playwriting.
In doing so, he essentially invented "drama": his "Oresteia" trilogy of plays
is seen as his crowning achievement. Other refiners of playwriting were
Sophocles and Euripides. Sophocles is credited with skillfully developing irony
as a literary technique, most famously in his play "Oedipus the King".
Euripedes, conversely, used plays to challenge societal norms and mores‚Äîa
hallmark of much of Western literature for the next 2,300 years and
beyond‚Äîand his works such as "Medea", "The Bacchae" and "The Trojan Women"
are still notable for their ability to challenge our perceptions of propriety,
gender, and war. Aristophanes, a comic playwright, defines and shapes the idea
of comedy almost as Aeschylus had shaped tragedy as an art form‚ÄîAristophanes'
most famous plays include the "Lysistrata" and "The Frogs". Philosophy entered
literature in the dialogues of Plato, who converted the give and take of
Socratic questioning into written form. Aristotle, Plato's student, wrote
dozens of works on many scientific disciplines, but his greatest contribution
to literature was likely his "Poetics", which lays out his understanding of
drama, and thereby establishes the first criteria for literary criticism. Music
and dance. Music was present almost universally in Greek society, from
marriages and funerals to religious ceremonies, theatre, folk music and the
ballad-like reciting of epic poetry. There are significant fragments of actual
Greek musical notation as well as many literary references to ancient Greek
music. Greek art depicts musical instruments and dance. The word "music"
derives from the name of the Muses, the daughters of Zeus who were patron
goddesses of the arts. Science and technology. Ancient Greek mathematics
contributed many important developments to the field of mathematics, including
the basic rules of geometry, the idea of formal mathematical proof, and
discoveries in number theory, mathematical analysis, applied mathematics, and
approached close to establishing integral calculus. The discoveries of several
Greek mathematicians, including Pythagoras, Euclid, and Archimedes, are still
used in mathematical teaching today. The Greeks developed astronomy, which they
treated as a branch of mathematics, to a highly sophisticated level. The first
geometrical, three-dimensional models to explain the apparent motion of the
planets were developed in the 4th century BC by Eudoxus of Cnidus and Callippus
of Cyzicus. Their younger contemporary Heraclides Ponticus proposed that the
Earth rotates around its axis. In the 3rd century BC Aristarchus of Samos was
the first to suggest a heliocentric system, although only fragmentary
descriptions of his idea survive. Eratosthenes, using the angles of shadows
created at widely separated regions, estimated the circumference of the Earth
with great accuracy. In the 2nd century BC Hipparchus of Nicea made a number of
contributions, including the first measurement of precession and the
compilation of the first star catalog in which he proposed the modern system of
apparent magnitudes. The Antikythera mechanism, a device for calculating the
movements of planets, dates from about 80 BC, and was the first ancestor of the
astronomical computer. It was discovered in an ancient shipwreck off the Greek
island of Antikythera, between Kythera and Crete. The device became famous for
its use of a differential gear, previously believed to have been invented in
the 16th century, and the miniaturization and complexity of its parts,
comparable to a clock made in the 18th century. The original mechanism is
displayed in the Bronze collection of the National Archaeological Museum of
Athens, accompanied by a replica. The ancient Greeks also made important
discoveries in the medical field. Hippocrates was a physician of the Classical
period, and is considered one of the most outstanding figures in the history of
medicine. He is referred to as the "father of medicine" in recognition of his
lasting contributions to the field as the founder of the Hippocratic school of
medicine. This intellectual school revolutionized medicine in ancient Greece,
establishing it as a discipline distinct from other fields that it had
traditionally been associated with (notably theurgy and philosophy), thus
making medicine a profession. Art and architecture. The art of ancient Greece
has exercised an enormous influence on the culture of many countries from
ancient times until the present, particularly in the areas of sculpture and
architecture. In the West, the art of the Roman Empire was largely derived from
Greek models. In the East, Alexander the Great's conquests initiated several
centuries of exchange between Greek, Central Asian and Indian cultures,
resulting in Greco-Buddhist art, with ramifications as far as Japan. Following
the Renaissance in Europe, the humanist aesthetic and the high technical
standards of Greek art inspired generations of European artists. Well into the
19th century, the classical tradition derived from Greece dominated the art of
the western world. Religion and mythology. Greek mythology consists of stories
belonging to the ancient Greeks concerning their gods and heroes, the nature of
the world and the origins and significance of their religious practices. The
main Greek gods were the twelve Olympians, Zeus, his wife Hera, Poseidon, Ares,
Hermes, Hephaestus, Aphrodite, Athena, Apollo, Artemis, Demeter, and Hades.
Other important deities included Hebe, Helios, Dionysus, Persephone and
Heracles (a demi-god). Zeus's parents were Kronos and Rhea who also were the
parents of Poseidon, Hades, Hera, Hestia, and Demeter. Legacy. The civilization
of ancient Greece has been immensely influential on language, politics,
educational systems, philosophy, science, and the arts. It became the
"Leitkultur" of the Roman Empire to the point of marginalizing native Italic
traditions. As Horace put it, Via the Roman Empire, Greek culture came to be
foundational to Western culture in general. The Byzantine Empire inherited
Classical Greek culture directly, without Latin intermediation, and the
preservation of classical Greek learning in medieval Byzantine tradition
further exerted strong influence on the Slavs and later on the Islamic Golden
Age and the Western European Renaissance. A modern revival of Classical Greek
learning took place in the Neoclassicism movement in 18th and 19th century
Europe and the Americas.
