Anthropology Anthropology is the "science of humanity." It has origins in the
humanities, the natural sciences, and the social sciences. The term "" is from
the Greek "anthrōpos" (), "man", understood to mean humankind or humanity, and
"" (-λογία), "discourse" or "study." The essence of anthropology has been,
since its tradition, cross-cultural comparison, and cultural relativism has
become the canon of anthropological inquiry. Anthropologists study topics
including the origin and evolution of "Homo sapiens", the organization of human
social and cultural relations, human physical traits, human behavior, the
variations among different groups of humans, how the evolutionary past of "Homo
sapiens" has influenced its social organization and culture, and so forth.
Anthropology originated in the colonial encounter between Western people and
colonized non-Western people, as Europeans tried to understand the origins of
observable cultural diversity. Today anthropology is a global discipline, and
anthropologists study all types of societies. In the United States, where
anthropology was first defined as a discipline, the field is traditionally
divided into four sub-fields: cultural anthropology, archaeology, linguistic
anthropology, and biological anthropology. In Europe, the discipline originated
as ethnology and was originally defined as the study of social organization in
non-state societies, later redefined as social anthropology. Socio-cultural
anthropology is considered anthropology proper in most of Europe, and in the
parts of the world that were influenced by the European tradition.
Sociocultural anthropology has been heavily influenced by structuralist and
postmodern theories, as well as a shift toward the analysis of modern
societies. During the 1970s and 1990s, there was an epistemological shift away
from the positivist traditions that had largely informed the discipline. During
this shift, enduring questions about the nature and production of knowledge
came to occupy a central place in cultural and social anthropology. In
contrast, archaeology and biological anthropology remained largely positivist.
Due to this difference in epistemology, anthropology as a discipline has lacked
cohesion over the last several decades. Etymology. The first use of the term
"anthropology" in English to refer to a natural science of humanity was
apparently in 1593, the first of the "logies" to be coined. History. Classical
Greece. Historians of anthropology, such as Marvin Harris, indicate two major
frameworks within which empirical anthropology has arisen: interest in
comparisons of people over space and interest in longterm human processes or,
humans as viewed through time. Harris dates studies of both to Classical Greece
and Classical Rome, specifically, to Herodotus, often called the "father of
history" and the Roman historian, Tacitus, who wrote many of our only surviving
contemporary accounts of several ancient Celtic and Germanic peoples. Herodotus
first formulated some of the persistent problems of anthropology. Middle Ages.
Another candidate for one of the first scholars to carry out comparative
ethnographic-type studies in person was the medieval Persian scholar Abū
Rayhān Bīrūnī in the eleventh century, who wrote about the peoples,
customs, and religions of the Indian subcontinent. According to Akbar S. Ahmed,
like modern anthropologists, he engaged in extensive participant observation
with a given group of people, learnt their language and studied their primary
texts, and presented his findings with objectivity and neutrality using cross-
cultural comparisons. Others argue, however, that he hardly can be considered
an anthropologist in the conventional sense. He wrote detailed comparative
studies on the religions and cultures in the Middle East, Mediterranean, and
especially South Asia. Biruni's tradition of comparative cross-cultural study
continued in the Muslim world through to Ibn Khaldun's work in the fourteenth
century. Medieval scholars may be considered forerunners of modern anthropology
as well, insofar as they conducted or wrote detailed studies of the customs of
peoples considered "different" from themselves in terms of geography. John of
Plano Carpini reported of his stay among the Mongols. His report was unusual in
its detailed depiction of a non-European culture. Marco Polo's systematic
observations of nature, anthropology, and geography are another example of
studying human variation across space. Polo's travels took him across such a
diverse human landscape and his accounts of the peoples he met as he journeyed
were so detailed that they earned for Polo the name "the father of modern
anthropology." 1770s: Immanuel Kant. It took Immanuel Kant 25 years to write
one of the first major treatises on anthropology, his "Anthropology from a
Pragmatic Point of View". Kant is not generally considered to be a modern
anthropologist, however, as he never left his region of Germany nor did he
study any cultures besides his own, and in fact, describes the need for
anthropology as a corollary field to his own primary field of philosophy. He
did, however, begin teaching an annual course in anthropology in 1772.
Anthropology is thus primarily an Enlightenment and post-Enlightenment
endeavor. Many scholars consider modern anthropology as an outgrowth of the Age
of Enlightenment, a period when Europeans attempted to study human behavior
systematically, the known varieties of which had been increasing since the
fifteenth century as a result of the first European colonization wave. The
traditions of jurisprudence, history, philology, and sociology then evolved
into something more closely resembling the modern views of these disciplines
and informed the development of the social sciences, of which anthropology was
a part. Developments in the systematic study of ancient civilizations through
the disciplines of Classics and Egyptology informed both archaeology and
eventually social anthropology, as did the study of East and South Asian
languages and cultures. At the same time, the Romantic reaction to the
Enlightenment produced thinkers, such as Johann Gottfried Herder and later
Wilhelm Dilthey, whose work formed the basis for the "culture concept," which
is central to the discipline. Institutionally, anthropology emerged from the
development of natural history (expounded by authors such as Buffon) that
occurred during the European colonization of the seventeenth, eighteenth,
nineteenth and twentieth centuries. Programs of ethnographic study originated
in this era as the study of the "human primitives" overseen by colonial
administrations. There was a tendency in late eighteenth century Enlightenment
thought to understand human society as natural phenomena that behaved according
to certain principles and that could be observed empirically. In some ways,
studying the language, culture, physiology, and artifacts of European colonies
was not unlike studying the flora and fauna of those places. Early anthropology
was divided between proponents of unilinealism, who argued that all societies
passed through a single evolutionary process, from the most primitive to the
most advanced, and various forms of non-lineal theorists, who tended to
subscribe to ideas such as diffusionism. Most nineteenth-century social
theorists, including anthropologists, viewed non-European societies as windows
onto the pre-industrial human past. 19th century. As academic disciplines began
to differentiate over the course of the nineteenth century, anthropology grew
increasingly distinct from the biological approach of natural history, on the
one hand, and from purely historical or literary fields such as Classics, on
the other. A common criticism has been that many social science scholars (such
as economists, sociologists, and psychologists) in Western countries focus
disproportionately on Western subjects, while anthropology focuses
disproportionately on the "other"; this has changed over the last part of the
twentieth century as anthropologists increasingly, also study Western subjects,
particularly variation across class, region, or ethnicity within Western
societies, and other social scientists increasingly take a global view of their
fields. 20th century. In the twentieth century, academic disciplines often have
been institutionally divided into three broad domains. The natural and
biological "sciences" seek to derive general laws through reproducible and
verifiable experiments. The "humanities" generally study local traditions,
through their history, literature, music, and arts, with an emphasis on
understanding particular individuals, events, or eras. Generally, the "social
sciences" have attempted to develop scientific methods to understand social
phenomena in a generalizable way, although usually with methods distinct from
those of the natural sciences. In particular, social sciences often develop
statistical descriptions rather than the general laws derived in physics or
chemistry, or they may explain individual cases through more general
principles, as in many fields of psychology. Anthropology (like some fields of
history) does not fit easily into one of these categories, and different
branches of anthropology draw on one or more of these domains. Anthropology as
it emerged amongst the Western colonial powers (mentioned above) has generally
taken a different path than that in the countries of southern and central
Europe (Italy, Greece, and the successors to the Austro-Hungarian and Ottoman
empires). In the former, the encounter with multiple, distinct cultures, often
very different in organization and language from those of Europe, has led to a
continuing emphasis on cross-cultural comparison and a receptiveness to certain
kinds of cultural relativism. In the successor states of continental Europe, on
the other hand, anthropologists often joined with folklorists and linguists in
building cultural perspectives on nationalism. Ethnologists in these countries
tended to focus on differentiating among local ethnolinguistic groups,
documenting local folk culture, and representing the prehistory of what has
become a nation through various forms of public education (e.g., museums of
several kinds). In this scheme, Russia occupied a middle position. On the one
hand, it had a large region (largely east of the Urals) of highly distinct,
pre-industrial, often non-literate peoples, similar to the situation in the
Americas. On the other hand, Russia also participated to some degree in the
nationalist (cultural and political) movements of Central and Eastern Europe.
After the Revolution of 1917, views expressed by anthropologists in the USSR,
and later the Soviet Bloc countries, were highly shaped by the requirement to
conform to Marxist theories of social evolution. Subfields. In the United
States, anthropology is traditionally divided into four sub-fields, each with
additional branches: biological or physical anthropology, social anthropology
or cultural anthropology, archaeology and anthropological linguistics. These
fields frequently overlap, but tend to use different methodologies and
techniques. Cultural anthropology. Cultural anthropology is also called socio-
cultural anthropology or social anthropology (especially in the United
Kingdom). Cultural anthropology is the comparative study of the manifold ways
in which people "make sense" of the world around them, while social
anthropology is the study of the "relationships" among persons and groups.
Cultural anthropology is more akin to philosophy, literature and the arts,
while social anthropology to sociology and history. The canon of
anthropological inquiry is cultural relativism. Traditionally, the essence of
anthropology has been cross-cultural comparison. Over the decades, such project
has become the field of ethnography. Ethnography can refer to both a
methodology and a product of research, namely a monograph or book. As
methodology, ethnography is based upon long-term fieldwork within a community
or other research site. Participant observation is one of the foundational
methods of social and cultural anthropology. Ethnology involves the systematic
comparison of different cultures. The process of participant-observation can be
especially helpful to understanding a culture from an emic point of view, which
would otherwise be unattainable by simply reading from a book. In some European
countries, all cultural anthropology is known as ethnology (a term coined and
defined by Adam F. Kollár in 1783). The study of kinship and social
organization is a central focus of cultural anthropology, as kinship is a human
universal. Cultural anthropology also covers economic and political
organization, law and conflict resolution, patterns of consumption and
exchange, material culture, technology, infrastructure, gender relations,
ethnicity, childrearing and socialization, religion, myth, symbols, values,
etiquette, worldview, sports, music, nutrition, recreation, games, food,
festivals, and language (which is also the object of study in linguistic
anthropology). Physical anthropology. Biological Anthropology and Physical
Anthropology are synonymous terms to describe anthropological research focused
on the study of humans and non-human primates in their biological,
evolutionary, and demographic dimensions. It examines the biological and social
factors that have affected the evolution of humans and other primates, and that
generate, maintain or change contemporary genetic and physiological variation.
Archaeological anthropology. Archaeology is the study of the human past through
its material remains. Artifacts, faunal remains, and human altered landscapes
are evidence of the cultural and material lives of past societies.
Archaeologists examine these material remains in order to deduce patterns of
past human behavior and cultural practices. Ethnoarchaeology is a type of
archaeology that studies the practices and material remains of living human
groups in order to gain a better understanding of the evidence left behind by
past human groups, who are presumed to have lived in similar ways. Linguistic
anthropology. Linguistic anthropology (also called anthropological linguistics)
seeks to understand the processes of human communications, verbal and non-
verbal, variation in language across time and space, the social uses of
language, and the relationship between language and culture. It is the branch
of anthropology that brings linguistic methods to bear on anthropological
problems, linking the analysis of linguistic forms and processes to the
interpretation of sociocultural processes. Linguistic anthropologists often
draw on related fields including sociolinguistics, pragmatics, cognitive
linguistics, semiotics, discourse analysis, and narrative analysis.
Commonalities between subfields. Because anthropology developed from so many
different enterprises (see History of Anthropology), including but not limited
to fossil-hunting, exploring, documentary film-making, paleontology,
primatology, antiquity dealings and curatorship, philology, etymology,
genetics, regional analysis, ethnology, history, philosophy, and religious
studies, it is difficult to characterize the entire field in a brief article,
although attempts to write histories of the entire field have been made.
Because of the holistic nature of anthropological research, all branches of
anthropology have widespread practical application in diverse fields. This is
known as applied anthropology. Thus military expeditions employ anthropologists
to discern strategic cultural footholds; marketing professionals employ
anthropology to determine propitious placement of advertising; and humanitarian
agencies depend on anthropological insights as means to fight poverty. Examples
of applied anthropology are ubiquitous. Focused in a positive light,
Anthropology is one of the few places where humanities, social, and natural
sciences are forced to confront one another. As such, anthropology has been
central in the development of several new (late 20th century) interdisciplinary
fields such as cognitive science, global studies, and various ethnic studies.
Basic trends. There are several characteristics that tend to unite
anthropological work. One of the central characteristics is that anthropology
tends to provide a comparatively more holistic account of phenomena and tends
to be highly empirical. The quest for holism leads most anthropologists to
study a particular place, problem or phenomenon in detail, using a variety of
methods, over a more extensive period than normal in many parts of academia. In
the 1990s and 2000s (decade), calls for clarification of what constitutes a
culture, of how an observer knows where his or her own culture ends and another
begins, and other crucial topics in writing anthropology were heard. It is
possible to view all human cultures as part of one large, ever-changing global
culture. These dynamic relationships, between what can be observed on the
ground, as opposed to what can be observed by compiling many local observations
remain fundamental in any kind of anthropology, whether cultural, biological,
linguistic or archaeological. Biological anthropologists are interested in both
human variation and in the possibility of human universals (behaviors, ideas or
concepts shared by virtually all human cultures) They use many different
methods of study, but modern population genetics, participant observation and
other techniques often take anthropologists "into the field," which means
traveling to a community in its own setting, to do something called
"fieldwork." On the biological or physical side, human measurements, genetic
samples, nutritional data may be gathered and published as articles or
monographs. At the same time, anthropologists urge, as part of their quest for
scientific objectivity, cultural relativism, which has an influence on all the
sub-fields of anthropology. This is the notion that particular cultures should
not be judged by one culture's values or viewpoints, but that all cultures
should be viewed as relative to each other. There should be no notions, in good
anthropology, of one culture being better or worse than another culture.
Ethical commitments in anthropology include noticing and documenting genocide,
infanticide, racism, mutilation including circumcision and subincision, and
torture. Topics like racism, slavery or human sacrifice, therefore, attract
anthropological attention and theories ranging from nutritional deficiencies to
genes to acculturation have been proposed, not to mention theories of
colonialism and many others as root causes of Man's inhumanity to man. To
illustrate the depth of an anthropological approach, one can take just one of
these topics, such as "racism" and find thousands of anthropological
references, stretching across all the major and minor sub-fields. Along with
dividing up their project by theoretical emphasis, anthropologists typically
divide the world up into relevant time periods and geographic regions. Human
time on Earth is divided up into relevant cultural traditions based on
material, such as the Paleolithic and the Neolithic, of particular use in
archaeology. Further cultural subdivisions according to tool types, such as
Olduwan or Mousterian or Levalloisian help archaeologists and other
anthropologists in understanding major trends in the human past.
Anthropologists and geographers share approaches to Culture regions as well,
since mapping cultures is central to both sciences. By making comparisons
across cultural traditions (time-based) and cultural regions (space-based),
anthropologists have developed various kinds of comparative method, a central
part of their science. Anthropological Organizations. Contemporary anthropology
is an established science with academic departments at most universities and
colleges. The single largest organization of Anthropologists is the American
Anthropological Association (AAA), which was founded in 1903. Membership is
made up of anthropologists from around the globe. In 1989, a group of European
and American scholars in the field of anthropology established the European
Association of Social Anthropologists (EASA) which serves as a major
professional organization for anthropologists working in Europe. The EASA seeks
to advance the status of anthropology in Europe and to increase visibility of
marginalized anthropological traditions and thereby contribute to the project
of a global anthropology or world anthropology. Hundreds of other organizations
exist in the various sub-fields of anthropology, sometimes divided up by nation
or region, and many anthropologists work with collaborators in other
disciplines, such as geology, physics, zoology, paleontology, anatomy, music
theory, art history, sociology and so on, belonging to professional societies
in those disciplines as well. Anthropological Traditions. Britain. Tylor and
Frazer. E. B. Tylor ( 2 October 1832 – 2 January 1917) and James George
Frazer ( 1 January 1854 – 7 May 1941) are generally considered the
antecedents to modern social anthropology in Britain. Although Tylor undertook
a field trip to Mexico, both he and Frazer derived most of the material for
their comparative studies through extensive reading, not fieldwork, mainly the
Classics (literature and history of Greece and Rome), the work of the early
European folklorists, and reports from missionaries, travelers, and
contemporaneous ethnologists. Tylor advocated strongly for unilinealism and a
form of "uniformity of mankind". Tylor in particular laid the groundwork for
theories of cultural diffusionism, stating that there are three ways that
different groups can have similar cultural forms or technologies: "independent
invention, inheritance from ancestors in a distant region, transmission from
one race to another." Tylor formulated one of the early and influential
anthropological conceptions of culture as "that complex whole, which includes
knowledge, belief, art, morals, law, custom, and any other capabilities and
habits acquired by as [members of society." However, as Stocking notes, Tylor
mainly concerned himself with describing and mapping the distribution of
particular elements of culture, rather than with the larger function, and he
generally seemed to assume a Victorian idea of progress rather than the idea of
non-directional, multilineal cultural development proposed by later
anthropologists. Tylor also theorized about the origins of religious beliefs in
human beings, proposing a theory of animism as the earliest stage, and noting
that "religion" has many components, of which he believed the most important to
be belief in supernatural beings (as opposed to moral systems, cosmology,
etc.). Frazer, a Scottish scholar with a broad knowledge of Classics, also
concerned himself with religion, myth, and magic. His comparative studies, most
influentially in the numerous editions of "The Golden Bough", analyzed
similarities in religious belief and symbolism globally. Neither Tylor nor
Frazer, however, was particularly interested in fieldwork, nor were they
interested in examining how the cultural elements and institutions fit
together. The Golden Bough was abridged drastically in subsequent editions
after his first. Malinowski and Radcliffe-Brown. Toward the turn of the
twentieth century, a number of anthropologists became dissatisfied with this
categorization of cultural elements; historical reconstructions also came to
seem increasingly speculative to them. Under the influence of several younger
scholars, a new approach came to predominate among British anthropologists,
concerned with analyzing how societies held together in the present ( analysis,
rather than or historical analysis), and emphasizing long-term (one to several
years) immersion fieldwork. Cambridge University financed a multidisciplinary
expedition to the Torres Strait Islands in 1898, organized by Alfred Court
Haddon and including a physician-anthropologist, William Rivers, as well as a
linguist, a botanist, and other specialists. The findings of the expedition set
new standards for ethnographic description. A decade and a half later, the
Polish anthropology student, Bronisław Malinowski (1884–1942), was beginning
what he expected to be a brief period of fieldwork in the old model, collecting
lists of cultural items, when the outbreak of the First World War stranded him
in New Guinea. As a subject of the Austro-Hungarian Empire resident on a
British colonial possession, he was effectively confined to New Guinea for
several years. He made use of the time by undertaking far more intensive
fieldwork than had been done by "British" anthropologists, and his classic
ethnography, "Argonauts of the Western Pacific" (1922) advocated an approach to
fieldwork that became standard in the field: getting "the native's point of
view" through participant observation. Theoretically, he advocated a
functionalist interpretation, which examined how social institutions functioned
to satisfy individual needs. British social anthropology had an expansive
moment in the Interwar period, with key contributions coming from the Polish-
British Bronisław Malinowski and Meyer Fortes A. R. Radcliffe-Brown also
published a seminal work in 1922. He had carried out his initial fieldwork in
the Andaman Islands in the old style of historical reconstruction. However,
after reading the work of French sociologists Émile Durkheim and Marcel Mauss,
Radcliffe-Brown published an account of his research (entitled simply "The
Andaman Islanders") that paid close attention to the meaning and purpose of
rituals and myths. Over time, he developed an approach known as structural
functionalism, which focused on how institutions in societies worked to balance
out or create an equilibrium in the social system to keep it functioning
harmoniously. (This contrasted with Malinowski's functionalism, and was quite
different from the later French structuralism, which examined the conceptual
structures in language and symbolism.) Malinowski and Radcliffe-Brown's
influence stemmed from the fact that they, like Boas, actively trained students
and aggressively built up institutions that furthered their programmatic
ambitions. This was particularly the case with Radcliffe-Brown, who spread his
agenda for "Social Anthropology" by teaching at universities across the British
Commonwealth. From the late 1930s until the postwar period appeared a string of
monographs and edited volumes that cemented the paradigm of British Social
Anthropology (BSA). Famous ethnographies include "The Nuer," by Edward Evan
Evans-Pritchard, and "The Dynamics of Clanship Among the Tallensi," by Meyer
Fortes; well-known edited volumes include "African Systems of Kinship and
Marriage" and "African Political Systems." Contemporary trends. Max Gluckman,
together with many of his colleagues at the Rhodes-Livingstone Institute and
students at Manchester University, collectively known as the Manchester School,
took BSA in new directions through their introduction of explicitly Marxist-
informed theory, their emphasis on conflicts and conflict resolution, and their
attention to the ways in which individuals negotiate and make use of the social
structural possibilities. In Britain, anthropology had a great intellectual
impact, it "contributed to the erosion of Christianity, the growth of cultural
relativism, an awareness of the survival of the primitive in modern life, and
the replacement of modes of analysis with , all of which are central to modern
culture." Later in the 1960s and 1970s, Edmund Leach and his students Mary
Douglas and Nur Yalman, among others, introduced French structuralism in the
style of Lévi-Strauss; while British anthropology has continued to emphasize
social organization and economics over purely symbolic or literary topics,
differences among British, French, and American sociocultural anthropologies
have diminished with increasing dialogue and borrowing of both theory and
methods. Today, social anthropology in Britain engages internationally with
many other social theories and has branched in many directions. In countries of
the British Commonwealth, social anthropology has often been institutionally
separate from physical anthropology and primatology, which may be connected
with departments of biology or zoology; and from archaeology, which may be
connected with departments of Classics, Egyptology, and the like. In other
countries (and in some, particularly smaller, British and North American
universities), anthropologists have also found themselves institutionally
linked with scholars of folklore, museum studies, human geography, sociology,
social relations, ethnic studies, cultural studies, and social work.
Anthropology has been used in Britain to provide an alternative explanation for
the Financial crisis of 2007–2010 to the technical explanations rooted in
economic and political theory. Dr. Gillian Tett, a Cambridge University trained
anthropologist who went on to become a senior editor at the Financial Times is
one of the leaders in this use of anthropology. France. Anthropology in France
has a less clear genealogy than the British and American traditions, in part
because many French writers influential in anthropology have been trained or
held faculty positions in sociology, philosophy, or other fields rather than in
anthropology. Marcel Mauss. Most commentators consider Marcel Mauss
(1872–1950), nephew of the influential sociologist Émile Durkheim, to be the
founder of the French anthropological tradition. Mauss belonged to Durkheim's
"Année Sociologique" group. While Durkheim and others examined the state of
modern societies, Mauss and his collaborators (such as Henri Hubert and Robert
Hertz) drew on ethnography and philology to analyze societies that were not as
'differentiated' as European nation states. Two works by Mauss in particular
proved to have enduring relevance: "Essay on the Gift," a seminal analysis of
exchange and reciprocity, and his Huxley lecture on the notion of the person,
the first comparative study of notions of person and selfhood cross-culturally.
Throughout the interwar years, French interest in anthropology often dovetailed
with wider cultural movements such as surrealism and primitivism, which drew on
ethnography for inspiration. Marcel Griaule and Michel Leiris are examples of
people who combined anthropology with the French avant-garde. During this time
most of what is known as "ethnologie" was restricted to museums, such as the
Musée de l'Homme founded by Paul Rivet, and anthropology had a close
relationship with studies of folklore. Claude Lévi-Strauss. Above all, Claude
Lévi-Strauss helped institutionalize anthropology in France. Along with the
enormous influence that his theory of structuralism exerted across multiple
disciplines, Lévi-Strauss established ties with American and British
anthropologists. At the same time, he established centers and laboratories
within France to provide an institutional context within anthropology, while
training influential students such as Maurice Godelier and Françoise
Héritier. They proved influential in the world of French anthropology. Much of
the distinct character of France's anthropology today is a result of the fact
that most anthropology is carried out in nationally funded research
laboratories (CNRS) rather than academic departments in universities Other
influential writers in the 1970s include Pierre Clastres, who explains in his
books on the Guayaki tribe in Paraguay that "primitive societies" actively
oppose the institution of the state. These stateless societies are not less
evolved than societies with states, but chose to conjure the institution of
authority as a separate function from society. The leader is only a
spokesperson for the group when it has to deal with other groups
("international relations") but has no inside authority, and may be violently
removed if he attempts to abuse this position. The most important French social
theorist since Foucault and Lévi-Strauss is Pierre Bourdieu, who trained
formally in philosophy and sociology and eventually held the Chair of Sociology
at the Collège de France. Like Mauss and others before him, he worked on
topics both in sociology and anthropology. His fieldwork among the Kabyle of
Algeria places him solidly in anthropology, while his analysis of the function
and reproduction of fashion and cultural capital in European societies places
him as solidly in sociology. United States. From its beginnings in the early
19th century through the early 20th century, anthropology in the United States
was influenced by the presence of Native American societies. Cultural
anthropology in the United States was influenced greatly by the ready
availability of Native American societies as ethnographic subjects. The field
was pioneered by staff of the Bureau of Indian Affairs and the Smithsonian
Institution's Bureau of American Ethnology, men such as John Wesley Powell and
Frank Hamilton Cushing. Lewis Henry Morgan. Lewis Henry Morgan (1818–1881), a
lawyer from Rochester, New York, became an advocate for and ethnological
scholar of the Iroquois. His comparative analyses of religion, government,
material culture, and especially kinship patterns proved to be influential
contributions to the field of anthropology. Like other scholars of his day
(such as Edward Tylor), Morgan argued that human societies could be classified
into categories of cultural evolution on a scale of progression that ranged
from "savagery", to "barbarism", to "civilization". Generally, Morgan used
technology (such as bowmaking or pottery) as an indicator of position on this
scale. Franz Boas. Franz Boas established academic anthropology in the United
States in opposition to this sort of evolutionary perspective. His approach was
empirical, skeptical of overgeneralizations, and eschewed attempts to establish
universal laws. For example, Boas studied immigrant children to demonstrate
that biological race was not immutable, and that human conduct and behavior
resulted from nurture, rather than nature. Influenced by the German tradition,
Boas argued that the world was full of distinct "cultures," rather than
societies whose evolution could be measured by how much or how little
"civilization" they had. He believed that each culture has to be studied in its
particularity, and argued that cross-cultural generalizations, like those made
in the natural sciences, were not possible. In doing so, he fought
discrimination against immigrants, blacks, and indigenous peoples of the
Americas. Many American anthropologists adopted his agenda for social reform,
and theories of race continue to be popular subjects for anthropologists today.
The so-called "Four Field Approach" has its origins in Boasian Anthropology,
dividing the discipline in the four crucial and interrelated fields of
sociocultural, biological, linguistic, and archaic anthropology (e.g.
archaeology). Anthropology in the United States continues to be deeply
influenced by the Boasian tradition, especially its emphasis on culture. Boas
used his positions at Columbia University and the American Museum of Natural
History to train and develop multiple generations of students. His first
generation of students included Alfred Kroeber, Robert Lowie, Edward Sapir and
Ruth Benedict, who each produced richly detailed studies of indigenous North
American cultures. They provided a wealth of details used to attack the theory
of a single evolutionary process. Kroeber and Sapir's focus on Native American
languages helped establish linguistics as a truly general science and free it
from its historical focus on Indo-European languages. The publication of Alfred
Kroeber's textbook, "Anthropology," marked a turning point in American
anthropology. After three decades of amassing material, Boasians felt a growing
urge to generalize. This was most obvious in the 'Culture and Personality'
studies carried out by younger Boasians such as Margaret Mead and Ruth
Benedict. Influenced by psychoanalytic psychologists including Sigmund Freud
and Carl Jung, these authors sought to understand the way that individual
personalities were shaped by the wider cultural and social forces in which they
grew up. Though such works as "Coming of Age in Samoa" and "The Chrysanthemum
and the Sword" remain popular with the American public, Mead and Benedict never
had the impact on the discipline of anthropology that some expected. Boas had
planned for Ruth Benedict to succeed him as chair of Columbia's anthropology
department, but she was sidelined by Ralph Linton, and Mead was limited to her
offices at the AMNH. Canada. Canadian anthropology began, as in other parts of
the Colonial world, as ethnological data in the records of travellers and
missionaries. In Canada, Jesuit missionaries such as Fathers LeClercq, Le Jeune
and Sagard, in the 17th century, provide the oldest ethnographic records of
native tribes in what was then the Dominion of Canada. George Mercer Dawson.
True anthropology began with a Government department: the Geological Survey of
Canada, and George Mercer Dawson (director in 1895). Dawson's support for
anthropology created impetus for the profession in Canada. This was expanded
upon by Prime Minister Wilfrid Laurier, who established a Division of
Anthropology within the Geological Survey in 1910. Edward Sapir.
Anthropologists were recruited from England and the USA, setting the foundation
for the unique Canadian style of anthropology. Scholars include the linguist
and Boasian Edward Sapir. In side the mind. Other countries. Anthropology in
Greece and Portugal is greatly influenced by British anthropology. In Greece,
there was since the 19th century a science of the folklore called "laographia"
(laography), in the form of "a science of the interior", although theoretically
weak; but the connotation of the field deeply changed after World War II, when
a wave of Anglo-American anthropologists introduced a science "of the outside".
In Italy, the development of ethnology and related studies did not receive as
much attention as other branches of learning. Germany and Norway are the
countries that showed the most division and conflict between scholars focusing
on domestic socio-cultural issues and scholars focusing on "other" societies..
Some German and Austrian scolars have increased cultural anthropology as both
legal anthropology reagarding "other" societies and anthropology of Western
civilization. Post–World War II. Before WWII British 'social anthropology'
and American 'cultural anthropology' were still distinct traditions. After the
war, enough British and American anthropologists borrowed ideas and
methodological approaches from one another that some began to speak of them
collectively as 'sociocultural' anthropology. In the 1950s and mid-1960s
anthropology tended increasingly to model itself after the natural sciences.
Some anthropologists, such as Lloyd Fallers and Clifford Geertz, focused on
processes of modernization by which newly independent states could develop.
Others, such as Julian Steward and Leslie White, focused on how societies
evolve and fit their ecological niche—an approach popularized by Marvin
Harris. Economic anthropology as influenced by Karl Polanyi and practiced by
Marshall Sahlins and George Dalton challenged standard neoclassical economics
to take account of cultural and social factors, and employed Marxian analysis
into anthropological study. In England, British Social Anthropology's paradigm
began to fragment as Max Gluckman and Peter Worsley experimented with Marxism
and authors such as Rodney Needham and Edmund Leach incorporated Lévi-
Strauss's structuralism into their work. Structuralism also influenced a number
of developments in 1960s and 1970s, including cognitive anthropology and
componential analysis. Authors such as David Schneider, Clifford Geertz, and
Marshall Sahlins developed a more fleshed-out concept of culture as a web of
meaning or signification, which proved very popular within and beyond the
discipline. In keeping with the times, much of anthropology became politicized
through the Algerian War of Independence and opposition to the Vietnam War;
Marxism became an increasingly popular theoretical approach in the discipline.
By the 1970s the authors of volumes such as "Reinventing Anthropology" worried
about anthropology's relevance. Since the 1980s issues of power, such as those
examined in Eric Wolf's "Europe and the People Without History", have been
central to the discipline. In the 1980s books like "Anthropology and the
Colonial Encounter" pondered anthropology's ties to colonial inequality, while
the immense popularity of theorists such as Antonio Gramsci and Michel Foucault
moved issues of power and hegemony into the spotlight. Gender and sexuality
became popular topics, as did the relationship between history and
anthropology, influenced by Marshall Sahlins (again), who drew on Lévi-Strauss
and Fernand Braudel to examine the relationship between social structure and
individual agency. Also influential in these issues were Nietzsche, Heidegger,
the critical theory of the Frankfurt School, Derrida and Lacan. In the late
1980s and 1990s authors such as George Marcus and James Clifford pondered
ethnographic authority, in particular how and why anthropological knowledge was
possible and authoritative. They were reflecting trends in research and
discourse initiated by Feminists in the academy, although they excused
themselves from commenting specifically on those pioneering critics.
Nevertheless, key aspects of feminist theorizing and methods became "de
rigueur" as part of the 'post-modern moment' in anthropology: Ethnographies
became more interpretative and reflexive, explicitly addressing the author's
methodology, cultural, gender and racial positioning, and their influence on
his or her ethnographic analysis. This was part of a more general trend of
postmodernism that was popular contemporaneously. Currently anthropologists pay
attention to a wide variety of issues pertaining to the contemporary world,
including globalization, medicine and biotechnology, indigenous rights, virtual
communities, and the anthropology of industrialized societies. Controversies
about its history. Anthropologists, like other researchers (especially
historians and scientists engaged in field research), have over time assisted
state policies and projects, especially colonialism. Military. Anthropologists'
involvement with the U.S. government, in particular, has caused bitter
controversy within the discipline. Franz Boas publicly objected to US
participation in World War I, and after the war he published a brief expose and
condemnation of the participation of several American archaeologists in
espionage in Mexico under their cover as scientists. But by the 1940s, many of
Boas' anthropologist contemporaries were active in the allied war effort
against the "Axis" (Nazi Germany, Fascist Italy, and Imperial Japan). Many
served in the armed forces, while others worked in intelligence (for example,
Office of Strategic Services and the Office of War Information). At the same
time, David H. Price's work on American anthropology during the Cold War
provides detailed accounts of the pursuit and dismissal of several
anthropologists from their jobs for communist sympathies. Attempts to accuse
anthropologists of complicity with the CIA and government intelligence
activities during the Vietnam War years have turned up surprisingly little
(although anthropologist Hugo Nutini was active in the stillborn Project
Camelot). Many anthropologists (students and teachers) were active in the
antiwar movement. Numerous resolutions condemning the war in all its aspects
were passed overwhelmingly at the annual meetings of the American
Anthropological Association (AAA). Professional anthropological bodies often
object to the use of anthropology for the benefit of the state. Their codes of
ethics or statements may proscribe anthropologists from giving secret
briefings. The Association of Social Anthropologists of the UK and Commonwealth
(ASA) has called certain scholarship ethically dangerous. The AAA's current
'Statement of Professional Responsibility' clearly states that "in relation
with their own government and with host governments ... no secret research, no
secret reports or debriefings of any kind should be agreed to or given."
Anthropologists, along with other social scientists, are working with the US
military as part of the US Army's strategy in Afghanistan. The Christian
Science Monitor reports that "Counterinsurgency efforts focus on better
grasping and meeting local needs" in Afghanistan, under the "Human Terrain
System" (HTS) program; in addition, HTS teams are working with the US military
in Iraq. In 2009, the American Anthropological Association's Commission on the
Engagement of Anthropology with the US Security and Intelligence Communities
released its final report concluding, in part, that, "When ethnographic
investigation is determined by military missions, not subject to external
review, where data collection occurs in the context of war, integrated into the
goals of counterinsurgency, and in a potentially coercive environment – all
characteristic factors of the HTS concept and its application – it can no
longer be considered a legitimate professional exercise of anthropology. In
summary, while we stress that constructive engagement between anthropology and
the military is possible, CEAUSSIC suggests that the AAA emphasize the
incompatibility of HTS with disciplinary ethics and practice for job seekers
and that it further recognize the problem of allowing HTS to define the meaning
of “anthropology” within DoD." Major discussions. Focus on other cultures.
Some authors argue that anthropology originated and developed as the study of
"other cultures", both in terms of time (past societies) and space (non-
European/non-Western societies). For example, the classic of urban
anthropology, Ulf Hannerz in the introduction to his seminal "Exploring the
City: Inquiries Toward an Urban Anthropology" mentions that the "Third World"
had habitually received most of attention; anthropologists who traditionally
specialized in "other cultures" looked for them far away and started to look
"across the tracks" only in late 1960s. Now there exist many works focusing on
peoples and topics very close to the author's "home". It is also argued that
other fields of study, like History and Sociology, on the contrary focus
disproportionately on the West. In France, the study of Western societies has
been traditionally left to sociologists, but this is increasingly changing,
starting in the 1970s from scholars like Isac Chiva and journals like "Terrain"
("fieldwork"), and developing with the center founded by Marc Augé ("Le Centre
d'anthropologie des mondes contemporains", the Anthropological Research Center
of Contemporary Societies). The same approach of focusing on "modern world"
topics by "Terrain", was also present in the British Manchester School of the
1950s. Since the 1980s it has become common for social and cultural
anthropologists to set ethnographic research in the North Atlantic region,
frequently examining the connections between locations rather than limiting
research to a single locale. There has also been a related shift toward
broadening the focus beyond the daily life of ordinary people; increasingly,
research is set in settings such as scientific laboratories, social movements,
governmental and nongovernmental organizations and businesses.
