Antimilitarism Antimilitarism is a doctrine commonly found in the anarchist
and, more globally, in the socialist movement, which may both be characterized
as internationalist movements. It relies heavily on a critical theory of
nationalism and imperialism, and was an explicit goal of the First and Second
International. Whereas pacifism is opposition to violence in general,
antimilitarism is opposed to war between states in particular and, of course,
militarism. Historian Paul B. Miller defines anti-militarism as ""ideology and
activities...aimed at reducing the civil power of the military and ultimately,
preventing international war"". While antimilitarism is an ideology typically
associated with the left, it is also found among Old Right and libertarian
elements, most notably in the United States. Distinction between antimilitarism
and pacifism. Pacifism has been historically associated with faith in
transcendent ideas, such as "God" or "Humanity", which Stirner, for example,
criticized in "The Ego and Its Own" (1844), a milestone of individualist
anarchism. Pacifism is thus opposed to atheistic antimilitarism, which is based
on a critical analysis of the military state institution, the military-
industrial complex and, in a broader sense, patriotism and the nationalist
concept of nation-states' sovereignty. Thus, Gandhi justified non-violence by
an ideal of redemption with the idea that non-violence makes one morally
stronger, while the early Martin Luther King based his civil disobedience
techniques on his Christian faith (later his criticism of the Vietnam War was
quite secular). On the contrary, antimilitarism was commonly found alongside
anti-clericalism, since the Church and the Army both represented repressive
institutions (or Ideological State Apparatuses - ISA - as Marxist philosopher
Louis Althusser called them). Antimilitarism, as a specific doctrine
distinguished from pacifism, is not opposed to violence in general, but mainly
to the state's control of police forces and the military institution.
Antimilitarism is thus often a logical consequence of anti-statism, and vice-
versa. Finally, antimilitarism should not be confused either with the
Clausewitzian doctrine of civilian control of the military, which considers
that "war is the continuation of politics by other means" and that tactics and
strategy must thus be controlled by diplomacy and political objectives.
Although Clausewitz opposed Jomini's advocacy of the autonomy of the military
institution, which became a reality with Prussian militarism and the Schlieffen
Plan, the latter limiting the political choices available until war finally
became the only solution available (and thus exploded in World War I), his
doctrine of limitation of military power was clearly an effort to increase the
power of the state, rather than to oppose inter-state wars Criticisms on
violence. Following Hegel's exploration of the relationship between history and
violence, antimilitarists argue that there are different types of violence,
some of which can be said to be legitimate and others non-legitimate. Anarcho-
syndicalist Georges Sorel advocated the use of violence as a form of direct
action, calling it "revolutionary violence", which he opposed in "Reflections
on Violence" (1908) to the violence inherent in class struggle. Sorel thus
followed the International Workers' Association (IWA, aka the First
International) theorization of propaganda of the deed. Later, Walter Benjamin,
in his "Critique of Violence" (1920) would also establish a difference between
"violence that founds the law", "violence that conserves the law", and an
additional last type, "divine violence" which breaks the "magic circle" between
both types of "state violence". The "violence that conserves the law" was
roughly equivalent to the state's monopoly of legitimate violence, while the
"violence that founds the law" was the original violence necessary to the
creation of a state. The last type of violence, Benjamin also called it
"revolutionary violence", and it was totally separated from the juridical
sphere. Giorgio Agamben showed that the theoretical link between the law and
violence permitted Nazi thinker Carl Schmitt to justify the "state of
exception" as the characteristic of sovereignty. Thus, indefinite suspension of
the law, which is the way to include-exclude violence in the juridical sphere
(this simultaneous inclusion and exclusion is characteristic of the structure
of "ex-ception"), may only be blocked by breaking this link between violence
and right. This explains why Agamben refers to Benjamin, whose theorization of
a "divine violence" broke the theoretical structure of the state of exception,
which is at the basis of the state's sovereignty. War, as violence, can be
distinguished into inter-states' war and civil war, in which case class
struggle is, according to antimilitarists theorists, a primordial component.
Hence, Marx's influence on antimilitarist doctrine will come as no surprise,
even though it would be doubtful to make Marx accountable for the whole
antimilitarist tradition. However, it would also be unwise to believe in the
myth of an eternal antimilitarist spirit, present in all places and time, since
modern military institution is a historic achievement, related to the
formation, in the 18th and 19th centuries, of nation-states. Napoleon's
invention of conscription is a fundamental progress in the organization of
state armies. Later, Prussian militarism would be revealed by a huge majority
of 19th century social theorists. Militarism has always been intimately linked
to propaganda. Machiavelli already considered popular armies to be superior to
mercenaries, and Althusser demonstrated how he had thought the unification of
Italy and therefore the creation of an Italian nation-state (aim which would
only be attained in the 1860s) through the implementation of popular armies,
leading to the creation of an "esprit de corps" which would form the basis for
the future nation. Rousseau also thought the creation of the military
institution as a form of education for the people. Finally, Michel Foucault
would show in "Discipline and Punish" how the Army had invented the concept of
"disciplines" to compose bodies together, thus paving the way for disciplinary
institutions (barracks, prisons, hospitals, schools, etc.) and, ultimately, a
"disciplinary society". Henry David Thoreau's Anti-Military Views. Henry David
Thoreau's 1849 essay " Civil Disobedience" (), originally titled "Resistance to
Civil Government", can be considered an antimilitarist point of view. His
refusal to pay taxes was justified as an act of protest against slavery and
against the Mexican-American War (1846-48). Capitalism and the military-
industrial complex. Antimilitarism has always been based on a political and
social analysis of the state and the concept of sovereignty. Indeed, capitalism
has often been thought by antimilitarist literature to be a major cause of
wars, an influence which has been theorized by Lenin and Rosa Luxembourg under
the name of "imperialism". The military-industrial complex has also been
accused of "pushing for war" in pursuit of private economic or financial
interests. The Second International was therefore opposed to the participation
of the working classes in war, which was analyzed as a competition between
different national bourgeois classes and different state imperialisms. However,
after the assassination of French socialist leader Jean Jaurès days before the
proclamation of World War I, nothing more was able to stop the masses from
participating in the coming war. The proletariat thus remained divided into
different nation-states. In "Mars or the War Judged" (1921), Alain would
criticize the destruction brought about by militarism, and demonstrated that it
wasn't patriotism that forced the soldiers to fight, but the bayonets behind
them. After World War II, US President Eisenhower's 1961 warning on the
influence of the "military-industrial complex" came as no surprise to many
antimilitarist-minded people. However, it did underline the relationship
between industrial power, economics, politics, etc. (in other words,
"capitalism"), and the making of wars. See RAND Corporation. Right-Wing
antimilitarism in the United States. American right-wing antimilitarists draw
heavily upon the statements of Thomas Jefferson and other Founding Fathers
condemning standing armies and foreign entanglements. They tend to see
militarism as in neither the best interests nor the real traditions of their
country, giving them an ideological continuity with isolationism. They also
note that the United States Constitution allows the Congress to raise and
support armies "but no Appropriation of Money to that Use shall be for a longer
Term than two Years," making the United States Army possibly unconstitutional.
Right-wing antimilitarists in the United States generally believe that "A well
regulated militia, composed of the body of the people, trained to arms, is the
best and most natural defense of a free country," as stated by James Madison.
To this end, there is much overlap between the Militia movement and right-wing
antimilitarists, although the two groups are not mutually inclusive. The term
"well regulated" in the above quote (and in the Second Amendment to the United
States Constitution) is taken by such antimilitarists not to mean "regulated by
the state" but rather "well equipped" and "in good working order," as was a
common usage of the word "regulated" in the late 18th century. Antimilitarist
groups. Also see: list of anti-war organizations, peace movement, etc.. Until
its dissolution, the Second International, like the First, was antimilitarist.
Jaurès' assassination on July 31, 1914, marks antimilitarism's failure in the
socialist movement. The American Union Against Militarism is an example of a US
antimilitarist movement born in the midst of the first World War, from which
the American Civil Liberties Union (ACLU) formed from after the war. Some
"Refuseniks" in Israel, who refuse the draft, and draft resisters in the USA
[http://www.resisters.info] may be antimilitarist or pacifists, depending on
the particular reasons for their opposition to conscription. Many pacifist
organizations, such as the War Resisters International and the War Resisters
League in the USA, are also antimilitarist.
