Anti-environmentalism Anti-environmentalism is a backlash against the
environmental movement. Anti-environmentalism disregards the current
“environmental crisis" due to specific scientific and economical reasoning.
The Anti-environmentalism movement is oppression to the environmental movement;
it focuses on job-creation, wage enhancement and industry. Anti-
environmentalists believe that the Earth is not as fragile as environmentalists
maintain. Generally, chemical manufacturers, oil producers, mining producers,
timber companies, real estate developers, nuclear power industries, and
electric utilities have anti-environmental motives. Anti-environmentalists are
generally right-winged with conservative views, however there may be
exceptions. Anti-environmentalism labels environmentalism as an extreme, false
and exaggerated reaction to the human contribution of climate change. Anti-
environmentalism often seeks to portray environmentalists as anti-human
advancement. History of Anti-Environmentalism in North America. Anti-
environmentalism is a movement against the environmentalism movement. This
backlashes’ origination in North America can be marked by an infamous speech
delivered by Lewis Powell to the US Chamber of Commerce in 1971. Several acts
had been passed in years prior to Powell’s speech in favor of
environmentalism, such the Wilderness Act 1964, Federal Wild and Scenic Rivers
Act 1968, National Environmental Policy Act 1969. Powell directed his audience
against the environmental movement and promoted a pro-industry and anti-
environmental view. James Watt was initially the most well-known Anti-
environmentalist. He advocated free for all mining, ranching, and drilling. In
1988 a Wise Use Campaign was introduced by republican senator, Mark Hatfield.
The Wise Use Campaign supported unrestricted access to timber and other
resources. Wise Use activists exploited the population’s fear of job and
property security loss. The Campaign placed a barrier between workers and
environmentalists. The Wise Use Campaign used bumper stickers, phone-ins and
faxes to promote their views. Wise Use and Republicans kicked off anti-
environmentalism. The recession that began in 1990 enhanced anti-green and pro-
industry views. A group called Alliance for America was created with 125 anti-
environment and pro-industry groups. In 1994, the US did not pass a
Biodiversity Treaty. Another group that was created in the 90’s was called
Earth Day Alternatives. They were also counter-environmentalists. This group
labelled environmentalists as “anti-human” and extremists. The Earth Day
Alternative group promoted three things. They aimed to privatise resources for
exploitation, advocate pollution to be permitted as trade between companies, to
discredit environmental science. Heritage was a group that was also created
with a laissez-faire approach toward the environment. Anti-environmentalists
were motivated by the fact that the ICI created deceptive green advertising.
Anti-environmentalism Quotes. “Environmental acts are mindless proposals that
would sacrifice the people of the US on the altar of nature” “Our goal is
to destroy and eradicate environmental movement” – “The environmental
community has only itself to blame for the rise of Wise Use sentiments” –
Philip Brick “Strangle the environmental movement. It’s the greatest single
threat to American economy. It doesn’t just include a few extremists. It is
extremist.” – Heritage Foundation Policy Review 1990 Overview. Paula
Snyder, Tom Denton and Peter Millson characterize environmentalist ideology as
unscientific, irrational and anti-humanist. The British trade union movement,
until the 1990s, argued that environmentalism was a form of middle class
protectionism intended to protect their economic and political interests from
the proletariat.
