Anti-cult movement The anti-cult movement (abbreviated ACM and sometimes called
the countercult movement) is a term used by academics and others to refer to
groups and individuals who oppose cults and new religious movements.
Sociologists David G. Bromley and Anson Shupe initially defined the ACM in 1981
as a collection of groups embracing brainwashing-theory, but later observed a
significant shift in ideology towards a "medicalization" of the memberships of
new religious movements (NRMs). Publications of the International Cultic
Studies Association have disputed the appropriateness of the term "Anti-cult
movement"; (see for example Kropveld ) with one writer preferring the label
"cult critics" rather than "anti-cult" activists. The concept of an ACM. The
anti-cult movement is conceptualized as a collection of individuals and groups,
whether formally organized or not, who oppose new religious movements (or
"cults"). This countermovement has reportedly recruited from family members of
"cultists"; former cult members, (or apostates); church groups (including
Jewish groups); and associations of health professionals. Although there is a
trend towards globalization, the social and organizational bases vary
significantly from country to country according to the social and political
opportunity structures in each place. As are many aspects of the social
sciences, the movement is variously defined. A significant minority opinion
suggests that analysis should treat the secular anti-cult movement separately
from the religiously motivated (mainly Christian) groups. As is typical in
social and religious movements, no unified ideology exists, but most, if not
all, the groups involved express the view that there are potentially
deleterious effects associated with New Religious Movements. History. Heresy in
Christianity. Concern against heretical teaching and heretical groups is part
of Christianity from the New Testament onwards. The apostle Paul rebukes the
Galatians for accepting "another Gospel," and the Corinthians for "another
Jesus." Irenaeus of Lyons (c.115 - c.202) was the first major Christian
heresiologist identifying many groups as Gnostics (from "gnostikos" "learned").
The greatest, and most persistant, of the early church "heresies" was Arianism.
Though orthodox Christian persecution of non-orthodox Christians did not start
until a century after Arius. The Middle Ages saw persecution of Bogomils,
Cathars and other groups, and the Inquisition (from the 12th century)
formalised the use of torture and execution. Protestantism also combatted
heresy with the methods of the Inquisition, most notably the Anabaptists,
Calvin's burning of the Arian Servetus, and the Anglican burning of another
Arian, Edward Wightman (1612). Christian debate on persecution and toleration
began from the Enlightenment. 18th and 19th Centuries. In both Britain and
America civil penalties against English Dissenters were progressively reduced
during the 18th century, and following the Doctrine of the Trinity Act 1813
removed entirely. However orthodox Christian concern against groups such as
Unitarians, Quakers, and others continued, and unorthodox groups proliferated
in America. 20th and 21st centuries. In the first half of the 20th century,
some conservative Christian scholars, mostly Protestants, conducted apologetics
defending what they saw as Christian mainstream theology against the teachings
of perceived fringe groups. More-or-less mainstream churches and groups
continue this activity today on various levels of theological expertise,
collectively described as the Christian countercult movement. Members of this
movement normally defined a "cult" as any group which provides its own,
unconventional, translation of the Bible or which regards non-canonical
writings as equivalent to Biblical teachings. The Calvinist writer Anthony A.
Hoekema (1963) considered that "cults" included Seventh-day Adventists,
Mormons, Christian Scientists, Jehovah's Witnesses, Barker is an active
participant on the subject of cult watching groups. Cult-watching groups and
individuals, and other opposition to cults. Family-members of adherents. Some
opposition to cults (and to new religious movements) started with family-
members of cult-adherents who had problems with the sudden changes in
character, lifestyle and future plans of their young adult children who had
joined NRMs. Ted Patrick, widely known as "the Father of deprogramming",
exemplifies members of this group. The former Cult Awareness Network (old CAN)
grew out of a grassroots-movement by parents of cult-members. The American
Family Foundation ( the International Cultic Studies Association) originated
from a father whose daughter had joined a high-control group. Clinical
psychologists and psychiatrists. From the 1970s onwards some psychiatrists and
clinical psychologists accused cults of harming some of their members. These
accusations were sometimes based on observations made during therapy, and
sometimes were related to research regarding brainwashing or mind-control.
Examples include Margaret Singer, John Gordon Clark, Louis Jolyon West, Robert
Cialdini, and Louise Samways. Former members. Some former members operate in
the counter-cult movement, such as Edmond C. Gruss and J. P. Moreland. Anson
Shupe, David G. Bromley and Joseph Ventimiglia coined the term "atrocity tales"
in 1979, which Bryan R. Wilson later took up in relation to former members'
narratives. Bromley and Shupe defined an "atrocity tale" as the symbolic
presentation of action or events (real or imaginary) in such a context that
they come flagrantly to violate the (presumably) shared premises upon which a
given set of social relationships should take place. The recounting of such
tales has the intention of reaffirming normative boundaries. By sharing the
reporter's disapproval or horror, an audience reasserts normative prescription
and clearly locates the violator beyond the limits of public morality. Massimo
Introvigne argues that the majority of former members hold no strong feelings
concerning their past experiences, while former members who dramatically
reverse their loyalties and become "professional enemies" of their former group
form a vociferous minority. The term "atrocity story" has itself become
controversial as it relates to the opposing views amongst scholars about the
credibility of the accounts of former cult-members. Phillip Charles Lucas came
to the conclusion that former members have as much credibility as those who
remain in the fold. Benjamin Beit-Hallahmi, a professor of psychology at the
University of Haifa, argues that in the cases of cult-catastrophes such as
People's Temple, or Heaven's Gate, allegations by hostile outsiders and
detractors matched reality more closely than other accounts, and that in that
context statements by ex-members turned out more accurate than those offered by
apologists and NRM-researchers. Christian countercult movement. A somewhat
similar movement, generally not considered part of the ACM, exists within a
recognized religion: the Christian countercult movement (CCM). The CCM offers
two basic arguments for opposition to cults and new religious movement: one
based mainly on theological differences; the other based on defending human
self-determinism and targeting mainly groups (religious and non-religious) with
alleged cultic behavior (according to the definition of the secular opposition
to cults). The trend focusing on theological differences has a very long
tradition in Christian apologetics. Since the 1970s, "countercult apologetics"
has developed, out of which the Christian countercult movement grew. The "CCM"
label does not actually designate a movement but a conglomerate of individuals
and groups of very different backgrounds and levels of scholarship. Other
designations include "countercult ministries", "discernment ministries" (mainly
used by such groups themselves) or "heresy hunters" (mainly used by their
critics). National and international entities. The secular opposition to cults
and to new religious movements operates internationally, though a number of
sizable and sometimes expanding groups originated in the United States. Some
European countries, such as France, Germany, Belgium and Switzerland, as well
as China, have introduced legislation or taken other measures against cults or
"cultic deviations." Cult-watchers. Cult-watchers include Rick Ross, Andreas
Heldal-Lund, Hank Hanegraff, Steven Hassan and Tilman Hausherr, as well as
anti-cult organizations such as Infosekta in Switzerland, UNADFI (National
Association for the Defense of Families and Individuals Victims of Cults) in
France, and the AGPF (Action for Mental and Psychological Freedom) in Germany.
Specific cult-watching government agencies exist (for example) in France
(MIVILUDES) and in Belgium (CIAOSN: Centre d'information et d'avis sur les
organisations sectaires nuisibles). Anti-cult movement in Russia. In the USSR,
all the important questions of the state-religious relations were resolved by
Central Committee of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union, KGB, the Counsel
about religions. There was no background for any ACM as a social initiative.
But some party functionaries thought that all the religions were reaction force
and “sects” were especially dangerous. In Russia “anticultism” appeared
in early 1990s. Some Russian protestants used to take part in criticizing of
foreigner missionaries, sects and new religious movements. Their chiefs hoped
that taking part in anti-cult declarations could demonstrate that they were not
“sectarians”. Now anti-cult movements, better known as “anti-sectarian
movements” take part in making laws about religion in Russia. Some religious
studies have shown that anti-cult movements, especially with support of the
government, can provoke serious religious conflicts in Russian society.
Controversies. Polarized views among scholars. Social scientists, sociologists,
religious scholars, psychologists and psychiatrists have studied the modern
field of cults and new religious movements since the early 1980s. Cult debates
about certain purported cults and about cults in general often become polarized
with widely divergent opinions, not only among current followers and
disaffected former members, but sometimes even among scholars as well. All
academics agree that some groups have become problematic and sometimes very
problematic; but they disagree over the extent to which new religious movements
in general cause harm. Scholars come from a variety of fields, many of them
sociologists of religion, psychologists, or researchers in religious studies.
Eileen Barker, David G. Bromley, Anson Shupe, J. Gordon Melton, Benjamin Beith-
Hallahmi, Benjamin Zablocki, and Philip Zimbardo have a research-orientation.
Some like John Gordon Clark, Margaret Singer, Stephen A. Kent and David C. Lane
are opposed to cults, and promote "cult-awareness". Others such as J. P.
Moreland or Edmond C. Gruss are considered "counter-cult". Jeffrey Hadden and
Douglas E. Cowan focus on the human rights of members of religious groups.
Other scholars studying and researching NRMs include Irving Hexham, James R.
Lewis, and James T. Richardson. Several scholars have questioned Hadden's
attitude towards NRMs and cult critics as one-sided. Janet Jacobs expresses the
range of views on the membership of the perceived ACM itself, ranging from
those who comment on "the value of the Cult Awareness Network, the value of
exit therapy for former members of new religious movements, and alternative
modes of support for family members of individuals who have joined new
religions" and extending to "a more critical perspective on perceived wide
range of ACM activities that threaten religious freedom and individual rights."
Compare conspiracy-theory. Brainwashing and mind-control. Both sympathizers and
critics of new religious movements have found the topic(s) of brainwashing or
mind-control extremely controversial. The controversy between sympathizers and
critics of new religious movements starts with discrepancies regarding the
definition and concept of "brainwashing" and of "mind-control," extends to the
possibility or probability of their application by cultic groups and to the
state of acceptance by various scholarly communities. Deprogramming and exit-
counseling. Some members of the secular opposition to cults and to new
religious movements have argued that if brainwashing has deprived a person of
their free will, treatment to restore their free will should take place —
even if the "victim" initially opposes this. Precedents for this exist in the
treatment of certain mental illnesses: in such cases medical and legal
authorities recognize the condition(s) as depriving sufferers of their ability
to make appropriate decisions for themselves. But the practice of forcing
treatment on a presumed victim of "brainwashing" (one definition of
"deprogramming") has constantly proven controversial, and courts have
frequently adjudged it illegal. Human-rights organizations (including the ACLU
and Human Rights Watch) have also criticized deprogramming. While only a small
fraction of the anti-cult movement has had involvement in deprogramming,
several deprogrammers (including a deprogramming-pioneer, Ted Patrick) have
served prison-terms for the practice, while courts have acquitted others. The
anti-cult movement in the USA has apparently abandoned deprogramming in favor
of the voluntary practice of exit counseling. However, this remains a subject
of controversy between sympathizers and critics of new religious movements, who
continue to debate deprogramming's basic assumptions and its relation to rights
of freedom of religion. Responses of targeted groups and scholars. The
Foundation against Intolerance of Religious Minorities, associated with the
Adidam NRM, sees the use of terms "cult" and "cult leader" as detestable and as
something to avoid at all costs. The Foundation regards such usage as the
exercise of prejudice and discrimination against them in the same manner as the
words "nigger" and "commie" served in the past to denigrate blacks and
Communists. CESNUR’s president Massimo Introvigne, writes in his article ""So
many evil things: Anti-cult terrorism via the Internet"", that fringe and
extreme anti-cult activists resort to tactics that may create a background
favorable to extreme manifestations of discrimination and hate against
individuals that belong to new religious movements. Critics of CESNUR, however,
call Introvigne a cult-apologist who defends harmful religious groups and
cults. Professor Eileen Barker points out in an interview that the controversy
surrounding certain new religious movements can turn violent by a process
called deviancy amplification spiral. In a paper presented at the 2000 meeting
of the Society for the Scientific Study of Religion, Anson Shupe and Susan
Darnell argued that although the International Cultic Studies Association
(ICSA, formerly known as AFF or American Family Foundation) has presented
"slanted, stereotypical images and language that has inflamed persons to
perform extreme actions," the extent to which one can classify the ICSA and
other anti-cult organizations as "hate-groups" (as defined by law in some
jurisdictions or by racial/ethnic criteria in sociology) remains open for
debate. See also Verbal violence in hate groups. An article on the
categorization of new religious movements in US media published by "The
Association for the Sociology of Religion" (formerly the American "Catholic
Sociological Society", criticizes the print media for failing to recognize
social-scientific efforts in the area of new religious movements, and its
tendency to use anti-cultist definitions rather than social-scientific insight,
and asserts that "The failure of the print media to recognize social-scientific
efforts in the area of religious movement organizations (as our previous
research Driel and Richardson, 1985 also shows) impels us to add yet another
failing mark to the media report card Weiss (1985) has constructed to assess
the media's reporting of the social sciences."
