Anti-communism Anti-communism is opposition to communism. Organized anti-
communism developed in reaction to the rise of communism, especially after the
1917 October Revolution in Russia and reaching global dimensions during the
Cold War. Most anti-communists reject the concept of historical materialism,
which is a central idea in Marxism. Anti-communists reject the Marxist belief
that capitalism will be followed by socialism and communism, just as feudalism
was followed by capitalism. Anti-communists question the validity of the
Marxist claim that the socialist state will "wither away" when it becomes
unnecessary in a true communist society. Anti-communists argue that the
repression in the early years of Bolshevik rule, while not as extreme as that
during Joseph Stalin's rule, was still severe by reasonable standards, citing
examples such as Felix Dzerzhinsky's secret police, which eliminated numerous
political opponents by extrajudicial executions, and the brutal crushing of the
Kronstadt rebellion and Tambov rebellion. Some anti-communists refer to both
Communism and fascism as totalitarianism, seeing similarity between the actions
of communist and fascist governments. Historian Robert Conquest has argued that
Communism was responsible for tens of millions of deaths during the 20th
century. Opponents argue that Communist parties that have come to power have
tended to be rigidly intolerant of political opposition. These opponents claim
that most Communist countries have shown no signs of advancing from Marx's
socialist stage of economy to an ideal communist stage. Rather, Communist
governments have been accused of creating a new ruling class (a
"Nomenklatura"), with powers and privileges greater than those previously
enjoyed by the upper classes in the non-communist regimes. Anti-communist
movements. Left-wing anti-communism. Since the split of the Communist Parties
from the socialist Second International to form the Communist Third
International, democratic socialists and social democrats have been in conflict
with Communism, criticising it for its anti-democratic nature. Examples of
left-wing critics of Communist states and parties are George Orwell, Boris
Souveraine, Bayard Rustin, Irving Howe and Max Shachtman. Anarchists. Although
many anarchists describe themselves as communists (spelled with a lower case
"c"), all anarchists criticize authoritarian Communist parties and states. They
argue that Marxist concepts such as dictatorship of the proletariat and state
ownership of the means of production are to anarchism. Some anarchists
criticize communism from an individualist or anarcho-capitalist point of view.
The anarchist Mikhail Bakunin debated with Karl Marx in the First
International, arguing that the Marxist state is another form of oppression. He
loathed the idea of a vanguard party ruling the masses from above. Anarchists
initially participated in, and rejoiced over, the 1917 revolution as an example
of workers taking power for themselves. However, after the October revolution,
it became evident that the Bolsheviks and the anarchists had very different
ideas. Anarchist Emma Goldman, deported from the United States to Russia in
1919, was initially enthusiastic about the revolution, but was left sorely
disappointed, and began to write her book "My Disillusionment in Russia".
Anarchist Peter Kropotkin, proffered trenchant criticism of the emergent
Bolshevik bureaucracy in letters to Vladimir Lenin, noting in 1920: "party
dictatorship is positively harmful for the building of a new socialist system.
What is needed is local construction by local forces ... Russia has already
become a Soviet Republic only in name." Many anarchists fought against Russian,
Spanish and Greek Communists; many were killed by them, such as Lev Chernyi,
Camillo Berneri and Constantinos Speras. Capitalists. The communist principle
of redistribution of wealth acquired in capitalist accumulation is held by
anti-communists to be opposed to the principle of voluntary free trade.
Furthermore many capitalist theorists believe that communism interferes with
the price mechanism that is only optimized in private competition. See economic
calculation debate. In the "Communist Manifesto", Marx lays out a 10-point plan
advising the redistribution of land and production, and Ludwig von Mises argues
that the initial and ongoing forms of redistribution constitute direct
coercion. Neither Marx's 10-point plan nor the rest of the manifesto say
anything about who has the right to carry out the plan. Milton Friedman argued
that the absence of voluntary economic activity makes it too easy for
repressive political leaders to grant themselves coercive powers. Friedman's
view was also shared by Friedrich Hayek and John Maynard Keynes, both of whom
believed that capitalism is vital for freedom to survive and thrive. Many
capitalist critics see a key error in communist economic theory, which predicts
that in capitalist societies, the bourgeoisie will accumulate ever-increasing
capital and wealth, while the lower classes become more dependent on the ruling
class for survival, selling their labor power for the most minimal of salaries,
blaming the effect on capitalism. Anti-communists point to the overall rise in
the average standard of living in the non-communist West and claim that both
the rich and poor have steadily gotten richer. Anti-communists argue that
former Third World countries that have successfully escaped poverty in recent
decades have done so using capitalism, most notably India and China. Anti-
communists cite the Mengistu regime in Ethiopia as an example how a Communist
regime in the Third World failed to achieve development or economic growth.
Objectivism. Objectivists argue that wealth (or any other human value) is the
creation of individual minds, that human nature requires motivation by personal
incentive, and therefore, that only political and economic freedom are
consistent with human prosperity. This is demonstrated, they believe, by the
comparative prosperity of free market and socialist economies. Objectivist Ayn
Rand writes that communist leaders typically claim to work for the common good,
but many or all of them have been corrupt and totalitarian. Ex-communists. Many
ex-communists have turned into anti-communists. Mikhail Gorbachev turned from a
Communist into a social democrat. Milovan Đilas, was a former Yugoslav
Communist official, who became a prominent dissident and critic of Communism.
Leszek Kołakowski was a Polish Communist who became a famous anti-communist.
He was best known for his critical analyses of Marxist thought, especially his
acclaimed three-volume history, "Main Currents of Marxism", which is
"considered by some to be one of the most important books on political theory
of the 20th century." "The God That Failed" is a 1949 book which collects
together six essays with the testimonies of a number of famous ex-Communists,
who were writers and journalists. The common theme of the essays is the
authors' disillusionment with and abandonment of Communism. The promotional
byline to the book is ""Six famous men tell how they changed their minds about
Communism."" Another notable anti-communist was Whittaker Chambers, a former
Soviet Union spy who testified against his fellow spies before the House Un-
American Activities Committee. Louis Fischer, André Gide, Arthur Koestler,
Ignazio Silone, Stephen Spender, Peter Hitchens, Zita Seabra and Richard
Wright. Anti-communists who were once socialists, modern liberals or social
democrats include: John Chamberlain, Friedrich Hayek, Raymond Moley, Norman
Podhoretz and Irving Kristol. Fascism and Socialism. Fascism is often
considered a reaction to communist and socialist uprisings in Europe. Italian
fascism, founded and led by Benito Mussolini, took power with the blessing of
Italy's king after years of leftist unrest led many conservatives to fear that
a communist revolution was inevitable. Historians Ian Kershaw and Joachim Fest
argue that in post-World War I Germany, the Nazis or Nazism ( English long form
National Socialism)were one of many nationalist socialist and fascistic
political parties contending for the leadership of Germany’s anti-communist
movement, and of the German state. The Nazis claimed that communism was
dangerous to the well-being of nations because of its intention to dissolve
private property, its support of class conflict, its aggression against the
middle class, its hostility to small businessmen, and its atheism. Nazism
rejected class conflict-based socialism and economic egalitarianism, favouring
instead a stratified economy with classes based on merit and talent, retaining
private property, and the creation of national solidarity that transcends class
distinction. Far-Right Politics. In Europe, numerous aristocrats, conservative
intellectuals, capitalists and industrialists lent their support to fascist
movements. During the late 1930s and the 1940s, several other anti-communist
regimes and groups supported Nazism: the Falange in Spain; the Vichy regime and
the Legion of French Volunteers against Bolshevism ("Wehrmacht" Infantry
Regiment 638) in France; the Cliveden set, Lord Halifax, and associates of
Neville Chamberlain in Britain.; and, in South America, movements such as
Brazilian Integralism. Anti-communism remained a theme in far right politics
after the war. For example, in the US, Frank L. Britton, editor of "The
American Nationalist" published a book, "Behind Communism", in 1952 which
disseminated the myth that Communism was a Jewish conspiracy originating in
Palestine. Religions. Buddhists. Thích Huyền Quang was a prominent
Vietnamese Buddhist monk and anti-communist dissident. In 1977, Huyền Quang
wrote a letter to Prime Minister Phạm Văn Đồng detailing counts of
oppression by the Communist regime. For this, he and five other senior monks
were arrested and detained. In 1982, Huyền Quang was arrested and
subsequently put into permanent house arrest for opposition to government
policy after publicly denouncing the establishment of the state-controlled
Vietnam Buddhist Church. Thích Quảng Độ is a Vietnamese Buddhist monk and
anti-communist dissident. In January 2008, the Europe-based magazine "A
Different View" chose Ven. Thích Quảng Độ as one of the 15 Champions of
World Democracy. Catholics. The Catholic Church has a history of anti-
communism. The most recent Catechism of the Catholic Church states: "The
Catholic Church has rejected the totalitarian and atheistic ideologies
associated in modern times with 'communism' or 'socialism.' … Regulating the
economy solely by centralized planning perverts the basis of social bonds …
reasonable regulation of the marketplace and economic initiatives, in keeping
with a just hierarchy of values and a view to the common good, is to be
commended." Pope John Paul II was a harsh critic of communism, and other popes
shared this view as well, for example Pope Pius IX issued a Papal encyclical,
entitled "Quanta Cura", in which he called "Communism and Socialism" the most
fatal error. During the Spanish Civil War, the Catholic Church opposed the
left-leaning Republican forces due to their ties to communism and atrocities
against Catholicism in Spain, and in many churches and schools prayers were
made for the victory of Franco. Lúcia Santos, a visionary of the Marian
apparition at Fátima, Portugal was known for her anti-communist beliefs, as
well as the message of Fatima in general. From 1945 onward Australian Labor
Party leadership accepted the assistance of an anti-Communist Roman Catholic
movement, led by B.A. Santamaria to oppose communist subversion of Australian
Trade Unions (Catholics being an important traditional support base). To oppose
communist infiltration of unions Industrial Groups were formed to regain
control of them. The groups were active from 1945 to 1954, with the knowledge
support of ALP leadership until after Labor's loss of the 1954 election, when
federal leader Dr H.V. Evatt, in the context of his response to the Petrov
affair, blamed “subversive” activities of the "Groupers", for the defeat.
After bitter public dispute many Groupers (including most members of the NSW
and Victorian state executives and most Victorian Labor branches) were expelled
from the ALP and formed the Democratic Labor Party (historical). In an attempt
to force the ALP reform and remove communist influence, with a view to then
rejoining the “purged” ALP, the DLP preferenced (see Australian electoral
system) the Liberal Party of Australia, enabling them remain in power for over
two decades. Their negative strategy failed, and after the Whitlam Labor
Government during the 1970s it, the majority of the DLP decided to wind up the
party in 1978, although a small Federal and State party continued based in
Victoria (see Democratic Labor Party) with state parties reformed in NSW and
Qld in 2008. After the Soviet occupation of Hungary During the final stages of
the Second World War, many clerics were arrested. The case of the Archbishop
József Mindszenty of Esztergom, head of the Catholic Church in Hungary was the
most known. He was accused of treason to the communist ideas and was sent to
trials and tortured during several years between 1949 and 1956. During the
Hungarian Revolution of 1956 against communism he was set free and after the
failure of the movement he was forced to move to the United States' embassy on
Budapest. There he lived until 1971 when the Vatican and the communist
government of Hungary pacted his way out to Austria. In the following years
Mindszenty travelled all over the world visiting the Hungarian colonies in
Canada, United States, Germany, Austria, South Africa and Venezuela. He led a
high critical campaign against the communist regime denouncing the atrocities
committed by them against him and the Hungarian people. The communist
government accused him and demanded that the Vatican remove him the title of
Archbishop of Esztergom and forbid him to keep giving public speech about the
communist torture methods and freedom privations. After a lot of political
interventions, the Vatican was forced to accomplish what the sovietic regime
demanded. However Mindszenty kept travelling all over the world being a real
symbol of unity, cultural preservation, and hope for the Hungarian people, no
matter their religion (Lutherans, Calvinists, Catholics, etc.). Falun Gong. In
April 1999, over ten thousand Falun Gong practitioners gathered at Communist
Party of China headquarters, Zhongnanhai, in a silent protest following an
incident in Tianjin. Two months later the CPC banned the practice, initiated a
security crackdown, and began a propaganda campaign against it. Since 1999,
Falun Gong practitioners in China have been reportedly subject to torture,
arbitrary imprisonment, beatings, forced labor, alleged organ harvesting, and
psychiatric abuses. Falun Gong has responded with their own media campaign, and
have emerged as a notable voice of dissent against the Communist Party of
China, by founding organizations such as the "Epoch Times", NTDTV and others
that criticize the CPC. Muslims. After the taming of Central Asian Muslim
Khanates by the Soviet Union, Soviet-style Communists did not have any
largescale interaction with Muslim populations until the Saur Revolution in
Afghanistan, 1978. Before this, traditional Muslim clerics rallied against
Communist influences in Muslim societies, but any action beyond the sermons was
rare. After the declaration in Kabul of the Democratic Republic of Afghanistan,
began a civil war that spiralled into the invasion of Afghanistan by the Soviet
Union. This event elevated the ideology of Islamism, which was rooted in
Afghanistan's anti-Communist struggle, into a regional influence throughout
Southwest Asia. Literature. George Orwell, a democratic socialist, wrote two of
the most widely read and influential anti-totalitarian novels: "Nineteen
Eighty-Four" and "Animal Farm", both of which featured allusions to the Soviet
Union under Joseph Stalin. Also on the left, Arthur Koestler — a former
member of the Communist Party — explored the ethics of revolution from an
anti-communist perspective in a variety of works. His trilogy of early novels
testified to Koestler's growing conviction that utopian ends do not justify the
means often used by revolutionary governments. These novels are: "The
Gladiators" (which explores the slave uprising led by Spartacus in the Roman
Empire as an allegory for the Russian Revolution), "Darkness at Noon" (based on
the Moscow Trials, this was a very widely read novel that made Koestler one of
the most prominent anti-communist intellectuals of the period), and "Arrival
and Departure". Whittaker Chambers — an American ex-communist who became
infamous for his cooperation with the House Un-American Activities Committee
(HUAC), where he implicated Alger Hiss — published an influential anti-
communist memoir, "Witness", in 1952. Boris Pasternak, a Russian writer, rose
to international fame after his anti-communist novel "Doctor Zhivago" was
smuggled out of the Soviet Union (where it was banned) and published in the
West in 1957. He received the Nobel Prize for Literature, much to the chagrin
of the Soviet authorities. Aleksandr Isayevich Solzhenitsyn was a Russian
novelist, dramatist and historian. Through his writings, — particularly "The
Gulag Archipelago" and "One Day in the Life of Ivan Denisovich", his two best-
known works — he made the world aware of the Gulag, the Soviet Union's forced
labor camp system. For these efforts, Solzhenitsyn was awarded the Nobel Prize
in Literature in 1970, and was exiled from the Soviet Union in 1974. Herta
Müller is a Romanian-born German novelist, poet and essayist noted for her
works depicting the harsh conditions of life in Communist Romania under the
repressive Nicolae Ceauşescu regime, the history of the Germans in the Banat
(and more broadly, Transylvania), and the persecution of Romanian ethnic
Germans by Stalinist Soviet occupying forces in Romania and the Soviet-imposed
Communist regime of Romania. Müller has been an internationally-known author
since the early 1990s, and her works have been translated into more than 20
languages. She has received over 20 awards, including the 1994 Kleist Prize,
the 1995 Aristeion Prize, the 1998 International IMPAC Dublin Literary Award,
the 2009 Franz Werfel Human Rights Award and the 2009 Nobel Prize in
Literature. Ayn Rand was a Russian-American 20th century writer who was an
enthusiastic supporter of "laissez-faire" capitalism. She wrote "We the Living"
about the effects of Communism in Russia. Performing arts. The Love-Girl and
the Innocent (also translated "The Tenderfoot and the Tart") is a play in four
acts by Russian author Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn. It is set over the course of
about one week in 1945 in a Stalin-era Soviet prison camp. As in many of
Solzhenitsyn's works, depicts the perceived suffering of the prisoners and
their incompetent but powerful wardens. Most of the prisoners depicted in the
play are serving 10 year sentences for violations of Soviet Penal Code Article
58. In this play, the author first explores the analogy of the camp system to a
separate nation within the Soviet Union, an analogy which would dominate his
later work, most clearly in The Gulag Archipelago. Evasion of censorship.
Samizdat was a key form of dissident activity across the Soviet-bloc;
individuals reproduced censored publications by hand and passed the documents
from reader to reader, thus building a foundation for the successful resistance
of the 1980s. This grassroots practice to evade officially imposed censorship
was fraught with danger as harsh punishments were meted out to people caught
possessing or copying censored materials. Vladimir Bukovsky defined it as
follows: "I myself create it, edit it, censor it, publish it, distribute it,
and get imprisoned for it." During the Cold War, Western countries invested
heavily in powerful transmitters which enabled broadcasters to be heard in the
Eastern Bloc, despite attempts by authorities to jam such signals. In 1947, VOA
started broadcasting in Russian with the intent to counter Soviet propaganda
directed against American leaders and policies. These included Radio Free
Europe (RFE)), RIAS (Berlin) the Voice of America (VOA), Deutsche Welle, Radio
France International and the British Broadcasting Corporation (BBC). The Soviet
Union responded by attempting aggressive, electronic jamming of VOA (and some
other Western) broadcasts on 1949. The BBC World Service similarly broadcast
language-specific programming to countries behind the Iron Curtain. In the
People's Republic of China, people have to bypass the Chinese Internet
censorship and other forms of censorship. Anti-communism in different countries
and regions. Council of Europe and European Union. Resolution 1481/2006 of the
Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe (PACE), issued on January 25,
2006 during its winter session, "strongly condemns crimes of totalitarian
communist regimes". The European Parliament has proposed making 23 August a
Europe-wide day of remembrance for 20th-century Nazi and communist crimes.
Albania. In 1945, Mit'hat Frashëri compiled a political platform proposing the
formation of a coalition government including, members of nationalist
Legaliteti, Balli Kombëtar, and other anti-communist movements in addition to
the winning communist group. Stemming was the unsuccessful Western-backed
campaign of toppling the communist government through the infiltration of
dissidents into the country that was made possible from the unification of the
four anti-communist groups Legaliteti, Balli Kombëtar, Independents' Block,
and the Kosovars' Group. In 1946, an armed uprising took place in Postribë
whereby more than a dozen participants were killed and others imprisoned. In
1973, a number of prisoners at the Spac concentration camp staged a rebellion
where the non-communist flag was raised. In 1984, a similar rebellion took
place at the prison of Qafë Bar. Albania has enacted the Law on Communist
Genocide with the purpose of expediting the prosecution of the violations of
the basic human rights and freedoms by the former communist governments of the
Socialist People's Republic of Albania. The law has also been referred to in
English as the "Genocide Law" and the "Law on Communist Genocide".
Czechoslovakia. The uprising in Plzeň was an anti-communist revolt by
Czechoslovakian workers in 1953. The Velvet Revolution or Gentle Revolution was
a non-violent revolution in Czechoslovakia that saw the overthrow of the
Communist government. It is seen as one of the most important of the
Revolutions of 1989. On November 17, 1989, a Friday, riot police suppressed a
peaceful student demonstration in Prague. That event sparked a series of
popular demonstrations from November 19 to late December. By November 20 the
number of peaceful protesters assembled in Prague had swollen from 200,000 the
previous day to an estimated half-million. A two-hour general strike, involving
all citizens of Czechoslovakia, was held on November 27. In June 1990
Czechoslovakia held its first democratic elections since 1946. Hong Kong. Hong
Kong has had numerous anti-communist protests. Some are even opposed to the end
of the HKSAR on July 1, 2047, the day on which Hong Kong is scheduled to be
fully assimilated into communist China. Memorials for the Tiananmen Square
protests of 1989 are held every year in Hong Kong. Tens of thousands people
have attended the candlelight vigil. Hungary. The Hungarian Revolution of 1956
was a spontaneous nationwide revolt in favour of "genuine" socialism against
the Stalinist government of the People's Republic of Hungary, lasting from 23
October until 10 November 1956. The revolt began as a student demonstration
which attracted thousands as it marched through central Budapest to the
Parliament building. A student delegation entering the radio building in an
attempt to broadcast its demands was detained. When the delegation's release
was demanded by the demonstrators outside, they were fired upon by the State
Security Police (ÁVH) from within the building. The news spread quickly and
disorder and violence erupted throughout the capital. The revolt spread quickly
across Hungary, and the government fell. After announcing a willingness to
negotiate a withdrawal of Soviet forces, the Politburo of the Central Committee
of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union changed its mind and moved to crush
the revolution. Indonesia. From 1965 to 1966, over a period of five months, an
estimated 500,000 Communists were killed by the Indonesian government and
allied militia. Japan. In 1948-1951, in the period of American occupation, a
"red purge" occurred in Japan, in which over 20,000 people accused of being
Communists were purged from their places of employment. People's Republic of
China. The Chinese democracy movement is a loosely organized anti-communist
movement in the People's Republic of China. The movement began during Beijing
Spring in 1978 and played an important role in the Tiananmen Square protests of
1989. The 1959 Tibetan Rebellion had some anti-communist leanings. In the
1990s, the movement underwent a decline both within China and overseas; it is
currently fragmented and most analysts do not consider it a serious threat to
communist rule. Charter 08 is a manifesto signed by over 303 Chinese
intellectuals and human rights activists to promote political reform and
democratization in the People's Republic of China. It declares a calling for
greater freedom of expression and for free elections. It was published on 10
December 2008, the 60th anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights, and its name is a reference to Charter 77, issued by dissidents in
Czechoslovakia. Since its release, more than 8,100 people inside and outside
the PRC have signed the charter. Poland. Lenin saw Poland as the bridge which
the Red Army would have to cross in order to assist the other communist
movements and help bring about other European revolutions. Poland was the first
country which successfully stopped a communist military advance. Between
February 1919 and March 1921, Poland's successful defence of its independence
was known as the Polish–Soviet War. According to American sociologist
Alexander Gella, "the Polish victory had gained twenty years of independence
not only for Poland, but at least for an entire central part of Europe." After
the German and Soviet invasion of Poland in 1939, the first Polish uprising
during World War II was against the Soviets. The Czortków Uprising occurred
during January 21–22, 1940, in the Soviet-occupied Podolia. Teenagers from
local high schools stormed the local Red Army barracks and a prison, in order
to release Polish soldiers who had been imprisoned there. In the latter years
of the war, there were increasing conflicts between Polish and Soviet
partisans, and some groups continued to oppose the Soviets long after the war.
Between 1944 and 1946, soldiers of the anti-communist armed groups, known as
the cursed soldiers, made a series of attacks on communist prisons immediately
following the end of World War II in Poland. The last of the cursed soldiers,
members of the militant anti-communist resistance in Poland, was Józef
Franczak, who was killed with a pistol in his hand by ZOMO in 1963. Poznań
1956 protests were massive anti-communist protests in the People's Republic of
Poland. Protesters were repressed by the regime. The Polish 1970 protests ()
were anti-Comintern protests which occurred in northern Poland in December
1970. The protests were sparked by a sudden increase in the prices of food and
other everyday items. As a result of the riots, brutally put down by the Polish
People's Army and the Citizen's Militia, at least 42 people were killed and
more than 1,000 were wounded. Solidarity was an anti-communist trade union in a
Warsaw Pact country. In the 1980s, it constituted a broad anti-communist
movement. The government attempted to destroy the union during the period of
martial law in the early 1980s, and several years of repression, however, in
the end, it had to start negotiating with the union. The Round Table Talks
between the government and the Solidarity-led opposition led to semi-free
elections in 1989. By the end of August, a Solidarity-led coalition government
was formed, and in December 1990, Wałęsa was elected President of Poland.
Since then, it has become a more traditional trade union. Romania. The Romanian
anti-communist resistance movement lasted between 1948 and the early 1960s.
Armed resistance was the first and most structured form of resistance against
the communist regime. It was not until the overthrow of Nicolae Ceauşescu in
late 1989 that details about what was called “anti-communist armed
resistance” were made public. It was only then that the public learned about
the numerous small groups of "haiducs" who had taken refuge in the Carpathian
Mountains, where some resisted for ten years against the troops of the
Securitate. The last “haiduc” was killed in the mountains of Banat in 1962.
The Romanian resistance was one of the longest lasting armed movement in the
former Soviet bloc. The Romanian Revolution of 1989 was a week-long series of
increasingly violent riots and fighting in late December 1989 that overthrew
the Government of Nicolae Ceauşescu. After a trial, Ceauşescu and his wife
Elena were executed. Romania was the only Eastern Bloc country to overthrow its
government violently or to execute its leaders. Moldova. The Moldovan anti-
communist social movement emerged on April 7, 2009, in major cities of Moldova
after the Party of Communists of the Republic of Moldova (PCRM) had allegedly
rigged elections. The anti-communists organized themselves using an online
social network service, Twitter, hence its moniker used by the media, the
Twitter Revolution or Grape revolution. Serbia. Serbian anti-Communist
partisans fought during World War II, on the Yugoslav Front: nationalist and
royalist paramilitary Chetniks conducted a guerilla war against much the
stronger Communist-led Yugoslav Partisans, the latter heavily sponsored by the
Allied powers, in the last two years of war. South America. During the 1970s,
the right-wing military juntas of South America implemented Operation Condor, a
campaign of political repression involving assassinations and other
intelligence operations. The campaign was aimed at eradicating alleged
communist and socialist influences in their respective countries, and control
opposition against the government, which resulted in a large number of deaths.
Participatory governments include Argentina, Bolivia, Brazil, Chile, Paraguay
and Uruguay, with limited support from the United States. South Korea. Choi ji-
ryong is an outspoken anti-communist cartoonist in South Korea. His editorial
cartoons have been critical of Korean Presidents Kim Dae-jung and Roh Moo Hyun.
United States. The first major manifestation of anti-communism in the United
States occurred in 1919 and 1920, during the First Red Scare, led by Attorney
General Alexander Mitchell Palmer. During the Red Scare, the Lusk Committee
investigated those suspected of sedition, and many laws were passed in the US
that sanctioned the firings of Communists. First came the Hatch Act of 1939
which was sponsored by Carl Hatch of New Mexico. This law attempted to drive
Communism out of public work places. The Hatch Act outlawed the hiring of
federal workers who advocated the "overthrow of our Constitutional form of
government". This phrase was specifically directed at the Communist Party.
Later in the spring of 1941 another anti-communist law, Public Law 135, was
passed. This law sanctioned the investigation of any federal worker suspected
of being communist and the firing of any communist worker. Following World War
II and the rise of the Soviet Union, many anti-communists in the United States
feared that Communism would triumph throughout the entire world and eventually
be a direct threat to the US government. This fear led to the domino theory,
which stated that a Communist takeover in any nation could not be tolerated
because it would lead to a chain reaction that would result in worldwide
Communism. There were fears that powerful Communist states such as the Soviet
Union and the People's Republic of China were using their power to forcibly
assimilate other countries into Communist rule. The Soviet Union's expansion
into central Europe after World War II was seen as evidence of this. The US
policy of halting further Communist expansion came to be known as containment.
This period, up to 1957, is known as the Second Red Scare. The deepening of the
Cold War in the 1950s saw a dramatic increase in anti-communism in the United
States, including the anti-communist campaign known as McCarthyism. Thousands
of Americans, such as the filmmaker Charlie Chaplin, were accused of being
Communists or sympathizers, and many became the subject of aggressive
investigations by government committees such as the House Committee on Un-
American Activities. As a result of sometimes vastly exaggerated accusations,
many of the accused lost their jobs and became blacklisted, although most of
these verdicts were later overturned. This was also the period of the McCarran
Internal Security Act and the Julius and Ethel Rosenberg trial. After the
collapse of the Soviet Union many records were made public that in fact
verified that many of those thought to be falsely accused for political
purposes were in fact Communist spies or sympathizers (see Venona Project).
During the 1980s, the Ronald Reagan administration pursued an aggressive policy
against the Soviet Union and its allies by building up weapons programs,
including the Strategic Defense Initiative. The Reagan Doctrine was implemented
to reduce the influence of the Soviet Union worldwide by providing aid to anti-
Soviet resistance movements, including the Contras in Nicaragua and the
Mujahideens in Afghanistan. The accidental downing of Korean Air Lines Flight
007 near Moneron Island by the Soviets on Sept. 1, 1983 contributed to the
anti-communism sentiment of the 1980s. KAL 007 had been carrying 269 people,
including a sitting U.S. Congressman, Larry McDonald. The US government usually
argued its anti-communist policies by citing the human rights record of
communist states, most notably the Soviet Union during the Joseph Stalin era,
Maoist China, North Korea, and the Pol Pot-led Khmer Rouge government and the
pro-Hanoi People's Republic of Kampuchea in Cambodia. During the 1980s, the
Kirkpatrick Doctrine was particularly influential in American politics; it
advocated US support of anti-communist governments around the world, including
authoritarian regimes. In support of the Reagan Doctrine and other anti-
communist foreign and defense policies, prominent U.S. and Western anti-
communists warned that the U.S. needed to avoid repeating the West's perceived
mistakes of appeasement of Nazi Germany. In one of the most prominent anti-
communist speeches of any U.S. President, Reagan labeled the Soviet Union an
"evil empire" and anti-communist intellectuals prominently defended the label.
In 1987, for instance, in commemoration of the 70th anniversary of the 1917
Bolshevik Revolution, Michael Johns of the Heritage Foundation cited 208
perceived acts of evil by the Soviets since the revolution. Anti-communism
became significantly muted after the fall of the Soviet Union and Eastern bloc
Communist governments in Europe between 1989 and 1991; the fear of a worldwide
Communist takeover was no longer a serious concern. Remnants of anti-communism
remain, however, in US foreign policy toward Cuba and North Korea. In the case
of Cuba, the US continues to maintain economic sanctions against the country.
Tensions with North Korea have heightened as the result of reports that it is
stockpiling nuclear weapons, and the assertion that it is willing to sell its
nuclear weapons and ballistic missile technology to any group willing to pay a
high enough price. Much of the US foreign policy establishment does not regard
the People's Republic of China as communist in any meaningful sense. Vietnam.
In Vietnam, anti-communist movements, including those from pro-democracy and
pro-human rights groups, had largely been limited before the advent of the
Internet. This was due to repression of dissidents as well as the Vietnamese
government's efforts in censorship and propaganda regarding foreign and
domestic policies, including examination of personal mails (especially those
sent from overseas), and a heavy censorship of foreign media broadcasts. Prior
to the arrival of the Internet, much of the global anti-communist activities
directed towards Vietnam were religious in nature. Clerical North American and
European organizations voiced concerns about religious oppressions. Of
particular robustness were the organizations of Monsignor Tran Van Hoai, the
first Director of the Vatican's Center of Pastoral Apostolate for Overseas
Vietnamese. In recent years, there have been many Vietnamese bloggers who, with
the aid of the World Wide Web, have disseminated information critical of Ho Chi
Minh and the Vietnamese government's relations with the People's Republic of
China, the most controversial of which are deals struck between the two
communist countries' leaders, such as territorial claims of islands in the
South China Sea. These have sparked intense nationalism and led to much outrage
felt even on the part of many Vietnamese themselves. The culmination of the
sentiments can be seen in many recent protests held in both former North
Vietnam's capital Hanoi and former South Vietnam's capital Saigon. Frequent
arrests of some democracy advocates by the government have also led to activism
among many Vietnamese who demand a release of all political dissidents as well
as greater clarity in their trials. Recently, there have also been protests
against the government blocking access to free networking and blogging services
such as Facebook, Wordpress, as well as calls for a unified effort in
boycotting government sanctioned blogging services like the so-called "Yahoo!
Việt Nam 360plus". Anti-Communist organizations that are located outside
Vietnam but also hold demonstrations in Vietnam are Khmers Kampuchea-Krom
Federation, Viet Tan, People's Action Party of Vietnam, Government of Free
Vietnam, Montagnard Foundation, Inc., Vietnamese Constitutional Monarchist
League and Nationalist Party of Greater Vietnam.
