Anti-capitalism Anti-capitalism describes a wide variety of movements, ideas,
and attitudes that oppose capitalism. Anti-capitalists, in the strict sense of
the word, are those who wish to completely replace capitalism with another
system. Conservatism and traditionalism. There are strands of conservatism that
are uncomfortable with liberal capitalism. Particularly in continental Europe,
many conservatives have been uncomfortable with the impact of capitalism upon
culture and traditions. The conservative opposition to the Renaissance, the
Enlightenment, the American Revolution, the French Revolution, and especially
the development of individualistic liberalism as a political theory and as
institutionalized social practices sought to retain traditional social
hierarchies, practices and institutions. There is also a conservative
protectionist opposition to certain types of international capitalism.
Paleoconservatives and other traditionalist ideologies are often in opposition
to capitalist ethics and the effects they have on society as a whole, which
they see as infringing upon or decaying social traditions or hierarchies that
are essential for social order. Some of these ideas are intertwined with
religious communism. More nationalist-oriented groups believe that aspects of
capitalism, such as free trade infringe upon national sovereignty, that
domestic industries and national traditions must be safeguarded, and that
preserving this is of greater importance than profit for business. Ecofeminism.
Ecofeminists criticise capitalism for defining the natural world as simply a
body of resources to be exploited and reshaped to serve human purposes and
interests. They also see it as inherently sapping the relationship between
humans to one another and to the natural world. Ecofeminists see capitalism as
a patriarchal construction "based on the colonization of women, nature, and
other peoples." Fascism. Fascism has mixed stances on capitalism; while
supportive of private property rights, fascism upholds statism and corporatism
and is hostile to the concepts of laissez-faire capitalism, free market
systems, free trade, economic individualism, consumerism, and bourgeois
culture. Like Marxists, fascists maintain that class conflict is a feature
inherent in capitalist societies and seek to remedy it by government means.
Participatory economics and inclusive democracy. Participatory economics, often
abbreviated as Parecon, is a proposed economic system that uses participatory
decision making as an economic mechanism to guide the production, consumption
and allocation of resources in a given society. Proposed as an alternative to
contemporary capitalist market economies and also an alternative to centrally
planned socialism, it is described as "an anarchistic economic vision",
although it could be considered a form of socialism as under Parecon, the means
of production are owned by the working class. It emerged from the work of
activist and political theorist Michael Albert and that of radical economist
Robin Hahnel, beginning in the 1980s and 1990s. Inclusive Democracy as
envisaged by Takis Fotopoulos, is a form of direct democracy. It is a political
theory and political project that aims for direct democracy in all fields of
social life: political democracy in the form of face-to-face assemblies which
are confederated, economic democracy in a stateless, moneyless and marketless
economy, democracy in the social realm, i.e., self-management in places of work
and education, and ecological democracy which aims to reintegrate society and
nature. Here, all decisions are taken by the Demos, and basic economic needs
could be met for all based upon a certain amount of work. Additional non-
necessary items could be earned by contributing above the minimum required to
meet society's basic needs. This approach is markedly anti-capitalist as well
as anti-market, including an absence of ability to accumulate wealth, where
each person earns for himself only, thereby avoiding the imbalance of power
inherent in a capitalist system. Religion. The Catholic Church forbids usury,
but with the Reformation and its revolt against Papal dogmatic teaching and
then the Enlightenment and its rejection of Papal moral teaching, "Christian
Europe" over time accepted some forms of interest-charging, allowing for some
societal changes after feudalism was replaced by other forms of government.
Christianity has been the source of many criticisms of capitalism, particularly
its materialist aspects. Many early and pre-socialist movements as well as
later ones drew principles from the Gospels (see Christian socialism and the
Social Gospel movement) and against the "values" of profiteering, greed,
selfishness and hoarding. However many Conservative Christians in the US are in
favour of capitalism in opposition to secular socialism. Islam forbids lending
money at interest, the mode of operation of capitalist finance; however Islamic
banks have developed ways to make a profit in transactions that are
traditionally arranged using interest. These include profit sharing
(Mudharabah), safekeeping (Wadiah), joint venture (Musharakah), cost plus
(Murabahah), and leasing (Ijarah). Socialism. Socialism includes various
theories of economic organization that advocate public or direct worker
ownership and administration of the means of production and allocation of
resources, and a society characterized by equal access to resources for all
individuals, with an egalitarian method of compensation. Socialists argue for
cooperative/community or state control of the economy, or the "commanding
heights" of the economy, with democratic control by the people over the state,
although there have been some undemocratic philosophies. "State" or "worker
cooperative" ownership is in fundamental opposition to "private" ownership of
the means of production, which is the defining feature of capitalism. Most
socialists argue that capitalism unfairly concentrates power, wealth and
profit, among a small segment of society that controls capital and derives its
wealth through exploitation, stifling technological and economic progress by
maintaining an anarchy of production. Anarchism. Libertarian socialists argue
for a total abolition of the state, with most anarchists (including proponents
of left anarchism, social anarchism and anarchist communism) opposing
capitalism on the grounds that it entails social domination (through
inequalities of wealth), involuntary relations and coercive hierarchy (through
the perceived pressure on individuals to engage in wage labour). Some forms of
anarchism oppose capitalism as a whole while supporting some institutions
associated with capitalism, such as markets (supported by some mutualists) and
some even go as far as supporting private property (supported by some
individualist anarchists). Many anarchists will make the distinction between
decentralized currencies being a practical tool for exchange within a community
as opposed to capitalism as a politically enforced authoritarian system.
Communism. Communism, Marxism, and revolutionary socialism disagrees with
capitalism and economic liberalism on a fundamental basis, in that communism
advocates communal ownership over the means of production and economic
decision-making of a society, with the abolishment of private property and
government. Friedrich Engels, one of the founders of modern socialist theory,
advocated the creation of a society that allows for the widespread application
of modern technology to rationalise economic activity by eliminating the
anarchy in production of capitalism. Marxism argues for collective ownership of
the means of production, the elimination of the exploitation of labor, and the
eventual abolition of the state, with an intermediate stage, of indeterminate
length, in which the state will be used to eliminate the vestiges of
capitalism. Some Communist states claimed to have abolished capitalism,
although some Marxist theorists describe them as state capitalist, rather than
anti-capitalist. Anti-globalization movement. The anti-globalization movement
is a worldwide activist movement that is critical of the globalization of
capitalism. Anti-globalization activists are particularly critical of the
undemocratic nature of capitalist globalization and the promotion of
neoliberalism by international institutions such as the International Monetary
Fund (IMF) and the World Bank without much regard to the often devastating
effects of global capital on local conditions. Meetings of such bodies are
often met with strong protests.
