Refusal of work Refusal of work is behavior which refuses to adapt to regular
employment. As actual behavior, with or without a political or philosophical
program, it has been practiced by various subcultures and individuals. Radical
political positions have openly advocated refusal of work. From within Marxism
it has been advocated by Paul Lafargue and the Italian workerist/autonomists
(e.g. Antonio Negri, Mario Tronti), the French ultra-left (e.g. √âchanges et
Mouvement); and within anarchism (especially Bob Black and the post-left
anarchy tendency). Abolition of unfree labour. International human rights law
does not recognize the refusal of work or right not to work by itself except
the right to strike. However the Abolition of Forced Labour Convention adopted
by International Labour Organization in 1957 prohibits all forms of forced
labour. The concept of wage slavery. Wage slavery refers to a situation where a
person's livelihood depends on wages, especially when the dependence is total
and immediate. It is a negatively connoted term used to draw an analogy between
slavery and wage labor, and to highlight similarities between owning and
employing a person. The term 'wage slavery' has been used to criticize economic
exploitation and social stratification, with the former seen primarily as
unequal bargaining power between labor and capital (particularly when workers
are paid comparatively low wages, e.g. in sweatshops), and the latter as a lack
of workers' self-management (which criticizes the job choices that an economy
allows). Similarities between wage labor and slavery were noted at least as
early as Cicero. Before the American Civil War, Southern defenders of African
American slavery invoked the concept to favorably compare the condition of
their slaves to workers in the North. With the advent of the industrial
revolution, thinkers such as Proudhon and Marx elaborated the comparison
between wage labor and slavery in the context of a critique of property not
intended for active personal use. The introduction of wage labor in 18th
century Britain was met with resistance ‚Äì giving rise to the principles of
syndicalism. Historically, some labor organizations and individual social
activists, have espoused workers' self-management or worker cooperatives as
possible alternatives to wage labor. Political views. Marxist-related. Paul
Lafargue and "The Right to be Lazy". "The Right to be Lazy" is an essay by
Cuban-born French revolutionary Marxist Paul Lafargue, written from his prison
cell in 1883. The essay polemicizes heavily against then-contemporary liberal,
conservative, Christian and even socialist ideas of work. Lafargue criticizes
these ideas from a Marxist perspective as dogmatic and ultimately false by
portraying the degeneration and enslavement of human existence when being
subsumed under the primacy of the "right to work", and argues that laziness,
combined with human creativity, is an important source of human progress. He
manifests that "When, in our civilized Europe, we would find a trace of the
native beauty of man, we must go seek it in the nations where economic
prejudices have not yet uprooted the hatred of work...The Greeks in their era
of greatness had only contempt for work: their slaves alone were permitted to
labor: the free man knew only exercises for the body and mind...The
philosophers of antiquity taught contempt for work, that degradation of the
free man, the poets sang of idleness, that gift from the Gods." And so he says
"Proletarians, brutalized by the dogma of work, listen to the voice of these
philosophers, which has been concealed from you with jealous care: A citizen
who gives his labor for money degrades himself to the rank of slaves." (The
last sentence a quote from Cicero.) No irony was intended when Lafargue and his
wife Laura, Marx's daughter, stated their wishes not to be a burden, as part of
their reason for committing suicide in their farewell note. "I end my life
before pitiless old age ... can paralyse my energy and break my will, making me
a burden to myself and to others." Lafargue's refusal to work was a refusal to
permit others to live off the working class's labour, not a right to refuse to
contribute to society or the right to be kept by the work of others.
Situationist International. Raoul Vaneigem, important theorist of the post-
surrealist Situationist International which was influential in the May 68
events in France, wrote "The Book of Pleasures". In it he says that "You
reverse the perspective of power by returning to pleasure the energies stolen
by work and constraint...As sure as work kills pleasure, pleasure kills work.
If you are not resigned to dying of disgust, then you will be happy enough to
rid your life of the odious need to work, to give orders (and obey them), to
lose and to win, to keep up appearances, and to judge and be judged."
Autonomism. Autonomism ("autonomia"), as an identifiable theoretical system,
first emerged in Italy in the 1960s from workerist ("operaismo") communism.
Later, post-Marxist and anarchist tendencies became significant after influence
from the Situationists, the failure of the Italian far-left movements in the
1970s and the emergence of a number of important theorists including Antonio
Negri, who had contributed to the 1969 founding of "Potere Operaio" Marxist
group, Mario Tronti, Paolo Virno, etc. It influenced the German and Dutch
"Autonomen", the worldwide Social Centre movement, and today is influential in
Italy, France, and to a significantly lesser extent the English-speaking
countries. Those who describe themselves as autonomists now vary from Marxists
to post-structuralists and anarchists. Autonomist philosopher Bifo defines
refusal of work as not "so much the obvious fact that workers do not like to be
exploited, but something more. It means that the capitalist restructuring, the
technological change, and the general transformation of social institutions are
produced by the daily action of withdrawal from exploitation, of rejection of
the obligation to produce surplus value, and to increase the value of capital,
reducing the value of life." More simply he states "Refusal of work means...I
don‚Äôt want to go to work because I prefer to sleep. But this laziness is the
source of intelligence, of technology, of progress. Autonomy is the self-
regulation of the social body in its independence and in its interaction with
the disciplinary norm." As a social development Bifo remembers "that one of the
strong ideas of the movement of autonomy proletarians during the 70s was the
idea "precariousness is good". Job precariousness is a form of autonomy from
steady regular work, lasting an entire life. In the 1970s many people used to
work for a few months, then to go away for a journey, then back to work for a
while. This was possible in times of almost full employment and in times of
egalitarian culture. This situation allowed people to work in their own
interest and not in the interest of capitalists, but quite obviously this could
not last forever, and the neoliberal offensive of the 1980s was aimed to
reverse the rapport de force." As a response to these developments his view is
that "the dissemination of self-organized knowledge can create a social
framework containing infinite autonomous and self-reliant worlds." From this
possibility of self-determination even the notion of Workers' self-management
is seen as problematic since "Far from the emergence of proletarian power,
...this self-management as a moment of the self-harnessing of the workers to
capitalist production in the period of real subsumption... Mistaking the
individual capitalist (who, in real subsumption disappears into the collective
body of share ownership on one side, and hired management on the other) rather
than the enterprise as the problem, ... the workers themselves became a
collective capitalist, taking on responsibility for the exploitation of their
own labor. Thus, far from breaking with 'work'...the workers maintained the
practice of clocking-in, continued to organize themselves and the community
around the needs of the factory, paid themselves from profits arising from the
sale of watches, maintained determined relations between individual work done
and wage, and continued to wear their work shirts throughout the process." The
"Krisis" group. In the "Manifesto Against Labour", Krisis argues against the
traditional Marxist notion of class struggle as the motor of history. According
to Krisis, there is no class-subject. The struggle between the proletariat and
the bourgeoisie is not a struggle between a revolutionary class and its
oppressor, but rather a struggle between two opposed interests that are
integral to capitalism and form a single "labor camp". Contrary to traditional
Marxism, then, Krisis asserts that the struggle against capitalism is not the
struggle for the liberation "of" labor, but rather a struggle for liberation
"from" labor. Anarchism. "The Abolition of Work". "The Abolition of Work", Bob
Black's most widely read essay, draws upon the ideas of Charles Fourier,
William Morris, Herbert Marcuse, Paul Goodman, and Marshall Sahlins. In it he
argues for the abolition of the producer- and consumer-based society, where,
Black contends, all of life is devoted to the production and consumption of
commodities. Attacking Marxist state socialism as much as market capitalism,
Black argues that the only way for humans to be free is to reclaim their time
from jobs and employment, instead turning necessary subsistence tasks into free
play done voluntarily - an approach referred to as "ludic". The essay argues
that "no-one should ever work", because work - defined as compulsory productive
activity enforced by economic or political means - is the source of most of the
misery in the world. Black denounces work for its compulsion, and for the forms
it takes - as subordination to a boss, as a "job" which turns a potentially
enjoyable task into a meaningless chore, for the degradation imposed by systems
of work-discipline, and for the large number of work-related deaths and
injuries - which Black typifies as "homicide". He views the subordination
enacted in workplaces as "a mockery of freedom", and denounces as hypocrites
the various theorists who support freedom while supporting work. Subordination
in work, Black alleges, makes people stupid and creates fear of freedom.
Because of work, people become accustomed to rigidity and regularity, and do
not have the time for friendship or meaningful activity. Most workers, he
states, are dissatisfied with work (as evidenced by petty deviance on the job),
so that what he says should be uncontroversial; however, it is controversial
only because people are too close to the work-system to see its flaws. Play, in
contrast, is not necessarily rule-governed, and is performed voluntarily, in
complete freedom, as a gift economy. He points out that hunter-gatherer
societies are typified by play, a view he backs up with the work of Marshall
Sahlins; he recounts the rise of hierarchal societies, through which work is
cumulatively imposed, so that the compulsive work of today would seem
incomprehensibly oppressive even to ancients and medieval peasants. He responds
to the view that "work," if not simply effort or energy, is necessary to get
important but unpleasant tasks done, by claiming that first of all, most
important tasks can be rendered ludic, or "salvaged" by being turned into game-
like and craft-like activities, and secondly that the vast majority of work
does not need doing at all. The latter tasks are unnecessary because they only
serve functions of commerce and social control that exist only to maintain the
work-system as a whole. As for what is left, he advocates Charles Fourier's
approach of arranging activities so that people will want to do them. He is
also skeptical but open-minded about the possibility of eliminating work
through labor-saving technologies. He feels the left cannot go far enough in
its critiques because of its attachment to building its power on the category
of workers, which requires a valorization of work. Anti-work. The anti-work
ethic states that labor tends to cause unhappiness, therefore, the quantity of
labor ought to be lessened. The ethic appeared in anarchist circles and to have
come to prominence with essays such as "In Praise of Idleness and Other Essays"
by Bertrand Russell, "The Right to Useful Unemployment" by Ivan Illich, and
"The Abolition of Work" by Bob Black, published in 1985. Friedrich Nietzsche
was a notable philosopher who presented a critique of work and an anti-work
ethic. In 1881, he wrote: The followers of this ethic typically argue that
capitalist and communist societies tend to encourage a "labor" mentality
towards life either directly or indirectly through the cost of living, labor
markets, the work week, applying normative values to economics, and social
conventions. The critics then ask why with increasing mechanization the number
of hours in the average work week have not fallen significantly; for example,
Bob Black asks, "Why hasn't the average work week gone down by more than a few
minutes in the past fifty years?" The devotees of the anti-work movement
therefore attempt to find answers and practical solutions towards reducing the
volume of work for a typical person and encouraging the activities they see as
conducive to happiness. "The Idler". "The Idler" is a bi-yearly British
magazine devoted to promoting its ethos of 'idle living' and all that entails.
It was founded in 1993 by Tom Hodgkinson and Gavin Pretor-Pinney with the
intention of exploring alternative ways of working and living. Work‚Äìlife
balance. Work‚Äìlife balance is a broad concept including proper prioritizing
between "work" (career and ambition) on one hand and "life" (Health, pleasure,
leisure, family and spiritual development) on the other. Related, though
broader, terms include "lifestyle balance" and "life balance". The expression
was first used in the late 1970s to describe the balance between an
individual's work and personal life. In the United States, this phrase was
first used in 1986. Refusal of work in practice. "Slackers". The term slacker
is commonly used to refer to a person who avoids work (especially British
English), or (primarily in North American English) an educated person who is
viewed as an underachiever. While use of the term "slacker" dates back to about
1790 or 1898 depending on the source, it gained some recognition during the
British Gezira Scheme, when Sudanese labourers protested their relative
powerlessness by working lethargically, a form of protest known as 'slacking'.
The term achieved a boost in popularity after its use in the films "Back to the
Future" by Robert Zemeckis, and Richard Linklater's "Slacker". NEET. NEET is an
acronym for the government classification for people currently "Not in
Employment, Education or Training". It was first used in the United Kingdom but
its use has spread to other countries, including Japan, China, and South Korea.
In the United Kingdom, the classification comprises people aged between 16 and
24 (some 16 year olds are still of compulsory school age). In Japan, the
classification comprises people aged between 15 and 34 who are unemployed,
unmarried, not enrolled in school or engaged in housework, and not seeking work
or the technical training needed for work. The "NEET group" is not a uniform
set of individuals but consists of those who will be NEET for a short time
while essentially testing out a variety of opportunities and those who have
major and often multiple issues and are at long term risk of remaining
disengaged. "Freeters" and parasite singles. The word "freeter" or "freeta" was
first used around 1987 or 1988 and is thought to be an amalgamation of the
English word "free" (or perhaps "freelance") and the German word "Arbeiter"
("worker"). (The German word "Arbeit" is commonly used as the Japanese loanword
"arubaito" for "part-time job".) It is said that the use was coined by the
Japanese part-time job magazine "From A" (Japanese: „Éï„É≠„É „Ç®„Éº
"Furomuƒì"). Other possible spellings are "furƒ´tƒÅ", "furiita", "freeta",
"furiitaa", or "furitaa" in order of frequency. Parasite single
(„Éë„É©„Çµ„Ç§„Éà„Ç∑„É≥„Ç∞„É´, "parasaito shinguru") is a Japanese term for a
single person who lives with their parents until their late twenties or early
thirties in order to enjoy a carefree and comfortable life. In English, the
expression "sponge" or "basement dweller" may sometimes be used. The expression
is mainly used in reference to Japanese society, but similar phenomena can also
be found in other countries worldwide. In Italy, 30-something singles still
relying on their mothers are joked about, being called "Bamboccioni"
(literally: grown-up babies) and in Germany they are known as "Nesthocker"
(German for an "altricial" bird), who are still living at "Hotel Mama". Such
behaviour is considered normal in Greece, both because of the traditional
strong family ties and because of the low wages. The low income even for highly
qualified university graduates does not allow young Greeks to start their own
home and raise children. It is also highly encouraged in Singapore as living
with parents is considered a cultural expectation, while living on one's own
(sometimes even if one is married with children) is perceived as an act of
insolence. Vagrancy. A vagrant is a person in a situation of poverty, who
wanders from place to place without a home or regular employment or income.
Many towns in the developed world have shelters for vagrants. Common
terminology is a tramp or a 'gentleman of the road'. Vagrancy was a crime in
some European countries, but most of these laws have been abandoned. Laws
against vagrancy in the United States have partly been invalidated as violative
of the due process clauses of the U.S. Constitution. However, the FBI report on
crime in the United States for 2005 lists 24,359 vagrancy violations. In legal
terminology, a person with a source of income is not a vagrant, even if he/she
is homeless. Cynic philosophical school. Cynicism (), in its original form,
refers to the beliefs of an ancient school of Greek philosophers known as the
Cynics (, ). Their philosophy was that the purpose of life was to live a life
of Virtue in agreement with Nature. This meant rejecting all conventional
desires for wealth, power, health, and fame, and by living a simple life free
from all possessions. They believed that the world belonged equally to
everyone, and that suffering was caused by false judgments of what was valuable
and by the worthless customs and conventions which surrounded society. The
first philosopher to outline these themes was Antisthenes, who had been a pupil
of Socrates in the late 5th century BCE. He was followed by Diogenes of Sinope,
who lived in a tub on the streets of Athens. Diogenes took Cynicism to its
logical extremes, and came to be seen as the archetypal Cynic philosopher. He
was followed by Crates of Thebes who gave away a large fortune so he could live
a life of Cynic poverty in Athens. Cynicism spread with the rise of Imperial
Rome in the 1st century, and Cynics could be found begging and preaching
throughout the cities of the Empire. It finally disappeared in the late 5th
century, although many of its ascetic and rhetorical ideas were adopted by
early Christianity. The name Cynic derives from the Greek word Œ∫œÖŒΩŒπŒ∫œåœÇ,
"kynikos", "dog-like" and that from Œ∫œçœâŒΩ, "ky√¥n", "dog" (genitive:
"kynos"). It seems certain that the word "dog" was also thrown at the first
Cynics as an insult for their shameless rejection of conventional manners, and
their decision to live on the streets. Diogenes, in particular, was referred to
as "the Dog". "Sadhus". In Hinduism, sadhu is a common term for a mystic, an
ascetic, practitioner of yoga ("yogi") and/or wandering monks. The sadhu is
solely dedicated to achieving the fourth and final Hindu goal of life, moksha
(liberation), through meditation and contemplation of Brahman. Sadhus often
wear ochre-colored clothing, symbolizing renunciation. "Hobos", "tramps" and
"bums". A hobo is a migratory worker or homeless vagabond, often penniless. The
term originated in the western‚Äîprobably northwestern‚ÄîUnited States during
the last decade of the 19th century. Unlike tramps, who worked only when they
were forced to, and bums, who didn't work at all, hobos were workers who
wandered. In British English and traditional American English usage, a tramp is
a long term homeless person who travels from place to place as an itinerant
vagrant, traditionally walking or hiking all year round. Both terms, "tramp"
and "hobo" (and the distinction between them), were in common use between the
1880s and the 1940s. Their populations and the usage of the terms increased
during the Great Depression. Like "hobo" and "bum," the word "tramp" is
considered vulgar in American English usage, having been subsumed in more
polite contexts by words such as "homeless person" or "vagrant." In colloquial
American English, the word "tramp" can also mean a sexually promiscuous female
or even prostitute. Tramps used to be known euphemistically in England and
Wales as "gentlemen of the road." Tramp is derived from the Middle English as a
verb meaning to "walk with heavy footsteps", and to go hiking. Bart Kennedy, a
self-described tramp of 1900 America, once said "I listen to the tramp, tramp
of my feet, and wonder where I was going, and why I was going." "Gutter punks".
A gutter punk is a homeless or transient individual, often through means of
freighthopping or hitchhiking. Gutter punks are often juveniles who are in some
way associated with the anarcho-punk subculture and physical traits including
unkempt dreadlocks, nose rings, or mohawk hairstyles. In certain regions,
gutter punks are notorious for panhandling and often display cardboard signs
that make statements about their lifestyles. Gutter punks are generally
characterized as being voluntarily unemployed. As such, "gutter punk" is a term
that is generally only applied to able-bodied individuals with no signs of
physical or mental disabilities. The term has also been used as in the field of
social science to describe a specific demographic group. Gutter punks often do
seek work; however, they often search for or are limited to short-term
employment. Other innovative methods of procuring income, such as panhandling,
are generally considered "last resorts" but are often used due to the average
gutter punk's difficulties in finding stable employment. Those associated with
the gutter punk way of life generally do not ascribe to the crust punk
ideology, however, due to its name crust punk is often confused with gutter
punk. Gutter punks tend not to involve themselves with peace, autonomy,
veganism or other activist ideals promoted in the crust punk or peace punk
scenes.
