Anti-nuclear movement in the United States The anti-nuclear movement in the
United States consists of more than 80 anti-nuclear groups that oppose nuclear
power, nuclear weapons, or both. These include the Abalone Alliance, Clamshell
Alliance, Institute for Energy and Environmental Research, Nuclear Information
and Resource Service, and Physicians for Social Responsibility. The anti-
nuclear movement has delayed construction or halted commitments to build some
new nuclear plants, and has pressured the Nuclear Regulatory Commission to
enforce and strengthen the safety regulations for nuclear power plants. Anti-
nuclear protests reached a peak in the 1970s and 1980s and grew out of the
environmental movement. Campaigns that captured national public attention
involved the Calvert Cliffs Nuclear Power Plant, Seabrook Station Nuclear Power
Plant, Diablo Canyon Power Plant, Shoreham Nuclear Power Plant, and Three Mile
Island. On June 12, 1982, one million people demonstrated in New York City's
Central Park against nuclear weapons and for an end to the cold war arms race.
It was the largest anti-nuclear protest and the largest political demonstration
in American history. International Day of Nuclear Disarmament protests were
held on June 20, 1983 at 50 sites across the United States. There were many
Nevada Desert Experience protests and peace camps at the Nevada Test Site
during the 1980s and 1990s. More recent campaigning by anti-nuclear groups has
related to several nuclear power plants including the Enrico Fermi Nuclear
Power Plant, Indian Point Energy Center, Oyster Creek Nuclear Generating
Station, Pilgrim Nuclear Generating Station, Salem Nuclear Power Plant, and
Vermont Yankee Nuclear Power Plant. There have also been campaigns relating to
the Y-12 Nuclear Weapons Plant, the Idaho National Laboratory, Yucca Mountain
nuclear waste repository proposal, the Hanford Site, the Nevada Test Site,
Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory, and transportation of nuclear waste
from the Los Alamos National Laboratory. Some scientists and engineers have
expressed reservations about nuclear power, including: Barry Commoner, S. David
Freeman, John Gofman, Arnold Gundersen, Mark Z. Jacobson, Amory Lovins, Arjun
Makhijani, Gregory Minor, M.V. Ramana, Joseph Romm and Benjamin K. Sovacool.
Scientists who have opposed nuclear weapons include Hermann Joseph Muller,
Linus Pauling, Eugene Rabinowitch, M.V. Ramana and Frank N. von Hippel.
Emergence of the movement. Emergence of the anti-nuclear weapons movement. The
nuclear debate initially was about nuclear weapons policy, and began within the
scientific community. Scientific concern about the adverse health effects
arising from atmospheric nuclear weapons testing first emerged in 1954.
Professional associations such as the Federation of Atomic Scientists and the
Pugwash Conference on Science and World Affairs were involved. The National
Committee for a Sane Nuclear Policy was formed in November 1957, and surveys
showed rising public uneasiness about the nuclear arms race---especially
atmospheric nuclear weapons tests that sent radioactive fallout around the
globe. In 1962, Linus Pauling won the Nobel Peace Prize for his work to stop
the atmospheric testing of nuclear weapons, and the "Ban the Bomb" movement
spread throughout the United States. Between 1945 and 1992, the United States
maintained a program of vigorous nuclear weapons testing. A total of 1,054
nuclear tests and two nuclear attacks were conducted, with over 900 of them at
the Nevada Test Site, and ten on miscellaneous sites in the United States
(Alaska, Colorado, Mississippi, and New Mexico). Until November 1962, the vast
majority of the U.S. tests were above-ground; after the acceptance of the
Partial Test Ban Treaty all testing was relegated underground, in order to
prevent the dispersion of nuclear fallout. The U.S. program of atmospheric
nuclear testing exposed some people to the hazards of fallout. Since the
Radiation Exposure Compensation Act of 1990, more than $1.38 billion in
compensation has been approved. The money is going to people who took part in
the tests, notably at the Nevada Test Site, and to others exposed to the
radiation. Emergence of the anti-nuclear power movement. Unexpectedly high
costs in the nuclear weapons program created "...pressure on federal officials
to develop a civilian nuclear power industry that could help justify the
government's considerable expenditures." The Atomic Energy Act of 1954
encouraged private corporations to build nuclear reactors and a significant
learning phase followed with many early partial core meltdowns and accidents at
experimental reactors and research facilities. This led to the introduction of
the Price-Anderson Act in 1957, which was, "...an implicit admission that
nuclear power provided risks that producers were unwilling to assume without
federal backing." The Price-Anderson Act "...shields nuclear utilities, vendors
and suppliers against liability claims in the event of a catastrophic accident
by imposing an upper limit on private sector liability." Without such
protection, private companies were unwilling to become involved. No other
technology in the history of American industry has enjoyed such continuing
blanket protection. The first U.S. reactor to face public opposition was Fermi
1 in 1957. It was built approximately 30 miles from Detroit and there was
opposition from the United Auto Workers Union. Pacific Gas & Electric planned
to build the first commercially viable nuclear power plant in the USA at Bodega
Bay, north of San Francisco. The proposal was controversial and conflict with
local citizens began in 1958. The proposed plant site was close to the San
Andreas fault and the region's environmentally sensitive fishing and dairy
industries. The Sierra Club became actively involved in the controversy. The
conflict ended in 1964, with the forced abandonment of plans for the Bodega Bay
power plant. Historian Thomas Wellock traces the birth of the anti-nuclear
movement in the United States to the controversy over Bodega Bay. Attempts to
build a nuclear power plant in Malibu were similar to those at Bodega Bay and
were also abandoned. Nuclear accidents continued into the 1960s with a small
test reactor exploding at the Stationary Low-Power Reactor Number One in Idaho
Falls in January 1961 and a partial meltdown at the Enrico Fermi Nuclear
Generating Station in Michigan in 1966. In his 1963 book "Change, Hope and the
Bomb", David E. Lilienthal criticized nuclear developments, particularly the
nuclear industry's failure to address the nuclear waste question. He argued
that it would be "...particularly irresponsible to go ahead with the
construction of full scale nuclear power plants without a safe method of
nuclear waste disposal having been demonstrated." However, Lilienthal stopped
short of a blanket rejection of nuclear power. His view was that a more
cautious approach was necessary. Samuel Walker, in his book "", explains that
the growth of the nuclear industry in the U.S. occurred as the environmental
movement was being formed. Environmentalists saw the advantages of nuclear
power in reducing air pollution, but became critical of nuclear technology on
other grounds. The view that nuclear power was better for the environment than
conventional fuels was partially undermined in the late 1960s when major
controversy erupted over the effects of waste heat from nuclear plants on water
quality. The nuclear industry "...gradually and reluctantly took action to
reduce thermal pollution by building cooling towers or ponds for plants on
inland waterways." Another concern was the effect of radiation emissions from
nuclear plants. Several scientists, including John Gofman and Arthur Tamplin,
challenged the prevailing view that the small amounts of radiation released by
nuclear power plants during normal operation were not a problem. They argued
"...that the routine releases were a severe threat to public health and could
cause tens of thousands of deaths from cancer each year." Exchange of views
about radiation risks caused uneasiness about nuclear power, especially among
those unable to evaluate the conflicting claims. Another issue was reactor
safety. The large size of nuclear plants ordered during the late 1960s raised
new safety questions and created fears of a severe reactor accident that would
send large quantities of radiation into the environment. In the early 1970s, a
highly contentious debate over the performance of emergency core cooling
systems in nuclear plants, designed to prevent a core meltdown that could lead
to the "China syndrome", received coverage in the popular media and technical
journals. The emergency core cooling systems controversy opened up the question
of whether the AECs first priority was promotion of the nuclear industry or
protection of public health and safety. By the early 1970s, anti-nuclear
activity had increased dramatically in conjunction with concerns about nuclear
safety and criticisms of a policy-making process that allowed little voice for
these concerns. Initially scattered and organized at the local level,
opposition to nuclear power became a national movement by the mid-1970s when
such groups as the Sierra Club, Friends of the Earth, Natural Resources Defense
Council, Union of Concerned Scientists, and Critical Mass became involved. With
the rise of environmentalism in the 1970s, the anti-nuclear movement grew
substantially: In 1975-76, ballot initiatives to control or halt the growth of
nuclear power were introduced in eight western states. Although they enjoyed
little success at the polls, the controls they sought to impose were sometimes
adopted in part by state legislature, most notably in California. Interventions
in plant licensing proceedings increased, often focusing on technical issues
related to safety. This widespread popular ferment kept the issue before the
public and contributed to growing public skepticism about nuclear power. John
Byrne and Steven M. Hoffman (1996). "Governing the Atom: The Politics of Risk",
Transaction Publishers, p. 219. Many technologies and materials associated with
the creation of a nuclear power program have a dual-use capability, in that
they can be used to make nuclear weapons if a country chooses to do so. In 1975
over 2,000 prominent scientists signed a Declaration on Nuclear Power, prepared
by the Union of Concerned Scientists, warning of the dangers of nuclear
proliferation and urging the President and Congress to suspend the exportation
of nuclear power to other countries, and reduce domestic construction until
major problems were resolved. Theodore Taylor, a former nuclear weapons
designer, explained, "...the ease with which nuclear bombs could be
manufactured if fissionable material was available." In 1976, four nuclear
engineers---three from GE and one from the Nuclear Regulatory Commission-
—resigned, stating that nuclear power was not as safe as their superiors were
claiming. These men were engineers who had spent most of their working life
building reactors, and their defection galvanized anti-nuclear groups across
the country. They testified to the Joint Committee on Atomic Energy that: Mark
Hertsgaard (1983). "Nuclear Inc. The Men and Money Behind Nuclear Energy",
Pantheon Books, New York, p. 72. These issues, together with a series of other
environmental, technical, and public health questions, made nuclear power the
source of acute controversy. Public support, which was strong in the early
1960s, had been shaken. "Forbes", in the September 1975 issue, reported that
"the anti-nuclear coalition has been remarkably successful ... has certainly
slowed the expansion of nuclear power." By the mid-1970s anti-nuclear activism,
fueled by dissenting experts, had moved beyond local protests and politics to
gain a wider appeal and influence. Although it lacked a single coordinating
organization, and did not have uniform goals, it emerged as a movement sharply
focused on opposing nuclear power, and the movement's efforts gained a great
deal of national attention. On March 28, 1979, equipment failures and operator
error contributed to loss of coolant and a partial core meltdown at the Three
Mile Island Nuclear Power Plant in Pennsylvania. The World Nuclear Association
has stated that cleanup of the damaged nuclear reactor system at TMI-2 took
nearly 12 years and cost approximately US $973 million. Benjamin K. Sovacool,
in his 2007 preliminary assessment of major energy accidents, estimated that
the TMI accident caused a total of $2.4 billion in property damages. The health
effects of the Three Mile Island accident are widely, but not universally,
agreed to be very low level. The accident triggered protests around the world.
The 1979 Three Mile Island accident inspired Perrow's book "Normal Accidents",
where a nuclear accident occurs, resulting from an unanticipated interaction of
multiple failures in a complex system. TMI was an example of a normal accident
because it was "...unexpected, incomprehensible, uncontrollable and
unavoidable."  Complexity of nuclear power. Nuclear power plants are a complex
energy system. and opponents of nuclear power have criticized the
sophistication and complexity of the technology. Helen Caldicott has said: "...
in essence, a nuclear reactor is just a very sophisticated and dangerous way to
boil water -- analogous to cutting a pound of butter with a chain saw." These
critics of nuclear power advocate the use of energy conservation, efficient
energy use, and appropriate renewable energy technologies to create our energy
future. Amory Lovins, from the Rocky Mountain Institute, has argued that
centralized electricity systems with giant power plants are becoming obsolete.
In their place are emerging "distributed resources"—smaller, decentralized
electricity supply sources (including efficiency) that are cheaper, cleaner,
less risky, more flexible, and quicker to deploy. Such technologies are often
called "soft energy technologies" and Lovins viewed their impacts as more
gentle, pleasant, and manageable than hard energy technologies such as nuclear
power. Nuclear energy systems have a long stay time. The completion of the
sequence of activities related to one commercial nuclear power station, from
the start of construction through the safe disposal of its last radioactive
waste, may take 100–150 years. Anti-nuclear protests. On November 1, 1961, at
the height of the Cold War, about 50,000 women brought together by Women Strike
for Peace marched in 60 cities in the United States to demonstrate against
nuclear weapons. It was the largest national women's peace protest of the 20th
century. There were many anti-nuclear protests in the United States which
captured national public attention during the 1970s and 1980s. These included
the well-known Clamshell Alliance protests at Seabrook Station Nuclear Power
Plant and the Abalone Alliance protests at Diablo Canyon Nuclear Power Plant,
where thousands of protesters were arrested. Other large protests followed the
1979 Three Mile Island accident. A large anti-nuclear demonstration was held in
May 1979 in Washington D.C., when 65,000 people including the Governor of
California, attended a march and rally against nuclear power. In New York City
on September 23, 1979, almost 200,000 people attended a protest against nuclear
power. Anti-nuclear power protests preceded the shutdown of the Shoreham,
Yankee Rowe, Millstone I, Rancho Seco, Maine Yankee, and about a dozen other
nuclear power plants. On June 3, 1981, Thomas launched the White House Peace
Vigil in Washington, D.C.. He was later joined on the vigil by anti-nuclear
activists Concepcion Picciotto and Ellen Benjamin. On June 12, 1982, one
million people demonstrated in New York City's Central Park against nuclear
weapons and for an end to the cold war arms race. It was the largest anti-
nuclear protest and the largest political demonstration in American history.
International Day of Nuclear Disarmament protests were held on June 20, 1983 at
50 sites across the United States. In 1986, hundreds of people walked from Los
Angeles to Washington DC in the Great Peace March for Global Nuclear
Disarmament. There were many Nevada Desert Experience protests and peace camps
at the Nevada Test Site during the 1980s and 1990s. In the 1980s, when fewer
nuclear power plants remained in the construction and licensing pipeline, and
interest in energy policy as a national issue declined, many anti-nuclear
activists switched their focus to nuclear weapons and the arms race. There has
also been an "institutionalization" of the anti-nuclear movement, where the
anti-nuclear movement carried its contests into less visible, and more
specialized institutional areas, such as regulatory and licensing hearings, and
legal challenges. At the state level, anti-nuclear groups were also successful
in placing several anti-nuclear referendums on the ballot. On May 1, 2005,
40,000 anti-nuclear/anti-war protesters marched past the United Nations in New
York, 60 years after the atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki. This was
the largest anti-nuclear rally in the U.S. for several decades. In 2008, 2009,
and 2010, there have been protests about, and campaigns against, several new
nuclear reactor proposals in the United States. There is an annual protest
against U.S. nuclear weapons research at Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory
in California and in the 2007 protest, 64 people were arrested. There have been
a series of protests at the Nevada Test Site and in the April 2007 Nevada
Desert Experience protest, 39 people were cited by police. There have been
anti-nuclear protests at Naval Base Kitsap for many years, and several in 2008.
Also in 2008 and 2009, there have been protests about several proposed nuclear
reactors. Specific groups. Some of the most influential groups in the anti-
nuclear movement have had members who were elite scientists, including several
Nobel Laureates and many nuclear physicists. In the United States, these
scientists have belonged primarily to three groups: the Union of Concerned
Scientists, the Federation of American Scientists, and the Committee for
Nuclear Responsibility. Many religious groups in America have a strong record
of opposing nuclear weapons. Rejecting the development and use of nuclear
weapons is "...one of the most widely shared convictions across faith
traditions". In the 1980s religious groups organized anti-nuclear marches
involving hundreds of thousands of people, and specific groups involved
included the American Catholic Bishops, the Southern Baptist Convention, and
the Episcopal Church. The Protestant, Catholic, and Jewish communities
published explicitly anti-nuclear statements, and Muslims also began to speak
out against nuclear weapons in 2000. The platform adopted by the delegates of
the Green Party (United States) at their annual Green Congress May 26–28,
2000, reflecting the majority views of the membership, included the creation of
self-reproducing, renewable energy systems and use of federal investments,
purchasing, mandates, and incentives to shut down nuclear power plants and
phase out fossil fuels. Recent campaigning by anti-nuclear groups has related
to several nuclear power plants including the Enrico Fermi Nuclear Power Plant,
Indian Point Energy Center, Oyster Creek Nuclear Generating Station, Pilgrim
Nuclear Generating Station, Salem Nuclear Power Plant, and Vermont Yankee
Nuclear Power Plant. There have also been campaigns relating to the Y-12
Nuclear Weapons Plant, the Idaho National Laboratory, proposed Yucca Mountain
nuclear waste repository, the Hanford Site, the Nevada Test Site, Lawrence
Livermore National Laboratory, and transportation of nuclear waste from the Los
Alamos National Laboratory. People with anti-nuclear views. Al Gore. Former
vice president Al Gore says he is not anti-nuclear, but has stated that the
"...cost of the present generation of reactors is nearly prohibitive." In his
2009 book, "Our Choice", Gore argues that nuclear power was once "expected to
provide virtually unlimited supplies of low-cost electricity", but the reality
is that it has been "...an energy source in crisis for the last 30 years."
Worldwide growth in nuclear power has slowed in recent years, with no new
reactors and an "actual decline in global capacity and output in 2008." In the
United States, "...no nuclear power plants ordered after 1972 have been built
to completion." Al Gore (2009). "Our Choice", p. 157. Amory Lovins. Lovins,
Amory (2005). Winning the Oil Endgame p. 259. In 1988, Lovins argued that
improving energy efficiency can simultaneously ameliorate greenhouse warming,
reduce acid rain and air pollution, save money, and avoid the problems of
nuclear power. Given the urgency of abating global warming, Lovins stated that
we cannot afford to invest in nuclear power when those same dollars put into
efficiency would displace far more carbon dioxide. In “Nuclear Power: Climate
Fix or Folly,” published in 2010, Lovins argued that expanded nuclear power
"...does not represent a cost-effective solution to global warming and that
investors would shun it were it not for generous government subsidies
lubricated by intensive lobbying efforts." Lester Brown. Lester Brown argues
that nuclear power is simply not economical, and that installed nuclear
capacity will probably remain much the same for the foreseeable future: Brown,
Lester R. (2008). PLAN B 3.0: Mobilizing to Save Civilization p. 214. Brown
states that simple measures, such as changing to more efficient lighting, can
lead to significant reductions in energy consumption. Christopher Flavin. Many
advocates of nuclear power argue that, given the urgency of doing something
about climate change quickly, it must be pursued. Christopher Flavin, however,
contends that speedy implementation is not one of nuclear power’s strong
points: Planning, licensing, and constructing even a single nuclear plant
typically takes a decade or more, and plants frequently fail to meet completion
deadlines. Due to the dearth of orders in recent decades, the world currently
has very limited capacity to manufacture many of the critical components of
nuclear plants. Rebuilding that capacity will take a decade or more. Worldwatch
Institute (2008). Building a Low-Carbon Economy in "State of the World 2008",
p. 80. Other people. Other notable individuals who have expressed reservations
about nuclear power or nuclear weapons, or both, in the US include: Criticism.
The movement has been criticized by some environmentalists and scientists for
understating the environmental impact of fossil fuels and renewable resources,
and overstating the dangers of nuclear power. Bernard Cohen, Professor Emeritus
of Physics at the University of Pittsburgh, calculates that nuclear power is
many times safer than any other form of power generation. Patrick Moore, one of
the initial founders of Greenpeace, said in a 2008 interview that, " "It wasn't
until after I'd left Greenpeace and the climate change issue started coming to
the forefront that I started rethinking energy policy in general and realized
that I had been incorrect in my analysis of nuclear as being some kind of evil
plot." Critics of the movement point to independent studies showing the capital
costs of renewable energy sources are higher than those from nuclear power.
While functioning normally, coal plants, which are the predominate source of
electricity in the U.S. (a trend that is expected to continue for some time to
come as renewable energy alone cannot cheaply supply constant base load power)
shorten nearly 24,000 lives a year in the United States with 2,800 from lung
cancer alone. The United States Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) estimates
that a range of 13,000 to 34,000 preventable premature deaths could be avoided
by the reductions in PM2.5 and ozone produced by coal power plants. In 2008 the
World Health Organization (WHO) and other organizations calculated that coal
particulates pollution cause approximately one million deaths annually across
the world, which is approximately one third of all premature deaths related to
all air pollution sources. For the sake of comparison, even after the nuclear
disaster of Chernobyl, the total death toll over the following decades has been
calculated to be orders of magnitude less than what is annually caused by U.S.
fossil fuel use. The most authoritative risk projections coming from the
"International Journal of Cancer" suggest that by now the 1986 Chernobyl
accident may have caused about 1,000 cases of thyroid cancer and 4,000 cases of
other cancers in Europe, representing about 0.01% of all incident cancers since
the accident. Cancer models also predict that by 2065, almost 80 years after
the accident, about 16,000 cases of thyroid cancer and 25,000 cases of other
cancers may be expected due to radiation from the accident, whereas several
hundred million cancer cases are expected from other causes by that time.
Critics argue that Chernobyl-type disasters cannot occur in U.S. power plants
because unlike Soviet designs, even the oldest U.S. nuclear plants are built
with a containment vessel to limit the release of radioisotopes in the event of
a major accident. Critics argue that the amount of waste generated by nuclear
power is very small, as all the high-level nuclear waste from 50+ years of
operation of the world's nuclear reactors would fit into a single football
field to the depth of five feet. Furthermore, U.S. coal power plants presently
create nearly a million tons of low-level radioactive waste per day and
therefore release more total radioactivity than the nation's nuclear plants,
due to the uranium and thorium found naturally within the coal. Nuclear
proponents also point out that cost and the quantity of waste figures for the
operation of nuclear power plants are commonly derived from nuclear reactors
built using second generation designs, dating from the 1960s. Advanced reactor
designs are estimated to be even cheaper to operate and generate less than 1%
the amount of waste of current designs. It is because of these facts that
proponents argue that nuclear fission power is the safest means currently
available to entirely replace the use of fossil fuels, and pro-nuclear
environmentalists argue that a combination of both nuclear energy and renewable
energy would be the fastest, safest, and cheapest way forward. Recent
developments. In November 2009, "The Washington Post" reported that nuclear
power is emerging as "...perhaps the world's most unlikely weapon against
climate change, with the backing of even some green activists who once
campaigned against it." The report said that rather than deride the potential
for nuclear power, some environmentalists are embracing it, and that presently
there is only "muted opposition"—nothing like the protests and plant
invasions that helped define the anti-nuclear movement in the United States
during the 1970s. As of early 2010, anti-nuclear groups such as Physicians for
Social Responsibility, NukeFree.org, and NIRS were actively fighting federal
loan guarantees for new nuclear plant construction. In February 2010, several
groups coordinated a national call-in day to Congress to attempt to stop $54
billion in federal loan guarantees for new nuclear plants. However, the first
such loan guarantee of $8.3 billion was offered to Southern Company that same
month. In January 2010, about 175 anti-nuclear activists participated in a 126-
mile walk in an effort to block the re-licensing of Vermont Yankee Nuclear
Power Plant. In February 2010, a large number of anti-nuclear activists and
private citizens gathered in Montpelier, to be at hand as the Vermont Senate
voted 26 to 4 against the "Public Good" certificate needed for continued
operation of Vermont Yankee past 2012. In April 2010 a dozen environmental
groups (including Friends of the Earth, South Carolina's Sierra Club, Nuclear
Watch South, the Southern Alliance for Clean Energy, Georgia Women's Action for
New Directions) stated that the proposed AP1000 reactor containment design is
"...inherently less safe than current reactors." Arnold Gundersen, a nuclear
engineer, authored a 32-page report arguing that the new AP1000 reactors will
be vulnerable to leaks caused by corrosion holes. There are plans to construct
the Westinghouse AP1000 reactors at seven sites across the southeast, including
Plant Vogtle in Burke County, Georgia. In October 2010, Michael Mariotte,
executive director of the Nuclear Information and Resource Service anti-nuclear
group, predicted that the U.S. nuclear industry will not experience a nuclear
renaissance, for the most simple of reasons: “nuclear reactors make no
economic sense”. The economic slump has driven down electricity demand and
the price of competing energy sources, and Congress has failed of to pass
climate change legislation, making nuclear economics very difficult. Governor-
elect Peter Shumlin is a prominent opponent of the Vermont Yankee Nuclear Power
Plant and two days after Shumlin was elected in November 2010, Entergy put the
plant up for sale. Post-Fukushima. Following the 2011 Japanese nuclear
accidents, activists who were involved in the movement’s emergence (such as
Graham Nash and Paul Gunter), suggest that Japan’s nuclear crisis may
rekindle an anti-nuclear protest movement in the United States. The aim, they
say, is "...not just to block the Obama administration’s push for new nuclear
construction, but to convince Americans that existing plants pose dangers." In
March 2011, 600 people gathered for a weekend protest outside the Vermont
Yankee plant. The demonstration was held to show support for the thousands of
Japanese people who are endangered by possible radiation from the Fukushima
Daiichi nuclear disaster. In April 2011, Rochelle Becker, executive director of
the Alliance for Nuclear Responsibility said that the United States should
review its nuclear accident liability limits, in the light of the economic
impacts of the Fukushima disaster. The New England region has a long history of
anti-nuclear activism and 75 people held a State House rally on April 6, 2011,
to "protest the region’s aging nuclear plants and the increasing stockpile of
radioactive spent fuel rods at them." The protest was held shortly before a
State House hearing where legislators were scheduled to hear representatives of
the region’s three nuclear plants – Pilgrim in Plymouth, Vermont Yankee in
Vernon, and Seabrook in New Hampshire—talk about the safety of their reactors
in the light of the Japanese nuclear crisis. Vermont Yankee and Pilgrim have
reactor designs similar to the crippled Japanese nuclear plants. As of April
2011, a total of 45 groups and individuals from across the nation are formally
asking the U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission (NRC) to immediately suspend all
licensing and other activities at 21 proposed nuclear reactor projects in 15
states until the NRC completes a thorough post-Fukushima reactor crisis
examination. The petitioners also are asking the NRC to supplement its own
investigation by establishing an independent commission comparable to that set
up in the wake of the serious, though less severe, 1979 Three Mile Island
accident. The petitioners include Public Citizen, Southern Alliance for Clean
Energy, and San Luis Obispo Mothers for Peace. Thirty two years after the No
Nukes concert in New York, on August 7, 2011, a Musicians United for Safe
Energy benefit concert was held Mountain View, California, to raise money for
MUSE and for Japanese tsunami/nuclear disaster relief. The show was powered
off-grid and artists included Jackson Browne, Bonnie Raitt, John Hall, Graham
Nash, David Crosby, Stephen Stills, Kitaro, Jason Mraz, Sweet Honey and the
Rock, the Doobie Brothers, Tom Morello, and Jonathan Wilson. In February 2012,
the United States Nuclear Regulatory Commission approved the construction of
two additional reactors at the Vogtle Electric Generating Plant, the first
reactors to be approved in over 30 years since the Three Mile Island accident,
but NRC Chairman Gregory Jaczko cast a dissenting vote citing safety concerns
stemming from Japan's 2011 Fukushima nuclear disaster, and saying "I cannot
support issuing this license as if Fukushima never happened". One week after
Southern received the license to begin major construction on the two new
reactors, a dozen environmental and anti-nuclear groups are suing to stop the
Plant Vogtle expansion project, saying "public safety and environmental
problems since Japan's Fukushima Daiichi nuclear reactor accident have not been
taken into account". The nuclear reactors to be built at Vogtle are new AP1000
third generation reactors, which are said to have safety improvements over
older power reactors. However, John Ma, a senior structural engineer at the
NRC, is concerned that some parts of the AP1000 steel skin are so brittle that
the "impact energy" from a plane strike or storm driven projectile could
shatter the wall. Edwin Lyman, a senior staff scientist at the Union of
Concerned Scientists, is concerned about the strength of the steel containment
vessel and the concrete shield building around the AP1000. Arnold Gundersen, a
nuclear engineer commissioned by several anti-nuclear groups, released a report
which explored a hazard associated with the possible rusting through of the
steel liner of the containment structure . In March 2012, activists protested
at San Onofre Nuclear Generating Station to mark the one-year anniversary of
the nuclear meltdowns in Fukushima, Japan. Around 200 people rallied in San
Onofre State Beach to listen to several speakers, including two Japanese
residents who lived through the Fukushima meltdowns. "Residents Organizing for
Safe Environment" and several other anti-nuclear energy organizations,
organized the event and about 100 activists came in from San Diego. As of March
2012, 23 aging nuclear power plants continue to operate, including some similar
in design to those that melted down in Fukushima, such as Vermont Yankee, and
Indian Point 2 just 24 miles north of New York City. Vermont Yankee has reached
the end of its projected lifetime operation but, despite strong local
opposition, the NRC favors extending its license. On March 22, 2012, "more than
1,000 people marched to the plant in protest, and about 130 engaging in civil
disobedience were arrested". According to a 2012 Pew Research Center poll, 44
percent of Americans favor and 49 percent oppose the promotion of increased use
of nuclear power, while 69 percent favor increasing federal funding for
research on wind power, solar power, and hydrogen energy technology.
