Antoine Barnave Antoine Pierre Joseph Marie Barnave (22 October 1761 – 29
November 1793) was a French politician, and, together with Honoré Mirabeau,
one of the most influential orators of the early part of the French Revolution.
He is most notable for correspondence with Marie Antoinette in an attempt to
set up a constitutional monarchy and for being one of the founding members of
the Feuillants. Early life. He was born at Grenoble in Dauphiné, of a
Protestant family. His father was an advocate at the "Parlement" of Grenoble,
and his mother was an upper-class educated woman. Because they were a
Protestant family, Antoine could not attend local schools, and his mother
educated him herself. Barnave was prepared for a career in law, and at the age
of twenty-two made himself known by a speech pronounced before the local
"Parlement" on the division of political powers. Dauphiné was one of the first
of the provinces of France to be touched by revolutionary ideals. After being
heavily influenced by the Day of the Tiles () in Grenoble, Barnave became
actively revolutionary. He explained his political position in a pamphlet
entitled "Esprit des édüs enregistrés militairement le 20 mai 1788". He was
immediately elected deputy, with his father, to the states of Dauphiné, and
played a prominent role in their debates. Estates-General and Assemblies. A few
months later he became better known, when the Estates-General of 1789 convened
at the Palace of Versailles for 5 May 1789, and Barnave was chosen to be a
deputy of the Third Estate for his native province of Dauphiné. He soon rose
to prominence in the National Assembly, becoming the friend of most of the
leaders of the party originating in the Third Estate, and formed with Adrien
Duport and Alexandre Lameth the group known during the Constituent Assembly as
"the triumvirate". Together these three would later be principal figures in the
formation of the Feuillants, the breakaway party from the Jacobin Club
dedicated to a moderate course supporting constitutional monarchy. Barnave took
part in the conference on the claims of the three orders, drew up the first
address to King Louis XVI, and supported the proposal of Emmanuel Joseph
Sieyès that the Assembly should declare itself "National". Until 1791, he was
one of the main members of the club known later as the Jacobins, of which he
drew up the manifesto and first rulebook. Political Views. Although a partisan
of political freedoms, he hoped to preserve revolutionary liberties together
while maintaining the ruling House of Bourbon. Barnave felt that a
constitutional monarchy would solve the problems facing France without being a
complete upheaval of the government. This does not mean he was entirely in
favor of the monarchy, however. Subject to the more radical forces, Barnave
took part in the attacks on the monarchy, on the clergy, on Roman Catholic
Church property, and on the provincial "Parlements". On several occasions he
stood in opposition to Mirabeau. After the storming of the Bastille, he saw the
power of the masses as a possibly leading to political chaos and wished to
avoid this by saving the throne. He advocated the suspensory veto, and the
establishment of trial by jury in civil causes, but voted with the Left against
the system of two chambers. His conflict with Mirabeau on the question of
assigning to the King the right to make peace or war (from 16 to 23 May 1790)
was one of the main episodes of the Assembly's mandate. In August 1790, after a
vehement debate, he fought a duel with Jacques Antoine Marie de Cazalès, in
which the latter was slightly wounded. About the close of October 1790, Barnave
was called to the presidency of the Assembly. On the death of Mirabeau a few
months later, Barnave paid a high tribute to his worth and public services,
designating him the "William Shakespeare of oratory". Rise, Decline, and
Execution. On the arrest of the king and the royal family during the Flight to
Varennes, Barnave was one of the three appointed to conduct them back to Paris,
along with Jerome Petion and the Marquis de Latour-Maubourg. During the
journey, he began to feel compassion for Queen Marie-Antoinette and the Royal
Family, and subsequently attempted to do what he could to alleviate their
sufferings. In one of his most powerful speeches, he maintained the
inviolability of the king’s person. As the Jacobin Club grew more radically
in favor of a republic, Barnave and the other members of the triumvirate
separated from them to form the Feuillant party in early 1791. In the summer of
1791, July and August specifically, Barnave reached his height of political
prominence after the 17 July 1791 Champ de Mars Massacre weakened the position
of the Jacobins. The Feuillants began to lose this political clout by early
autmun however, a matter that was complicated by disagreements that arose with
the growing influence of Jacques Pierre Brissot and his supporters, known as
the Girondists. After the Feuillants opposed war against Austria and the
Habsburgs, they were driven out of the Assembly. Barnave's public career came
to an end, and he returned to Grenoble at the beginning of 1792. His sympathy
and relations with the royal family, to whom he had submitted a plan for a
counter-revolution, and his desire to check the violence of the Revolution,
brought on him suspicion of treason. He was denounced on 15 August 1792 in the
Legislative Assembly, arrested and imprisoned for ten months at Grenoble, then
transferred to Fort Barraux, and in November 1793 to Paris (during the Reign of
Terror). On 28 November he appeared before the Revolutionary Tribunal. He was
condemned for treason on the evidence of papers detailing his extensive
clandestine correspondence with Queen Marie Antoinette found in the Tuileries
Palace, and guillotined the next day, alongside Marguerite-Louis-François
Duport-Dutertre. Correspondence with Marie Antoinette. Along with Jérôme
Pétion and the Marquis de Latour-Maubourg, Barnave had been sent on behalf of
the National Assembly to escort the extravagant berline carriage, with the
Royal Family within, from Varennes back to Paris. It was in this setting that
Barnave first met Queen Marie Antoinette. Though their initial interactions
were marked by Barnave’s shy attempts to avoid eye contact, the queen was
soon able to charm the twenty-nine-year-old politician and earn his favor. The
two were reported to have been seen conversing intently on several occasions
within the carriage, and near the rest stops, on the journey from Varennes.
Purportedly, the subject of these conversations included Barnave and the rest
of the Feuillants’ fervent belief that a constitutional monarchy was the most
viable solution for ending the revolution with a minimum of further bloodshed.
Much evidence indicates that, because her closest friends, including Count von
Fersen (who had organized the flight from Paris), were absent, Marie Antoinette
was attempting to influence Barnave and his fellow Feuillants as a way to
ensure her family’s safety. She may also have dared to hope that it was still
possible to reinstate some form of the former monarchy. Barnave was, quite
clearly, taken by the Queen’s charm and waited for her to call on him when
she was in grave circumstances. This hour arrived only a few weeks later when,
in early July 1791, Marie Antoinette wrote to Barnave the first of a long
series of cryptic communications. Referring to him by a code name, Barnave
received his letters through an unknown similarly codenamed intermediary. Her
instructions were that her letter be read while the intermediary stood by to
accept a reply; then he would return both documents to the queen. She herself
never wrote any of the letters; instead, she dictated them so as to avoid
embarrassing, and possibly incriminating, documentation. Eventually, the entire
series of letters were smuggled out of the Tuileries to Count von Fersen who
sent them to his sister in Sweden where they remain today. The letters revealed
that Barnave was confident of his influence in the National Assembly,
especially in light of the massacre on the Champ de Mars.
