Aptitude An aptitude is a component of a competency to do a certain kind of
work at a certain level, which can also be considered "talent". Aptitudes may
be physical or mental. Aptitude is not knowledge, understanding, learned or
acquired abilities (skills) or attitude. The innate nature of aptitude is in
contrast to achievement, which represents knowledge or ability that is gained.
Intelligence and aptitudes. Aptitude and intelligence quotient are related, and
in some ways opposite views of human mental ability. Whereas intelligence
quotient sees intelligence as being a single measurable characteristic
affecting all mental ability, aptitude refers to one of many different
characteristics which can be independent of each other, such as aptitude for
military flight, air traffic control, or computer programming. This is more
similar to the theory of multiple intelligences. Concerning a single measurable
characteristic affecting all mental ability, analysis of any group of
intelligence test scores will nearly always show them to be highly correlated.
The U.S. Department of Labor's General Learning Ability, for instance, is
determined by combining Verbal, Numerical and Spatial aptitude subtests. In a
given person some are low and others high. In the context of an aptitude test
the "high" and "low" scores are usually not far apart, because all ability test
scores tend to be correlated. Aptitude is better applied intra-individually to
determine what tasks a given individual is more skilled at performing. Inter-
individual aptitude differences are typically not very significant due to IQ
differences. Of course this assumes individuals have not already been pre-
screened for aptitude through some other process such as SAT scores, GRE
scores, finishing medical school, etc.etc. Combined aptitude and knowledge
tests. Tests that assess learned skills or knowledge are frequently called
achievement tests. However, certain tests can assess both types of constructs.
An example that leans both ways is the Armed Services Vocational Aptitude
Battery (ASVAB), which is given to recruits entering the armed forces of the
United States. Another is the SAT, which is designed as a test of aptitude for
college in the United States, but has achievement elements. For example, it
tests mathematical reasoning, which depends both on innate mathematical ability
and education received in mathematics. 1. Fluid Intelligence 2. Crystallised
Intelligence Crystallised intelligence is the ability to learn from past
experiences and relevant learning, and to apply this learning to work-related
situation. Work situations that require crystallised intelligence include
producing and analysing written reports, comprehending work instructions, using
numbers as a tool to make effective decisions, etc
