Arctic Refuge drilling controversy The question of whether to drill for oil in
the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge (ANWR) has been an ongoing political
controversy in the United States since 1977. The issue has been used by both
Democrats and Republicans as a political device, especially through contentious
election cycles, and has been the subject of much debate in the National media.
ANWR comprises of the north Alaskan coast. The land is situated between the
Beaufort Sea to the north, Brooks Range to the south, and Prudhoe Bay to the
west. It is the largest protected wilderness in the United States and was
created by Congress under the Alaska National Interest Lands Conservation Act
of 1980. Section 1002 of that act deferred a decision on the management of oil
and gas exploration and development of in the coastal plain, known as the "1002
area". The controversy surrounds drilling for oil in this subsection of ANWR.
Much of the debate over whether to drill in the 1002 area of ANWR rests on the
amount of economically recoverable oil, as it relates to world oil markets,
weighed against the potential harm oil exploration might have upon the natural
wildlife, in particular the calving ground of the Porcupine caribou. History.
Before Alaska was granted statehood on January 3, 1959, virtually all of the
Territory of Alaska was federal land and wilderness. The act granting statehood
gave Alaska the right to select for use as an economic and tax base. In 1966,
Alaska Natives protested a Federal oil and gas lease sale of lands on the North
Slope which were claimed by Natives. Late that year Secretary of the interior
Stewart Udall ordered the lease sale suspended, and shortly thereafter
announced a 'freeze' on the disposition of all Federal land in Alaska, pending
Congressional settlement of Native land claims. These claims were settled in
1971 by the Alaska Native Claims Settlement Act, which granted them . The act
also froze development on federal lands pending a final selection of parks,
monuments, and refuges. The law was set to expire in 1978. Toward the end of
1976, with the Trans-Alaska Pipeline System virtually complete, major
conservation groups shifted their attention to how best to protect the hundreds
of millions of acres of Alaskan wilderness unaffected by the pipeline. On May
16, 1979, the United States House of Representatives approved a
conservationist-backed bill that would have protected more than of Federal
lands in Alaska, including the calving ground of the nation's largest caribou
herd. Backed by President Jimmy Carter, and sponsored by Morris K. Udall and
John B. Anderson, the bill would have prohibited all commercial activity in
designated as wilderness areas. The US senate had opposed similar legislation
in the past and filibusters were threatened. On December 2, 1980, Carter signed
into law the Alaska National Interest Lands Conservation Act, which created
more than of national parks, wildlife refuges and wilderness areas from Federal
holdings in that state. The bill allowed drilling in ANWR, but not without
prior approval from Congress. Both sides of the controversy announced they
would attempt to change it in the next session of Congress. Section 1002 of the
act stated that a comprehensive inventory of fish and wildlife resources would
be conducted on of the Arctic Refuge coastal plain (1002 Area). Potential
petroleum reserves in the 1002 Area were to be evaluated from surface
geological studies and seismic exploration surveys. No exploratory drilling was
allowed. Results of these studies and recommendations for future management of
the Arctic Refuge coastal plain were to be prepared in a report to Congress. In
November 1986, a draft report by the United States Fish and Wildlife Service
recommended that all of the coastal plain within the Arctic National Wildlife
Refuge be opened for oil and gas development. It also proposed to trade the
mineral rights of in the refuge for surface rights to owned by corporations of
six Alaska native groups, including Aleuts, Eskimos and Tlingits. The report
argued that the oil and gas potentials of the coastal plain were needed for the
country's economy and national security. Conservationists argued that oil
development would unnecessarily threaten the existence of the Porcupine caribou
by cutting off the herd from calving areas. They also expressed concerns that
oil operations would erode the fragile ecological systems that support wildlife
on the tundra of the Arctic plain. The proposal faced stiff opposition in the
House of Representatives. Morris Udall, chairman of the House Interior
Committee, said he would reintroduce legislation to turn the entire coastal
plain into a wilderness area, effectively giving the refuge permanent
protection from development. On July 17, 1987, the United States and the
Canadian government signed the "Agreement on the Conservation of the Porcupine
Caribou Herd" a treaty which was designed to protect the species from damage to
its habitat and migration routes. Canada has special interest in the region
because its Ivvavik National Park and Vuntut National Park borders the refuge.
The treaty required an impact assessment and required that where activity in
one country is "likely to cause significant long-term adverse impact on the
Porcupine Caribou Herd or its habitat, the other Party will be notified and
given an opportunity to consult prior to final decision." In March 1989, a bill
permitting drilling in the reserve was "sailing through the Senate and had been
expected to come up for a vote" when the Exxon Valdez oil spill delayed and
ultimately derailed the process. In 1996, the Republican-majority House and
Senate voted to allow drilling in ANWR, but this legislation was vetoed by
President Bill Clinton. Toward the end of his presidential term
environmentalists pressed Clinton to declare the Arctic Refuge a U.S. National
Monument. Doing so would have permanently closed the area to oil exploration.
While Clinton did create several refuge monuments, the Arctic Refuge was not
among them. A 1998 report by the U.S. Geological Survey estimated that there
was between and of technically recoverable oil in the designated 1002 area, and
that most of the oil would be found west of the Marsh Creek anticline. When
Non-Federal and Native areas are excluded, the estimated amounts of technically
recoverable oil are reduced to and . These figures differed from an earlier
1987 USGS report which estimated less quantities of oil and that it would be
found in the southern and eastern parts of the 1002 area. However the 1998
report warned that the "estimates cannot be compared directly because different
methods were used in preparing those parts of the 1987 Report to Congress." In
the 2000s, votes about the status of the refuge occurred repeatedly in the U.S.
House of Representatives and Senate. President George W. Bush pushed to perform
exploratory drilling for crude oil and natural gas in and around the refuge.
The House of Representatives voted in mid-2000 to allow drilling. In April 2002
the Senate rejected it. Arctic Refuge drilling was again approved by the
Republican-controlled House of Representatives as part of the Energy Bill on
April 21, 2005, but the Arctic Refuge provision was later removed by the House-
Senate conference committee. The Republican-controlled Senate passed Arctic
Refuge drilling on March 16, 2005 as part of the federal budget resolution for
fiscal year 2006. That Arctic Refuge provision was removed during the
reconciliation process, due to Democrats in the House of Representatives who
signed a letter stating they would oppose any version of the budget that had
Arctic Refuge drilling in it. On December 15, 2005, Senator Ted Stevens, a
Republican from Alaska, attached an Arctic Refuge drilling amendment to the
annual defense appropriations bill. A group of Democratic Senators led a
successful filibuster of the bill on December 21, and the language was
subsequently removed. On June 18, 2008, President George W. Bush pressed
Congress to reverse the ban on offshore drilling in the Arctic National
Wildlife Refuge in addition to approving the extraction of oil from shale on
federal lands. Despite his previous stance on the issue, President Bush cited
the growing energy crisis as a major factor for reversing the presidential
executive order issued by President George H. W. Bush in 1990, which banned
coastal oil exploration and oil and gas leasing on most of the outer
continental shelf. In conjunction with the presidential order, the
Congressional moratorium banning drilling was first enacted in 1982 and has
been renewed annually. Department of Energy projections and estimates.
Estimates of oil reserves. In 1998, the USGS estimated that between 5.7 and of
technically recoverable crude oil and natural gas liquids are in the coastal
plain area of ANWR, with a mean estimate of , of which lie within the Federal
portion of the ANWR 1002 Area. In comparison, the estimated volume of
undiscovered, technically recoverable oil in the rest of the United States is
about . The ANWR and undiscovered estimates are categorized as prospective
resources and therefore, not proved. The United States Department of Energy
(DOE) reports US proved reserves are roughly of crude and natural gas liquids,
of which are crude. A variety of sources compiled by the DOE estimate world
proved oil and gas condensate reserves to range from 1.1 to . The DOE reports
there is uncertainty about the underlying resource base in ANWR. “The USGS
oil resource estimates are based largely on the oil productivity of geologic
formations that exist in the neighboring State lands and which continue into
ANWR. Consequently, there is considerable uncertainty regarding both the size
and quality of the oil resources that exist in ANWR. Thus, the potential
ultimate oil recovery and potential yearly production are highly uncertain.”
In 2010, the USGS revised an estimate of the oil in the National Petroleum
Reserve–Alaska (NPRA), concluding that it contained approximately "896
million barrels of conventional, undiscovered oil". The NPRA is west of ANWR.
The reason for the decrease is because of new exploratory drilling, which
showed that many areas that were believed to hold oil actually hold natural
gas. The opening of the ANWR 1002 Area to oil and natural gas development is
projected to increase domestic crude oil production starting in 2018. In the
mean ANWR oil resource case, additional oil production resulting from the
opening of ANWR reaches in 2027 and then declines to in 2030. In the low and
high ANWR oil resource cases, additional oil production resulting from the
opening of ANWR peaks in 2028 at 510,000 and , respectively. Between 2018 and
2030, cumulative additional oil production is for the mean oil resource case,
while the low and high resource cases project a cumulative additional oil
production of 1.9 and , respectively. In 2007, the United States consumed 20.68
m bbls of petroleum products per day. It produced roughly of crude oil, and
imported of crude and of petroleum products. Projected impact on global oil
price. The total production from ANWR would be between 0.4 and 1.2 percent of
total world oil consumption in 2030. Consequently, ANWR oil production is not
projected to have any significant impact on world oil prices. Furthermore, the
Energy Information Administration does not feel ANWR will affect the global
price of oil when past behaviors of the oil market are considered. "The opening
of ANWR is projected to have its largest oil price reduction impacts as
follows: a reduction in low-sulfur, light crude oil prices of $0.41 per barrel
(2006 dollars) in 2026 for the low oil resource case, $0.75 per barrel in 2025
for the mean oil resource case, and $1.44 per barrel in 2027 for the high oil
resource case, relative to the reference case." "Assuming that world oil
markets continue to work as they do today, the Organization of Petroleum
Exporting Countries (OPEC) could neutralize any potential price impact of ANWR
oil production by reducing its oil exports by an equal amount." Supporting
views. Former President George W. Bush and his administration supported
drilling in the Arctic Refuge, contending that it could "keep economy growing
by creating jobs and ensuring that businesses can expand [and it will make
America less dependent on foreign sources of energy," and that "scientists have
developed innovative techniques to reach ANWR's oil with virtually no impact on
the land or local wildlife." A June 29, 2008 Pew Research Poll reported that
50% of Americans favor drilling of oil and gas in ANWR while 43% oppose
(compared to 42% in favor and 50% opposed in February of the same year). A CNN
opinion poll conducted on August 31, 2008 reported 59% favor drilling for oil
in ANWR, while 39% oppose it. A large majority of Alaskans support drilling in
ANWR, including every governor, senator, representative, and legislature for
the past 25 years. In the state of Alaska, residents receive annual dividends
from a permanent fund funded partially by oil-lease revenues. In 2000 the
dividend came to $1,964 per resident. The United States Department of Energy
estimates that ANWR oil production between 2018 and 2030 would reduce the
cumulative net expenditures on imported crude oil and liquid fuels by an
estimated $135 to $327 billion (2006 dollars), reducing the foreign trade
deficit. Arctic Power cites a U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service report which
states that 77 of the 567 wildlife refuges in 22 states had oil and gas
activities. Louisiana had the most with 19 units followed by Texas which had 11
units. Furthermore, oil or gas was produced in 45 of the 567 units located in
15 states. The number of producing wells in each unit ranged from one to more
than 300 in the Upper Ouachita National Wildlife Refuge in Louisiana. Arctic
Power also claims support from the chiefly Inupiat Eskimo residents of the
village of Kaktovik, located in area 1002. Sixty-eight villagers responded to a
2000 survey paid for by the state of Alaska with a $25,000 grant to educate the
town on ANWR, fifty-three of whom strongly agreed or agreed that "The coastal
plain of the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge should be open to oil and gas
exploration." (Broken Link) Opposing views. President Barack Obama opposes
drilling in the Arctic Refuge. In a League of Conservation Voters
questionnaire, Obama said, "I strongly reject drilling in the Arctic National
Wildlife Refuge because it would irreversibly damage a protected national
wildlife refuge without creating sufficient oil supplies to meaningfully affect
the global market price or have a discernible impact on US energy security."
Senator John McCain, while running for the 2008 Republican presidential
nomination, said, "As far as ANWR is concerned, I don't want to drill in the
Grand Canyon, and I don't want to drill in the Everglades. This is one of the
most pristine and beautiful parts of the world." In 2008, the U.S. Department
of Energy reported uncertainties about the USGS oil estimates for ANWR and the
projected effects on oil price and supplies. "There is little direct knowledge
regarding the petroleum geology of the ANWR region... ANWR oil production is
not projected to have a large impact on world oil prices... Additional oil
production resulting from the opening of ANWR would be only a small portion of
total world oil production, and would likely be offset in part by somewhat
lower production outside the United States." The DOE reported that annual
United States consumption of crude oil and petroleum products was in 2006. In
comparison, the USGS estimated that the ANWR reserve contains . Although, only
were thought to be within the proposed drilling region. "Environmentalists and
most congressional Democrats have resisted drilling in the area because the
required network of oil platforms, pipelines, roads and support facilities, not
to mention the threat of foul spills, would play havoc on wildlife. The coastal
plain, for example, is a calving home for some 129,000 caribou." The NRDC
argues that drilling would not take place in a compact, space as proponents
claim, but in fact, undertake "a spiderweb of industrial sprawl across the
whole of the refuge's coastal plain, including drill sites, airports and roads,
and gravel mines, it would have a footprint of , but actually spread across an
area of more than , or . Additionally, drilling opponents warn of the danger of
oil spills in the region. The US Fish and Wildlife Service has stated that the
1002 area has a "greater degree of ecological diversity than any other similar
sized area of Alaska's north slope." The FWS also states, "Those who campaigned
to establish the Arctic Refuge recognized its wild qualities and the
significance of these spatial relationships. Here lies an unusually diverse
assemblage of large animals and smaller, less-appreciated life forms, tied to
their physical environments and to each other by natural, undisturbed
ecological and evolutionary processes." Prior to 2008, 39% of the residents of
the United States and a majority of Canadians opposed drilling in the refuge.
The Alaska Inter-Tribal Council, which represents 229 Native Alaskan tribes,
officially opposes any development in ANWR. In March 2005 Luci Beach, the
executive director of the steering committee for the Native Alaskan and
Canadian Gwich’in tribe (a member of the AI-TC), during a trip to Washington
D.C., while speaking for a unified group of 55 Alaskan and Canadian indigenous
peoples, said that drilling in ANWR is "a human rights issue and it's a basic
Aboriginal human rights issue." She went on to say, "Sixty to 70 percent of our
diet comes from the land and caribou is one of the primary animals that we
depend on for sustenance." The Gwich'in tribe adamantly believes that drilling
in ANWR would have serious negative effects on the calving grounds of the
Porcupine Caribou herd that they partially rely on for food. A part of the
Inupiat population of Kaktovik, and 5,000 to 7,000 Gwich’in peoples feel
their lifestyle would be disrupted or destroyed by drilling. The Inupiat from
Point Hope, Alaska recently passed resolutions recognizing that drilling in
ANWR would allow resource exploitation in other wilderness areas. The Inupiat,
Gwitch'in, and other tribes are calling for sustainable energy practices and
policies. The Tanana Chiefs Conference (representing 42 Alaska Native villages
from 37 tribes) opposes drilling, as do at least 90 Native American tribes. The
National Congress of American Indians (representing 250 tribes), the Native
American Rights Fund as well as some Canadian tribes also oppose drilling in
the 1002 area. In May 2006 a resolution was passed in the village of Kaktovik
calling Shell Oil Company "a hostile and dangerous force" which authorized the
mayor to take legal and other actions necessary to "defend the community." The
resolution also calls on all North Slope communities to oppose Shell owned
offshore leases unrelated to the ANWR controversy until the company becomes
more respectful of the people. Mayor Sonsalla says Shell has failed to work
with the villagers on how the company would protect bowhead whales which are
part of Native culture, subsistence life, and diet.
