Hannah Arendt Johanna "Hannah" Arendt (October 14, 1906 – December 4, 1975)
was a German American political theorist. She has often been described as a
philosopher, although she refused that label on the grounds that philosophy is
concerned with "man in the singular." She described herself instead as a
political theorist because her work centers on the fact that "men, not Man,
live on the earth and inhabit the world." Arendt's work deals with the nature
of power, and the subjects of politics, authority, and totalitarianism. Life
and career. Arendt was born into a family of secular German Jews in the city of
Linden (now part of Hanover). She was the daughter of Martha (née Cohn) and
Paul Arendt. She grew up in Königsberg (the birthplace of Prussian philosopher
Immanuel Kant, renamed Kaliningrad and annexed to the Soviet Union in 1946) and
Berlin. At the University of Marburg, she studied philosophy with Martin
Heidegger. According to Hans Jonas, her only German-Jewish classmate, Arendt
embarked on a long and stormy romantic relationship with Heidegger, for which
she was later criticized because of Heidegger's support for the Nazi party when
he was rector of Freiburg University. In the wake of one of their breakups,
Arendt moved to Heidelberg, where she wrote her dissertation, under the
existentialist philosopher-psychologist Karl Jaspers, on the concept of love in
the thought of Saint Augustine. In 1929, in Berlin, she married Günther Stern,
later known as Günther Anders; they divorced in 1937. The dissertation was
published in 1929. Because she was Jewish, Arendt was prevented from
"habilitating", a prerequisite for teaching in German universities. She
researched anti-Semitism for some time before being interrogated by the
Gestapo. Thereupon Arendt fled Germany for Paris. There she befriended the
Marxist literary critic and philosopher Walter Benjamin, her first husband's
cousin. While in France, Arendt worked to support and aid Jewish refugees. She
was imprisoned in Camp Gurs but was able to escape after a few weeks. With the
German military occupation of northern France during World War II and the
deportation of Jews to Nazi concentration camps even by the Vichy collaborator
regime in the unoccupied south, Arendt was compelled to leave France. In 1940,
she married the German poet and Marxist philosopher Heinrich Blücher, by then
a former member of the Communist Party. In 1941, Arendt escaped with her
husband and her mother to the United States. They relied on the life-saving
visas, illegally issued by the American diplomat Hiram Bingham IV, who aided in
this way approximately 2,500 other Jewish refugees. Another American, Varian
Fry, paid for their travels and helped in securing the visas. Upon arrival in
New York, Arendt became active in the German-Jewish community. From 1941 to
1945, she wrote a column for the German-language Jewish newspaper, "Aufbau".
From 1944, she directed research for the Commission of European Jewish Cultural
Reconstruction and traveled frequently to Germany in this capacity. After World
War II she returned to Germany and worked for Youth Aliyah, a Zionist
organization that had saved thousands of children from the Holocaust and
settled them in Palestine. She became a close friend of Karl Jaspers and his
Jewish wife, developing a deep intellectual friendship with him. She began
corresponding with Mary McCarthy. In 1950, she became a naturalized citizen of
the United States. Arendt served as a visiting scholar at the University of
California, Berkeley, Princeton University, and Northwestern University. In the
spring of 1959, she became the first woman lecturer at Princeton. Arendt also
taught at the University of Chicago, where she was a member of the Committee on
Social Thought; The New School in New York City; Yale University, where she was
a fellow; and, the Center for Advanced Studies at Wesleyan University
(1961–1962, 1962–1963). Arendt was elected a Fellow of the American Academy
of Arts and Sciences in 1962 and a member of the American Academy of Arts and
Letters in 1964. She died in 1975, at age 69, of a heart attack and was buried
at Bard College in Annandale-on-Hudson, New York, where her husband taught for
many years. Arendt was instrumental in the creation of Structured Liberal
Education (SLE) at Stanford University. She wrote a letter to the then
president of Stanford University to convince the university to enact Mark
Mancall's vision of a residentially based humanities program. Works. Arendt
theorizes freedom as public, performative and associative, drawing for
illustration on the Greek "Polis," American townships, the Paris Commune, the
civil rights movements of the 1960s, and the 1956 Hungarian uprising. She
posits that freedom does not pre-exist the organised community but is rather
constructed there, as the common space whereto its equal members bring their
own uniqueness and "natality," and create something of lasting value such as a
state. This natality signs the contingent, indeterminate and so political
future that we don't know anything about. Arendt's first major book was "The
Origins of Totalitarianism" (1951), which traced the roots of Stalinist
Communism and Nazism in both anti-Semitism and imperialism. The book was
opposed by the Left on the grounds that it presented the two movements as
equally tyrannical. She further contends that Jewry was not the operative
factor in the Holocaust but merely a convenient proxy. Totalitarianism in
Germany was in the end about megalomania and consistency, not eradicating Jews.
Arguably, her most influential work, "The Human Condition" (1958),
distinguishes between the concepts of political and social, labour and work,
various forms of action, and explores implications of those distinctions. Her
theory of political action, corresponding to the existence of a public realm,
is extensively developed in this work. Arendt argues that, while human life
always evolves within societies, the social-being part of human nature,
political life, was intentionally constructed by only a few of these societies
as a space for individuals to achieve freedom through the construction of a
common world. These categories, which attempt to bridge the gap between
ontological and sociological structures, are sharply delineated. While Arendt
relegates labour and work to the realm of the "social," she favors the human
condition of action as the "political" that is both existential and aesthetic.
Her collection of essays "Men in Dark Times" presents intellectual biographies
of some creative and moral figures of the 20th century, such as Walter
Benjamin, Karl Jaspers, Rosa Luxemburg, Hermann Broch, Pope John XXIII, and
Isak Dinesen. In her reporting of the Eichmann trial for "The New Yorker",
which evolved into "" (1963), she coined the phrase "the banality of evil" to
describe Eichmann. She raised the question of whether evil is radical or simply
a function of thoughtlessness, a tendency of ordinary people to obey orders and
conform to mass opinion without a critical evaluation of the consequences of
their actions and inaction. Arendt published another book in the same year, "On
Revolution." In this analysis of the two major revolutions of the 18th century,
Arendt went against the grain of Marxist and leftist thought by contending that
the American Revolution was a successful revolution, whereas the French
Revolution was not. When the masses of France gained the sympathy of
revolutionaries, the French Revolution turned away from the legal stability of
a constitutional government toward the lawless satisfaction of the constantly
regenerating economic needs of these masses. Some saw in this argument a post-
Holocaust anti-French sentiment. Nevertheless, it was inveterate in the history
of political philosophy, echoing that of Edmund Burke. Arendt also argued that
the revolutionary spirit endemic to the founding fathers had not been preserved
in America because the majority of people had no role to play in politics other
than voting. She admired Thomas Jefferson's idea of dividing counties into
townships. Arendt's interest in such a "council system," which she saw as the
only alternative to the state, continued all her life. Arendt's essay "On
Violence" distinguishes violence and power. She maintains that, although
theorists of both the Left and Right regard violence as an extreme
manifestation of power, the two concepts are in fact antithetical. Power comes
from the collective will and does not need violence to achieve any of its goals
since voluntary compliance takes its place. As governments start losing their
legitimacy, violence becomes an artificial means towards the same ends and is
therefore found only in the absence of Power. Bureaucracies then become the
ideal birthplaces of violence since they are defined as the "rule by no one,"
with whom to argue against and therefore re-create the missing link with the
people it rules over. Her posthumous book, "The Life of the Mind" (1978, edited
by Mary McCarthy), remained incomplete. Stemming from her Gifford Lectures at
the University of Aberdeen in Scotland, it focuses on the mental faculties of
thinking and willing, in a sense moving beyond her previous work concerning the
"vita activa". In her discussion of thinking, she focuses mainly on Socrates
and his notion of thinking as a solitary dialogue between Me and Myself. This
appropriation of Socrates leads her to introduce novel concepts of conscience
(which gives no positive prescriptions but instead tells me what I cannot do if
I would remain friends with myself when I re-enter the two-in-one of thought
where I must render an account of my actions to myself) and morality (an
entirely negative enterprise concerned with non-participation in certain
actions for the sake of remaining friends with one's self). In her volume on
Willing, Arendt, relying heavily on Augustine's notion of the will, discusses
the will as an absolutely free mental faculty that makes new beginnings
possible. Legacy. In the third volume, Arendt was planning to engage the
faculty of judgment by appropriating Kant's "Critique of Judgment", however,
she did not live to write it. Nevertheless, although her notion of judging
remains unknown, Arendt did leave manuscripts ("Thinking and Moral
Considerations," "Some Questions on Moral Philosophy,") and lectures ("Lectures
on Kant's Political Philosophy") concerning her thoughts on this mental
faculty. The first two articles were edited and published by Jerome Kohn, an
assistant of Arendt and a director of Hannah Arendt Center at The New School,
and the last was edited and published by Ronald Beiner, professor of political
science at the University of Toronto. Her personal library was deposited at
Bard College at the Stevenson Library in 1976, and includes approximately 4,000
books, ephemera, and pamphlets from Arendt's last apartment. The college has
begun digitally archiving some of the collection, which is available at The
Hannah Arendt Collection.
