Aristotelianism Aristotelianism ( ) is a tradition of philosophy that takes its
defining inspiration from the work of Aristotle. The works of Aristotle were
initially defended by the members of the Peripatetic school, and, later on, by
the Neoplatonists, who produced many commentaries on Aristotle's writings. In
the Islamic world, the works of Aristotle were translated into Arabic, and
under philosophers such as Al-Kindi, Al-Farabi, Avicenna, and Averroes,
Aristotelianism became a major part of early Islamic philosophy. Although some
knowledge of Aristotle's logical works was known to western Europe, it wasn't
until the Latin translations of the 12th century that the works of Aristotle
and his Arabic commentators became widely available. Scholars such as Albertus
Magnus and Thomas Aquinas interpreted and systematized Aristotle's works in
accordance with Christian theology. History. Ancient Greece. The original
followers of Aristotle were the members of the Peripatetic school. The most
prominent members of the school after Aristotle were Theophrastus and Strato of
Lampsacus, who both continued Aristotle's researches. During the Roman era the
school concentrated on preserving and defending his work. The most important
figure in this regard was Alexander of Aphrodisias who commentated on
Aristotle's writings. With the rise of Neoplatonism in the 3rd century,
Peripateticism as an independent philosophy came to an end, but the
Neoplatonists sought to incorporate Aristotle's philosophy within their own
system, and produced many commentaries on Aristotle. Islamic world. In the
Abbasid Empire, many foreign works were translated into Arabic, large libraries
were constructed, and scholars were welcomed. Under the caliphs Harun al-Rashid
and his son Al-Ma'mun, the House of Wisdom in Baghdad flourished. Christian
scholar Hunayn ibn Ishaq (809–873) was placed in charge of the translation
work by the caliph. In his lifetime, Ishaq translated 116 writings, including
works by Plato and Aristotle, into Syriac and Arabic. Al-Kindi (801–873) was
the first of the Muslim Peripatetic philosophers, and is known for his efforts
to introduce Greek and Hellenistic philosophy to the Arab world. He
incorporated Aristotelian and Neoplatonist thought into an Islamic
philosophical framework. This was an important factor in the introduction and
popularization of Greek philosophy in the Muslim intellectual world. The
philosopher Al-Farabi (872–950) had great influence on science and philosophy
for several centuries, and was widely regarded to be second only to Aristotle
in knowledge (alluded to by his title of "the Second Teacher") in his time. His
work, aimed at synthesis of philosophy and Sufism, paved the way for the work
of Avicenna (980–1037). Avicenna was one of the main interpreters of
Aristotle. The school of thought he founded became known as Avicennism, which
was built on ingredients and conceptual building blocks which are largely
Aristotelian and Neoplatonist. At the western end of the Mediterranean Sea,
during the reign of Al-Hakam II (961 to 976) in Córdoba, a massive translation
effort was undertaken, and many books were translated into Arabic. Averroes
(1126–1198), who spent much of his life in Cordoba and Seville, was
especially distinguished as a commentator of Aristotle. He often wrote two or
three different commentaries on the same work, and some 38 commentaries by
Averroes on the works of Aristotle have been identified. Although his writings
had only marginal impact in Islamic countries, his works would eventually have
a huge impact in the Latin West, and would lead to the school of thought known
as Averroism. Europe. Although some knowledge of Aristotle seems to have
lingered on in the ecclesiastical centres of western Europe after the fall of
the Roman empire, by the ninth century nearly all that was known of Aristotle
consisted of Boethius's commentaries on the "Organon", and a few abridgments
made by Latin authors of the declining empire, Isidore of Seville and Martianus
Capella. From that time until the end of the eleventh century, little progress
is apparent in Aristotelian knowledge. The renaissance of the 12th century saw
a major search by European scholars for new learning. James of Venice, who
probably spent some years in Constantinople, translated Aristotle's "Posterior
Analytics" from Greek into Latin in the mid-twelfth century, thus making the
complete Aristotelian logical corpus, the "Organon", available in Latin for the
first time. Scholars travelled to areas of Europe that once had been under
Muslim rule and still had substantial Arabic-speaking populations. From central
Spain, which had come under Christian rule in the eleventh century, scholars
produced many of the Latin translations of the 12th century. The most
productive of these translators was Gerard of Cremona, (c. 1114–1187), who
translated 87 books, which included many of the works of Aristotle such as his
"Posterior Analytics", "Physics", "On the Heavens", "On Generation and
Corruption", and "Meteorology". Michael Scot (c. 1175–1232) translated
Averroes' commentaries on the scientific works of Aristotle. Aristotle's
physical writings began to be discussed openly, and at a time when Aristotle's
method was permeating all theology, these treatises were sufficient to cause
his prohibition for heterodoxy in the Condemnations of 1210–1277. In the
first of these, in Paris in 1210, it was stated that "neither the books of
Aristotle on natural philosophy or their commentaries are to be read at Paris
in public or secret, and this we forbid under penalty of excommunication."
However, despite further attempts to restrict the teaching of Aristotle, by
1270 the ban on Aristotle's natural philosophy was ineffective. William of
Moerbeke (c. 1215–1286) undertook a complete translation of the works of
Aristotle or, for some portions, a revision of existing translations. He was
the first translator of the "Politics" (c. 1260) from Greek into Latin. Many
copies of Aristotle in Latin then in circulation were assumed to have been
influenced by Averroes, who was suspected of being a source of philosophical
and theological errors found in the earlier translations of Aristotle. Such
claims were without merit, however, as the "Alexandrian" Aristotelianism of
Averroes followed "the strict study of the text of Aristotle, which was
introduced by Avicenna, a large amount of traditional Neoplatonism was
incorporated with the body of traditional Aristotelianism". Albertus Magnus (c.
1200–1280) was among the first among medieval scholars to apply Aristotle's
philosophy to Christian thought. He produced paraphrases of most of the works
of Aristotle available to him. He digested, interpreted and systematized the
whole of Aristotle's works, gleaned from the Latin translations and notes of
the Arabian commentators, in accordance with Church doctrine. His efforts
resulted in the formation of a Christian reception of Aristotle in the Western
Europe. Thomas Aquinas (1225–1274), the pupil of Albertus Magnus, wrote a
dozen commentaries on the works of Aristotle. Thomas was emphatically
Aristotelian, he adopted Aristotle's analysis of physical objects, his view of
place, time and motion, his proof of the prime mover, his cosmology, his
account of sense perception and intellectual knowledge, and even parts of his
moral philosophy. The philosophical school that arose as a legacy of the work
of Thomas Aquinas was known as Thomism, and was especially influential among
the Dominicans, and later, the Jesuits. Modern era. After retreating under
criticism from modern natural philosophers, the distinctively Aristotelian idea
of teleology was transmitted through Wolff and Kant to Hegel, who applied it to
history as a totality. Although this project was criticized by Trendelenburg
and Brentano as un-Aristotelian, Hegel’s influence is now often said to be
responsible for an important Aristotelian influence upon Marx. Postmodernists,
in contrast, reject Aristotelianism’s claim to reveal important theoretical
truths. In this, they follow Heidegger’s critique of Aristotle as the
greatest source of the entire tradition of Western philosophy. Contemporary
Aristotelianism. Aristotelianism is understood by its proponents as critically
developing Plato’s theories. Recent Aristotelian ethical and ‘practical’
philosophy, such as that of Gadamer and McDowell, is often premised upon a
rejection of Aristotelianism’s traditional metaphysical or theoretical
philosophy. From this viewpoint, the early modern tradition of political
republicanism, which views the "res publica", public sphere or state as
constituted by its citizens’ virtuous activity, can appear thoroughly
Aristotelian. The contemporary Aristotelian philosopher Alasdair MacIntyre is
specially famous for helping to revive virtue ethics in his book "After
Virtue". MacIntyre revises Aristotelianism with the argument that the highest
temporal goods, which are internal to human beings, are actualized through
participation in social practices. He opposes Aristotelianism to the managerial
institutions of capitalism and its state, and to rival traditions—including
the philosophies of Hume, Kant, Kierkegaard, and Nietzsche—that reject its
idea of essentially human goods and virtues and instead legitimize capitalism.
Therefore, on MacIntyre’s account, Aristotelianism is not identical with
Western philosophy as a whole; rather, it is "the best theory so far, the best
theory so far about what makes a particular theory the best one." Politically
and socially, it has been characterized as a newly 'revolutionary
Aristotelianism'. This may be contrasted with the more conventional, apolitical
and effectively conservative uses of Aristotle by, for example, Gadamer and
McDowell. Other important contemporary Aristotelian theorists include Fred D.
Miller, Jr. in politics and Rosalind Hursthouse in ethics. Criticism. Bertrand
Russell criticizes Aristotle's logic on the following points :
