Arm's length principle The arm's length principle (ALP) is the condition or the
fact that the parties to a transaction are independent and on an equal footing.
Such a transaction is known as an "arm's-length transaction". It is used
specifically in contract law to arrange an equitable agreement that will stand
up to legal scrutiny, even though the parties may have shared interests (e.g.,
employer-employee) or are too closely related to be seen as completely
independent (e.g., the parties have familial ties). Examples. A simple example
of not at arm's length is the sale of real property from parents to children.
The parents might wish to sell the property to their children at a price below
market value, but such a transaction might later be classified by a court as a
gift rather than a bona fide sale, which could have tax and other legal
consequences. To avoid such a classification, the parties need to show that the
transaction was conducted no differently than it would have been for an
arbitrary third party. This can be done, for example, by hiring a disinterested
third party such as an appraiser or broker, who can offer a professional
opinion that the sale price is appropriate and reflects the true value of the
property. The principle is often invoked to avoid undue government influence
over other bodies, such as the legal system, the press, or the arts. For
example, in the United Kingdom Arts Councils operate "at arm's length" in
allocating the funds they receive from the government. The Organisation for
Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) has adopted the principle in
Article 9 of the OECD Model Tax Convention, to ensure that transfer prices
between companies of multinational enterprises are established on a market
value basis. In this context, the principle means that prices should be the
same as they would have been, had the parties to the transaction not been
related to each other. This is often seen as being aimed at preventing profits
being systematically deviated to lowest tax countries, although most countries
are also concerned about prices that fail to meet the arm's length test due to
inattention rather than by design and that shifts profits to any other country
(whether it has low or high tax rates). It provides the legal framework for
governments to have their fair share of taxes, and for enterprises to avoid
double taxation on their profits. In the workplace, supervisors and managers
deal with employee discipline and termination of employment at arm's length
through the human resources department, if the company has one. In such cases,
terminations and discipline must be rendered by staff who have the training and
certification to do so legally. This is intended to protect the employer from
legal recourse that employees may otherwise have in the event that it can be
demonstrated that such discipline or terminations were not handled in
accordance with the latest labour laws. For employees in unionised
environments, shop stewards can represent the employee, whereas the HR
department represents the company, so that both sides are on a more equal
footing and can resolve matters outside of court, using informal negotiations
or a grievance, saving both sides time and money. The arm's length dealings in
this case mean that both an employee and a supervisor each have a qualified
advocate.
