Arms Length Management Organisation In the United Kingdom, an arm's length
management organisation (ALMO) is a not-for-profit company that provides
housing services on behalf of a local authority. Usually an ALMO is set up by
the authority to manage and improve all or part of its housing stock. Ownership
of the housing stock itself normally stays with the local authority. , 70 ALMOs
were managing over half of all UK council housing, consisting of more than a
million properties. Ownership. ALMOs are owned by local authorities and operate
under the terms of a management agreement between the authority and the
organisation. An ALMO is managed by an (often unpaid) board of directors which
includes tenants, local authority nominees, and independent members. At least a
third of an ALMO board is normally made up of tenants. Purpose. Establishment
of an ALMO separates the day to day housing management role of the landlord
from the wider strategic housing role of the local authority. However, the
local authority normally retains ownership of the housing and tenants remain
secure tenants of the local authority. Ministers do not give consent to the
establishment of a new ALMO without clear evidence that the council has
consulted its tenants and leaseholders and can demonstrate a balance of support
from them for the ALMO proposal. Unlike a stock transfer to a Housing
Association, Councils can transfer management of their housing to an ALMO
without holding a ballot, although many councils undertake a ballot in any
case. Through the ALMO Programme, Communities and Local Government (CLG) offer
additional resources towards the cost of achieving the Decent Homes Standard to
councils who set up ALMOs that are assessed as 2* (good) or 3* (excellent) on
inspection by the Housing Inspectorate (which is part of the Audit Commission).
A number of ALMOs are considering whether to proceed with the construction of
new housing which would be owned and managed by the ALMO. The ability of ALMOs
to undertake new build projects is considered by the Government to be a way for
ALMOs to develop and be financially viable post 2010, i.e. after the Decent
Homes target date. Criticisms. Since ALMOs are non-profit organisations which
can receive extra funding from the government, dependent on performance, it can
be argued that cost cuts are inevitable. Some say that as a result, the
conditions and pay for their staff (except the management) is much lower than
in the private sector, leading to a high level of staff turnover. Critics of
the ALMO system, such as Defend Council Housing (DCH), have characterised ALMOs
as a stepping stone to stock transfer, in areas where this would have
previously been politically unacceptable. Level of success. The National
Federation of ALMOs stated that as at March 2008, 77% of tenants reported
satisfaction with ALMO housing management. They also stated that 90% of ALMOs
which have been inspected achieved a 2 or 3 star rating, therefore being
eligible for extra funding. They also report significant efficiency savings and
an enhanced timetable for reaching the Decent Homes Standard for much of the
country's housing stock. In 2009 the Government diverted money from ALMOs to
building new homes. Councils that had promoted ALMOs in order to access the
extra funding, and the tenants who had got involved, felt betrayed at the
decision. Tax status. An ALMO cannot benefit from the same tax exemptions as a
local authority. As a result, after discussions with KPMG, HM Revenue & Customs
have published guidance which states that provided certain conditions are met
they will view activities between the ALMO and the local authority as a non-
trading activity and so any profit arising will not be taxable. List of ALMOs.
A list of ALMOs can be found on the website for the National Federation of
ALMOs, together with copies of inspection reports and the number of stars
achieved upon inspection.
