Arrow Cross Party The Arrow Cross Party (, literally "Arrow Cross Party-
Hungarist Movement") was a national socialist party led by Ferenc Szálasi,
which led in Hungary a government known as the Government of National Unity
from 15 October 1944 to 28 March 1945. During its short rule, ten to fifteen
thousand people (many of whom were Jews) were murdered outright, and 80,000
people were deported from Hungary to their deaths in the Auschwitz
concentration camp. After the war, Szálasi and other Arrow Cross leaders were
tried as war criminals by Soviet courts. Formation. The party was founded by
Ferenc Szálasi in 1935 as the Party of National Will. It had its origins in
the political philosophy of pro-German extremists such as Gyula Gömbös, who
famously coined the term "national socialism" in the 1920s. The party was
outlawed in 1937 but was reconstituted in 1939 as the Arrow Cross Party, and
was said to be modeled fairly explicitly on the Nazi Party of Germany, although
Szálasi often and harshly criticized the Nazi regime of Germany. The
iconography of the party was clearly inspired by that of the Nazis; the Arrow
Cross emblem was an ancient symbol of the Magyar tribes who settled Hungary,
thereby suggesting the racial purity of the Hungarians in much the same way
that the Nazi swastika was intended to allude to the racial purity of the
Aryans. Ideology. The party's ideology was similar to that of Nazism, although
a more accurate comparison might be drawn between Austrofascism and Hungarian
fascism which was called Hungarism by Ferenc Szálasi – extreme nationalism,
the promotion of agriculture, anti-capitalism, anticommunism and militant
antisemitism. The party and its leader were originally anti-German, so it was a
long and very difficult process for Hitler to compromise with Szálasi and his
party. The Arrow Cross Party conceived Jews in racial as well as religious
terms, although the necessary scientific capital for a widespread and elaborate
program of eugenics simply did not exist in Hungary at the time. Thus, although
the Arrow Cross Party was certainly far more racist than the Judeophobic
Horthyite regime, whose antisemitism was based solely on Christian belief, it
was still very different from the German Nazi Party. The Arrow Cross Party was
pro-Catholic and its antisemitism had its origins in Christian belief. It was
also more economically radical than other fascist movements, advocating worker
rights and land reforms. In a sense, the Arrow Cross Party was more like
Germany's NSDAP prior to the Night of the Long Knives when the socialist
faction among the Nazis (led by Ernst Roehm) was murdered or subjugated. Rise
to power. The roots of Arrow Cross influence can be traced to the outburst of
anti-Jewish feeling that followed the Communist putsch and brief rule in
Hungary in the spring and summer of 1919. Some Communist leaders, like Tibor
Szamuely, came from Jewish families, or like Béla Kun, its leader, who had a
Jewish father and a Protestant Swabian mother, were considered to be Jews, and
the failed and murderous policies of the Hungarian Soviet Republic came to be
associated in the minds of many Hungarians with a "Jewish-Bolshevist
conspiracy." After the communist regime was crushed in August 1919,
conservatives under the leadership of Admiral Miklós Horthy took control of
the nation. Many Hungarian military officers took part in the counter-reprisals
known as the White Terror – some of that violence was directed at Jews,
simply because they were Jewish. Although the White Guard was officially
suppressed, many of its most bloodthirsty members went underground and formed
the core membership of a spreading nationalist and anti-Jewish movement. During
the 1930s, the Arrow Cross gradually began to dominate Budapest's working class
district, defeating the Social Democrats. It should be noted, however, that the
Social Democrats did not really contest elections effectively; they had to make
a pact with the conservative Horthy regime in order to prevent the abolition of
their party. The Arrow Cross subscribed to the Nazi ideology of "master races"
which, in Szálasi's view, included the Hungarians and Germans, and also
supported the concept of an order based on the power of the strongest – what
Szálasi called a "brutally realistic étatism". But its espousal of
territorial claims under the banner of a "Greater Hungary" and Hungarian values
(which Szálasi labelled "Hungarizmus" or "Hungarianism") clashed with Nazi
ambitions in central Europe, delaying by several years Hitler's endorsement of
that party. The German Foreign Office instead endorsed the pro-German Hungarian
National Socialist Party, which had some support among German minorities.
Before World War II, the Arrow Cross were not proponents of the racial
antisemitism of the Nazis, but utilized traditional stereotypes and prejudices
to gain votes among voters both in Budapest and the countryside. However, the
constant bickering among these diverse fascist groups prevented the Arrow Cross
Party from gaining even more support and power. The Arrow Cross obtained most
of its support from a disparate coalition of military officers, soldiers,
nationalists and agricultural workers. It was only one of a number of similar
openly fascist factions in Hungary but was by far the most prominent, having
developed an effective system of recruitment. When it contested the May 1939
elections – the only ones in which it participated – the party won more
than 25% of the vote and 30 seats in the Hungarian Parliament. This was only a
superficially impressive result; the majority of Hungarians were not permitted
to vote. It did, however, become one of the most powerful parties in Hungary.
But the Horthy leadership banned the Arrow Cross on the outbreak of World War
II, forcing it to operate underground. In 1944, the Arrow Cross Party's
fortunes were abruptly reversed after Hitler lost patience with the reluctance
of Horthy and his moderate prime minister, Miklós Kállay, to toe the Nazi
line fully. In March 1944, the Germans invaded and officially occupied Hungary;
Kállay fled and was replaced by the Nazi proxy, Döme Sztójay. One of
Sztójay's first acts was to legalize the Arrow Cross. During the spring and
summer of 1944, more than 400,000 Jews were herded into centralized ghettos and
then deported from the Hungarian countryside to death camps by the Nazis, with
the willing help of the Hungarian Interior Ministry and its gendarmerie (the
"csendőrség"), both of whose members had close links to the Arrow Cross. The
Jews of Budapest were concentrated into so-called Yellow Star Houses,
approximately 2,000 single-building mini-ghettos identified by a yellow Star of
David over the entrance. In August 1944, before deportations from Budapest
began, Horthy used what influence he had to stop the deportations and force the
radical antisemites out of the government. As the summer progressed, and the
Allied and Soviet armies closed in on central Europe, the ability of the Nazis
to devote themselves to Hungary's "Jewish Solution" waned. Arrow Cross rule. In
October 1944, Horthy negotiated a cease-fire with the Soviets and ordered
Hungarian troops to lay down their arms. In response, Nazi Germany launched
Operation Panzerfaust, a covert operation which forced Horthy to resign, after
which he was put into "protective custody" in Germany. With Nazi approval, the
Arrow Cross Party seized Budapest. Szálasi was declared "Leader of the Nation"
and prime minister of a "Government of National Unity". Soviet and Romanian
forces were already fighting in Hungary even before Szálasi's takeover, and by
the time the Arrow Cross took power the Red Army was already far inside the
country. As a result, its jurisdiction was effectively limited to an ever-
narrowing band of territory in central Hungary, around Budapest. Nonetheless,
the Arrow Cross rule, short-lived as it was, was brutal. In fewer than three
months, death squads killed as many as 38,000 Hungarians. Arrow Cross officers
helped Adolf Eichmann re-activate the deportation proceedings from which the
Jews of Budapest had thus far been spared, sending some 80,000 Jews out of the
city on slave labor details and many more straight to death camps. Many Jewish
males of conscription age were already serving as slave labor for the Hungarian
Army's Forced Labor Battalions. Most of them died, including many who were
murdered outright after the end of the fighting as they were returning home.
Quickly formed battalions raided the Yellow Star Houses and combed the streets,
hunting down Jews claimed to be partisans and saboteurs since Jews attacked
Arrow Cross squads at least six to eight times with gunfire. These
approximately 200 Jews were taken to the bridges crossing the Danube, where
they were shot and their bodies borne away by the waters of the river because
many were attached to weights while they were handcuffed to each other in
pairs. Red Army troops reached the outskirts of the city in December 1944, and
the siege action known as the Battle of Budapest began, although it has often
been claimed that there is no proof that the Arrow Cross members and the
Germans conspired to destroy the Budapest ghetto. Days before he fled the city,
Arrow Cross Interior Minister Gabor Vájna commanded that streets and squares
named for Jews be renamed. As control of the city's institutions began to
decay, the Arrow Cross trained their guns on the most helpless possible
targets: patients in the beds of the city's two Jewish hospitals on Maros
Street and Bethlen Square, and residents in the Jewish poorhouse on Alma Road.
As order collapsed, Arrow Cross members continually sought to raid the ghettos
and Jewish concentration buildings; the majority of Budapest's Jews were saved
only by fearless and heroic efforts on the part of a handful of Jewish leaders
and foreign diplomats, most famously the Swedish Raoul Wallenberg, Swiss Consul
Carl Lutz and Giorgio Perlasca. Szálasi knew that the documents used by these
diplomats to save Jews were invalid according to international law, but he
allowed them to use those papers. Charles Ardai, an American entrepreneur,
novelist and book publisher, recounted in an Oct. 2008 National Public Radio
interview an episode recalled by his mother, who survived the Holocaust in
Hungary. Her family and other Budapest Jews were preparing to flee before the
approach of Arrow Cross killers. They pleaded with two young boys who were
family relatives to go with them, but they refused because their parents had
told them to wait for them at home. As a result, the Arrow Cross men discovered
the boys and killed them. The atrocities committed during the Arrow Cross rule,
especially the mass murders of Jewish citizens, are depicted at length in
György Konrad's largely autobiographical novel "Feast in the Garden" (1989).
The Arrow Cross government effectively fell at the end of January 1945, when
the Soviet Army took Pest and the fascist forces retreated across the Danube to
Buda. Szálasi had escaped from Budapest on December 11, 1944, taking with him
the Hungarian royal crown, while Arrow Cross members and German forces
continued to fight a rear-guard action in the far west of Hungary until the end
of the war in April 1945. Many Jews were murdered in these final weeks because
the Nyilas would not allow them to survive. Post-war developments. After the
war, many of the Arrow Cross leaders were captured and tried for war crimes. In
the first months of postwar adjudication, no fewer than 6,200 indictments for
murder were served against Arrow Cross men. Some Arrow Cross officials,
including Szálasi himself, were executed. In 2006, a former high-ranking
member of the Arrow Cross Party named Lajos Polgár was found to be living in
Melbourne, Australia. He was accused of war crimes, but the case was later
dropped and Polgár died of natural causes in July of that year. The ideology
of the Arrow Cross has resurfaced to some extent in recent years, with the
neofascist Hungarian Welfare Association prominent in reviving Szálasi's
"Hungarizmus" through its monthly magazine, "Magyartudat" (""Hungarian
Awareness""). But "Hungarism" is very much a fringe element of modern Hungarian
politics, and the Hungarian Welfare Association has since dissolved.
