Arthashastra The Arthashastra (IAST: "Arthaśāstra")is an ancient Indian
treatise on statecraft, economic policy and military strategy which identifies
its author by the names 'Kautilya' and ", both names that are traditionally
identified with Chanakya (c. 350–283 BC), who was a scholar at Takshashila
and the teacher and guardian of Emperor Chandragupta Maurya, the founder of
Mauryan Empire. Date and authorship. The author of the "Arthashastra" refers to
himself as 'Kautilya', while the last verse mentions the name 'Vishnupgupta'.
Many scholars believe that the former was the gotra of the author, while the
latter was his personal name. Most scholars, though not all, also believe that
these names refer to the 4th century BC scholar . Thus, the original
identification of Kautilya or Vishnugupta with the Mauryan minister Chanakya
would date the "Arthaśāstra" to the 4th century BCE. Some scholars believe
that Arthasastra was written at a later stage. Their arguments include the
assertion that the state described in Arthasastra is smaller than the Maurya
empire, and there is no reference to either the empire or its capital
Pataliputra. In addition, some of the geographical place names, the reference
to the Hunas and the use of the Greek loan words suggest a later date. Thomas
R. Trautmann and I.W. Mabbett have hypothesized that the 'Arthaśāstra' is a
composition from no earlier than the 2nd century AD, but is clearly based on
earlier material. Their explanation is that while the doctrines of the
'Arthaśāstra' may have been written by Chanakya in the 4th century BC, the
treatise we know today may have been edited or condensed by another author in
the 2nd century AD. This would explain, some affinities with smrtis and
references in the Arthaśāstra which would be anachronistic for the 4th
century BC. Trautmann believes that "Arthashastra" is actually a compilation of
a number of earlier texts written by various authors, and Chanakya might have
been 'one" of these authors. K.C. Ojha has put forward the view attributing the
doctrines of 'Arthaśāstra' to Kautilya or Chanakya and suggests that
Vishnugupta is in fact a redactor of the original work. Thomas Burrow goes even
further and says that Chanakya and Kautilya are actually two different people.
However, some doubt about Burrow's assertion is due to the end of the treatise,
which says: "This Sástra has been made by him who from intolerance (of
misrule) quickly rescued the scriptures and the science of weapons and the
earth which had passed to the Nanda king." This supports the more commonly held
belief that Kautilya and Chanakya are the same person, given Chanakya's role as
mentor to Chandragupta Maurya. More recently, Mital concluded that the methods
used by Trautmann were inadequate to prove his claims, and therefore "there
exists no direct evidence against Kautilya being the sole author of The
Arthashastra, nor evidence that it was not written during the 4th century
BCE.". Mital goes on to rebut Trautmann's reliance on the affinity with the
smrtis. Noted Indian scholars such as Dr RC Majumdar, Dr DR Bhandarkar, Dr KP
Jayaswal and Dr AS Altekar place the date of the Arthshastra between 7th
century BC to 2nd century BC. Dr RK Mookerji, Prof FW Thomas and Vincent Arthur
Smith all agree with the 4th century BC as the time of the book's composition.
HC Raychoudhuri puts 249BC as the lower limit and 100AD as the upper limit of
composition of the text of the Arthshastra in its present form and postulates
that the original text dates from an earlier period. Sir RG Bhandarkar dated
the composition of the current treatise to around 1st or 2nd century AD. This
view is also held by some Western scholars but scholars such as DR RC Majumdar
and Vincent Arthur Smith have rejected the date of Arthshastra as late as 2nd
century AD and cite evidence that supports the composition of the Arthshastra
in 4th century BC. DD Kosambi, noted historian and Indologist, maintains that
the book is a 4th BC century creation by Chanakya or Kautilya who was Prime
Minister of Chandragupta Maurya. Prof Romilla Thapar believes that the book is
a geniune text dating from Mauryan India (4th century BC) but given its final
touch by an editor in 3rd century AD. She supports the view of Trautmann that
portions were composed by Kautilya, but various sections were composed or
edited later and the treatise was given its present day form in 3rd century AD.
Trautmann notes that some portions of the treatise were probably composed by
Kautilya, who was the Prime Minister of Chandragupta, but that other parts were
added later on. He dates the composition of Book-2 of the 'Arthaśāstra' to
150CE and the whole treatise in its present form by 250CE. In summary, most
scholars put the composition of the 'Arthaśāstra' to between 4th century BC
and 2nd century AD. The text was influential until the 12th century, when it
disappeared. It was discovered in 1904 by R. Shamasastry, who published it in
1909 and the first English translation was published in 1915. Translation of
the title. Different scholars have translated the word "arthaśāstra" in
different ways. Roger Boesche describes the "Arthaśāstra" as "a book of
political realism, a book analysing how the political world does work and not
very often stating how it ought to work, a book that frequently discloses to a
king what calculating and sometimes brutal measures he must carry out to
preserve the state and the common good." Centrally, "Arthaśāstra" argues how
in an autocracy an efficient and solid economy can be managed. It discusses the
ethics of economics and the duties and obligations of a king. The scope of
"Arthaśāstra" is, however, far wider than statecraft, and it offers an
outline of the entire legal and bureaucratic framework for administering a
kingdom, with a wealth of descriptive cultural detail on topics such as
mineralogy, mining and metals, agriculture, animal husbandry, medicine and the
use of wildlife. The "Arthaśāstra" also focuses on issues of welfare (for
instance, redistribution of wealth during a famine) and the collective ethics
that hold a society together. Comparison to Machiavelli. Because of its harsh
political pragmatism, the "Arthashastra" has often been compared to
Machiavelli's "The Prince". Max Weber observed However, these aspects form just
one of the 15 books that comprise the 'Arthaśāstra'. The scope of the work is
far broader than popular perceptions indicate, and in the treatise can also be
found compassion for the poor, for servants and slaves, and for women. For
instance, Kautilya advocates what is now known as land reform, and elsewhere
ensures the protection of the chastity of female servants or prisoners.
Significant portions of the book also cover the role of dharma, welfare of a
kingdom's subjects and alleviating hardship in times of disaster, such as
famine. The Rajarshi. "Arthashastra" deals in detail with the qualities and
disciplines required for a Rajarshi – a wise and virtuous king. According to
Kautilya, a Rajarshi is one who: Such a disciplined king should: – Kautilya
says that artha (Sound Economies) is the most important; dharma and kama are
both dependent on it. A Rajarshi shall always respect those councillors and
purohitas who warn him of the dangers of transgressing the limits of good
conduct, reminding him sharply (as with a goad) of the times prescribed for
various duties and caution him even when he errs in private. Duties of the
king. The day shall end with evening prayers. Or some other time table which
suits the king. Hence the king shall be ever active in the management of the
economy. The root of wealth is (economic) activity and lack of it (brings)
material distress. In the absence of (fruitful economic) activity, both current
prosperity and future growth will be destroyed. A king can achieve the desired
objectives and abundance of riches by undertaking (productive) economic
activity. An ideal king is one who has the highest qualities of leadership,
intellect, energy & personal attributes. The qualities of leadership (which
attracts followers) are: birth in a noble family, good fortune, intellect and
prowess, association with elders, being righteous, truthful, resolute,
enthusiastic and disciplined, not breaking his promises, showing gratitude (to
those who help him), having lofty aims, not being dilatory, being stronger than
neighbouring kings and having ministers of high quality. The qualities of
intellect are: desire to learn, listening (to others), grasping, retaining,
understanding thoroughly and reflecting on knowledge, rejecting false views and
adhering to the true ones. An energetic king is one who is valorous,
determined, quick, and dexterous. As regards personal attributes, an ideal king
should be eloquent, bold and endowed with sharp intellect, a strong memory and
a keen mind. He should be amenable to guidance. He should be well trained in
all the arts and be able to lead the army. He should be just in rewarding and
punishing. He should have the foresight to avail himself of the opportunities
(by choosing) the right time, place and type of action. He should know how to
govern in normal times and in times of crisis. He should know when to fight and
when to make peace, when to lie in wait, when to observe treaties and when to
strike at an enemy's weakness. He should preserve his dignity at all times and
not laugh in an undignified manner. He should be sweet in speech, look straight
at people and avoid frowning. He should eschew passion, anger, greed,
obstinacy, fickleness and backbiting. He should conduct himself in accordance
with advice of elders. Internal strife. Kautilya says – Quarrels among people
can be resolved by winning over the leaders or by removing the cause of the
quarrel – people fighting among themselves help the king by their mutual
rivalry. Conflicts (for power) within the royal family, on the other hand,
bring about harassment and destruction to the people and double the exertion
that is required to end such conflicts. Hence internal strife in the royal
family for power is more damaging than quarrels among their subjects. The king
must be well versed in discretion and shrewd in judgement. Comments on vices.
Vices are corruptions due to ignorance and indiscipline; an unlearned man does
not perceive the injurious consequences of his vices. He summarizes: subject to
the qualification that gambling is most dangerous in cases where power is
shared, the vice with the most serious consequence is addiction to drink,
followed by, lusting after women, gambling, and lastly hunting. Training of a
future king. Importance of self-discipline Discipline is of two kinds –
inborn and acquired. (There must be an innate capacity for self discipline for
the reasons given below). Instruction & training can promote discipline only in
a person capable of benefiting from them, people incapable of (natural) self-
discipline do not benefit. Learning imparts discipline only to those who have
the following mental facilities – obedience to a teacher, desire and ability
to learn, capacity to retain what is learnt, understanding what is learnt,
reflecting on it and (finally) ability to make inferences by deliberating on
the knowledge acquired. Those who are devoid of such mental faculties are not
benefited (by any amount of training) One who will be a king should acquire
discipline and follow it strictly in life by learning the sciences from
authoritative teachers. The training of a prince. With improving his self-
discipline, he should always associate with learned elders, for in them alone
has discipline its firm roots. For a trained intellect ensues yoga (successful
application), from yoga comes self-possession. This is what is meant by
efficiency in acquiring knowledge. Only a king, who is wise, disciplined,
devoted to a just governing of the subjects & conscious of the welfare of all
beings, will enjoy the earth unopposed. Seven ways to greet a neighbour.
Kautilya recommended seven strategies in dealing with neighboring powers to
Chandragupta Maurya. Maintenance of law and order. A conducive atmosphere is
necessary for the state's economy to thrive. This requires that a state's law
and order be maintained. Arthashastra specifies fines and punishments to
support strict enforcement of laws. The science of law enforcement is also
called "Dandaniti". Wildlife and forests. The "Kauthilayas Arthashastra" also
reveals that the Mauryas designated specific forests to protect supplies of
timber, as well as lions and tigers, for skins. Elsewhere the "Protector of
Animals" also worked to eliminate thieves, tigers and other predators to render
the woods safe for grazing cattle. Economic ideas. The exhaustive account of
the economic ideas embedded in the Arthasastra has been given by Ratan Lal Basu
and by many renowned Arthasastra-experts in an Edited Volume by Sen & Basu This
book contains papers presented by authors from all over the world in the
International Conference held in 2009 at the Oriental Research Institute,
Mysore, India to celebrate the Centenary of discovery of the manuscript of the
Arthasastra by R. Shamasastry. Recognition. In October 2012, after about two
thousand years from its composition, India's National Security Advisor Shiv
Shankar Menon praised Arthashastra for its clear and precise rules which apply
even today. Furthermore, he recommended reading of the book for broadening the
vision on strategic issues.
