Artivism Artivist is a portmanteau word combining "art" and "activist". Frank
Berganza has stated: "When one pushes for change, socially, politically, or
environmentally, by utilizing their creative ability to communicate in ways of
their artistic activity, that shall be known as Artivism". Artivist Eve Ensler
has stated: "... This passion has all the ingredients of activism, but is
charged with the wild creations of art. Artivism — where edges are pushed,
imagination is freed, and a new language emerges altogether." Bruce Lyons has
written: "... artivism ... promotes the essential understanding that ... ...
can, through courageous creative expression, experience the unifying power of
love when courage harnesses itself to the task of art + social responsibility."
Artivism developed in recent years while the antiwar and anti-globalization
protests emerged and proliferated. In most of the cases artivists attempt to
push political agendas by the means of art, but the focus on raising social,
environmental and technical awareness, has increased exponentially as people
has started to lose faith in politics and the current socioeconomic system.
Besides using traditional mediums like film and music to raise awareness or
push for change, an artivist can also be involved in culture jamming,
subvertising, street art, spoken word, protesting and activism. In some cases,
Paris in 2003 for instance, artivists were arrested for acts of political art
that verged on property destruction. A typical short term goal of artivists is
to reclaim public space, especially by subvertising or destroying ads in urban
areas or on city transportation systems. Nevertheless artivists engage in
different media like utilizing the Internet not only for actions which could be
described as hacktivism. There is a chapter on Artivism in "It's Bigger Than
Hip Hop" by M.K. Asante, Jr.. Asante writes of the artivist: The artivist
(artist +activist) uses her artistic talents to fight and struggle against
injustice and oppression—by any medium necessary. The artivist merges
commitment to freedom and justice with the pen, the lens, the brush, the voice,
the body, and the imagination. The artivist knows that to make an observation
is to have an obligation.
