Asian values Asian values was a concept that came into vogue briefly in the
1990s to justify authoritarian regimes in Asia, predicated on the belief in the
existence within Asian countries of a unique set of institutions and political
ideologies which reflected the region's culture and history. In particular,
this idea was strongly advocated by former Prime Minister Mahathir Mohamad of
Malaysia and former Prime Minister Lee Kuan Yew of Singapore in 1995. The
theory is that there are many differences in Eastern and Western ideas,
philosophy and religion. For instance, collectivism, the idea that human beings
are an integral part of the universe and people are fundamentally connected, is
stronger in Asian society. On the other hand, individualism, the idea that a
human being is an independent part of the universe and society, is stronger in
Western society. Nevertheless, there is no single set of "Asian" values. Main
schools of Asian values include Buddhism, Confucianism, Hinduism, Integral
yoga, Islam, Taoism, Zen, along with other philosophies, movements and
religions. The debate over Asian values, which used to be conducted heatedly,
gradually declined during the 1997 Asian Financial Crisis when it became
evident that Asia as a whole lacked a regional institution mechanism, let alone
any collective action to deal with imminent problems and thus had been subdued
recently. The term has continuously challenged the western interpretation,
which remained uncontested since the French Revolution. During the booming
economy, especially in eastern Asia, the initiators of the debate on
‘‘Asian values’’ wished to create a pan-Asian identity as a counterpart
to the identity of ‘‘the West’’. The handover of Hong Kong and Macao
may have symbolized the removal of the final colonial remnants in Asia. The
response of the West to the new self-confidence manifested by numerous Asian
political leaders was of a decidedly defensive nature. Definition. Because the
proponents of the concept came from different cultural backgrounds, no single
definition of the term exists, but typically "Asian values" encompass some
influences of Confucianism, in particular loyalty towards the family,
corporation, and nation; the forgoing of personal freedom for the sake of
society's stability and prosperity; the pursuit of academic and technological
excellence; and work ethic and thrift. Proponents of "Asian values", who tend
to support Asian-style authoritarian governments claim they are more
appropriate for the region than Western democracy. These values found
expression in the Bangkok Declaration of 1993, which reemphasized the
principles of sovereignty, self-determination, and noninterference. Political
significance. The concept of "Asian values" was a popular idea in People's
Republic of China, Malaysia, Singapore, Indonesia and also in some political
circles in Japan. In Malaysia and Singapore, the concept of Asian values was
embraced partly because it reconciled Islam, the religion of the Malays, with
the Confucianism of the ethnic Chinese, and Hinduism, thereby helping to create
a sense of common values between different ethnic and religious groups in those
countries, as well as forming an ideology that they could call their own which
is different from their understanding of the West. In Japan, it was popular
among some nationalist circles because it challenged the West and also offered
the possibility of Japanese leadership in a new Asia. From the 1960s to the
1980s, the East and Southeast Asian regions were the only developing regions
that grew exponentially in terms of economic wealth; some proponents of Asian
Values have credited this success to a distinctive "third-way" Asian political
model that was touted as an alternative to both totalitarism and liberal
democracy. Mahathir Mohamad and Lee Kuan Yew, at that time the prime ministers
of Malaysia and Singapore, respectively, were particularly vocal advocates of
Asian values. Lee maintained that more than economics, more than politics, a
nation's culture will determine its fate. Fareed Zakaria has written
extensively on Asian values, while Amartya Sen has been one of the concept's
strongest critics. Some critics of the term argue that no universal "Asian"
value system exists, because the cultural diversity of Asia is too great for
there to be a single set of common values across the region. The suggestion
that a set of 'Asian values' operated throughout the Asian region, or even just
in East Asia, contradicts what we know about the presence of long-standing
religious (Islamic, Hindu, Confucian, Buddhist, and Christian) and other
divisions in the region, and of the major social and cultural transformation
that has been underway, especially in the last decade or so. The concept of
"Asian values" began to lose currency after the Asian financial crisis weakened
the economies of many Asian countries, leading to the collapse of the Suharto
regime in Indonesia. Some consider these values to have contributed to the
crisis. When the crisis spread worldwide, the blame subsided. A sharp
observation may suggest that speaking in the name of Asian values (as opposed
to Western, or universal values) serves the purpose of forming a robust
ideological counter force in Asia, and most particularly in China, to the
nations which most clearly aim at the imposition of western ideology on the
East. One way or the other, the use of the term is capable in itself of
creating a significant Dialogue Among Civilizations between human ideas in all
fields. The End of History and the Last Man written by Francis Fukuyama, a
strong propoenent of Western liberal democracy, is one of the key examples to
provide such ideological counter force against Asian values. In his book,
Fukuyama notes that democracy "...conquered rival ideologies like hereditary
monarchy, fascism and most recently communism", marked by the end of the Cold
War. His thesis is that "Liberal democracy may constitute the "end point of
mankind's ideological evolution" and the "final form of human government" and
as such constituted the end of history." In 2006 Indonesian Vice President
Jusuf Kalla linked the concepts of Asian values with the proposed East Asian
Free Trade Agreement and East Asian Community arising from the East Asia
Summit. He partly defends Asian values by placing emphasis on co-operation over
competition. Even until recently, there have been a number of efforts promote
East Asian regional institution such as the idea of single regional FTA like
the East Asia Free Trade Area(EAFTA) among the ASEAN+3 countries — the 10
ASEAN members plus the People’s Republic of China (PRC), Japan and the
Republic of Korea — or a Comprehensive Economic Partnership in East Asia
(CEPEA) among the ASEAN+6 countries — also including Australia, India and New
Zealand. These initiatives may be seen as a first step towards the creation of
a region-wide economic community. According to the Asian Development Bank (ADB)
study Institutions for Asian Integration: Toward an Asian Economic Community
(2010), Asia is supported by a dense web of 40 overlapping regional and sub-
regional institutions that promote regional cooperation and integration at the
intergovernmental level. The realization of a single Asian community would
strengthen the idea of Asian values. Criticism. Taiwan social-politics critic
Lung Ying-Tai argues that Asian values are merely a doublespeak on suppressing
universal values of freedom of speech and human rights. Several Asian political
figures have expressed criticism of the idea of Asian values, including former
President of the Republic of China (Taiwan), Lee Teng-hui, and former President
of the Republic of Korea (South Korea), Kim Dae Jung. Also, in his article
"Democracy as a Universal Value", Amartya Sen pointed out that no universal
"Asian" value system could possibly exist, because the cultural diversity of
Asia is far too great for there to be a single set of common values across the
region. Media. The concept of Asian values is the main theme of the 2002 film
"Hero" which was directed by internationally acclaimed Chinese filmmaker Zhang
Yimou and starred famed martial arts actor Jet Li. The film was criticised for
its perceived pro-totalitarian subtext and ulterior meaning of triumph of
security and stability over liberty and human rights.
