Assembly of the Poor The Assembly of the Poor (Thai:
สมัชชาคนจน) is a non-governmental organization in Thailand.
Its aim is to help those affected by development projects and industries to
become involved in the process of development, so that they benefit from those
projects. The Assembly of the Poor is now considered to be a political voice
for villagers and marginalized members of society. As an organization, it is
allied with other NGOs in Thailand. When the Assembly of the Poor first began,
it was accused of dismantling Thailand's unity and the democratic principles of
Thai ideologies. The non-governmental organization is an amalgamation of seven
districts representing every region of Thailand. It is composed of urban and
rural small-scale agriculturists and manual laborers. Due to its variety of
members, the Assembly is able to transcend regional and class divisions.
Background. In the 1950s, Thailand underwent a plan of development, supported
by the World Bank, intended to help the country industrialize. Subsequent
foreign investment in the company's economy assisted it towards meeting its
goals, but while it would by the 1990s be considered a leader among developing
nations, along with other Southeast Asian countries, by the World Bank and
other economists, development was uneven through the country, with a long-term
problem of unequal distribution of wealth and technology. The agricultural
community, which had both sacrificed natural resources and contributed
significant capital to the development of infrastructure to benefit the plan
without seeing significant gains for themselves, grew resentful. Formation. The
Assembly of the Poor grew out of this unrest, beginning with villagers angry
about local impact of the Pak Mun dam. One of the co-founders of the group,
Vanida Tantiwittayapitak had become involved in Pak Mun after her relocation to
the country following the Thammasat University massacre. While it started as a
rural assembly, city workers were also welcomed. The grass-roots organization
became official on International Human Rights Day, 10 December, in 1995,
becoming the first rural political voice after the 1975 suppression of the
Peasants' Federation. This took place on the opening day of their first
conference, "Assembly of the Poor: The consequences of Large-Scale Development
Projects", held at Thammasat University of Bangkok and intended to coincide
with the ASEAN Summit scheduled in Bangkok on 14–15 December. Conference
attendees spent several days developing the "Mun River Declaration", which both
announced their existence and cricitized the prioritization of industrial
development at the expense of local communities. It also fired a warning shot
against the bow of government, forming a petition detailing their grievances to
the government, punctuated by a march through Bangkok of hundreds of AOP
members and sympathizers. Goals. The Assembly of the Poor's first strategy
connecting the issues experienced by local communities plainly to national
policy. Their second was creating a sense of shared identity among those who
identified themselves as suffering from developmental policies or being
excluded from developmental benefits. AoP both demands compensation for those
injured by developmental strategies and access to resources by their own
communities, but does not limit its political activities to self-interest.
Challenges. According to the "Bangkok Post" the recent issues in Thailand have
a lot to do with the political divisions trying to undermine the AOP. The lack
of unity among the poor poses a major obstacle in the battle to a more
democratic society. In the 21st century, political divisions in Thailand have
weakened the movements of the Assembly of the Poor. In order for the NGO to
stay in a positive direction the "Bangkok Post" states they must focused on;
The rural farmers and peasants need to form a foundation of community rights
that is the constitution of how they country should run. They need to do this
to enhance the future of Thailand and it rank in the global economy and that of
a developing nation.
