Atrocity story The term atrocity story (also referred to as "atrocity tale") as
defined by the American sociologists David G. Bromley and Anson D. Shupe refers
to the symbolic presentation of action or events (real or imaginary) in such a
context that they are made flagrantly to violate the (presumably) shared
premises upon which a given set of social relationships should be conducted.
The recounting of such tales is intended as a means of reaffirming normative
boundaries. By sharing the reporter's disapproval or horror, an audience
reasserts normative prescription and clearly locates the violator beyond the
limits of public morality. The term was coined in 1979 by Bromley, Shupe, and
Joseph Ventimiglia. Views and studies. The term "atrocity story" is
controversial as it relates to the differing views amongst scholars about the
credibility of the accounts of former members. (See: The reliability of
apostates' testimony.) Bryan R. Wilson, Reader Emeritus of Sociology of the
University of Oxford says apostates of new religious movements are generally in
need of self-justification, seeking to reconstruct their past and to excuse
their former affiliations, while blaming those who were formerly their closest
associates. Wilson, thus, challenges the reliability of the apostate's
testimony by saying that the apostate "must always be seen as one whose
personal history predisposes him to bias with respect to both his previous
religious commitment and affiliations, the suspicion must arise that he acts
from a personal motivation to vindicate himself and to regain his self-esteem,
by showing himself to have been first a victim but subsequently to have become
a redeemed crusader." Wilson also asserts that some apostates or defectors from
religious organisations rehearse atrocity stories to explain how, by
manipulation, coercion or deceit, they were recruited to groups that they now
condemn. Jean Duhaime of the Université de Montréal writes, referring to
Wilson, based on his analysis of three books by apostates of new religious
movements, that stories of apostates cannot be dismissed only because they are
subjective. Danny Jorgensen, Professor at the Department of Religious Studies
of the University of Florida, in his book "The Social Construction and
Interpretation of Deviance: Jonestown and the Mass Media" argues that the role
of the media in constructing and reflecting reality is particularly apparent in
its coverage of cults. He asserts that this complicity exists partly because
apostates with an atrocity story to tell make themselves readily available to
reporters and partly because new religious movements have learned to be
suspicious of the media and, therefore, have not been open to investigative
reporters writing stories on their movement from an insider's perspective.
Besides this lack of information about the experiences of people within new
religious movements, the media is attracted to sensational stories featuring
accusations of food and sleep deprivation, sexual and physical abuse, and
excesses of spiritual and emotional authority by the charismatic leader.
Michael Langone argues that some will accept uncritically the positive reports
of current members without calling such reports, for example, "benevolence
tales" or "personal growth tales". He asserts that only the critical reports of
ex-members are called "tales", which he considers to be a term that clearly
implies falsehood or fiction. He states that it wasn't until 1996 that a
researcher conducted a study to assess the extent to which so called "atrocity
tales" might be based on fact. Other uses. The term is also used as related to
atrocity stories told as a form of propaganda, and its power in the shaping of
public opinion during wartime. The term was coined by Stimson and Webb (1975)
in discussing the ways in which patients talk about doctors. It has also been
applied in health care contexts to examine the way in which such stories are
used to assert and defend the character of an occupation against illegitimate
claims to its work or social standing (Dingwall 1977). Further reading.
Dingwall, R. (1977) Atrocity Stories and Professional Relationships. Sociology
of Work and Occupations, Vol4, No 4, November. Stimson GV, and B. Webb (1975)
Going to see the doctor. London: Routledge.
