Augustine of Hippo Augustine of Hippo ( or ; ; November 13, 354 – August 28,
430), also known as St. Augustine, St. Austin, or St. Augoustinos, was bishop
of Hippo Regius (present-day Annaba, Algeria). He was a Latin philosopher and
theologian from the Africa Province of the Roman Empire and is generally
considered as one of the greatest Christian thinkers of all times. His writings
were very influential in the development of Western Christianity. According to
his contemporary Jerome, Augustine "established anew the ancient Faith." In his
early years he was heavily influenced by Manichaeism and afterward by the Neo-
Platonism of Plotinus. After his conversion to Christianity and his baptism in
387, Augustine developed his own approach to philosophy and theology,
accommodating a variety of methods and different perspectives. He believed that
the grace of Christ was indispensable to human freedom, and he framed the
concepts of original sin and just war. When the Western Roman Empire was
starting to disintegrate, Augustine developed the concept of the Catholic
Church as a spiritual City of God (in a book of the same name), distinct from
the material Earthly City. His thoughts profoundly influenced the medieval
worldview. Augustine's "City of God" was closely identified with the Church,
the community that worshiped the Trinity. In the Catholic Church and the
Anglican Communion, he is a saint and pre-eminent Doctor of the Church, and the
patron of the Augustinians; his memorial is celebrated 28 August, the day of
his death. He is the patron saint of brewers, printers, theologians, the
alleviation of sore eyes, and a number of cities and dioceses. Many
Protestants, especially Calvinists, consider him to be one of the theological
fathers of the Protestant Reformation due to his teaching on salvation and
divine grace. In the Eastern Orthodox Church he is also considered a saint, his
feast day being celebrated on 15 June. He carries the additional title of
"Blessed". Among the Orthodox, he is called "Blessed Augustine" or "St.
Augustine the Blessed". Life. Early childhood. Augustine was born in 354 in the
municipium of Thagaste (now Souk Ahras, Algeria) in Roman Africa. His father,
Patricius, was a pagan, and his mother, Monica, was Christian. Scholars believe
that Augustine's ancestors included Berbers, Latins and Phoenicians.
Augustine's family name, Aurelius, suggests that his father's ancestors were
freedmen of the "gens Aurelia" given full Roman citizenship by the Edict of
Caracalla in 212. Augustine's family had been Roman, from a legal standpoint,
for at least a century when he was born. It is assumed that his mother, Monica,
was of Berber origin, on the basis of her name, but as his family were
"honestiores", Augustine's first language is likely to have been Latin. At the
age of 11, he was sent to school at Madaurus (now M'Daourouch), a small
Numidian city about 19 miles south of Thagaste. There he became familiar with
Latin literature, as well as pagan beliefs and practices. While at home in 369
and 370, he read Cicero's dialogue "Hortensius" (now lost), which he described
as leaving a lasting impression on him and sparking his interest in philosophy.
Studying at Carthage. At age 17, through the generosity of fellow citizen
Romanianus, Augustine went to Carthage to continue his education in rhetoric.
Although raised as a Christian, Augustine left the church to follow the
Manichaean religion, much to the despair of his mother, Monica. As a youth
Augustine lived a hedonistic lifestyle for a time, associating with young men
who boasted of their sexual exploits with women and urged the inexperienced
boys, like Augustine, to seek out experiences or to make up stories about
experiences in order to gain acceptance and avoid ridicule. It was during this
period that he uttered his famous prayer, "Grant me chastity and continence,
but not yet" (). At a young age, he began an affair with a young woman in
Carthage. She was his lover for over thirteen years and gave birth to his son
Adeodatus, who was said to have been extremely intelligent. Teaching rhetoric.
During the years 373 and 374, Augustine taught grammar at Thagaste. The
following year he moved to Carthage to conduct a school of rhetoric, and would
remain there for the next nine years. Disturbed by the unruly behavior of the
students in Carthage, in 383 he moved to establish a school in Rome, where he
believed the best and brightest rhetoricians practiced. However, Augustine was
disappointed with the Roman schools, where he was met with apathy. Once the
time came for his students to pay their fees they simply fled. Manichaean
friends introduced him to the prefect of the City of Rome, Symmachus, who had
been asked to provide a professor of rhetoric for the imperial court at Milan.
Augustine won the job and headed north to take up his position in late 384. At
the age of thirty, he had won the most visible academic position in the Latin
world – at a time when such posts gave ready access to political careers.
During this period, although Augustine showed some fervor for Manichaeism, he
was never an initiate or "elect" but remained an "auditor", the lowest level in
the sect's hierarchy. While he was in Milan, Augustine's life changed. While
still at Carthage, he had begun to move away from Manichaeism, in part because
of a disappointing meeting with the Manichean Bishop, Faustus of Mileve, a key
exponent of Manichaean theology. In Rome, he is reported to have completely
turned away from Manichaeanism, and instead embraced the scepticism of the New
Academy movement. At Milan, his mother pressured him to become a Christian.
Augustine's own studies in Neoplatonism were also leading him in this
direction, and his friend Simplicianus urged him that way as well. But it was
the bishop of Milan, Ambrose, who had most influence over Augustine. Ambrose
was a master of rhetoric like Augustine himself, but older and more
experienced. Augustine's mother had followed him to Milan and he allowed her to
arrange a society marriage, for which he abandoned his concubine. It is
believed that Augustine truly loved the woman he had lived with for so long. In
his "Confessions," he expressed how deeply he was hurt by ending this
relationship, and also admitted that the experience eventually produced a
decreased sensitivity to pain over time. However, he had to wait two years
until his fiancee came of age, so despite the grief he felt over leaving "The
One", as he called her, he soon took another concubine. Augustine eventually
broke off his engagement to his eleven-year-old fiancee, but never renewed his
relationship with "The One" and soon left his second concubine. It was because
of "otium" that Alypius of Thagaste steered Augustine away from marriage. He
said that they could not live a life together in the love of wisdom if he
married. Augustine looked back years later on the life at Cassiciacum, a villa
outside of Milan where he gathered with his followers, and described it as
"Christianae vita otium" - the Christian life of leisure. Augustine had been
awarded a job of professor of rhetoric in Milan at the time he was living at
Cassiciacum around 383. In 388, he returned to Africa and his home country and
pursued a life of aristocratic "otium" at his family's property. In 391 he was
ordained bishop of Hippo Regius (hence obtaining the name "Augustine of Hippo")
and gave his property to the church of Thagaste. Christian conversion. The
volume Augustine read was Paul's Epistle to the Romans. He wrote an account of
his conversion in his "Confessions" (), which became a classic of Christian
theology. Ambrose baptized Augustine, along with his son, Adeodatus, on Easter
Vigil in 387 in Milan, and a year later they returned to Africa. Also in 388 he
completed his "apology" "On the Holiness of the Catholic Church". On the way
back to Africa Augustine's mother Monica died, and Adeodatus soon after.
Priesthood. Upon his return to north Africa Augustine sold his patrimony and
gave the money to the poor. The only thing he kept was the family house, which
he converted into a monastic foundation for himself and a group of friends. In
391 he was ordained a priest in Hippo Regius (now Annaba, in Algeria). He
became a famous preacher (more than 350 preserved sermons are believed to be
authentic), and was noted for combating the Manichaean religion, to which he
had formerly adhered. In 395 he was made coadjutor Bishop of Hippo, and became
full Bishop shortly thereafter. He remained in this position until his death in
430. Augustine worked tirelessly in trying to convince the people of Hippo to
convert to Christianity. He left his monastery, but continued to lead a
monastic life in the episcopal residence. He left a "regula" his monastery that
has led him to be designated the "patron saint of regular clergy" Much of
Augustine's later life was recorded by his friend Possidius, bishop of Calama
(present-day Guelma, Algeria), in his "Sancti Augustini Vita". Possidius
admired Augustine as a man of powerful intellect and a stirring orator who took
every opportunity to defend Christianity against its detractors. Possidius also
described Augustine's personal traits in detail, drawing a portrait of a man
who ate sparingly, worked tirelessly, despised gossip, shunned the temptations
of the flesh, and exercised prudence in the financial stewardship of his see.
Death. Shortly before Augustine's death, Roman Africa was invaded by the
Vandals, a Germanic tribe that had converted to Arianism. The Vandals besieged
Hippo in the spring of 430, when Augustine entered his final illness. According
to Possidius one of the few miracles attributed to Augustine took place during
the siege. While Augustine was confined to his sick bed, a man petitioned him
that he might lay his hands upon a relative who was ill. Augustine replied that
if he had any power to cure the sick, he would surely have applied it on
himself first. The visitor declared that he was told in a dream to go to
Augustine so that his relative would be made whole. When Augustine heard this,
he no longer hesitated, but laid his hands upon the sick man, who departed from
Augustine's presence healed. Possidius also gives a first-hand account of
Augustine's death, which occurred on August 28, 430, while Hippo was still
besieged. Augustine spent his final days in prayer and repentance, requesting
that the penitential Psalms of David be hung on his walls so that he could read
them. He directed that the library of the church in Hippo and all the books
therein should be carefully preserved. Shortly after his death the Vandals
lifted the siege of Hippo, but they returned not long thereafter and burned the
city. They destroyed all of it but Augustine's cathedral and library, which
they left untouched. According to Bede's "True Martyrology", Augustine's body
was later removed to Cagliari, Sardinia by the Catholic bishops expelled from
North Africa by Huneric. Around 720 his remains were moved again by Peter,
bishop of Pavia and uncle of the Lombard king Liutprand, to the church of San
Pietro in Ciel d'Oro, in order to save them from frequent coastal raids by
Muslims. In January 1327 Pope John XXII issued the papal bull "Veneranda
Santorum Patrum", in which he appointed the Augustinians guardians of the tomb
of Augustine, which was remade in 1362 and elaborately carved with bas-reliefs
of scenes from Augustine's life. By that time, however, the actual remains of
Augustine could not be authenticated. Stonemasons working in the crypt altar
removed paving blocks and discovered a marble box. Within it were other boxes;
in the third box were fragments of wood, numerous bones and bone fragments, and
glass vials. Some of the workers later claimed to have seen the name
"Augustine" written in charcoal on the top of the box. A factor complicating
the authentication of the remains was that San Pietro was shared by two
Augustinian religious orders in bitter rivalry. The Augustinians were expelled
from Pavia in 1700, taking refuge in Milan with the relics of Augustine, and
the disassembled Arca, which were removed to the cathedral there. San Pietro
fell into disrepair and was a military magazine during the Napoleonic
occupation of the city. It was finally rebuilt in the 1870s, under the urging
of Agostino Gaetano Riboldi, and reconsecrated in 1896 when the relics of
Augustine and the shrine were once again reinstalled. Works. Augustine was one
of the most prolific Latin authors in terms of surviving works, and the list of
his works consists of more than one hundred separate titles. They include
apologetic works against the heresies of the Arians, Donatists, Manichaeans and
Pelagians, texts on Christian doctrine, notably "De Doctrina Christiana" ("On
Christian Doctrine"), exegetical works such as commentaries on Book of Genesis,
the Psalms and Paul's Letter to the Romans, many sermons and letters, and the
"Retractationes", a review of his earlier works which he wrote near the end of
his life. Apart from those, Augustine is probably best known for his
"Confessiones" ("Confessions"), which is a personal account of his earlier
life, and for "De civitate dei" ("Of the City of God", consisting of 22 books),
which he wrote to restore the confidence of his fellow Christians, which was
badly shaken by the sack of Rome by the Visigoths in 410. His "On the Trinity",
in which he developed what has become known as the 'psychological analogy' of
the Trinity, is also among his masterpieces, and arguably one of the greatest
theological works of all time. He also wrote "On Free Choice Of The Will" ("De
libero arbitrio"), addressing why God gives humans free will that can be used
for evil. In his work, De Ordine ("On Order"), "Augustine, stumbling upon a
cockfight, had a revelation", and writes "in every motion of these animals
unendowed with reason there was nothing ungraceful since, of course, another
higher reason was guiding everything they did". Again in understanding God's
creation and His order, Augustine further writes, "Order is that which will
lead us to God, if we hold to it during life; and unless we do hold to it
during life, we shall not come to God." Influence as a theologian and thinker.
Augustine was a bishop, priest, and father who remains a central figure, both
within Christianity and in the history of Western thought, and is considered by
modern historian Thomas Cahill to be the first medieval man and the last
classical man. In both his philosophical and theological reasoning, he was
greatly influenced by Stoicism, Platonism and Neo-platonism, particularly by
the work of Plotinus, author of the Enneads, probably through the mediation of
Porphyry and Victorinus (as Pierre Hadot has argued). Although he later
abandoned Neoplatonism some ideas are still visible in his early writings. His
generally favourable view of Neoplatonic thought contributed to the "baptism"
of Greek thought and its entrance into the Christian and subsequently the
European intellectual tradition. His early and influential writing on the human
will, a central topic in ethics, would become a focus for later philosophers
such as Schopenhauer, Kierkegaard, and Nietzsche. In addition, Augustine was
influenced by the works of Virgil (known for his teaching on language), Cicero
(known for his teaching on argument), and Aristotle (particularly his Rhetoric
and Poetics). Augustine's concept of original sin was expounded in his works
against the Pelagians. However, St. Thomas Aquinas took much of Augustine's
theology while creating his own unique synthesis of Greek and Christian thought
after the widespread rediscovery of the work of Aristotle. Augustine's doctrine
of efficacious grace found eloquent expression in the works of Bernard of
Clairvaux; also Reformation theologians such as Martin Luther and John Calvin
would look back to him as their inspiration. Augustine was canonized by popular
acclaim, and later recognized as a Doctor of the Church in 1298 by Pope
Boniface VIII. His feast day is August 28, the day on which he died. He is
considered the patron saint of brewers, printers, theologians, sore eyes, and a
number of cities and dioceses. The latter part of Augustine's "Confessions"
consists of an extended meditation on the nature of time. Even the agnostic
philosopher Bertrand Russell was impressed by this. He wrote, "a very admirable
relativistic theory of time. ... It contains a better and clearer statement
than Kant's of the subjective theory of time - a theory which, since Kant, has
been widely accepted among philosophers." Catholic theologians generally
subscribe to Augustine's belief that God exists outside of time in the "eternal
present"; that time only exists within the created universe because only in
space is time discernible through motion and change. His meditations on the
nature of time are closely linked to his consideration of the human ability of
memory. Frances Yates in her 1966 study "The Art of Memory" argues that a brief
passage of the "Confessions", 10.8.12, in which Augustine writes of walking up
a flight of stairs and entering the vast fields of memory clearly indicates
that the ancient Romans were aware of how to use explicit spatial and
architectural metaphors as a mnemonic technique for organizing large amounts of
information. Augustine's philosophical method, especially demonstrated in his
"Confessions", has had continuing influence on Continental philosophy
throughout the 20th century. His descriptive approach to intentionality,
memory, and language as these phenomena are experienced within consciousness
and time anticipated and inspired the insights of modern phenomenology and
hermeneutics. Edmund Husserl writes: "The analysis of time-consciousness is an
age-old crux of descriptive psychology and theory of knowledge. The first
thinker to be deeply sensitive to the immense difficulties to be found here was
Augustine, who laboured almost to despair over this problem." Martin Heidegger
refers to Augustine's descriptive philosophy at several junctures in his
influential work, "Being and Time". Hannah Arendt began her philosophical
writing with a dissertation on Augustine's concept of love, "Der Liebesbegriff
bei Augustin" (1929): "The young Arendt attempted to show that the
philosophical basis for "vita socialis" in Augustine can be understood as
residing in neighbourly love, grounded in his understanding of the common
origin of humanity." Jean Bethke Elshtain in "Augustine and the Limits of
Politics" finds likeness between Augustine and Arendt in their concepts of
evil: "Augustine did not see evil as glamorously demonic but rather as absence
of good, something which paradoxically is really nothing. Arendt ... envisioned
even the extreme evil which produced the Holocaust as merely banal "Eichmann in
Jerusalem"." Augustine's philosophical legacy continues to influence
contemporary critical theory through the contributions and inheritors of these
20th-century figures. According to Leo Ruickbie, Augustine's arguments against
magic, differentiating it from miracle, were crucial in the early Church's
fight against paganism and became a central thesis in the later denunciation of
witches and witchcraft. According to Professor Deepak Lal, Augustine's vision
of the heavenly city has influenced the secular projects and traditions of the
Enlightenment, Marxism, Freudianism and Eco-fundamentalism. Influence on St.
Thomas Aquinas. For quotations of St. Augustine by St. Thomas Aquinas see
Aquinas and the Sacraments and Thought of Thomas Aquinas. On the topic of
original sin, Aquinas proposed a more optimistic view of man than that of
Augustine in that his conception leaves to the reason, will, and passions of
fallen man their natural powers even after the Fall. Influence on Protestant
reformers. While in his pre-Pelagian writings Augustine taught that Adam's
guilt as transmitted to his descendants much enfeebles, though does not
destroy, the freedom of their will, Protestant reformers Martin Luther and John
Calvin affirmed that Original Sin completely destroyed liberty (see total
depravity). Influence on Modern-Day Ministers and Authors. Augustine's
influence has impacted many modern day theologians and authors. One known
theologian and author is John Piper, whose series of books are called, "The
Swans Are Not Silent" in which the first book is titled "The Legacy of
Sovereign Joy", referring to a quote taken from ("Confessions, IX,1"). "How
sweet it was for me to be rid of those fruitless joys which I had once feared
to lose... You drove them from me, you who are the true, the sovereign joy. You
drove them from me and took their place, you who are sweeter than all pleasure,
though not of flesh and blood, you who outshine all light, yet are hidden
deeper than any secret in our hearts, you who surpass all honor, though not in
the eyes of men who see all honor in themselves... O Lord my God, my Light, my
Wealth, and My Salvation." Hannah Arendt, an influential 20th century political
theorist, wrote her doctoral dissertation in philosophy on St. Augustine, and
continued to rely on his thought throughout her career. In his autobiographical
book "Milestones", Pope Benedict XVI, a prolific and influential Catholic
theologian in his own right before ascending to the papacy, claims St.
Augustine as one of the deepest influences in his thought. Theology. Abortion
and ensoulment. Like other Church Fathers such as Athenagoras St. Augustine
"vigorously condemned the practice of induced abortion" as a crime, in any
stage of pregnancy, although he accepted the distinction between "formed" and
"unformed" fetuses mentioned in the Septuagint translation of , a text that, he
observed, did not classify as murder the abortion of an "unformed" fetus, since
it could not be said with certainty that it had already received a soul (see,
e.g., "De Origine Animae" 4.4). Anthropology. Augustine's favourite figure to
describe "body-soul" unity is marriage: "caro tua, coniunx tua - your body is
your wife". Initially, the two elements were in perfect harmony. After the fall
of humanity they are now experiencing dramatic combat between one another. They
are two categorically different things. The body is a three-dimensional object
composed of the four elements, whereas the soul has no spatial dimensions. Soul
is a kind of substance, participating in reason, fit for ruling the body.
Augustine was not preoccupied, as Plato and Descartes were, with going too much
into details in efforts to explain the metaphysics of the soul-body union. It
suffices for him to admit that they are metaphysically distinct; to be a human
is to be a composite of soul and body, and that the soul is superior to the
body. The latter statement is grounded in his hierarchical classification of
things into those that merely exist, those that exist and live, and those that
exist, live, and have intelligence or reason. Baptism. This belief was shared
by many early Christians. Creation. In ""The Literal Interpretation of
Genesis"" Augustine took the view that everything in the universe was created
simultaneously by God, and not in seven calendar days like a plain account of
Genesis would require. He argued that the six-day structure of creation
presented in the book of Genesis represents a logical framework, rather than
the passage of time in a physical way - it would bear a spiritual, rather than
physical, meaning, which is no less literal. One reason for this interpretation
is the passage in Sirach 18:1, "creavit omni simul" ("he created all things at
once"), which Augustine took as proof that the days of Genesis 1 had to be
taken non-literally. Augustine also does not envision original sin as
originating structural changes in the universe, and even suggests that the
bodies of Adam and Eve were already created mortal before the Fall. Apart from
his specific views, Augustine recognizes that the interpretation of the
creation story is difficult, and remarks that we should be willing to change
our mind about it as new information comes up. Ecclesiology. Augustine
developed his doctrine of the Church principally in reaction to the Donatist
sect. He taught that there is one Church, but that within this Church there are
two realities, namely, the visible aspect (the institutional hierarchy, the
sacraments, and the laity) and the invisible (the souls of those in the Church,
who are either dead, sinful members or elect predestined for Heaven). The
former is the institutional body established by Christ on earth which proclaims
salvation and administers the sacraments while the latter is the invisible body
of the elect, made up of genuine believers from all ages, and who are known
only to God. The Church, which is visible and societal, will be made up of
"wheat" and "tares", that is, good and wicked people (as per Mat. 13:30), until
the end of time. This concept countered the Donatist claim that only those in a
state of grace were the "true" or "pure" church on earth, and that priests and
bishops who were not in a state of grace had no authority or ability to confect
the sacraments. Augustine's ecclesiology was more fully developed in "City of
God". There he conceives of the church as a heavenly city or kingdom, ruled by
love, which will ultimately triumph over all earthly empires which are self-
indulgent and ruled by pride. Augustine followed Cyprian in teaching that the
bishops and priests of the Church are the successors of the Apostles, and that
their authority in the Church is God-given. Eschatology. Augustine originally
believed that Christ would establish a literal 1,000-year kingdom prior to the
general resurrection (premillennialism or chiliasm) but rejected the system as
carnal. He was the first theologian to systematically expound a doctrine of
amillennialism, although some theologians and Christian historians believe his
position was closer to that of modern postmillennialists. The mediaeval
Catholic church built its system of eschatology on Augustinian amillennialism,
where the Christ rules the earth spiritually through his triumphant church. At
the Reformation, theologians such as John Calvin accepted amillennialism while
rejecting aspects of mediaeval ecclesiology which had been built on Augustine's
teaching. Augustine taught that the eternal fate of the soul is determined at
death, and that purgatorial fires of the intermediate state purify only those
that died in communion with the Church. His teaching provided fuel for later
theology. Epistemological views. Augustine's intellectual development was
shaped by epistemological concerns. His early dialogues (Contra academicos
(386) and De Magistro (389)), both written shortly after his conversion to
Christianity, reflect his engagement with skeptical arguments and show the
development of his doctrine of inner illumination. Augustine also posed the
problem of other minds throughout different works, most famously perhaps in On
the Trinity (VIII.6.9), and develops what has come to be a standard solution:
the argument from analogy to other minds. In contrast to Plato and other
earlier philosophers, Augustine recognizes the centrality of testimony to human
knowledge and argues that what others tell us can provide knowledge even if we
don't have independent reasons to believe their testimonial reports.
Intercession of the Saints. In his book "Confessions", Augustine wrote of a
peculiar practice of his Christian mother, Monica, in which she "brought to
certain oratories, erected in the memory of the saints, offerings of porridge,
bread, and wine." When she moved to Milan, the bishop Ambrose forbade her to
use the offering of wine, since "it might be an occasion of gluttony for those
who were already given to drink". So, Augustine wrote of her: Just war.
Augustine was one of the first major theologians to assert that Christians
should not be pacifists, despite the famous passage, Matthew 5:39, which says
"But I say, do not resist an evil person! If someone slaps you on the right
cheek, offer the other cheek also". In essence, the pursuit of peace must
include the option of fighting to preserve it in the long-term. Such a war
could not be preemptive, but defensive, to restore peace. Mariology. Although
Augustine did not develop an independent Mariology, his statements on Mary
surpass in number and depth those of other early writers. Even before the
Council of Ephesus, he defended the ever Virgin Mary as the Mother of God, who,
because of her virginity, is full of grace. Likewise, he affirmed that the
Virgin Mary "“conceived as virgin, gave birth as virgin and stayed virgin
forever”". Natural knowledge and biblical interpretation. A more clear
distinction between "metaphorical" and "literal" in literary texts arose with
the rise of the Scientific Revolution, although its source could be found in
earlier writings, such as those of Herodotus (5th century BC). It was even
considered heretical to interpret the Bible literally at times. Original sin.
Augustine taught that Original sin of Adam and Eve was either an act of
"foolishness" ("insipientia") followed by "pride" and "disobedience" to God or
the opposite: pride came first. The first couple disobeyed God, who had told
them not to eat of the Tree of the knowledge of good and evil (Gen 2:17). The
tree was a symbol of the order of creation. Self-centeredness made Adam and Eve
eat of it, thus failing to acknowledge and respect the world as it was created
by God, with its hierarchy of beings and values. They would not have fallen
into pride and lack of wisdom, if Satan hadn't sown into their senses ""the
root of evil"" ("radix Mali"). Their nature was wounded by "concupiscence" or
"libido", which affected human intelligence and will, as well as affections and
desires, including sexual desire. In terms of Metaphysics, "concupiscence" is
not a being but bad quality, the privation of good or a wound. Augustine's
understanding of the consequences of the original sin and of necessity of the
redeeming grace was developed in the struggle against Pelagius and his pelagian
disciples, Caelestius and Julian of Eclanum, who had been inspired by Rufinus
of Syria, a disciple of Theodore of Mopsuestia. They refused to agree that
"libido" wounded human will and mind, insisting that the human nature was given
the power to act, to speak, and to think when God created it. Human nature
cannot lose its moral capacity for doing good, but a person is free to act or
not to act in a righteous way. Pelagius gave an example of eyes: they have
capacity for seeing, but a person can make either good or bad use of it. Like
Jovinian, pelagians insisted that human affections and desires were not touched
by the fall either. Immorality, "e.g." fornication, is exclusively a matter of
will, "i.e." a person does not use natural desires in a proper way. Augustine
had served as a "Hearer" for the Manicheans for about nine years, who taught
that the original sin was carnal knowledge. But his struggle to understand the
cause of evil in the world started before that, at the age of nineteen. By
"malum" ("evil") he understood most of all "concupiscence", which he
interpreted as a vice dominating person and causing in men and women moral
disorder. A. Trapè insists that Augustine's personal experience cannot be
credited for his doctrine about concupiscence. His marriage experience, though
Christian marriage celebration was missing, was exemplary, very normal and by
no means specifically sad. As J. Brachtendorf showed, Augustine used Ciceronian
Stoic concept of passions, to interpret St. Paul's doctrine of universal sin
and redemption. The view that not only human soul but also senses were
influenced by the fall of Adam and Eve was prevalent in Augustine's time among
the Fathers of the Church. It is clear that the reason of Augustine's distance
towards the affairs of the flesh was different than that of Plotinus, a neo-
Platonist Augustine taught the redemption, i.e. transformation and
purification, of the body in the resurrection. Some authors perceive
Augustine's doctrine as directed against human sexuality and attribute his
insistence on continence and devotion to God as coming from Augustine's need to
reject his own highly sensual nature as described in the Confessions. But in
view of his writings it is apparently a misunderstanding. Augustine teaches
that human sexuality has been wounded, together with the whole of human nature,
and requires redemption of Christ. That healing is a process realized in
conjugal acts. The virtue of continence is achieved thanks to the grace of the
sacrament of Christian marriage, which becomes therefore a "remedium
concupiscentiae" - remedy of concupiscence. The sin of Adam is inherited by all
human beings. Already in his pre-Pelagian writings, Augustine taught that
Original Sin was transmitted by concupiscence, which he regarded as the passion
of both, soul and body, making humanity a "massa damnata" (mass of perdition,
condemned crowd) and much enfeebling, though not destroying, the freedom of the
will. Augustine's formulation of the doctrine of original sin was confirmed at
numerous councils, "i.e." Carthage (418), Ephesus (431), Orange (529), Trent
(1546) and by popes, "i.e." Pope Innocent I (401–417) and Pope Zosimus
(417–418). Anselm of Canterbury established in his "Cur Deus Homo" the
definition that was followed by the great Schoolmen, namely that Original Sin
is the "privation of the righteousness which every man ought to possess", thus
interpreting "concupiscence" as something more than mere sexual lust, with
which some Augustine's disciples had defined it as later did Luther and Calvin,
a doctrine condemned in 1567 by Pope Pius V. Lutherans and Calvinists suggest
that, according to Augustine, human beings are utterly depraved in nature. That
humans are spoiled by the original sin to the extent that the very presence of
concupiscence, "fomes peccati" ("incendiary of sin"), is already a personal
sin. Augustine's doctrine about the "liberum arbitrium" or free will and its
inability to respond to the will of God without divine grace is interpreted in
terms of Predestination: grace is irresistible, results in conversion, and
leads to perseverance. The Calvinist view of Augustine's teachings rests on the
assertion that God has foreordained, from eternity, those who will be saved.
The number of the elect is fixed. God has chosen the elect certainly and
gratuitously, without any previous merit ("ante merita") on their part. The
Catholic Church considers Augustine's teaching to be consistent with free will.
He often said that any can be saved if they wish. While God knows who will be
saved and who will not, with no possibility that one destined to be lost will
be saved, this knowledge represents God's perfect knowledge of how humans will
freely choose their destinies. Sacramental theology. Also in reaction against
the Donatists, Augustine developed a distinction between the "regularity" and
"validity" of the sacraments. Regular sacraments are performed by clergy of the
Catholic Church while sacraments performed by schismatics are considered
irregular. Nevertheless, the validity of the sacraments do not depend upon the
holiness of the priests who perform them ("ex opere operato"); therefore,
irregular sacraments are still accepted as valid provided they are done in the
name of Christ and in the manner prescribed by the Church. On this point
Augustine departs from the earlier teaching of Cyprian, who taught that
converts from schismatic movements must be re-baptised. Augustine taught that
sacraments administered outside the Catholic Church, though true sacraments,
avail nothing. However, he also stated that baptism, while it does not confer
any grace when done outside the Church, does confer grace as soon as one is
received into the Catholic Church. Eucharist. Upholding the early Christian
understanding of the Real Presence of Christ in the Eucharist, Augustine made
the following logical observation regarding this sacrament: "Christ was carried
in his own hands when, referring to his own body, he said, ‘This is my
body’ 26:26. For he carried that body in his hands." In a sermon addressed to
new Christians, Augustine explicitly described the bread and wine as the body
and blood of Christ. Statements on Jews. Against certain Christian movements,
some of which rejected the use of Hebrew Scripture, Augustine countered that
God had chosen the Jews as a special people, and he considered the scattering
of Jews by the Roman Empire to be a fulfillment of prophecy. Augustine also
quotes part of the same prophecy that says "Slay them not, lest they should at
last forget Thy law" (Psalm 59:11). Augustine argued that God had allowed the
Jews to survive this dispersion as a warning to Christians, thus they were to
be permitted to dwell in Christian lands. Augustine further argued that the
Jews would be converted at the end of time. Views on lust. Here we can see the
theoretical resolution of the struggle documented in "Confessions": that proper
love exercises a denial of selfish pleasure and the subjugation of corporeal
desire to God. To the pious virgins raped during the sack of Rome, he writes,
"Truth, another's lust cannot pollute thee." Chastity is "a virtue of the mind,
and is not lost by rape, but is lost by the intention of sin, even if
unperformed." Augustine viewed erections themselves as involuntary: "at times,
without intention, the body stirs on its own, insistent; at other times, it
leaves a straining lover in the lurch." In short, Augustine's life experience
led him to consider lust to be one of the most grievous sins, and a serious
obstacle to the virtuous life. Views on Women. Augustine's view of sexual
feelings as sinful impacted his view of women. His beliefs on this issue were
so extreme that he considered a man’s erection to be sinful because it did
not take place under his conscious control. His solution was to place controls
on women to limit their ability to influence men: “Thus the woman, but not
the man, should veil herself to prevent her from causing this sinful response
in the male.” Augustine viewed women not only as threatening to men, but also
as intellectually and morally inferior: “It is the natural order among people
that women serve their husbands and children their parents, because the justice
of this lies in (the principle that) the lesser serves the greater . . . This
is the natural justice that the weaker brain serve the stronger. This therefore
is the evident justice in the relationships between slaves and their masters,
that they who excel in reason, excel in power.” “Flesh stands for the
woman,” he said, “and the spirit for the husband…” "He concluded that
'the serpent, which represents the enticement to disobedience to God and the
preference for selfish desires, first approached Eve, because as a woman she
had less rationality and self-control and was closer to the ‘lower’ or
female part of the soul…" "Adam, on the other hand, was equated with the
higher, superior part of the human soul. In fact, his choice to eat the
forbidden fruit along with his wife was viewed by Augustine as “an act of
kindly companionship, lest she be left alone outside paradise” "In other
words, Augustine believed that sin entered the world because man—the
spirit—did not exercise proper authority over the woman—the flesh."
Influence on the Role of Women in the Church. The idea that women cannot lead,
teach or be a witness can be found in a document called, in Latin, the Decretum
Gratiani. According to Raming, the authority of this document rests largely on
two sources, Roman law, and the views of the early church fathers—one of the
most influential being St. Augustine, the Bishop of Hippo. “By a principle of
civil law, no woman can exercise a public office. By Church Law women are
equally barred from all spiritual functions and offices.” “A woman can,
therefore, not receive any ecclesiastical ordination. If she receives one, the
ordination will not imprint a sacramental character . . . .” “No woman,
however saintly she may be, may either preach or teach . . . .” “A wife is
under the power of her husband, the husband not under the power of the wife.
The husband may punish her. A wife is obliged to follow her husband to wherever
he decides to fix his residence.” “A woman is bound to greater modesty than
a man.” “A woman is sooner excused on account of fear than a man. She is
dispensed from going to Rome to obtain absolution from an excommunication.”
"Augustine remains the classical theologian for the Western Christian
tradition. His was a brilliant mind, and his voluminous writings grew from a
lifetime of grappling with the relation of the Christian tradition to his own
spiritual journey. Teaching philosophy. Augustine is considered an influential
figure in the history of education. He introduced the theory of three different
categories of students, and instructed teachers to adapt their teaching styles
to each student's individual learning style. The three different kinds of
students are: the student who has been well-educated by knowledgeable teachers;
the student who has had no education; and the student who has had a poor
education, but believes himself to be well-educated. If a student has been well
educated in a wide variety of subjects, the teacher must be careful not to
repeat what they have already learned, but to challenge the student with
material which they do not yet know thoroughly. With the student who has had no
education, the teacher must be patient, willing to repeat things until the
student understands, and sympathetic. Perhaps the most difficult student,
however, is the one with an inferior education who believes he understands
something when he does not. Augustine stressed the importance of showing this
type of student the difference between "having words and having understanding,"
and of helping the student to remain humble with his acquisition of knowledge.
Augustine introduced the idea of teachers responding positively to the
questions they may receive from their students, no matter if the student
interrupted his teacher. Augustine also founded the "restrained" style of
teaching. This teaching style ensures the students' full understanding of a
concept because the teacher does not bombard the student with too much
material; focuses on one topic at a time; helps them discover what they don't
understand, rather than moving on too quickly; anticipates questions; and helps
them learn to solve difficulties and find solutions to problems. Yet another of
Augustine's major contributions to education is his study on the styles of
teaching. He claimed there are two basic styles a teacher uses when speaking to
the students. The "mixed style" includes complex and sometimes showy language
to help students see the beautiful artistry of the subject they are studying.
The "grand style" is not quite as elegant as the mixed style, but is exciting
and heartfelt, with the purpose of igniting the same passion in the students'
hearts. Augustine balanced his teaching philosophy with the traditional Bible-
based practice of strict discipline. For example, he agreed with using
punishment as an incentive for children to learn. He believed all people tend
toward evil, and students must therefore be physically punished when they allow
their evil desires to direct their actions. Translations. English translations
of Augustine's work abound. One of the best translations of Augustine into
English currently available is the one offered by New City Press in the series
"The Works of St. Augustine: A translation for the 21st Century". To date, this
is also the most complete translation of Augustine's works in English. The
Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy offers a list of selected translations,
which however does not claim to be exhaustive. In popular culture. Augustine
was played by Dary Berkani in the 1972 television movie "Augustine of Hippo".
He was also played by Franco Nero in the 2010 mini-series "". The modern day
name links to the Agostinelli Family. Jostein Gaarder's book "Vita Brevis" is a
translation of a letter Gaarder found in a bookshop in Buenos Aires which is
assumed to be a letter from Augustine's concubine to him after he became the
Bishop of Hippo. St. Augustine appears in the novel "The Dalkey Archive" by
Flann O'Brian (the pen name of Irish Author Brian O'Nolan). He is summoned to
an underwater cavern by an absurd scientist called De Selby; together they
discuss life in Heaven and the characters of other Saints. Walter M. Miller,
Jr.'s novel A Canticle for Leibowitz cites St. Augustine as possibly positing
the first version of a theory of evolution. Bob Dylan recorded a song entitled
"I Dreamed I Saw St. Augustine" on his album "John Wesley Harding". Pop artist
Sting pays an homage of sorts to Augustine's struggles with lust with the song
"Saint Augustine in Hell" which appears on the singer's 1993 album "Ten
Summoner's Tales". Christian Rock artist Disciple named their fourth track on
their 2010 release "Horseshoes and Handgrenades" after Augustine, called: "The
Ballad of St. Augustine". The song "St. Augustine" appears on Girlyman's album,
"Supernova". American rock band Moe named and referenced Augustine of Hippo in
their song entitled, "St. Augustine."
