Außerparlamentarische Opposition The Außerparlamentarische Opposition (German
for "extra-parliamentary opposition", commonly known as the APO), was a
political protest movement active in West Germany during the latter half of the
1960s and early 1970s, forming a central part of the German student movement.
Its membership consisted mostly of young people disillusioned with the grand
coalition ("Große Koalition") of the SPD and the CDU. Since the Coalition
controlled 95% of the Bundestag, the APO provided a more effective outlet for
student dissent. Its most prominent member and unofficial spokesman was Rudi
Dutschke. Classification. As opposed to APO, there was also opposition from
other parties that, although they are represented in parliament, do not
participate in the formation of the government. Small parties would receive too
few votes in an election to reenter the parliament. For example, in the past
the Free Democratic Party (FDP) has often not been represented in
Länderparlamente (federal state governments), but they are not classified as
APO. APO in Germany. APO in Germany called primarily for the constitutional
freedom of opinion, freedom of the press and freedom of assembly to convey its
demands publicly. New political currents usually begin outside the parliament
and usually creep over the Länderparlamente into the German Bundestag (federal
parliament) or even into the Bundesregierung Deutschlands (the German federal
government). For example, the Green Party entered into a coalition with the SPD
(the social democratic party in Germany) in 1998, remaining in government until
2005. APO in the 1960s. The student movement began to gain strength and
momentum in the middle of the 1960s in West Germany. The student movement is
often used synonymously with APO, since it was at the time the most prominent
form of extraparliamentary opposition in Germany. The student movement reached
its peak in 1967 and 1968, especially in the towns with universities. The most
cited form of student-led APO was headed by the Sozialistischer Deutscher
Studentenbund (the socialist German student group). The APO was formed through
the opposition mounting against the "grand coalition" government in power since
1966, which united the CDU and the SPD under the Chancellor Kurt Georg
Kiesinger (CDU) and its proposed German Emergency Acts (emergency laws), which
would maximise governmental control in case of public emergency, allowing them
to restrict civil rights such as privacy and freedom of movement. With 49 seats
in parliament, the FDP was the only opposing party in the parliament; the rest
of the opposition was extraparliamentary. This weakened opposition in the
Bundestag strengthened the APO in Germany. The APO demanded a democratisation
of university politics A motto of the student movement protesting against the
oldfashioned nature of higher education institutions was "Unter den Talaren -
Muff von 1000 Jahren" ("under the university gowns, the musty smell of a
thousand years"), which also referred to Hitler, who had called his regime a
Reich for a thousand years. The APO criticised society's repression of the
crimes of National Socialism through its parents' generation, interested only
in economic recovery. Thus, it joined worldwide protests against the Vietnam
War and showed solidarity with the guerrilla fighters campaigning in North
Vietnam against the actions of the USA. Among other protagonists, the movement
idolised both Cuban guerilla fighter Che Guevara and the founder of the
Vietnamese Communist Party Ho Chi Minh. "Ho-Ho-Ho-Chi-Minh" was often chanted
at demonstrations towards the end of the 1960s. Soon student movement took part
in discussions about society and made eidely criticised society, demanding
fundamental changes in society toward a socialist revolutionary ideal. New
forms of communal life were tried, as well as new forms of protests and
political actions. In particular, life in the Kommune I (Commune 1) was begun,
spurred on by the words of Fritz Teufel, Dieter Kunzelmann and Rainer Langhans.
Its members were often prosecuted, which caused a platform for further
protests. The APO also found support and theoretical guidance from
intellectuals and philosophers such as Ernst Bloch, Theodor W. Adorno, Herbert
Marcuse and Jean-Paul Sartre. On the whole, the West German APO consisted of
young people, mostly students, who could hardly gain a foothold in the work
force and in the milieu. A few analysts of the time, such as Jutta Ditfurth,
spoke out against these assumptions and embraced the workforce, including them
in the political movement. In France, the case was somewhat different. There
solidarity was found between the unions and the student activists, which led to
a near-revolutionary situation and much disruption, street fighting and mass
strikes in May 1968, culminating in a state crisis. One of the protagonists of
the German and French APO, activist and later Green Party politician Daniel
Cohn-Bendit was refused reentry into France on the initiative of president
Charles de Gaulle. Further members of the APO were Joseph "Joschka" Fischer
(German foreign minister from 1998–2005) and Matthias Beltz, who became a
famous kabarettist in the 1990s and the 1980s. Intensified conflict. A
watershed in the history of the West German APO commenced on June 2, 1967
during demonstrations against the official visit of the Iranian Shah Mohammad
Reza Pahlavi when student Benno Ohnesorg was shot by a policeman. Ohnesorg was
attending his first-ever political demonstration, and his death left his
pregnant girlfriend to fend for herself. The student movement radicalised
itself, became more militant and focused its attention on the Springer Press,
namely the "Bild Zeitung" (the German equivalent of the British publication
"The Sun"), which greatly opposed the student movement to the general public.
Almost a year after the death of Benno Ohnesorg, Rudi Dutschke, one of the most
prominent leaders of the student movement, was severely wounded by three shots
fired against him by worker and avid "Bild"-reader Josef Bachmann. Dutschke
survived the attack but died from the effects of his injuries, which caused him
to suffer from epilepsy for the remainder of his life. After 1969, the APO, in
its then-current form, played no further role in West Germany, although there
was further extraparliamentary opposition. New social movements in the 1970s
affected political and social areas, which had already been addressed in part
by the student movement. Environmental protection and nuclear power became the
latest themes focused on by former APO activists. From the end of the SDS to
the founding of the Green Party (end 1960s to present day). The SDS disbanded
itself in 1968, dividing into smaller communist groups known as K-Gruppen,
which remained on the political landscape but had no notable influence on West
German politics. The "Marsch durch die Institutionen" (march through the
institutions) propagated by Rudi Dutschke was embarked upon, resulting in the
formation of the Green Party 11 years later. The idea behind this march was
that political structures could be manipulated only from within, so it made
more sense for larger groups to disband and for individuals and smaller groups
to work singlehandedly to change the political system of their federal
republic. The Green Party was formed to organise and accommodate the anti-
nuclear movement in Germany, the peace movement activists and other new social
movements in the 1970s and 1980s, whose founders had previously been very
active in the APO. In 1983, the German Green Party was elected into the
Bundestag, where it stood for the concept of movement and change, so that its
roots and philosophy were seen in new social movements. Within only a few
years, the Greens gained much political power and prestige. In the time
following the party's founding, there was a divide between the fundamentalists
and the realists, which still exists. It is the willingness of the Greens to
compromise and adapt that has led to their increased political power. In
particular, since they entered into a coalition government with the SPD in 1998
and supported issues targeted by the APO which were in the eyes of many
underrepresented such as participation in the Kosovo War in 1999 and the Afghan
War in 2002. Radicalised Groups. A small number of APO activists such as
Andreas Baader, Gudrun Ensslin, journalist Ulrike Meinhof resorted to arson in
department stores and illegal underground work. They collaborated in the "Rote
Armee Fraktion" (RAF) that was commonly known as the "bewaffneten Widerstand"
(armed opposition). Bank robberies, kidnappings and even murders were committed
against protagonists of the businesses, politics and justice by the RAF, the
"Bewegung 2. Juni" (Movement of the 2nd June) and the "Revolutionären Zellen"
(Revolutionary Cells) right up until the 1980s.
