Austrian School The Austrian School of economics is a school of economic
thought which bases its study of economic phenomena on the interpretation and
analysis of the purposeful actions of individuals. It derives its name from its
origin in late-19th and early-20th century Vienna with the work of Carl Menger,
Eugen von Böhm-Bawerk, Friedrich von Wieser, and others. Currently, adherents
of the Austrian School can come from any part of the world, but they are often
referred to as "Austrian economists" or "Austrians" and their work as "Austrian
economics". Among the contributions of the Austrian School to economic theory
are the subjective theory of value, marginalism in price theory, and the
Austrian formulation of the economic calculation problem. Mainstream economists
are critical of the current-day Austrian School and consider its methodology
and conclusions in areas such as its rejection of econometrics and other tools
of aggregate macroeconomic analysis, to be outside of mainstream economic
theory, or "heterodox". Austrians are likewise critical of mainstream
economics. Although the Austrian School had been considered heterodox since the
late 1930s, it began to attract renewed academic and public interest starting
in the 1970s. Theory. Methodology. The Austrian School differs significantly
from many other schools of economic thought in that the Austrian analysis of
the observed economy begins from a prior understanding of the motivations and
processes of human action. To understand purposeful economic behavior and its
consequences, the Austrian School follows an approach termed methodological
individualism, or, as Ludwig von Mises termed it, "praxeology." Mises was the
first Austrian economist to present a theory of praxeology as such.
Subsequently, Murray Rothbard presented a different version of praxeology in
his work "Man, Economy, and State." Mises argued against the use of
probabilities in economic models. Instead, the Austrian praxeological method is
based on the heavy use of deductive arguments from undeniable, self-evident
axioms or from irrefutable facts about human existence. According to Austrians,
deductive economic thought experiment, if performed correctly, can yield
conclusions that follow irrefutably from the underlying assumptions and could
not be discovered by empirical observation or statistical inference. However,
economist Bryan Caplan has stated that the Austrian challenge to the realism of
neoclassical assumptions actually helps make those assumptions more plausible.
Some Austrians incorporate models and mathematics into their analysis of the
economy. Austrian economist Steven Horwitz argues that Austrian methodology is
consistent with macroeconomics and that Austrian macroeconomics can be
expressed in terms of microeconomic foundations. Austrian economist Roger
Garrison argues that Austrian macroeconomic theory can be correctly expressed
in terms of diagrammatic models. In 1944, Austrian economist Oskar Morgenstern
presented a rigorous schematization of an ordinal utility function (the Von
Neumann–Morgenstern utility theorem) in Theory of Games and Economic
Behavior. Opportunity cost. The opportunity cost doctrine was first explicitly
formulated by the Austrian economist Friedrich von Wieser in the late 19th
century. Opportunity cost is the cost of any activity measured in terms of the
value of the next best alternative foregone (that is not chosen). It is the
sacrifice related to the second best choice available to someone, or group, who
has picked among several mutually exclusive choices. The opportunity cost is
also the cost of the foregone products after making a choice. Opportunity cost
is a key concept in economics, and has been described as expressing "the basic
relationship between scarcity and choice". The notion of opportunity cost plays
a crucial part in ensuring that scarce resources are used efficiently. Thus,
opportunity costs are not restricted to monetary or financial costs: the real
cost of output foregone, lost time, pleasure or any other benefit that provides
utility should also be considered opportunity costs. Capital and interest. The
Austrian theory of capital and interest holds that interest rates and profits
are determined solely by the interaction of diminishing gains or losses from a
change in the consumption of a good or service with diminishing extra output
that can be produced by using one more unit of the input, and the valuation
consumers place on consumption nearer in time versus more remote consumption.
The Austrian theory of capital and interest was created by Böhm-Bawerk. He
created the theory as a response to Marx's theories on capital. Böhm-Bawerk's
theory centered on the untenability of the labor theory of value in the light
of the transformation problem. He also argued that capitalists do not exploit
workers; they "accommodate" workers by providing them with income well in
advance of the revenue from the output they helped to produce. Böhm-Bawerk's
theory equates capital intensity with the degree of roundaboutness of
production processes. Böhm-Bawerk also argued that the law of marginal utility
necessarily implies the classical law of costs. Austrians therefore reject the
notion that interest rates are determined by liquidity preference. In his book
"America's Great Depression", Rothbard argued that interest rates are instead
determined by time preference. Says Rothbard, "Increased hoarding can either
come from funds formerly consumed, from funds formerly invested, or from a
mixture of both that leaves the old consumption-investment proportion
unchanged. Unless time preferences change, the last alternative will be the one
adopted. Thus, the rate of interest depends solely on time preference, and not
at all on "liquidity preference." In fact, if the increased hoards come mainly
out of consumption, an increased demand for money will cause interest rates to
fall – because time preferences have fallen." Inflation.  Following their
definition, Austrians measure inflation by calculating the growth of what they
call "the true money supply", i.e. how many new units of money which are
available for immediate use in exchange have been created over a specified
period of time. This interpretation of inflation implies that, within a
centralized banking system, inflation is usually the result of action taken by
the central government or its central bank, which permits or allows an increase
in the money supply. Mises includes bank credit as a significant contributor to
inflation, given that the value of bank credit generated by private financial
institutions via fractional reserve banking greatly exceeds the value of
physical paper bills and metallic coins issued by the Federal government. In
addition to state-induced monetary expansion via printing of paper money,
Austrians also maintain that the effects of increasing the money supply are
exacerbated by the credit expansion performed by private financial institutions
practising fractional-reserve banking, legally permitted in most economic and
financial systems in the world. Austrians hold that states use monetary
inflation as one of the three means by which it can fund its activities, the
other two being taxing and borrowing. Therefore, Austrians often seek to
identify reasons why the state resorts to allowing the creation new money
(whether fiat paper or electronic money) and what the new money is used for.
Various forms of spending are often cited as reasons for resorting to inflation
and borrowing. In other cases, the central bank may try avoid or defer the
widespread bankruptcies and insolvencies which cause economic recessions by
artificially trying to "stimulate" the economy through money supply growth and
further borrowing via artificially low interest rates.  Economic calculation
problem. Background. The economic calculation problem is a criticism of
socialist economics. It was first proposed by Max Weber in 1920. This led to
Mises discussing Weber's idea with his student Friedrich Hayek, who expanded
upon it to such an extent that it became a key reason cited for the awarding of
his Nobel prize. The problem referred to is that of how to distribute resources
effectively in an economy. On the economic calculation problem. Austrian theory
emphasizes the organizing power of the price mechanism. Mises and Hayek argued
that the price mechanism is the only viable solution to the economic
calculation problem, as the price mechanism co-ordinates supply and investment
decisions most efficiently. Without the information efficiently and effectively
provided by market prices, socialism lacks a method to efficiently allocate
resources over an extended period of time in any market where the price
mechanism is effective (an example where the price mechanism may not work is in
the relatively confined area of public and common goods). Those who agree with
this criticism argue it is a refutation of socialism and that it shows that a
socialist planned economy could never work in the long term for the vast bulk
of the economy and has very limited potential application. The debate raged in
the 1920s and 1930s, and that specific period of the debate has come to be
known by historians of economic thought as "The Socialist Calculation Debate."
Mises argued in a 1920 article "Economic Calculation in the Socialist
Commonwealth" that the pricing systems in socialist economies were necessarily
deficient because if government owned the means of production, then no prices
could be obtained for capital goods as they were merely internal transfers of
goods in a socialist system and not "objects of exchange," unlike final goods.
Therefore, they were unpriced and hence the system would be necessarily
inefficient since the central planners would not know how to allocate the
available resources efficiently. This led him to declare "…that rational
economic activity is impossible in a socialist commonwealth." Mises's
declaration has been criticized as overstating the strength of his case, in
describing socialism as impossible, rather than having to contend with a source
of inefficiency. Business cycles. Background. The Austrian theory of the
business cycle (or "ABCT") focuses on the credit cycle as the primary cause of
most business cycles. The theory was created by Hayek, by integrating Böhm-
Bawerk's theory of capital and interest with Mises's arguments concerning how
an expansion of the money supply or government manipulation of interest rates
contributed to malinvestment (investments of firms being badly allocated).
Empirical research by economists regarding the accuracy of the Austrian
business cycle theory has generated disparate conclusions, though most research
within mainstream economics regarding the theory concludes that the theory is
inconsistent with empirical evidence. Economists such as Gordon Tullock, Bryan
Caplan, Milton Friedman, and Paul Krugman have said that they regard the theory
as incorrect. In 1969, Friedman argued that the theory is not consistent with
empirical evidence and using newer data in 1993 reached the same conclusion.
However, in 2001, Austrian economist James P. Keeler argued that the theory is
consistent with empirical evidence and in 2006, Austrian economist Robert
Mulligan also argued that the theory is consistent with empirical evidence.
Rothbard also argues that a feature of the theory is how it integrates "macro"
with "micro" economics, being a theory in harmony with general economic theory
and other Austrian theories regarding price coordination and capital structure.
Assertions. According to the theory, a boom-bust cycle of malinvestment is
generated by excessive and unsustainable credit expansion to businesses and
individual borrowers by the banks. This credit creation makes it appear as if
the supply of "saved funds" ready for investment has increased, for the effect
is the same: the supply of funds for investment purposes increases, and the
interest rate is lowered. Borrowers, in short, are misled by the bank inflation
into believing that the supply of saved funds (the pool of "deferred" funds
ready to be invested) is greater than it really is. When the pool of "saved
funds" increases, entrepreneurs invest in "longer process of production," i.e.,
the capital structure is lengthened, especially in the "higher orders", most
remote from the consumer. Borrowers take their newly acquired funds and bid up
the prices of capital and other producers' goods, which, in the theory,
stimulates a shift of investment from consumer goods to capital goods
industries. Austrians further contend that such a shift is unsustainable and
must reverse itself in due course. They conclude that the longer the
unsustainable shift in capital goods industries continues, the more violent and
disruptive the necessary re-adjustment process. While agreeing with economist
Tyler Cowen, Bryan Caplan has stated that he also denies "that the artificially
stimulated investments have any tendency to become malinvestments." The
preference by entrepreneurs for longer term investments can be shown
graphically by using any discounted cash flow model. Lower interest rates
increase the relative value of cash flows that come in the future. When
modeling an investment opportunity, if interest rates are artificially low,
entrepreneurs are led to believe the income they will receive in the future is
sufficient to cover their near term investment costs. Therefore, investments
that would not make sense with a 10% cost of funds become feasible with a
prevailing interest rate of 5%. The proportion of consumption to saving or
investment is determined by people's time preferences, which is the degree to
which they prefer present to future satisfactions. Thus, the pure interest rate
is determined by the time preferences of the individuals in society, and the
final market rates of interest reflect the pure interest rate plus or minus the
entrepreneurial risk and purchasing power components. If the pricing signal
triggering investment in the economy is artificially "fixed" too low, many
entrepreneurs can make the same mistake at the same time (i.e. many believe
investment funds are really available for long term projects when in fact the
pool of available funds has come from credit creation - not real savings out of
the existing money supply) because the debasement of the means of exchange is
universal, . As they are all competing for the same pool of capital and market
share, some entrepreneurs begin to borrow simply to avoid being "overrun" by
other entrepreneurs who may take advantage of the lower interest rates to
invest in more up-to-date capital infrastructure. A tendency towards over-
investment and speculative borrowing in this "artificial" low interest rate
environment is therefore almost inevitable. This new money then percolates
downward from the business borrowers to the factors of production: to the
landowners and capital owners who sold assets to the newly indebted
entrepreneurs, and then to the other factors of production in wages, rent, and
interest. Austrians conclude that, since time preferences have not changed,
people will rush to reestablish the old proportions, and demand will shift back
from the higher to the lower orders. In other words, depositors will tend to
remove cash from the banking system and spend it (not save it), banks will then
ask their borrowers for payment and interest rates and credit conditions will
deteriorate. Austrians argue that capital goods industries will find that their
investments have been in error; that what they thought profitable really fails
for lack of demand by their entrepreneurial customers. Higher orders of
production will have turned out to be wasteful, and the malinvestment must be
liquidated. In other words, the particular "types" of investments made during
the monetary boom were inappropriate and "wrong" from the perspective of the
long-term financial sustainability of the market because the price signals
stimulating the investment were distorted by fractional reserve banking's
recursive lending "ballooning" the pricing structure in various capital
markets. This concept is dependent on notion of the "heterogeneity of capital",
where Austrians emphasize that the mere macroeconomic "total" of investment
does not adequately capture whether this investment is genuinely sustainable or
productive, due to the inability of the raw numbers to reveal the particular
investment activities being undertaken and the inherent inability of the
numbers to reveal whether these particular investment activities were
appropriate and economically sustainable given people's real preferences.
Austrians argue that a boom taking place under these circumstances is actually
a period of wasteful malinvestment, a "false boom" where the particular kinds
of investments undertaken during the period of fiat money expansion are
revealed to lead nowhere but to insolvency and unsustainability. It is the time
when errors are made, when speculative borrowing has driven up prices for
assets and capital to unsustainable levels, due to low interest rates
"artificially" increasing the money supply and triggering an unsustainable
injection of fiat money "funds" available for investment into the system,
thereby tampering with the complex pricing mechanism of the free market. "Real"
savings would have required higher interest rates to encourage depositors to
save their money in term deposits to invest in longer term projects under a
stable money supply. According to Mises's work, the artificial stimulus caused
by bank-created credit causes a generalized speculative investment bubble, not
justified by the long-term structure of the market. Mises further argues that a
"crisis" (or "credit crunch") arrives when the consumers come to reestablish
their desired allocation of saving and consumption at prevailing interest
rates. Mises conjectured that the "recession" or "depression" is actually the
process by which the economy adjusts to the wastes and errors of the monetary
boom, and reestablishes efficient service of sustainable consumer desires.
Austrians argue that continually expanding bank credit can keep the borrowers
one step ahead of consumer retribution (with the help of successively lower
interest rates from the central bank). In the theory, this postpones the "day
of reckoning" and defers the collapse of unsustainably inflated asset prices.
It can also be temporarily put off by exogenous events such as the "cheap" or
free acquisition of marketable resources by market participants and the banks
funding the borrowing (such as the acquisition of land from local governments,
or in extreme cases, the acquisition of foreign land through the waging of
war). Austrians argue that the monetary boom ends when bank credit expansion
finally stops - when no further investments can be found which provide adequate
returns for speculative borrowers at prevailing interest rates. They further
argue that the longer the "false" monetary boom goes on, the bigger and more
speculative the borrowing, the more wasteful the errors committed and the
longer and more severe will be the necessary bankruptcies, foreclosures, and
depression readjustment. There is no means of avoiding the final collapse of a
boom brought about by credit expansion. The alternative is only whether the
crisis should come sooner as a result of the voluntary abandonment of further
credit expansion, or later as a final and total catastrophe of the currency
system involved. The role of central banks. Austrians generally argue that
inherently damaging and ineffective central bank policies, including
unsustainable expansion of bank credit through fractional reserve banking, are
the predominant cause of most business cycles, as they tend to set artificial
interest rates too low for too long, resulting in excessive credit creation,
speculative "bubbles", and artificially low savings. Under fiat monetary
systems, a central bank creates new money when it lends to member banks, and
this money is multiplied many times over through the money creation process of
the private banks. This new bank-created money enters the loan market and
provides a lower rate of interest than that which would prevail if the money
supply were stable. Murray Rothbard argues central banks played a large role in
creating an environment of loose credit prior to the onset of the Great
Depression, as well as the subsequent ineffectiveness of central bank policies,
which he argues delayed necessary price adjustments and prolonged market
dysfunction. Rothbard begins with the premise that in a market with no
centralized monetary authority, there would be no simultaneous cluster of
malinvestments or entrepreneurial errors, since astute entrepreneurs would not
all make errors at the same time and would quickly take advantage of any
temporary, isolated mispricing. In addition, in an open, non-centralized
(uninsured) capital market, astute bankers would shy away from speculative
lending and uninsured depositors would carefully monitor the balance sheets of
risky financial institutions, tempering any speculative excesses that arose
sporadically in the finance markets. In Rothbard's view, the cycle of
generalized malinvestment is greatly exacerbated by centralized monetary
intervention in the money markets by the central bank. Rothbard argues that an
over-encouragement to borrow and lend is initiated by the mispricing of credit
via the central bank's centralized control over interest rates and its need to
protect banks from periodic bank runs (which Austrians believe then causes
interest rates to be set too low for too long when compared to the rates that
would prevail in a genuine non-central bank dominated free market). Etymology.
The School owes its name to members of the German Historical school of
economics, who argued against the Austrians during the "Methodenstreit"
("methodology struggle"), in which the Austrians defended the reliance that
classical economists placed upon deductive logic. In 1883, Menger published
"Investigations into the Method of the Social Sciences with Special Reference
to Economics", which attacked the methods of the Historical school. Gustav von
Schmoller, a leader of the Historical school, responded with an unfavorable
review, coining the term "Austrian School" in an attempt to characterize the
school as outcast and provincial. The label remained and was adopted by the
adherents themselves. History. Precursors. Classical economics theory is
generally considered to be a major precursor to the Austrian School. Classical
economists Jean-Baptiste Say and Frédéric Bastiat argued that value is
subjective. In the late 19th century, attention then focused on the concepts of
“marginal” cost and value. Austrian economist Murray Rothbard has argued
that the roots of the Austrian School came from the teachings of the School of
Salamanca in the 15th century and Physiocrats in the 18th century. First Wave.
The school originated in Vienna, in the Austrian Empire. Carl Menger's 1871
book, "Principles of Economics", is generally considered the founding of the
Austrian School. The book was one of the first modern treatises to advance the
theory of marginal utility. The Austrian School was one of three founding
currents of the marginalist revolution of the 1870s, with its major
contribution being the introduction of the subjectivist approach in economics.
While marginalism was generally influential, there was also a more specific
school that began to coalesce around Menger's work, which came to be known as
the “Psychological School,” “Vienna School,” or “Austrian School.”
Thorstein Veblen introduced the term neoclassical economics in his
"Preconceptions of Economic Science" (1900) to distinguish marginalists in the
objective cost tradition of Alfred Marshall from those in the subjective
valuation tradition of the Austrian School. Carl Menger contributions to
economic theory were closely followed by that of Böhm-Bawerk and Friedrich von
Wieser. These three economists became what is known as the "first wave" of the
Austrian School. Böhm-Bawerk wrote extensive critiques of Karl Marx in the
1880s and 1890s, as was part of the Austrians' participation in the late 19th
Century "Methodenstreit", during which they attacked the Hegelian doctrines of
the Historical School. Twentieth century. By the mid-1930s, most economists had
embraced what they considered the important contributions of the early
Austrians. After World War II, Austrian economics was disregarded or derided by
most economists because it rejected mathematical and statistical methods in the
study of economics. Austrian economics after 1940 can be divided into two
schools of economic thought, and the school "split" to some degree in the late
20th century. One camp of Austrians, exemplified by Mises, regards neoclassical
methodology to be irredeemably flawed; the other camp, exemplified by Friedrich
Hayek, accepts a large part of neoclassical methodology and is more accepting
of government intervention in the economy. The reputation of the Austrian
School rose in the late-20th century due in part to the work of Israel Kirzner
and Ludwig Lachmann, and renewed interest in the work of Hayek after he won the
Nobel Memorial Prize in Economic Sciences. Hayek's work was influential in the
revival of "laissez-faire" thought in the 20th century. Following Hayek, one of
Mises's students, Murray Rothbard, became prominent in Austrian theory.
Rothbard opposed fractional reserve banking, viewing it as a fraudulent
contract that should be criminalized as a sub-category of embezzlement. Twenty-
first century. Several Austrian economists have made contributions to Austrian
economics in the twenty-first century, including noted Spanish economist Jesús
Huerta de Soto, Anthony Carilli, Gregory Dempster, Roger Garrison, Steven
Horwitz, and Robert Murphy. Garrison have contributed to Austrian
macroeconomics. Carlilli, Dempster, Garrison, de Soto and Murphy have
contributed to the Austrian business cycle theory. Influence. Many theories
developed by "first wave" Austrian economists have been absorbed into most
mainstream schools of economics. These include Carl Menger's theories on
marginal utility, Friedrich von Wieser's theories on opportunity cost, and
Eugen von Böhm-Bawerk's theories on time preference, as well as Menger and
Böhm-Bawerk's criticisms of Marxian economics. The former U.S. Federal Reserve
Chairman, Alan Greenspan, speaking of the originators of the School, said in
2000, "the Austrian School have reached far into the future from when most of
them practiced and have had a profound and, in my judgment, probably an
irreversible effect on how most mainstream economists think in this country."
Nobel Laureate James M. Buchanan has stated that he would not object to being
identified as an Austrian economist. Republican U.S. congressman Ron Paul is a
firm believer in Austrian School economics and has authored six books on the
subject. Paul's former economic adviser, Peter Schiff, is an adherent of the
Austrian School. Jim Rogers, investor and financial commentator, also considers
himself of the Austrian School of economics. Chinese economist Zhang Weiying,
who is known in China for his advocacy of free market reforms, supports some
Austrian theories such as the Austrian theory of the business cycle. Currently,
universities with a significant Austrian presence are George Mason University,
Loyola University New Orleans, and Auburn University in the United States and
Universidad Francisco Marroquín in Guatemala. Austrian economic ideas are also
promoted by bodies such as the Mises Institute and the Foundation for Economic
Education. Criticisms. General criticisms. Some economists have argued that
Austrians are often averse to the use of mathematics and statistics in
economics. Economist Bryan Caplan argues that Austrians have often
misunderstood modern economics, causing them to overstate their differences
with it. For example, many Austrians object to the use of cardinal utility in
microeconomic theory; however, microeconomic theorists go to great pains to
show that their results hold for all strictly monotonic transformations of
utility, and so are true for purely ordinal preferences. The result is that
conclusions about utility preferences hold no matter what values are assigned
to them. Economist Paul Krugman has stated that because Austrians do not use
"explicit models" they are unaware of holes in their own thinking. Economist
Benjamin Klein has criticized the economic methodological work of Austrian
economist Israel M. Kirzner. While praising Kirzner for highlighting
shortcomings in traditional methodology, Klein argued that Kirzner did not
provide a viable alternative for economic methodology. Economist Jeffrey Sachs
argues that among developed countries, those with high rates of taxation and
high social welfare spending perform better on most measures of economic
performance compared to countries with low rates of taxation and low social
outlays. He concludes that Friedrich Hayek was wrong to argue that high levels
of government spending harms an economy, and "a generous social-welfare state
is not a road to serfdom but rather to fairness, economic equality and
international competitiveness." Austrian economist Sudha Shenoy responded by
arguing that countries with large public sectors have grown more slowly.
Methodology. Critics generally argue that Austrian economics lacks scientific
rigor and rejects scientific methods and the use of empirical data in modelling
economic behavior. Some economists describe Austrian methodology as being "a
priori" or non-empirical. Economist Mark Blaug has criticized over-reliance on
methodological individualism, arguing it would rule out all macroeconomic
propositions that cannot be reduced to microeconomic ones, and hence reject
almost the whole of received macroeconomics. Economist Thomas Mayer has stated
that Austrians advocate a rejection of the scientific method which involves the
development of empirically falsifiable theories. Furthermore, many supporters
of using models of market behavior to analyze and test economic theory argue
that economists have developed numerous experiments that elicit useful
information about individual preferences. Capital and interest. Many social
anarchists object to the theory of time preference being applied to an economy
as a whole in a capitalist society. They argue that the theory fails to take
into account that making profits in a capitalist society is not the provision
of future means of consumption, but rather profits for their own sake. Business
cycle theory. According to most economists, the Austrian business cycle theory
is incorrect. Theory. Some economists argue that Austrian business cycle theory
requires bankers and investors to exhibit a kind of irrationality, because the
Austrian theory posits that investors will be be fooled repeatedly (by
temporarily low interest rates) into making unprofitable investment decisions.
Bryan Caplan writes: "Why does Rothbard think businessmen are so incompetent at
forecasting government policy? He credits them with entrepreneurial foresight
about all market-generated conditions, but curiously finds them unable to
forecast government policy, or even to avoid falling prey to simple accounting
illusions generated by inflation and deflation... Particularly in
interventionist economies, it would seem that natural selection would weed out
businesspeople with such a gigantic blind spot." Addressing this issue,
Austrian economists Anthony Carilli and Gregory Dempster argue that a banker or
firm would lose market share if it did not borrow or loan at a magnitude
consistent with current interest rates, regardless of whether rates are below
their natural levels. Thus, they argue, businesses are forced to operate as
though rates were set appropriately, because the consequence of a single entity
deviating would be a loss of business. Austrian economist Robert Murphy argues
that it is difficult for investors to make sound business choices because they
cannot know what the interest rate would be if it were set by the market.
Economist Paul Krugman has argued that the theory cannot explain changes in
unemployment over the business cycle. Austrian business cycle theory postulates
that business cycles are caused by the misallocation of resources from
consumption to investment during "booms", and out of investment during "busts".
Krugman argues that because total spending is equal to total income in an
economy, the theory implies that the reallocation of resources during "busts"
would increase employment in consumption industries, whereas in reality,
spending declines in all sectors of an economy during recessions. He also
argues that according to the theory the initial "booms" would also cause
resource reallocation, which implies an increase in unemployment during booms
as well. In response, Austrian economist David Gordon argues that Krugman's
argument is dependent on a misrepresentation of the theory. He furthermore
argues that prices on consumption goods may go up as a result of the investment
bust, which could mean that the amount spent on consumption could increase even
though the quantity of goods consumed has not. Furthermore, Roger Garrison
argues that a false boom caused by artificially low interest rates would cause
a boom in consumption goods as well as investment goods (with a decrease in
"middle goods"), thus explaining the jump in unemployment at the end of a boom.
Many Austrians also argue that capital allocated to investment goods cannot be
quickly augmented to create consumption goods. Economist Jeffery Hummel is
critical of Hayek's explanation of labor asymmetry in booms and busts. He
argues that Hayek makes peculiar assumptions about demand curves for labor in
his explanation of how a decrease in investment spending creates unemployment.
He also argues that the labor asymmetry can be explained in terms of a change
in real wages, but this explanation fails to explain the business cycle in
terms of resource allocation. Empirical evidence. Hummel argues that the
Austrian explanation of the business cycle fails on empirical grounds. In
particular, he notes that investment spending remained positive in all
recessions where there are data, except for the Great Depression. He argues
that this casts doubt on the notion that recessions are caused by a
reallocation of resources from industrial production to consumption, since he
argues that the Austrian business cycle theory implies that net investment
should be below zero during recessions. In response, Austrian economist Walter
Block argues that the misallocation during booms does not preclude the
possibility of demand increasing overall. Critics have also argued that, as the
Austrian business cycle theory points to the actions of fractional-reserve
banks and central banks to explain the business cycles, it fails to explain the
severity of business cycles before the establishment of the Federal Reserve in
1913. Supporters of the Austrian business cycle theory respond that the theory
applies to the expansion of the money supply, not necessarily an expansion done
by a central bank. Historian Thomas Woods argues that the crashes were caused
by various privately-owned banks with state charters that issued paper money,
supposedly convertible to gold, in amounts greatly exceeding their gold
reserves. In 1969, economist Milton Friedman, after examining the history of
business cycles in the U.S., concluded that "The Hayek-Mises explanation of the
business cycle is contradicted by the evidence. It is, I believe, false." He
analyzed the issue using newer data in 1993, and again reached the same
conclusion. Austrian economist Jesus Huerta de Soto argued that Friedman's
conclusions are based on misleading data (such as GDP). Austrian economist
Roger Garrison argued that Friedman misinterpreted economic aggregates and how
they related to the business cycles he reviewed.
