Autarchism Autarchism (from Greek, "belief in self rule") is a political
philosophy that upholds the principle of individual liberty, rejects compulsory
government, and supports the elimination of government in favor of ruling
oneself and no other. Advocates of the philosophy are autarchist (from Greek,
"one who believes in self rule"), while the state in which everyone rules
themselves and no one else is called autarchy (from Greek αὐταρχία
"autarchia," "state of self rule"). Autarchists. Robert LeFevre, a "self-
proclaimed autarchist" recognized as such by Murray Rothbard, distinguished
autarchism from anarchy, whose economics he felt entailed interventions
contrary to freedom, in contrast to his own laissez faire economics of the
Austrian School. In professing "a sparkling and shining individualism" while
"it advocates some kind of procedure to interfere with the processes of a free
market", anarchy seemed to LeFevre to be self-contradictory. He situated the
fundamental premise of autarchy within the Stoicism of philosophers such as
Zeno, Epicurus and Marcus Aurelius, which he summarized in the credo, "Control
yourself". Fusing these influences together, he arrived at the autarchist
philosophy: "The Stoics provide the moral framework; the Epicureans, the
motivation; the praxeologists, the methodology. I propose to call this package
of ideological systems autarchy, because autarchy means self-rule." LeFevre
stated that "the bridge between Spooner and modern-day autarchists was
constructed primarily by persons such as H. L. Mencken, Albert Jay Nock, and
Mark Twain". Ralph Waldo Emerson, although he did not call himself an
autarchist, is considered to have espoused autarchy. Philip Jenkins has stated
that "Emersonian ideas stressed individual liberation, autarchy, self-
sufficiency and self-government, and strenuously opposed social conformity.".
Robert D. Richardson stated that the anarchy Emerson had in mind "would be
'autarchy', rule by self". The essay "Autarchy, or, the art of self
government," published in 1691 in London and listing the author as "G.B.," is
attributed to George Burghope by "NUC" and to both Burghope and George Bright
by Donald Goddard Wing.
