Autarky Autarky is the quality of being self-sufficient. Usually the term is
applied to political states or their economic systems. The latter are called
closed economies. Autarky exists whenever an entity can survive or continue its
activities without external assistance or international trade. Autarky is not
necessarily economic. For example, a military autarky would be a state that
could defend itself without help from another country. Autarky can be said to
be the policy of a state or other entity when it seeks to be self-sufficient as
a whole, but also can be limited to a narrow field such as possession of a key
raw material. Etymology. The word "autarky" is from the , which means "self-
sufficiency" (derived from αὐτο-, "self," and ἀρκέω, "to suffice").
The term is sometimes confused with autocracy (Greek: αὐτoκρατία/
αὐταρχία "government by single absolute ruler") or autarchy.
Libertarian theorist Robert LeFevre used "autarchy" and "autarchism" in the
sense of self-government to describe his own political philosophy and to
distinguish it from anarchism. Modern examples. Mercantilism was a policy
followed by empires, especially in the 17th and 18th centuries, forbidding or
limiting trade outside the empire. In the 1930s, autarky as a policy goal was
sought by Nazi Germany, which maximized trade within its economic bloc and
minimized external trade, particularly with the then world powers such as Great
Britain, the Soviet Union, and France, with which it expected to go to war and
consequently could not rely upon. The economic bloc wherein trade was maximized
comprised countries that were economically weak—namely, those in South
America, the Balkans and eastern Europe (Yugoslavia, Romania and Hungary)—and
had raw materials vital to Germany's growth. Trade with these countries, which
was negotiated by then Minister of Economics Hjalmar Schacht, was based on the
exchange of German manufactured produce directly for these materials rather
than currency, allowing Schacht to barter without reliance on the strength of
the Reichsmark. However, although food imports fell significantly between 1932
and 1937, Germany's rapid rearmament policy after 1935 proved contradictory to
the Nazi Party autarkic ambitions and imports of raw materials rose by 10% over
the same period. Today, complete economic autarkies are rare. A possible
example of a current autarky is North Korea, based on the government ideology
of Juche (self-sufficiency), which is concerned with maintaining its domestic
localized economy in the face of its isolation. However, even North Korea has
extensive trade with the Russian Federation, the People's Republic of China,
Syria, Iran, Vietnam, and many countries in Europe and Africa. Bhutan, seeking
to preserve a manorialist economic and cultural system centered around the
dzong, has until recently maintained an effective economic embargo against the
outside world, and has been described as an autarky. With the introduction of
roads and electricity, however, the kingdom has entered trade relations as its
citizens seek modern, manufactured goods. Economic and political dilemmas of an
autarky. A self-sufficient economy can experience "diseconomies of scale" in
the public and private business sectors. It is evident that several nations in
the world do not have direct access to certain raw materials such as oil, coal,
gas, wheat or fabrics such as wool due to geographical boundaries including
climate, location, land size or population numbers. Therefore the production of
scarce resources becomes relatively expensive and a large cost to consumers and
firms that need to pay a higher price for these goods and services. Beginning
after the close of World War II, and coming into full prominence in the mid-
1970s, trade policy architects of the world's highly industrialized nations
began to embrace a transnational system of production, exchange & capital
mobility in a process that has come to be known as "Globalization". Proponents
of Globalization, often referred to as advocates of Free Trade, embrace the
economic philosophy of Neoliberalism articulated by economists working in the
Neoclassical tradition, such as Milton Friedman. Neoliberalism emphasizes the
Ricardian concept of comparative advantage over theories of Import Substitution
Industrialization, which had gained prominence in the first half of the 20th
Century and which involved a limited use of protectionist measures. Examples of
Import Substitution Industrialization regimes include the Dirigisme of France
in the De Gaulle era, Stalin's advocacy of Socialism In One Country and the
economic policies of Taiwan and South Korea in the 3 decades following the 2nd
World War. Import Substitution Industrialization combines aspects of Infant
Industry protection, promoted by Alexander Hamilton and Friedrich List, and
which defined the trade policy of the United States and Britain during the 19th
Century, with Keynesian stimulus policies. Proponents of comparative advantage
believe that trade without tariff restriction and regulation will benefit all
participating parties, regardless of asymmetries in economies of scale,
infrastructural development or commodity holdings between them. Critics, and
those associated with the Anti-Globalization Movement, claim that the model has
been unevenly applied to favor multinational corporations over local producers
& retailers, and has led to a model of global domination along the north-south
divide, characterized by a rich core and an impoverished periphery. As the
political influence of those promoting Neoliberal stances and Globalization
gained prominence during the 1970s, the advocates of Import Substitution
Industrialization, Protectionism, Social Corporatism, Syndicalism, many models
of Socialism and other forms of Autarky or semi-Autarky began to occupy an
increasingly marginalized space in public policy circles, professional
economics and elected office. Due in no small part to the influence of
transnational economic bodies such as the World Bank, the International
Monetary Fund, the World Trade Organization, the G7, G8, G20, and trade
agreements between nations with differing degrees of industrialization such as
the Central American Free Trade Agreement, the North American Free Trade
Agreement, the Free Trade Agreement of the Americas, the European Union, AFTA,
ACTA and TPP, regions of economic exchange have become more integrated across
the world than ever before and supply chains for vital commodities and products
previously maintained within national borders have became distributed across
international lines. Increasing financialization of commodity, industrial and
commercial wealth and increasing specialization of national and regional
economies and has left them vulnerable to the risk of capital flight, in the
face of competitive pressure from other producing nations or localities. The
global integration of economies effected by these agreements has resulted in a
gradual shift of the composition of wealth among the elites in many large
industrial states, from industrial activities, whose proceeds derived mostly
from domestic sales, to financial activities, whose profits are stem from
substantial investments in foreign trade, including developing markets. This
shift from national to transnational sources of profit among the wealthiest
has, in turn, altered the focus of dominant lobbying interests across the
developed world and, since the mid-1970s, greatly weakened the political
bargaining power of proponents of Autarkic principles in many legislative
bodies. The domestic changes brought about by a continued entrenchment of
Neoliberal economic policies in multinational trade agreements and economic
forums has also led to a feedback loop, wherein influence within and thus
support for such bodies predicates favorable national economic outcomes for the
commercial constituencies that hold most political sway across the political
spectrum in many nations. As a result, political parties, such as Britain's
Labour Party, France's Socialist Party (France), and Mexico's PRI, which, from
the 1930s - the 1970s, fiercely championed the protection of domestic industry
and promoted the nationalization of large infrastructural assets, have, since
at least the 1990s, abandoned these stances in favor of an internationalist
trade policy and public-private partnerships. Cheaper labor, commodity and
compliance costs for multinational corporations, access of corporations to raw
materials and consumer markets located in previously autonomous regions, and
the ability to establish publicly-funded zero tax export zones with minimal
regulation are major motivational factors influencing the growth of
international trade law and property law harmonization across the world. In
this period, and in part as a result of the economic changes brought about by
Globalization, geopolitical strategy, military policy and domestic economic
policy has become increasingly subject to the lobbying influence of major
multinational firms, marginalizing proponents of Autarky across the political
spectrum in many countries. These changes have resulted in a corresponding
reduction in the national economic self-sufficiency of many nations, whether
highly or sparsely industrialized. See also. Local Autarky National Autarky
Macroeconomic Theory of Autarky Relevant Microeconomic Theory Topics
