Authoritarianism Authoritarianism is a form of social organization
characterized by submission to authority as well as the administration of said
authority. In politics, an authoritarian government is one in which political
authority is concentrated in a small group of politicians. It is usually
opposed to individualism and libertarianism. Characteristics. Authoritarianism
is characterized by highly concentrated, and centralized power maintained by
political repression and the exclusion of potential challengers. It uses
political parties and mass organizations to mobilize people around the goals of
the regime. Authoritarianism emphasizes arbitrary law rather than the rule of
law, it often includes election rigging, political decisions being made by a
select group of officials behind closed doors, a bureaucracy that sometimes
operates independently of rules, which does not properly supervise elected
officials, and fails to serve the concerns of the constituencies they
purportedly serve. Authoritarianism also tends to embrace the informal and
unregulated exercise of political power, a leadership that is "self-appointed
and even if elected cannot be displaced by citizens' free choice among
competitors," the arbitrary deprivation of civil liberties, and little
tolerance for meaningful opposition. A range of social controls also attempt to
stifle civil society, while political stability is maintained by control over
and support of the armed forces, a bureaucracy staffed by the regime, and
creation of allegiance through various means of socialization and
indoctrination. Authoritarian political systems may be weakened through
"inadequate performance to demands of the people." Vestal writes that the
tendency to respond to challenges to authoritarianism through tighter control
instead of adaptation is a significant weakness, and that this overly rigid
approach fails to "adapt to changes or to accommodate growing demands on the
part of the populace or even groups within the system." Because the legitimacy
of the state is dependent on performance, authoritarian states that fail to
adapt may collapse. Authoritarianism is marked by "indefinite political tenure"
of the ruler or ruling party (often in a single-party state) or other
authority. The transition from an authoritarian system to a more democratic
form of government is referred to as democratization. John Duckitt of the
University of the Witwatersrand suggests a link between authoritarianism and
collectivism, asserting that both stand in opposition to individualism. Duckitt
writes that both authoritarianism and collectivism submerge individual rights
and goals to group goals, expectations and conformities. Others argue that
collectivism, properly defined, has a basis of consensus decision-making, the
opposite of authoritarianism. Authoritarianism and totalitarianism. Thus,
compared to totalitarian systems, authoritarian systems may also leave a larger
sphere for private life, lack a guiding ideology, tolerate some pluralism in
social organization, lack the power to mobilize the whole population in pursuit
of national goals, and exercise their power within relatively predictable
limits. Authoritarianism and democracy. Authoritarianism and democracy are not
fundamentally opposed to one another, it is thus perfectly possible for
democracies to possess strong authoritarian elements, for both feature a form
of submission to authority. An illiberal democracy (or procedural democracy) is
distinguished from liberal democracy (or substantive democracy) in that
illiberal democracies lack the more democratic features of liberal democracies,
such as the rule of law, an independent judiciary, along with a further
distinction that liberal democracies have rarely made war with one another.
More recent research has extended the theory and finds that more democratic
countries tend to have few Militarized Interstate Disputes causing less battle
deaths with one another, and that democracies have few civil wars.
Authoritarian states. Any list of such states is bound to be controversial;
certain indices have striven to ascertain the openness or democratic quality of
countries based on a somewhat simplistic tick-box method, the notion of index
itself being economically oriented. Within the present world system,
unsurprisingly the "soft power" countries of major western power centers often
come out at the top of such lists. On the other hand, places like Armenia,
North Korea, Chad, Iran, Burma, Zimbabwe, Saudi Arabia, and Burkina Faso appear
as strongly authoritarian. For a list see, for example, "The Economist"
magazine's democracy index, though this is an economic-liberal magazine ‚Äì but
indexes compiled from other points of view such as Amnesty International or
Freedom House are available from time to time. It is often the more wealthy
countries that come out at the top of such lists and the poorer ones that fall
toward the end; whether this is a cause or result of their political systems is
open to debate. Another way of looking at the problem of trying to make a list
of authoritarian regimes is not to compare the apparent forms of government
(for example, whether direct election as in the Swiss Cantons or by collegiate
representation etc.) but, in making such a list, to compare the balance of
power between the political elite and the general populace. Such an index asks
questions as to whether or not a given government allows the direct influence
of its subjects in the decision making process, whether or not it suppresses
Freedom of speech, imprisons them in Gulags or other such prison systems or
behaves in a belligerent manner towards more democratic nations or allows poor
work conditions to flourish or even allows forms of slavery. The government of
China is generally considered to be a modern authoritarian government. China is
ruled by one party only, known as the Communist Party. Policies in China are
created in high-level meetings, in which the general population has no input
into the choices that are made for them. The government of China keeps watch
over the Chinese internet meticulously, looking for anything that may be
considered politically sensitive. China is also on Reporters Without Borders'
"Enemies of the Internet" blacklist. They also block major social networking
websites such as Facebook and Twitter, as they are concerned that citizens may
use these sites to organize public demonstrations. Furthermore, some citizens
who have posted information on the Internet that is pro-democratic have been
harassed and are sometimes even imprisoned. Another measure that the government
of China has taken which many argue infringes on the rights of its citizens is
the enforcement of the one-child policy of 1979, which limits each couple who
are ethnic Han Chinese living in urban areas to one child. While this was done
for purposes of population control, it has led to the killing or abandonment of
many female babies (so that the couple may instead have a son to carry on their
family name). Also, there have been multiple consequences for parents who have
more than one child, including fines, pressure to abort, and forced
sterilization. The communist Vietnamese government is also commonly described
as authoritarian. Vietnam is ruled by the Vietnamese Communist Party, the only
legal political party in the country. Policies and laws are all made
unilaterally by the Party, with the general public having no power in the
decision-making process. Any political opposition is prohibited, like the Bloc
8406, Viet Tan and Viet Nam Quoc Dan Dang; dissidents, such as the singer and
composer Viet Khang, are routinely arrested and imprisoned, with the government
frequently charging dissidents for "subverting the State", "endangering State
security" or attempting to "overthrow the "People's socialist government".
Protests in Vietnam are carefully monitored by the government, most notably the
protests on supporting Vietnamese sovereignty of the Paracel Islands and
Spratly Islands in the summer of 2011 in the cities of Hanoi and Saigon, and
smaller protests on the government's confiscation of land. The Internet is
heavily censored, most sites that having anti-communist content, critical or
opposing the government, or in support of the former Republic of Vietnam being
blocked by the government firewall. Social networking sites, including
Facebook, have also been blocked. Vietnam is also on Reporters Without Borders'
"Enemies of the Internet" blacklist. After the Vietnam War, hundreds of
thousands of South Vietnamese were sent to the "reeducation camps", where they
were forced to work under meager living conditions. Common attributes of
authoritarianism are becoming evident in Russia after numerous reports of vote
rigging during Parliament election in 2011, as well as Presidential election in
2012. Combined with the privileged position of United Russia (–ï–¥–∏–Ω–∞—è
– –æ—Å—Å–∏—è), a pro-Kremlin majority political party, repeatedly biased court
decisions, regulations that complicate the development of meaningful
opposition, and controversial legitimacy of the third term of President
Vladimir Putin, it shows tendency for authoritarian development in Russian
political system. Outcome of recent statements made by both President (ex-Prime
Minister) Putin and Prime Minister (ex-President) Medvedev regarding
liberalization of the political system is yet to be seen, and such discourse
may be perceived as a populistic attempt to cope with the social discontent.
Authoritarianism in history. Many different forms of authoritarianism have
served as the norm in many polities and in most periods from the dawn of
recorded history. Tribal chiefs and god-kings often gave way to despots and
emperors, then to enlightened monarchs and juntas. Even superficially
democratic constitutions or those claiming to be such can allow the
concentration of power or domination by strong-men or by small groups of
political elites - note the history of the Icelandic Althing. In contrast to
the varying manifestations of authoritarianism, more democratic forms of
governance as a standard mode of political organization became widespread only
after the Industrial Revolution had established modernity. Tyrants and
oligarchs bracketed the flourishing of democracy in ancient Athens; and kings
and emperors preceded and followed experimentation with democratic forms in the
Roman Republic. In the 15th century, Vlad Dracula is credited for being the
first ruler of Wallachia and Transylvania to rule by Authoritarianism.
