Authority Authority (from the Latin "auctoritas") is a right conferred by
recognized social position. Authority often refers to power vested in an
individual or organization by the state. Authority can also refer to recognized
expertise in an area of academic knowledge. An Authority (capitalized) refers
to a governing body upon which certain authority (with lower case "a") is
vested. Authority in various settings. Politics. In government, authority is
the scope of an entity's legitimate power (Cline n.d.) when acting on behalf of
the government. This power is conferred through officially recognized channels
within the government, and represents a portion of the government's overall
power. For example, a government might have the authority to execute criminals.
The government could then contain a jury authorized to determine if a citizen
is a criminal or a non-criminal; a judge authorized to sentence criminals to
execution; and an executioner authorized to kill criminals who have been
sentenced to execution. In contrast, a mob of citizens might have the power to
do all of the above things, but still lack the authority because the actions
would not be legitimate. Political authority can also be seen in situations
that are typically considered apolitical. (Agarwal n.d.) In truth bestowing
authority is a function of any social institution. A corporation, for example,
must hire employees as a standard function of its existence. However, most of
the corporation's members are not authorized to hire employees. This authority
is passed down through the corporation to specific individuals without
government involvement. This same phenomenon can be found in religious
organizations, charities, fraternities, etc. Religion. Recognizing when God has
indicated His will requires the ability to understand how authority is
expressed by a higher power. Direct statements and commands are most easily
recognized as expressed authority. Seeing an example of someone acting in a way
that meets with approval is helpful. Oftentimes, directions from the author
require some inferring as the author implies what is required. Philosophy. One
should distinguish between power and authority. Both are involved with the use
of agreement, power can relate to an armed criminal while authority may relate
to a wise guru. The guru has authority but no power, while a criminal has power
but no authority. If a military force loses their control, then they will lose
authority. Academia. A person (or group) could be considered an "authority" on
a subject matter if their expertise is well established. This means that any
statements the person makes, with regard to their field of expertise, will have
the burden of proof in their favor. That is, if a professor of mathematics
makes a statement about numbers, it will be assumed to be true in the absence
of evidence to the contrary. This will also overrule any unsupported objections
by an individual without such expertise. Professional scholars are common
examples of this, but they are not the only examples. A carpenter might be
considered an authority on wood, for example. Governmental agencies. Every
state has a number of institutions which exercise authority based on
longstanding practices. Apart from this, every state sets up agencies which are
competent in dealing with one particular matter. All this is set up within its
charter. One example would be a port authority like the Port of London. They
are usually created by special legislation and are run by a board of directors.
Several agencies and institutions are created along the same lines and they
exercise authority in certain matters. They are usually required to support
themselves through property taxes or other forms of collection or fees for
services. Psychology. The Milgram experiment of 1961 demonstrated that people
will follow an authority figure regardless of consequent effects on other
people. Participants followed the orders of experimenters who represented the
authority, and continued to give electric shocks to the learner who gave wrong
answers to questions, even though the participants themselves were not required
to administer the shock.
