Autonomous area An autonomous area or autonomous entity is an area of a country
that has a degree of autonomy, or freedom from an external authority. Typically
it is either geographically distinct from the rest of the country or populated
by a national minority. Giving one a certain amount of self-government may be a
way for a national government to try and defuse an existing or possible
internal conflict. Countries that include autonomous areas are often
federacies. Autonomous areas can be divided into territorial autonomies,
subregional territorial autonomies and local autonomies. Contemporary. Many
autonomous areas lie within two of the world's largest countries, People's
Republic of China and Russia. China. China (PRC) has five types of autonomous
areas. Found only as divisions of Inner Mongolia. In effect, these are
autonomous counties (see below). The most numerous type of autonomous area in
China, found both within and outside the larger autonomous prefectures and
regions. China has 30 prefectures that are autonomous, mostly in the periphery
of the country. A first-level administrative subdivision of China. There are
five ARs in China. They are Inner Mongolia AR, Tibet AR, Ningxia Hui AR,
Xinjiang Uyghur AR, and Guangxi Zhuang AR. Regardless of the names, these
regions are in fact less autonomous than the special administrative regions of
China. Although not autonomous in name, in practice China's special
administrative regions, Hong Kong and Macau, enjoy a very high degree of
autonomy. Russia. "Okrug" is a transliterated Slavic loanword usually
translated as "district". Okrugs, however, vary more widely in size than other
areas commonly identified as "districts", from large first-level divisions to
third-level divisions within cities. As of 2008, Russia has four autonomous
okrugs. "Oblast" is a transliterated Slavic loanword usually understood to mean
"province". , one autonomous oblast exists: the Jewish Autonomous Oblast. Other
countries. Autonomous city. Four cities are formally designated by their
countries as autonomous: the capital of Uzbekistan, Tashkent; the Spanish
exclaves of Ceuta and Melilla; and the Argentine capital, Buenos Aires.
Brussels, formally the "Bussels-Capital Region" and one of the three regions of
Belgium, can also be seen as a kind of autonomous city. Note that the "City of
Brussels" is one of the municipalities "within" that Region. Autonomous
commune. Bangui, the capital of the Central African Republic, is described as
an autonomous commune ("commune autonome"). Autonomous community. The
territories into which Spain's provinces are grouped are known as autonomous
communities ("comunidades autónomas"). The Spanish model of state established
by the 1978 Constitution is a quasi-federation, consisting of 17 autononomous
communities having the constitutional right to self-rule. Spain is not a
federation in name and is not yet a fully formed federation, but it does
exhibit some of the institutional characteristics of contemporary federal
political systems. Autonomous republic. The Palestinian Authority exercises
certain sovereign powers within its borders, but is not a fully independent
government. The PA-administrated territories are internationally recognized as
occupied by Israel, and not a proper part of that country. Autonomous sector.
The Bissau Region, in which Guinea-Bissau's capital Bissau is found, is
described as an "autonomous sector" ("sector autónomo"). Autonomous territory.
Ostensibly Moldova has two autonomous territories: Gagauzia and Transnistria.
However, this nominal status obscures the fact that the central government of
Moldova has no effective authority in Transnistria (officially the
Pridnestrovian Moldavian Republican), which although unrecognized by any other
nation, effectively governs itself as a sovereign state. Gagauzia, on the other
hand, is an actual autonomous territory, with a degree of control being
exercised by the central government. Other entities with devolution (autonomy).
British constituent countries and Crown Dependencies. In the United Kingdom.
New Zealand dependent territories. New Zealand has several autonomous islands
and atolls in the Pacific Ocean, like the Cook Islands and Niue (two states in
free association with New Zealand), the Chatham Islands (a special territory
within New Zealand) and Tokelau (a non-self-governing territory of New
Zealand). Ethiopian special woredas. In Ethiopia, "special woredas" are a
subgroup of "woredas" (districts) that are organized around the traditional
homelands of an ethnic minority, and are outside the usual hierarchy of a
"kilil", or region. These "woredas" have many similarities to autonomous areas
in other countries.
