Averroes (), commonly known as Ibn Rushd () or by his Latinized name Averroës
(; April 14, 1126 – December 10, 1198), was an Andalusian Muslim polymath; a
master of Aristotelian philosophy, Islamic philosophy, Islamic theology, Maliki
law and jurisprudence, logic, psychology, politics, Arabic music theory, and
the sciences of medicine, astronomy, geography, mathematics, physics and
celestial mechanics. Averroes was born in Córdoba, Al Andalus, present-day
Spain, and died in Marrakesh, present-day Morocco, but his body was transferred
to his family tomb at Córdoba. The 13th-century philosophical movement based
on Averroes' work is called Averroism. Averroes was a defender of Aristotelian
philosophy against Ash'ari theologians led by Al-Ghazali. Averroes' philosophy
was considered controversial in Muslim circles. Averroes had a greater impact
on Western European circles and he has been described as the "founding father
of secular thought in Western Europe". The detailed commentaries on Aristotle
earned Averroes the title "The Commentator". Latin translations of Averroes'
work led the way to the popularization of Aristotle and were responsible for
the development of scholasticism in medieval Europe. Name. Averroes' name is
also seen as "Averroës", "Averroès" or "Averrhoës", indicating that the "o"
and the "e" form separate syllables. "Averroës" is a Latinisation of the
Arabic name "Ibn Rushd". According to Ernest Renan, Averroes was also known as
"Ibin-Ros-din", "Filius Rosadis", "Ibn-Rusid", "Ben-Raxid", "Ibn-Ruschod",
"Den-Resched", "Aben-Rassad", "Aben-Rois", "Aben-Rasd", "Aben-Rust", "Avenrosdy
Avenryz", "Adveroys", "Benroist", "Avenroyth" and "Averroysta". Biography.
Averroes was born in Córdoba to a family with a long and well-respected
tradition of legal and public service. His grandfather Abu Al-Walid Muhammad
(d. 1126) was chief judge of Córdoba under the Almoravids. His father, Abu Al-
Qasim Ahmad, held the same position until the Almoravids were replaced by the
Almohads in 1146. Averroes' education followed a traditional path, beginning
with studies in Hadith, linguistics, jurisprudence and scholastic theology.
Throughout his life he wrote extensively on Philosophy and Religion, attributes
of God, origin of the universe, Metaphysics and Psychology. It is generally
believed that he was perhaps once tutored by Ibn Bajjah (Avempace). His medical
education was directed under Abu Jafar ibn Harun of Trujillo in Seville.
Averroes also studied the works and philosophy of Ibn Bajjah ("Avempace" to the
West), another famous Islamic philosopher who greatly influenced his own
Averroist thought. However, while the thought of his mentors Ibn Tufail and Ibn
Bajjah were mystic to an extent, the thought of Averroes was purely
rationalist. Together, the three men are considered the greatest Andalusian
philosophers. Averroes devoted the last 30 years to his philosophical writings.
In 1160, Averroes was made "Qadi" (judge) of Seville and he served in many
court appointments in Seville, Cordoba, and Morocco during his career.
Sometimes during the reign of Yaqub al-Mansur, Averroes' political career was
abruptly ended and he faced severe criticism from the Fuqaha (Islamic jurists)
of the time. Averroes's strictly rationalist views collided with the more
orthodox views of Abu Yusuf Ya'qub al-Mansur, who therefore eventually banished
Averroes, though he had previously appointed him as his personal physician.
Averroes was not reinstated until shortly before his death in the year 1198 AD.
Works. Averroes's works were spread over 20,000 pages covering a variety of
different subjects, including early Islamic philosophy, logic in Islamic
philosophy, Arabic medicine, Arabic mathematics, Arabic astronomy, Arabic
grammar, Islamic theology, Sharia (Islamic law), and Fiqh (Islamic
jurisprudence). In particular, his most important works dealt with Islamic
philosophy, medicine and Fiqh. He wrote at least 67 original works, which
included 28 works on philosophy, 20 on medicine, 8 on law, 5 on theology, and 4
on grammar, in addition to his commentaries on most of Aristotle's works and
his commentary on Plato's "The Republic". He wrote commentaries on most of the
surviving works of Aristotle. These were not based on primary sources (it is
not known whether he knew Greek), but rather on Arabic translations. There were
three levels of commentary: the "Jami", the "Talkhis" and the "Tafsir" which
are, respectively, a simplified overview, an intermediate commentary with more
critical material, and an advanced study of Aristotelian thought in a Muslim
context. The terms are taken from the names of different types of commentary on
the Qur'an. It is not known whether he wrote commentaries of all three types on
all the works: in most cases only one or two commentaries survive. He did not
have access to any text of Aristotle's "Politics". As a substitute for this, he
commented on Plato's "The Republic", arguing that the ideal state there
described was the same as the original constitution of the Arab Caliphate, as
well as the Almohad state of Ibn Tumart. His most important original
philosophical work was "The Incoherence of the Incoherence" ("Tahafut al-
tahafut"), in which he defended Aristotelian philosophy against al-Ghazali's
claims in "The Incoherence of the Philosophers" ("Tahafut al-falasifa"). Al-
Ghazali argued that Aristotelianism, especially as presented in the writings of
Avicenna, was self-contradictory and an affront to the teachings of Islam.
Averroes' rebuttal was two-pronged: he contended both that al-Ghazali's
arguments were mistaken and that, in any case, the system of Avicenna was a
distortion of genuine Aristotelianism so that al-Ghazali was aiming at the
wrong target. Other works were the "Fasl al-Maqal", which argued for the
legality of philosophical investigation under Islamic law, and the "Kitab al-
Kashf", which argued against the proofs of Islam advanced by the Ash'arite
school and discussed what proofs, on the popular level, should be used instead.
Averroes is also a highly regarded legal scholar of the Maliki school. Perhaps
his best-known work in this field is "Bidāyat al-Mujtahid wa Nihāyat al-
Muqtaṣid" ( بداية المجتهد و نهاية المقتصد), a
textbook of Maliki doctrine in a comparative framework. Jacob Anatoli
translated several of the works of Averroes from Arabic into Hebrew in the 13th
century. Many of them were later translated from Hebrew into Latin by Jacob
Mantino and Abraham de Balmes. Other works were translated directly from Arabic
into Latin by Michael Scot. Many of his works in logic and metaphysics have
been permanently lost, while others, including some of the longer Aristotelian
commentaries, have only survived in Latin or Hebrew translation, not in the
original Arabic. The fullest version of his works is in Latin, and forms part
of the multi-volume Juntine edition of Aristotle published in Venice 1562-1574.
Science. Medicine. Averroes wrote a medical encyclopedia called "Kulliyat"
("Generalities", i. e. general medicine), known in its Latin translation as
"Colliget". He also made a compilation of the works of Galen, and wrote a
commentary on the Canon of Medicine (Qanun fi 't-tibb) of Avicenna (Ibn Sina)
(980-1037). Physics. Averroes also authored three books on physics namely:
Short Commentary on the Physics, Middle Commentary on the Physics and Long
Commentary on the Physics. Averroes defined and measured force as "the rate at
which work is done in changing the kinetic condition of a material body" and
correctly argued "that the effect and measure of force is change in the kinetic
condition of a materially resistant mass". He took a particular and keen
interest in the understanding of "motor force". Averroes also developed the
notion that bodies have a (non-gravitational) inherent resistance to motion
into physics. This idea in particular was adopted by Thomas Aquinas and
subsequently by Johannes Kepler, who refereed to this fact as "Inertia". In
Optics Averroes followed Alhazen's incorrect explanation that a Rainbow is due
to reflection, not refraction. Astronomy. Regarding his studies in astronomy,
Averroes argued for a strictly concentric model of the universe, and explained
sunspots and scientific reasoning regarding the occasional opaque colors of the
moon. He also worked on the description of the spheres, and movement of the
spheres. Psychology. Averroes also made some studies regarding Active intellect
and Passive intellect, both of the following were formerly regarded subjects of
Psychology. Philosophy. The Tradition of Islamic Philosophy. Averroes furthered
the tradition of Greek philosophy in the Islamic world ("falsafa"). His
commentaries removed the neo-Platonic bias of his predecessors. Criticizing al-
Farabi's attempt to merge Plato and Aristotle's ideas, Averroes argued that
Aristotle's philosophy diverged in significant ways from Plato's. Averroes
rejected Avicenna's Neoplatonism which was partly based on the works of neo-
Platonic philosophers, Plotinus and Proclus, that were mistakenly attributed to
Aristotle. In metaphysics, or more exactly ontology, Averroes rejects the view
advanced by Avicenna that existence is merely accidental. Avicenna holds that
"essence is ontologically prior to existence". The accidental, i. e. attributes
that are not essential, are additional contingent characteristics. Averroes,
following Aristotle, holds that individual existing substances are primary. One
may separate them mentally; however, ontologically speaking, existence and
essence are one. According to Fakhry, this represents a change from Plato's
theory of Ideas, where ideas precede particulars, to Aristotle's theory where
particulars come first and the essence is "arrived at by a process of
abstraction. " Commentaries on Aristotle and Plato. Averroes wrote commentaries
on most of the surviving works of Aristotle working from Arabic translations.
He wrote three types of commentaries. The short commentary ("jami") is
generally an epitome; the middle commentary ("talkhis") is a paraphrase; the
long commentary ("tafsir") includes the whole text with a detailed analysis of
each line. Unlike the European scholars who came after him, Averroes argued
that rhetoric and poetics were both part of Aristotle's work on logical
thought. Averroes, not having access to Aristotle's Politics, substituted
Plato's Republic. Averroes, following Plato's paternalistic model, advances an
authoritarian ideal. Absolute monarchy, led by a philosopher-king, creates a
justly ordered society. This requires extensive use of coercion. Although,
persuasion is preferred and is possible if the young are properly raised.
Averroes, following Plato, accepts the principle of women's equality. They
should be educated and allowed to serve in the military; the best among them
might be tomorrow's philosophers or rulers. He also accepts Plato's illiberal
measures such as the censorship of literature. He uses examples from Arab
history to illustrate just and degenerate political orders. Independent
philosophical works. His most important original philosophical work was "The
Incoherence of the Incoherence" ("Tahafut al-tahafut"), in which he defended
Aristotelian philosophy against al-Ghazali's claims in "The Incoherence of the
Philosophers" ("Tahafut al-falasifa"). Al-Ghazali argued that Aristotelianism,
especially as presented in the writings of Avicenna, was self-contradictory and
an affront to the teachings of Islam. Averroes' rebuttal was two-pronged: he
contended both that al-Ghazali's arguments were mistaken and that, in any case,
the system of Avicenna was a distortion of genuine Aristotelianism so that al-
Ghazali was aiming at the wrong target. Other works were the "Fasl al-Maqal",
which argued for the legality of philosophical investigation under Islamic law,
and the "Kitab al-Kashf". Jacob Anatoli translated his works from Arabic to
Hebrew in the 13th century. Many of them were later translated from Hebrew to
Latin by Jacob Mantino and others. Other works were translated directly from
Arabic to Latin by Michael Scot. Many of his works in logic and metaphysics
have been permanently lost, while others, including some of the longer
Aristotelian commentaries, have only survived in Latin or Hebrew translation,
not in the original Arabic. The fullest version of his works is in Latin, and
forms part of the multi-volume Juntine edition of Aristotle published in Venice
1562-1574. System of philosophy. Averroes tried to reconcile Aristotle's system
of thought with Islam. According to him, there is no conflict between religion
and philosophy, rather that they are different ways of reaching the same truth.
He believed in the eternity of the universe. He also held that the soul is
divided into two parts, one individual and one divine; while the individual
soul is not eternal, all humans at the basic level share one and the same
divine soul. Averroes has two kinds of Knowledge of Truth. The first being his
knowledge of truth of religion being based in faith and thus could not be
tested, nor did it require training to understand. The second knowledge of
truth is philosophy, which was reserved for an elite few who had the
intellectual capacity to undertake its study. Significance. Averroes is most
famous for his commentaries of Aristotle's works, which had been mostly
forgotten in the West. Before 1150 only a few translated works of Aristotle
existed in Latin Europe (i. e. excluding Greek Byzantium), and they were not
studied much or given as much credence by monastic scholars. It was in part
through the Latin translations of Averroes's work beginning in the 12th century
that the legacy of Aristotle was recovered in the Latin West. Averroes's work
on Aristotle spans almost three decades, and he wrote commentaries on almost
all of Aristotle's work except for Aristotle's "Politics", to which he did not
have access. Hebrew translations of his work also had a lasting impact on
Jewish philosophy. Moses Maimonides, Samuel Ben Tibbon, Juda Ben Solomon Choen,
and Shem Tob Ben Joseph Falaquera were Jewish philosophers influenced by
Averroes. His ideas were assimilated by Siger of Brabant and Thomas Aquinas and
others (especially in the University of Paris) within the Christian scholastic
tradition which valued Aristotelian logic. Famous scholastics such as Aquinas
believed him to be so important they did not refer to him by name, simply
calling him "The Commentator" and calling Aristotle "The Philosopher. "
Averroes had no discernible influence on Islamic philosophic thought until
modern times. His death coincides with a change in the culture of Al-Andalus.
In his work "Fasl al-Maqāl" (translated a. o. as "The Decisive Treatise"), he
stresses the importance of analytical thinking as a prerequisite to interpret
the Qur'an. Jurisprudence and law. Averroes is also a highly-regarded legal
scholar of the Maliki school. Perhaps his best-known work in this field is
"Bidāyat al-Mujtahid wa Nihāyat al-Muqtaṣid, " a textbook of Maliki
doctrine in a comparative framework, which is renderd in English as "The
Distinguished Jurist's Primer"—. He is also the author of "al-Bayān wa'l-
Taḥṣīl, wa'l-Sharḥ wa'l-Tawjīh wa'l-Ta`līl fi Masā'il al-Mustakhraja,
" a long and detailed commentary based on the "Mustakhraja" of Muḥammad al-
`Utbī al-Qurtubī.
