Balance of trade The balance of trade, or net exports (sometimes symbolized as
NX), is the difference between the monetary value of exports and imports of
output in an economy over a certain period. It is the relationship between a
nation's imports and exports. A positive balance is known as a trade surplus if
it consists of exporting more than is imported; a negative balance is referred
to as a trade deficit or, informally, a trade gap. The balance of trade is
sometimes divided into a goods and a services balance. Early understanding of
the functioning of balance of trade informed the economic policies of Early
Modern Europe that are grouped under the heading mercantilism. An early
statement appeared in "Discourse of the Common Wealth of this Realm of
England", 1549: "We must always take heed that we buy no more from strangers
than we sell them, for so should we impoverish ourselves and enrich them."
Similarly a systematic and coherent explanation of balance of trade was made
public through Thomas Mun's c1630 "England's treasure by forraign trade, or,
The balance of our forraign trade is the rule of our treasure" Definition. The
balance of trade forms part of the current account, which includes other
transactions such as income from the international investment position as well
as international aid. If the current account is in surplus, the country's net
international asset position increases correspondingly. Equally, a deficit
decreases the net international asset position. The trade balance is identical
to the difference between a country's output and its domestic demand (the
difference between what goods a country produces and how many goods it buys
from abroad; this does not include money re-spent on foreign stock, nor does it
factor in the concept of importing goods to produce for the domestic market).
Measuring the balance of trade can be problematic because of problems with
recording and collecting data. As an illustration of this problem, when
official data for all the world's countries are added up, exports exceed
imports by almost 1%; it appears the world is running a positive balance of
trade with itself. This cannot be true, because all transactions involve an
equal credit or debit in the account of each nation. The discrepancy is widely
believed to be explained by transactions intended to launder money or evade
taxes, smuggling and other visibility problems. However, especially for
developed countries, accuracy is likely. In addition, the trade balance is
likely to differ across the business cycle. In export-led growth (such as oil
and early industrial goods), the balance of trade will improve during an
economic expansion. However, with domestic demand led growth (as in the United
States and Australia) the trade balance will worsen at the same stage in the
business cycle. Since the mid 1980s, the United States has had a growing
deficit in tradeable goods, especially with Asian nations (China and Japan)
which now hold large sums of U.S debt that has funded the consumption. The U.S.
has a trade surplus with nations such as Australia. The issue of trade deficits
can be complex. Trade deficits generated in tradeable goods such as
manufactured goods or software may impact domestic employment to different
degrees than trade deficits in raw materials. Economies such as Canada, Japan,
and Germany which have savings surpluses, typically run trade surpluses. China,
a high growth economy, has tended to run trade surpluses. A higher savings rate
generally corresponds to a trade surplus. Correspondingly, the U.S. with its
lower savings rate has tended to run high trade deficits, especially with Asian
nations. Views on economic impact. Conditions where trade imbalances may be
problematic. Those who ignore the effects of long run trade deficits may be
confusing David Ricardo's principle of comparative advantage with Adam Smith's
principle of absolute advantage, specifically ignoring the latter. The
economist Paul Craig Roberts notes that the comparative advantage principles
developed by David Ricardo do not hold where the factors of production are
internationally mobile. Global labor arbitrage, a phenomenon described by
economist Stephen S. Roach, where one country exploits the cheap labor of
another, would be a case of absolute advantage that is not mutually beneficial.
The case of the United States. Since the stagflation of the 1970s, the U.S.
economy has been characterized by slower GDP growth. In 1985, the U.S. began
its growing trade deficit with China. Over the long run, nations with trade
surpluses tend also to have a savings surplus. The U.S. generally has lower
savings rates than its trading partners, which tend to have trade surpluses.
Germany, France, Japan, and Canada have maintained higher savings rates than
the U.S. over the long run. Few economists believe that GDP and employment can
be dragged down by an over-large deficit over the long run. Others believe that
trade deficits are good for the economy. The opportunity cost of a forgone tax
base may outweigh perceived gains, especially where artificial currency pegs
and manipulations are present to distort trade. Wealth-producing primary sector
jobs in the U.S. such as those in manufacturing and computer software have
often been replaced by much lower paying wealth-consuming jobs such as those in
retail and government in the service sector when the economy recovered from
recessions. Some economists contend that the U.S. is borrowing to fund
consumption of imports while accumulating unsustainable amounts of debt. In
2006, the primary economic concerns focused on: high national debt ($9
trillion), high non-bank corporate debt ($9 trillion), high mortgage debt ($9
trillion), high financial institution debt ($12 trillion), high unfunded
Medicare liability ($30 trillion), high unfunded Social Security liability ($12
trillion), high external debt (amount owed to foreign lenders) and a serious
deterioration in the United States net international investment position (NIIP)
(-24% of GDP), high trade deficits, and a rise in illegal immigration. These
issues have raised concerns among economists and unfunded liabilities were
mentioned as a serious problem facing the United States in the President's 2006
State of the Union address. On June 26, 2009, Jeff Immelt, the CEO of General
Electric, called for the U.S. to increase its manufacturing base employment to
20% of the workforce, commenting that the U.S. has outsourced too much in some
areas and can no longer rely on the financial sector and consumer spending to
drive demand. Conditions where trade imbalances may not be problematic. Small
trade deficits are generally not considered to be harmful to either the
importing or exporting economy. However, when a national trade imbalance
expands beyond prudence (generally thought to be several percent of GDP, for
several years), adjustments tend to occur. While unsustainable imbalances may
persist for long periods (cf, Singapore and New Zealand’s surpluses and
deficits, respectively), the distortions likely to be caused by large flows of
wealth out of one economy and into another tend to become intolerable. In
simple terms, trade deficits are paid for out of foreign exchange reserves, and
may continue until such reserves are depleted. At such a point, the importer
can no longer continue to purchase more than is sold abroad. This is likely to
have exchange rate implications: a sharp loss of value in the deficit
economy’s exchange rate with the surplus economy’s currency will change the
relative price of tradable goods, and facilitate a return to balance or (more
likely) an over-shooting into surplus the other direction. More complexly, an
economy may be unable to export enough goods to pay for its imports, but is
able to find funds elsewhere. Service exports, for example, are more than
sufficient to pay for Hong Kong’s domestic goods export shortfall. In poorer
countries, foreign aid may fill the gap while in rapidly developing economies a
capital account surplus often off-sets a current-account deficit. There are
some economies where transfers from nationals working abroad contribute
significantly to paying for imports. The Philippines, Bangladesh and Mexico are
examples of transfer-rich economies. Finally, a country may partially rebalance
by use of quantitative easing at home. This involves a central bank buying back
long term government bonds from other domestic financial institutions without
reference to the interest rate (which is typically low when QE is called for),
seriously increasing the money supply. This debases the local currency but also
reduces the debt owed to foreign creditors - effectively "exporting inflation".
Adam Smith on trade deficits. "In the foregoing part of this chapter I have
endeavoured to show, even upon the principles of the commercial system, how
unnecessary it is to lay extraordinary restraints upon the importation of goods
from those countries with which the balance of trade is supposed to be
disadvantageous. Nothing, however, can be more absurd than this whole doctrine
of the balance of trade, upon which, not only these restraints, but almost all
the other regulations of commerce are founded. When two places trade with one
another, this doctrine supposes that, if the balance be even, neither of them
either loses or gains; but if it leans in any degree to one side, that one of
them loses and the other gains in proportion to its declension from the exact
equilibrium." (Smith, 1776, book IV, ch. iii, part ii) Frédéric Bastiat on
the fallacy of trade deficits. The 19th century economist and philosopher
Frédéric Bastiat expressed the idea that trade deficits actually were a
manifestation of profit, rather than a loss. He proposed as an example to
suppose that he, a Frenchman, exported French wine and imported British coal,
turning a profit. He supposed he was in France, and sent a cask of wine which
was worth 50 francs to England. The customhouse would record an export of 50
francs. If, in England, the wine sold for 70 francs (or the pound equivalent),
which he then used to buy coal, which he imported into France, and was found to
be worth 90 francs in France, he would have made a profit of 40 francs. But the
customhouse would say that the value of imports exceeded that of exports and
was trade deficit against the ledger of France. By "reductio ad absurdum",
Bastiat argued that the national trade deficit was an indicator of a successful
economy, rather than a failing one. Bastiat predicted that a successful,
growing economy would result in greater trade deficits, and an unsuccessful,
shrinking economy would result in lower trade deficits. This was later, in the
20th century, affirmed by economist Milton Friedman. John Maynard Keynes on the
balance of trade. In the last few years of his life, John Maynard Keynes was
much preoccupied with the question of balance in international trade. He was
the leader of the British delegation to the United Nations Monetary and
Financial Conference in 1944 that established the Bretton Woods system of
international currency management. He was the principal author of a proposal
— the so-called Keynes Plan —— for an International Clearing Union. The
two governing principles of the plan were that the problem of settling
outstanding balances should be solved by 'creating' additional 'international
money', and that debtor and creditor should be treated almost alike as
disturbers of equilibrium. In the event, though, the plans were rejected, in
part because "American opinion was naturally reluctant to accept the principle
of equality of treatment so novel in debtor-creditor relationships". His view,
supported by many economists and commentators at the time, was that creditor
nations may be just as responsible as debtor nations for disequilibrium in
exchanges and that both should be under an obligation to bring trade back into
a state of balance. Failure for them to do so could have serious consequences.
In the words of Geoffrey Crowther, then editor of The Economist, "If the
economic relationships between nations are not, by one means or another,
brought fairly close to balance, then there is no set of financial arrangements
that can rescue the world from the impoverishing results of chaos." These ideas
were informed by events prior to the Great Depression when — in the opinion
of Keynes and others — international lending, primarily by the U.S., exceeded
the capacity of sound investment and so got diverted into non-productive and
speculative uses, which in turn invited default and a sudden stop to the
process of lending. Influenced by Keynes, economics texts in the immediate
post-war period put a significant emphasis on balance in trade. For example,
the second edition of the popular introductory textbook, "An Outline of Money",
devoted the last three of its ten chapters to questions of foreign exchange
management and in particular the 'problem of balance'. However, in more recent
years, since the end of the Bretton Woods system in 1971, with the increasing
influence of Monetarist schools of thought in the 1980s, and particularly in
the face of large sustained trade imbalances, these concerns — and
particularly concerns about the destabilising effects of large trade surpluses
— have largely disappeared from mainstream economics discourse and Keynes'
insights have slipped from view. They are receiving some attention again in the
wake of the Financial crisis of 2007–2010. Milton Friedman on trade deficits.
In the 1980s, Milton Friedman, the Nobel Prize-winning economist and father of
Monetarism, contended that some of the concerns of trade deficits are unfair
criticisms in an attempt to push macroeconomic policies favorable to exporting
industries. Prof. Friedman argued that trade deficits are not necessarily as
important as high exports raise the value of the currency, reducing
aforementioned exports, and vice versa for imports, thus naturally removing
trade deficits not due to investment. Since 1971, when the Nixon administration
decided to abolish fixed exchange rates, America's Current Account accumulated
trade deficits have totaled $7.75 Trillion as of 2010. This deficit exists as
it is matched by investment coming in to the United States- purely by the
definition of the balance of payments, any current account deficit that exists
is matched by an inflow of foreign investment. In the late 1970s and early
1980s, the U.S. had experienced high inflation and Friedman's policy positions
tended to defend the stronger dollar at that time. He stated his belief that
these trade deficits were not necessarily harmful to the economy at the time
since the currency comes back to the country (country A sells to country B,
country B sells to country C who buys from country A, but the trade deficit
only includes A and B). However, it may be in one form or another including the
possible tradeoff of foreign control of assets. In his view, the "worst case
scenario" of the currency never returning to the country of origin was actually
the best possible outcome: the country actually purchased its goods by
exchanging them for pieces of cheaply made paper. As Friedman put it, this
would be the same result as if the exporting country burned the dollars it
earned, never returning it to market circulation. This position is a more
refined version of the theorem first discovered by David Hume. Hume argued that
England could not permanently gain from exports, because hoarding gold (i.e.,
currency) would make gold more plentiful in England; therefore, the prices of
English goods would rise, making them less attractive exports and making
foreign goods more attractive imports. In this way, countries' trade balances
would balance out. Friedman believed that deficits would be corrected by free
markets as floating currency rates rise or fall with time to encourage or
discourage imports in favor of the exports, reversing again in favor of imports
as the currency gains strength. In the real world, a potential difficulty is
that currency markets are far from a free market, with government and central
banks being major players, and this is unlikely to change within the
foreseeable future. Nevertheless, recent developments have shown that the
global economy is undergoing a fundamental shift. For many years, the U.S. has
borrowed and bought while in general, the rest of the world has lent and sold.
As of October 2007, the U.S. dollar weakened against the euro, British pound,
and many other currencies. For instance, the euro hit $1.42 in October 2007,
the strongest it has been since its birth in 1999. Against this backdrop,
American exporters are finding quite favorable overseas markets for their
products and U.S. consumers are responding to their general housing slowdown by
slowing their spending. Furthermore, China, the Middle East, central Europe and
Africa are absorbing more of the world's imports which in the end may result in
a world economy that is more evenly balanced. All of this could well add up to
a major readjustment of the U.S. trade deficit, which as a percentage of GDP,
began in 1991. Friedman contended that the structure of the balance of payments
was misleading. In an interview with Charlie Rose, he stated that "on the
books" the US is a net borrower of funds, using those funds to pay for goods
and services. He essentially claimed that the foreign assets were not carried
on the books at their higher, truer value. Friedman presented his analysis of
the balance of trade in "Free to Choose", widely considered his most
significant popular work. Warren Buffett on trade deficits. The successful
American businessman and investor Warren Buffett was quoted in the Associated
Press (January 20, 2006) as saying "The U.S trade deficit is a bigger threat to
the domestic economy than either the federal budget deficit or consumer debt
and could lead to political turmoil... Right now, the rest of the world owns $3
trillion more of us than we own of them." In a more detailed 2003 Fortune
article, Buffett proposed a tool called Import Certificates as a solution to
the United States' problem and ensure balanced trade. "The rest of the world
owns a staggering $2.5 trillion more of the U.S. than we own of other
countries. Some of this $2.5 trillion is invested in claim checks—U.S. bonds,
both governmental and private— and some in such assets as property and equity
securities." Physical balance of trade. Monetary balance of trade is different
from physical balance of trade (which is expressed in amount of raw materials,
known also as Total Material Consumption). Developed countries usually import a
lot of primary raw materials from developing countries at low prices. Often,
these materials are then converted into finished products, and a significant
amount of value is added. Although for instance the EU (as well as many other
developed countries) has a balanced monetary balance of trade, its physical
trade balance (especially with developing countries) is negative, meaning that
a lot less material is exported than imported. For this reason, activists talk
about the issue of ecological debt which implies a sort of predatory economic
system. The nature of the trade balance statistics is such that it conceals
distorted material flow. United States trade deficit. The U.S. has held a trade
deficit starting late in the 1960s. Its trade deficit has been increasing at a
large rate since 1997 (See chart) and increased by 49.8 billion dollars between
2005 and 2006, setting a record high of 817.3 billion dollars, up from 767.5
billion dollars the previous year. The graph indicates that, as Frédéric
Bastiat predicted, the deficit slackened during recessions and grew during
periods of expansion. Also of note, many economists calculate trade deficits
and/or current account deficits as a percentage of GDP. The US last had a trade
surplus in 1975. Every year there has been a major reduction in economic
growth, it is followed by a reduction in the US trade deficit.
