Ballot A ballot is a device used to cast votes in an election, and may be a
piece of paper or a small ball used in secret voting. It was originally a small
ball—see blackball) used to record decisions made by voters. Each voter uses
one ballot, and ballots are not shared. In the simplest elections, a ballot may
be a simple scrap of paper on which each voter writes in the name of a
candidate, but governmental elections use pre-printed to protect the secrecy of
the votes. The voter casts his/her ballot in a box at a polling station. In
British English, this is usually called a "ballot paper". The word "ballot" is
used for an election process within an organisation (such as a trade union
"holding a ballot" of its members). Etymology. The word ballot comes from the
Italian "ballotta", from Italian dialect. In the 1540s, the word ballot was
used to describe a “small ball was used in voting” or a “secret vote
taken by ballots”. The earliest use of the word is referenced to Venice,
Italy. History. In ancient Greece, citizens used pieces of broken pottery to
scratch in the name of the candidate in the procedures of ostracism. This was
done because while papyrus was expensive and had to be imported from Egypt,
broken pottery was abundant and virtually free. The first use of paper ballots
to conduct an election appears to have been in Rome in 139 BC. In Ancient
India, around 920 AD, in Tamil Nadu, Palm leaves were used for village assembly
elections. The palm leaves with candidate names, will be put inside a mud pot,
for counting. This was called "Kudavolai" system. The first use of paper
ballots in North America was in 1629 within the Massachusetts Bay Colony to
select a pastor for the Salem Church. In the United States initially paper
ballots were pieces of paper marked and supplied by voters. Later on, political
parties and candidates provided preprinted ballots for voters to cast. Types of
voting systems. Depending on the type of voting system used in the election,
different ballots may be used. Ranked ballots allow voters to rank candidates
in order of preference, while ballots for first-past-the-post systems only
allow voters to select one candidate for each position. In party-list systems,
lists may be open or closed. The United States has a unique politics of long
and short ballot. Before the Civil War, many believed democracy was enhanced by
increasing the number of elective offices to include such comparatively minor
posts as the state-level secretary of state, county surveyor, register of
deeds, county coroner, and city clerk. A larger number of elected offices
required longer ballots, and at times the long ballot undoubtedly resulted in
confusion and blind voting, though the seriousness of either problem can be
disputed. Progressivists attacked the long ballot during the Progressive Era
(circa 1893–1917). In the United States today, the term ballot reform
sometimes refers to efforts to reduce the number of elected offices. Design.
Ballot design can aid or inhibit clarity in an election. Poor designs lead to
confusion and potentially chaos if large numbers of voters spoil or mismark a
ballot. The butterfly ballot used in the Florida U.S. presidential election,
2000 (a ballot paper that has names down both sides, with a single column of
punch holes in the center, which has been likened to a maze) led to widespread
allegations of mismarked ballots. Some political scientists prefer more
explicit statement of the voter's actual tolerances and preferences, and
believe that failure to reflect these in ballot design and voting system
alternatives causes many problems and leads for calls for electoral reform. For
instance, a non-binding referendum or poll, carried out on a ballot, carries
much more weight than one carried out with only a public sampling in a less
politically committed event than an election. For example, one might count the
number of ballots whereon the voter had crossed out the name of the political
party that nominated the candidate, even if (maybe only if) that voter had
voted for him or her. This would indicate support for candidates but would be
able to send signals to them that the "party line" was not why that voter voted
for them, but rather, she or he expected them to act independently. Such
marking and counting could be carried out on an ordinary ballot with no
provision for it, however, there would be risk of counting it as "spoiled" if
the marks were unclear, and if ballot design had not allowed for it initially.
