Barbara Kay controversy Barbara Kay is a columnist for the Canadian national
broadsheet the "National Post", wherein she expressed, in a series of three
articles, beginning with a column entitled "The Rise of Quebecistan," on August
9, 2006, her concern at the involvement of Quebec politicians in a
demonstration in support of Lebanon during the 2006 Israel-Lebanon conflict
that took place on August 6, 2006, in the city of Montreal, Quebec, Canada. Kay
wrote: "'The Rise of Quebecistan,' has become a focus for great controversy in
Quebec. In the past week, I have been interviewed by numerous radio stations,
both French and English, and declared an enemy of the people, in so many words,
in no less than three newspapers, including in a Post column... ." Kay claimed
that both she, and what she described as her "criticism" of the demonstration,
were attacked by elements of the French Quebec media and politicians—some of
whom support the separation of the province of Quebec from Canada—was
seemingly because her criticisms were expressed in the English language; and
not French. "Virulently anti-Israel rally". All four, along with prominent
Quebec union leaders, signed a manifesto that did not condemn Hezbollah's
aggression, then endorsed and willingly undertook a dominant role in a march at
which Hezbollah flags were in evidence, along with placards, reading "Juifs
assassins," Jewish assassins, (not "Israelis" -- Jews), "Nous sommes tous
Hezbollah," We are all Hezbollah, "Longue vie a Nasrallah," Long life to
Nasrallah, "Vive le Hezbollah," Long live Hezbollah. Gleeful separatist
cineaste Pierre Falardeau was photographed brandishing a fleur-de-lys in one
hand, a Hezbollah flag in the other. Graffiti on a building read: "God f--- the
Jews." A Jewish prayer shawl was torn to pieces. Kay wrote that these Quebec
politicians participated in the rally despite Hezbollah being an organization
officially classified as a terrorist group by the Canadian government. She also
asserted that the rally's organizing committee "deliberately excluded a Jewish
presence", which was "in itself an anti-Semitic act and a warning to any
politician, whose business it is to remain neutral in affairs of this kind, to
stay away." The rally also didn't call for "peace" but a cease fire or hudna.
Kay asked: "If these signs had read: 'We are all KKK,' 'Long life to Osama Bin
Laden,' 'We are all Nazis,' 'Women are pigs,' would these same leaders have
turned the blind eye they did at the time? Hezbollah's mission is to eradicate
Jews—not just Israelis—from the earth." And Kay felt that the involvement
of politicians in the rally was troubling: "It is true that similar marches
have taken place in other cities. The difference is that politicians in Toronto
and elsewhere in Canada do not march at the head of these hatefests." Kay
commented on the motivations of the politicians, noting: Their cultural and
historical sympathy for Arab countries from the francophonie -- Morocco,
Algeria, Lebanon -- joined with reflexive anti-Americanism and a fat streak of
anti-Semitism that has marbled the intellectual discourse of Quebec throughout
its history, has made Quebec the most anti-Israel of the provinces, and
therefore the most vulnerable to tolerance for Islamist terrorist sympathizers.
These politicians are playing a dangerous game. They have no political support
from Jews (who are all federalists), so have nothing to lose in courting anti-
Israel Arab groups. There are at least 50,000 Lebanese-Canadians in the
Montreal area. We can expect those numbers to swell as Hezbollah-supporting
residents of southern Lebanon cash in on their Canadian citizenship and flee to
the safety of Quebec. Under the circumstances, it may be politically convenient
for some left-wing Quebec politicians to stoke fires of enthusiasm for
Hezbollah -- an organization officially classified as a terrorist group by the
Canadian government. Yet it would be disastrous for the future of the province.
"The complicity of politicians, not with terrorism itself, but with those who
support terrorism, indicates a penchant for appeasement of hateful attitudes...
Quebec politicians and union leaders have, by their silence and weakness and
acts of overt complicity, legitimated rather than defused anti-Jewish sentiment
in Quebec. For this reason, I stand behind my previous statement that Quebec in
the hands of these people might very well become a Quebecistan." Criticism of
Kay. The French Quebec politicians defended their participation in the impugned
rally. Gilles Duceppe stated that he was there in the interest of Israel and
Lebanese civilian populations alike and André Boisclair said the Hezbollah
flag had no place in Quebec. A press release from Duceppe's Bloc Québécois
pointed out the presence of Jews at the rally and noted that Duceppe's presence
was conditional on no pro-Hezbollah demonstrators and no anti-Israel slogans.
Duceppe also indicated that the Bloc and others tried to get Hezbollah
supporters to leave the event. Montreal journalist Mark Abley also criticized
Kay's piece, noting that both Duceppe and Coderre called for an immediate
ceasefire and the disarming of Hezbollah in their speeches. He also indicated
that Hezbollah banners were described by those in attendance as "few and far
between", and described Kay's categorization of the rally as "Hezbollah-
dominated" as "intellectually untrue". "No flag of the controversial Shia
movement was visible during the march"). French Canadian activist Gilles
Rhéaume announced his intention to lodge a complaint to the police for hate
speech. William Tetley, a McGill University professor and past Robert Bourassa
provincial cabinet minister, wrote a letter to "The National Post" where he
stated that, as an anglophone, he viewed Quebec society as holding a long-
standing tolerance toward Jews by asserting that, at a time when his own
English-language McGill University imposed quotas on Jews, the French-language
Université de Montréal welcomed Jews. The French-Canadian premier of the
province of Quebec Jean Charest called the expression "Quebecistan" ""une
grossièreté"" (something rude, crude, a "vulgarity"). However, he also stated
that "No one in my government supports Hezbollah," and that he would not
participate in a demonstration where there was a Hezbollah flag. Kay's
supporters. Reacting to the controversy, "National Post" Comment Pages Editor,
and Barbara's son, Jonathan Kay declared that his newspaper had no reason to
offer apologies. In a statement to "La Presse", he asserted that "is no doubt
that Quebec has an antisemitic past." Barbara Kay was also defended by Howard
Galganov and "Ottawa Citizen" French Canadian journalist Brigitte Pellerin.
Beryl Wajsman, the president of the Institute for Public Affairs of Montreal,
wrote an article in the Canadian Free Press (CFP) in support of Kay. Quebec
Press Council decision. In 2007, the Quebec Press Council released a decision
condemning Kay for "undue provocation" and "generalizations suitable to
perpetuate prejudices". "The Council noted throughout the chronicle of Mrs. Kay
a lack of rigour in the presentation of the context surrounding the walk for
peace of August 2006, which tends to encourage the reader to lend intentions to
public personalities without providing concrete facts to support these
intentions. On several occasions in the chronicle, the journalist deformed
facts, to present only a part of the situation, aiming only at supporting her
point of view that the leaders of independent Quebec would withdraw the
Hezbollah of the list of the terrorist movements and that this new country
would become a harbour for them. The Council points out that, if the
chroniclers can denounce with strength the ideas and the actions which they
reject and carry judgements with complete freedom, nothing however authorizes
them to deteriorate facts to justify interpretation that they draw. Deontology
of the Council Press clearly established that the media and the professionals
of information must avoid cultivating or to maintain the prejudices. They must
imperatively avoid using, at the place of the people or the groups, the
representations or the terms which tend to raise the contempt, to run up
against the dignity of a person or a category of people because of a
discriminatory reason. The Council estimated that the remarks of the journalist
were equivalent to an undue provocation, in addition to establishing
generalizations suitable to perpetuate the prejudices rather than to dissipate
them." Kay's Response. I quickly realized that my opinion piece would never
have been published in a Quebec-based newspaper. Representatives from all the
mainstream media sit on the QPC, and they would all know instinctively what
would pass muster and what wouldn't. So in fact, even though the council has no
legal power, it has strong moral power amongst its constituents. So they self-
censure before they publish. Barbara Kay, The perils of a national press
council: Been there, done that by Barbara Kay, National Post, February 12,
2009.
