Barter Barter is a medium of exchange by which goods or services are directly
exchanged for other goods or services without using a medium of exchange, such
as money. It is usually , but may be multilateral, and usually exists parallel
to monetary systems in most developed countries, though to a very limited
extent. Barter usually replaces money as the method of exchange in times of
monetary crisis, such as when the currency may be either unstable (e.g.,
hyperinflation or deflationary spiral) or simply unavailable for conducting
commerce. History. Contrary to popular conception, there is no evidence of a
society or economy that relied primarily on barter. Instead, non-monetary
societies operated largely along the principles of gift economics and debt.
When barter did in fact occur, it was usually between either complete strangers
or would-be enemies. While one-to-one bartering is practised between
individuals and businesses on an informal basis, organized barter exchanges
have developed to conduct third party bartering. A barter exchange operates as
a broker and bank in which each participating member has an account that is
debited when purchases are made, and credited when sales are made. Compared to
one-to-one bartering, concerns over unequal exchanges are reduced in a barter
exchange. Barter was also used in the colonization of Brazil, since the Indians
did not know hard currency. Bartering benefits companies and countries that see
a mutual benefit in exchanging goods and services rather than cash, and it also
enables those who are lacking hard currency to obtain goods and services. To
make up for a lack of hard currency, Thailand's township, Amphoe Kut Chum, once
issued its own local scrip called "Bia Kut Chum": Bia is Thai for cowry shell,
was once Baht, and is still current in metaphorical expressions. Running afoul
of national currency laws, the community changed to barter coupons called
"Boon" Kut Chum that bear a fixed value in baht, which they swap for goods and
services within the community. Soviet bilateral trade is occasionally called
"barter trade", because although the purchases were denominated in U.S.
dollars, the transactions were credited to an international clearing account,
avoiding the use of hard cash. Trade exchanges. A trade or barter exchange is a
commercial organization that provides a trading platform and bookkeeping system
for its members or clients. The member companies buy and sell products and
services to each other using an internal currency known as barter or trade
dollars. Modern barter and trade has evolved considerably to become an
effective method of increasing sales, conserving cash, moving inventory, and
making use of excess production capacity for businesses around the world.
Businesses in a barter earn trade credits (instead of cash) that are deposited
into their account. They then have the ability to purchase goods and services
from other members utilizing their trade credits – they are not obligated to
purchase from who they sold to, and vice-versa. The exchange plays an important
role because they provide the record-keeping, brokering expertise and monthly
statements to each member. Commercial exchanges make money by charging a
commission on each transaction either all on the buy side, all on the sell
side, or a combination of both. Transaction fees typically run between 8 and
15%. There are also rare free online barter exchanges where users do not incur
any fees, such as Turrency. It is estimated that over 450,000 businesses in the
United States were involved in barter exchange activities in 2010. There are
approximately 400 commercial and corporate barter companies serving all parts
of the world. There are many opportunities for entrepreneurs to start a barter
exchange. Several major cities in the U.S. and Canada do not currently have a
local barter exchange. There are two industry groups in the United States, the
National Association of Trade Exchanges (NATE) and the International Reciprocal
Trade Association (IRTA). Both offer training and promote high ethical
standards among their members. Moreover, each has created its own currency
through which its member barter companies can trade. NATE's currency is the
known as the BANC and IRTA's currency is called Universal Currency (UC). In
Canada, the largest barter exchange is Tradebank, founded in 1987. In the
United States, the largest barter exchange and corporate trade group is
International Monetary Systems, founded in 1993, now with representation in
various countries. In Australia and New Zealand the largest barter exchange is
Bartercard, founded in 1991, with offices in the UK and Thailand. The first
exchange system was the Swiss WIR Bank. It was founded in 1934 as a result of
currency shortages after the stock market crash of 1929. "WIR" is both an
abbreviation of Wirtschaftsring and the word for "we" in German, reminding
participants that the economic circle is also a community. Corporate barter.
Corporate barter focuses on larger transactions, which is different from a
traditional, retail oriented barter exchange. Corporate barter exchanges
typically use media and advertising as leverage for their larger transactions.
It entails the use of a currency unit called a "trade-credit". The trade-credit
must not only be known and guaranteed, but also be valued in an amount the
media and advertising could have been purchased for had the "client" bought it
themselves (contract to eliminate ambiguity and risk). Barter markets. In Spain
(particularly the Catalonia region) there is a growing number of exchange
markets. These barter markets or swap meets work without money. Participants
bring things they do not need and exchange them for the unwanted goods of
another participant. Swapping among three parties often helps satisfy tastes
when trying to get around the rule that money is not allowed. According to the
International Reciprocal Trade Association, the industry trade body, more than
450,000 businesses transacted $10 billion globally in 2008 – and officials
expect trade volume to grow by 15% in 2009. Environmental implications. Barter
complements the environmental movement that has gained traction in the late
20th and early 21st centuries. The expenditure of resources involved in the
manufacture and distribution of new products is concomitantly reduced by
trading existing products. A global market for barter mitigates waste and acts
as a counterpoint to the disposable economy. Consumer and small business
websites such as Tradepal, This4that.biz, BarterQuest.com and BarterForce.com
promote bartering as a green alternative to buying and selling. Tax
implications. In the United States, Karl Hess used bartering to make it harder
for the IRS to seize his wages and as a form of tax resistance. Hess explained
how he turned to barter in an op-ed for "The New York Times" in 1975. However
the IRS now requires barter exchanges to be reported as per the Tax Equity and
Fiscal Responsibility Act of 1982. Barter exchanges are considered taxable
revenue by the IRS and must be reported on a 1099-B form. According to the IRS,
"The fair market value of goods and services exchanged must be included in the
income of both parties." Other countries though do not have the reporting
requirement that the U.S. does concerning proceeds from barter transactions,
but taxation is handled the same way as a cash transaction. If one barters for
a profit, one pays the appropriate tax; if one generates a loss in the
transaction, they have a loss. Bartering for business is also taxed accordingly
as business income or business expense. Many barter exchanges require that one
register as a business. Limitations of a barter economy. Need for presence of
double coincidence of wants: For barter to occur between two people, both would
need to have what the other wants.
