Bavarian Soviet Republic The Bavarian Soviet Republic, also known as the Munich
Soviet Republic () was, as part of the German Revolution of 1918–1919, the
short-lived attempt to establish a socialist state in the form of a democratic
workers' council republic in the Free State of Bavaria. It sought independence
from the also recently proclaimed Weimar Republic. Its capital was Munich. Kurt
Eisner's bloodless revolution. On the afternoon of 7 November 1918, the first
anniversary of the Russian revolution, Kurt Eisner of the Independent Social
Democratic Party of Germany (USPD) addressed a crowd, estimated to have been
about 60,000, on the Theresienwiese (current site of the Oktoberfest). He
demanded an immediate peace, an 8 hour workday, relief for the unemployed,
abdication of the Bavarian king, King Ludwig III, and Emperor Wilhelm II, and
proposed the formation of workers' and soldiers' councils. The crowd marched to
the army barracks and won over most of the soldiers to the side of the
revolution. That night, the King went into exile. The next day, Eisner declared
Bavaria a "free state" – a declaration which overthrew the monarchy of the
Wittelsbach dynasty which had ruled for over 700 years, and Eisner became
Minister-President of Bavaria. Though he advocated a "socialist republic", he
distanced himself from the Russian Bolsheviks, declaring that his government
would protect property rights. For a few days, the Munich economist Lujo
Brentano served as People's Commissar for Trade ("Volkskommissar für Handel").
After Eisner's USPD had lost the elections, he decided to resign from his
office. On 21 February 1919, as he was on his way to parliament to announce his
resignation, he was shot dead by the right-wing nationalist Anton Graf von Arco
auf Valley, who was rejected from membership in the Thule Society because of
Jewish ancestry on his mother's side. This assassination caused unrest and
lawlessness in Bavaria, and the news of a Soviet revolution in Hungary
encouraged communists and anarchists to seize power. Hoffmann government. On
March 7, 1919, the leader of the majority Social Democratic Party, Johannes
Hoffmann, formed a coalition government, but was unable to muster political
support. Ernst Toller government. On 6 April 1919, a Soviet Republic was
formally proclaimed. Initially, it was ruled by USPD members such as Ernst
Toller, and anarchists like Gustav Landauer, Silvio Gesell and Erich Mühsam.
Toller, a playwright, described the revolution as the "Bavarian Revolution of
Love", but he was not a very effective politician, and his government did
little to restore order in Munich. His government members were also not always
well-chosen. For instance, the Foreign Affairs Deputy Dr. (who had been
admitted several times to psychiatric hospitals), declared war on Switzerland
over the Swiss refusal to lend 60 locomotives to the Soviet Republic. He also
claimed to be well acquainted with Pope Benedict XV and he informed Vladimir
Lenin via cable that the ousted former Minister-President Hoffmann had fled to
Bamberg and taken the key to the ministry toilet with him. Communist coup
d'etat. On Sunday, April 12, 1919, the Communist Party seized power, with Eugen
Leviné as their leader. Leviné began to enact communist reforms, which
included forming a "Red Army", seizing cash and food supplies, expropriating
luxurious apartments and giving them to the homeless and placing factories
under the ownership and control of their workers. Leviné also had plans to
abolish paper money and reform the education system, but never had time to
implement them. At the suggestion of Vladimir Lenin, Leviné took hostages from
among the elite. When his troops refused to execute the hostages, Russian
soldiers were sent to do it. On 30 April 1919, eight men, including the well-
connected Prince Gustav of Thurn and Taxis, were accused as right-wing spies
and executed. The Thule Society's secretary, Countess Hella von Westarp, was
also murdered. Demise. Soon after, on 3 May 1919, remaining loyal elements of
the German army (called the "White Guards of Capitalism" by the communists),
with a force of 9,000, and Freikorps (such as the Freikorps Epp and the
Marinebrigade Ehrhardt) with a force of about 30,000 men, entered Munich and
defeated the communists after bitter street fighting in which over 1,000
supporters of the government were killed. About 700 men and women were arrested
and summarily executed by the victorious Freikorps troops. Leviné was
condemned to death for treason, and was shot by a firing squad in Stadelheim
Prison.
