Bavaria The Free State of Bavaria (, ), is a state of Germany, located in the
southeast of Germany. With an area of , it is the largest state by area,
forming almost 20% of the total land area of Germany. Bavaria is Germany's
second most populous state (after North Rhine-Westphalia), with 12.5 million
inhabitants, more than any of the three sovereign nations on its borders.
Bavaria's capital and largest city is Munich, the third largest city in
Germany. One of the oldest states of Europe, it was established as a duchy in
the mid first millennium. In the 17th century, the Duke of Bavaria became a
Prince-elector of the Holy Roman Empire. The Kingdom of Bavaria existed from
1806 to 1918, and Bavaria has since been a free state (republic). Modern
Bavaria also includes parts of the historical regions of Franconia and Swabia.
History. The Bavarians emerged in a region north of the Alps, originally
inhabited by the Gauls, which had been part of the Roman provinces of Raetia
and Noricum. The Bavarians spoke Old High German but, unlike other Germanic
groups, probably did not migrate from elsewhere. Rather, they seem to have
coalesced out of other groups left behind by Roman withdrawal late in the 5th
century. These peoples may have included the Celtic Boii, some remaining
Romans, Marcomanni, Allemanni, Quadi, Thuringians, Goths, Scirians, Rugians,
Heruli. The name "Bavarian" ("Baiuvarii") means "Men of Baia" which may
indicate Bohemia, the homeland of the Celtic Boii and later of the Marcomanni.
They first appear in written sources c. 520. Saint Boniface completed the
people's conversion to Christianity in the early-8th century. Bavaria was, for
the most part, unaffected by the Protestant Reformation. From about 554 to 788,
the house of Agilolfing ruled the Duchy of Bavaria, ending with Tassilo III who
was deposed by Charlemagne. Three early dukes are named in Frankish sources:
Garibald I may have been appointed to the office by the Merovingian kings and
married the Lombard princess Walderada when the church forbade her to King
Chlothar I in 555. Their daughter, Theodelinde, became Queen of the Lombards in
northern Italy and Garibald was forced to flee to her when he fell out with his
Frankish overlords. Garibald's successor, Tassilo I, tried unsuccessfully to
hold the eastern frontier against the expansion of Slavs and Avars around 600.
Tassilo's son Garibald II seems to have achieved a balance of power between 610
and 616. After Garibald II little is known of the Bavarians until Duke Theodo
I, whose reign may have begun as early as 680. From 696 onwards he invited
churchmen from the west to organize churches and strengthen Christianity in his
duchy (it is unclear what Bavarian religious life consisted of before this
time). His son, Theudebert, led a decisive Bavarian campaign to intervene in a
succession dispute in the Lombard Kingdom in 714, and married his sister
Guntrud to the Lombard King Liutprand. At Theodo's death the duchy was divided
among his sons, but reunited under his grandson Hucbert. At Hucbert's death
(735) the duchy passed to a distant relative named Odilo, from neighbouring
Alemannia (modern southwest Germany and northern Switzerland). Odilo issued a
law code for Bavaria, completed the process of church organisation in
partnership with St. Boniface (739), and tried to intervene in Frankish
succession disputes by fighting for the claims of the Carolingian Grifo. He was
defeated near Augsburg in 743 but continued to rule until his death in 748.
Middle Ages. Tassilo III (b. 741 - d. after 794) succeeded his father at the
age of eight after an unsuccessful attempt by Grifo to rule Bavaria. He
initially ruled under Frankish oversight but began to function independently
from 763 onwards. He was particularly noted for founding new monasteries and
for expanding eastwards, fighting Slavs in the eastern Alps and along the River
Danube and colonising these lands. After 781, however, his cousin Charlemagne
began to pressure Tassilo to submit and finally deposed him in 788. The
deposition was not entirely legitimate. Dissenters attempted a coup against
Charlemagne at Tassilo's old capital of Regensburg in 792, led by his own son
Pépin the Hunchback, and the king had to drag Tassilo out of imprisonment to
formally renounce his rights and titles at the Assembly of Frankfurt in 794.
This is the last appearance of Tassilo in the sources and he probably died a
monk. As all of his family were also forced into monasteries, this was the end
of the Agilolfing dynasty. For the next 400 years numerous families held the
duchy, rarely for more than three generations. With the revolt of duke Henry
the Quarrelsome in 976, Bavaria lost large territories in the south and south
east. Among them a mark called "Ostarrichi" which was elevated to a duchy out
of own right and given to the Babenberger family. This event marks the birth of
Austria. The last, and one of the most important, of these dukes was Henry the
Lion of the house of Welf, founder of Munich, de facto the second most powerful
man in the empire as the ruler of two duchies. When in 1180, Henry the Lion was
deposed as Duke of Saxony and Bavaria by his cousin, Frederick I, Holy Roman
Emperor (aka "Barbarossa" for his red beard), Bavaria was awarded as fief to
the Wittelsbach family, counts palatinate of Schyren ("Scheyern" in modern
German), which ruled from 1180 to 1918. The Electorate of the Palatinate by
Rhine ("Kurpfalz" in German) was also acquired by the House of Wittelsbach in
1214. The first of several divisions of the duchy of Bavaria occurred in 1255.
With the extinction of the Hohenstaufen in 1268 also Swabian territories were
acquired by the Wittelsbach dukes. Emperor Louis the Bavarian acquired
Brandenburg, Tirol, Holland and Hainaut for his House but released the Upper
Palatinate for the Palatinate branch of the Wittelsbach in 1329. In 1506 with
the Landshut War of Succession the other parts of Bavaria were reunited and
Munich became the sole capital. 17th and 18th centuries. In 1623 the Bavarian
duke replaced his relative of the Palatinate branch, the Electorate of the
Palatinate in the early days of the Thirty Years' War and acquired the powerful
prince-electoral dignity in the Holy Roman Empire, determining its Emperor
thence forward, as well as special legal status under the empire's laws. The
country became one of the Jesuit supported counter-reformation centers. During
the early and mid-18th century the ambitions of the Bavarian prince electors
led to several wars with Austria as well as occupations by Austria (Spanish
succession, election of a Wittelsbach emperor instead of a Habsburger). From
1777 onwards and after the old Bavarian branch of the family had died out with
elector Max III Joseph, Bavaria and the Electorate of the Palatinate were
governed once again in personal union, now by the Palatinian lines. Kingdom of
Bavaria. When Napoleon abolished the Holy Roman Empire, Bavaria became a
kingdom in 1806, and its area doubled. Tirol was temporarily united, Salzburg
temporarily reunited with Bavaria but finally ceded to Austria. In return the
Rhenish Palatinate and Franconia were annexed to Bavaria in 1815. Between 1799
and 1817 the leading minister count Montgelas followed a strict policy of
modernisation and laid the foundations of administrative structures that
survived even the monarchy and are (in their core) valid until today. In 1808 a
first and in 1818 a more modern constitution (by the standards of the time) was
passed, that established a bicameral Parliament with a House of Lords ("Kammer
der Reichsräte") and a House of Commons ("Kammer der Abgeordneten"). The
constitution would last until the collapse of the monarchy at the end of World
War I. Bavaria as a part of the German Empire. After the rise of Prussia to
prominence Bavaria managed to preserve its independence by playing off the
rivalries of Prussia and Austria. Allied to Austria, it was defeated in the
1866 Austro-Prussian War and did not belong to the North German Federation of
1867, but the question of German unity was still alive. When France attacked
Prussia in 1870, the south German states Baden, Württemberg, Hessen-Darmstadt
and Bavaria joined the Prussian forces and ultimately joined the Federation,
which was renamed "Deutsches Reich" (German Empire) in 1871. Bavaria continued
as a monarchy, and it even had some special rights within the federation (such
as an army, railways and a postal service of its own). In the early-20th
century Wassily Kandinsky, Paul Klee, Henrik Ibsen, and other notable artists
were drawn to Bavaria, notably to the Schwabing district of Munich, later
devastated by World War II. 20th century. On November 12, 1918, Ludwig III
signed a document, the Anif declaration, releasing both civil and military
officers from their oaths; the newly-formed republican government of Socialist
premier Kurt Eisner interpreted this as an abdication. To date, however, no
member of the house of Wittelsbach has ever formally declared renunciation of
the throne. On the other hand, none has ever since officially called upon their
Bavarian or Stuart claims. Family members are active in cultural and social
life, including the head of the house, HRH Duke Franz in Bavaria. They step
back from any announcements on public affairs, showing approval or disapproval
solely by HRH's presence or absence. Eisner was assassinated in February 1919
ultimately leading to a Communist revolt and the short-lived Bavarian Socialist
Republic being proclaimed 6 April 1919. After violent suppression by elements
of the German Army and notably the Freikorps, the Bavarian Socialist Republic
fell in May 1919. The Bamberg Constitution ("") was enacted on 12 or 14 August
1919 and came into force on 15 September 1919 creating the Free State of
Bavaria within the Weimar Republic. Extremist activity further increased,
notably the 1923 Beer Hall Putsch led by the National Socialists, and Munich
and Nuremberg became Nazi strongholds under the Third Reich. As a manufacturing
center, Munich was heavily bombed during World War II and occupied by U.S.
troops. The Rhenish Palatinate was detached from Bavaria in 1946 and made part
of the new state Rhineland-Palatinate. During the Cold War, Bavaria was part of
West Germany. Since World War II, Bavaria has been rehabilitated from a poor
agrarian province into a prosperous industrial hub. A massive reconstruction
effort restored much of Munich's and other places historic cores. The state
capital hosted the 1972 Summer Olympics and matches of the Football World Cups
of 1974 and 2006 as well as European Track & Field championships. More
recently, former state minister-president Edmund Stoiber was the CDU/CSU
candidate for chancellor in the 2002 federal election which he lost, and native
son Cardinal Joseph Ratzinger was elected Pope Benedict XVI in 2005. Coat of
arms. The modern coat of arms of Bavaria was designed by Eduard Ege in 1946,
following heraldic traditions. Geography. Bavaria shares international borders
with Austria and the Czech Republic as well as with Switzerland (across Lake
Constance). Because all of these countries are part of the Schengen Area, the
border is completely open. Neighbouring states within Germany are Baden-
Württemberg, Hesse, Thuringia and Saxony. Two major rivers flow through the
state, the Danube ("Donau") and the Main. The Bavarian Alps define the border
with Austria, (including the Austrian federal-states of Vorarlberg, Tyrol and
Salzburg) and within the range is the highest peak in Germany, the Zugspitze.
The Bavarian Forest and the Bohemian Forest form the vast majority of the
frontier with the Czech Republic and Bohemia. The major cities in Bavaria are
Munich ("München"), Nuremberg ("Nürnberg"), Augsburg, Regensburg, Würzburg,
Ingolstadt, Fürth and Erlangen. Administrative divisions. (administrative
districts). Bavaria is divided into 7 administrative districts called '
(singular '). ' (districts) are the third communal layer in Bavaria; the others
are the ' and the ' or '. The ' in Bavaria are territorially identical with the
' (e.g. ), but are a different form of administration, having their own
parliaments, etc. In the larger states of Germany (including Bavaria), there
are ' which are only administrative divisions and not self-governing entities
as the ' in Bavaria. Landkreise/kreisfreie cities. These administrative regions
consist of 71 administrative districts (called ', singular ') and 25
independent cities (', singular '). (municipalities). The 71 administrative
districts are on the lowest level divided into 2031 municipalities (called ',
singular '). Together with the 25 independent cities (', which are in effect
municipalities independent of ' administrations), there are a total of 2056
municipalities in Bavaria. In 44 of the 71 administrative districts, there are
a total of 215 unincorporated areas (as of January 1, 2005, called ', singular
'), not belonging to any municipality, all uninhabited, mostly forested areas,
but also four lakes (-without islands, -without island , , which are the three
largest lakes of Bavaria, and ). Government and politics. Government. Bavaria
has a unicameral ', or state parliament, elected by universal suffrage. Until
December 1999, there was also a ', or Senate, whose members were chosen by
social and economic groups in Bavaria, but following a referendum in 1998, this
institution was abolished. Political processes also take place in the 7 regions
(' / ') in Bavaria, in the 71 administrative districts (') and the 25 towns and
cities forming their own districts ('), and in the 2,031 local authorities
(""). In 1995 Bavaria introduced direct democracy on the local level in a
referendum. This was initiated bottom-up by an association called "Mehr
Demokratie" (More Democracy). This is a grass-roots organization which
campaigns for the right to citizen-initiated referendums. In 1997 the Bavarian
Supreme Court aggravated the regulations considerably (e.g. by introducing a
turn-out quorum). Nevertheless, Bavaria has the most advanced regulations on
local direct democracy in Germany. This has led to a spirited citizens'
participation in communal and municipal affairs—835 referenda took place from
1995 through 2005. Politics. Bavaria has a multi-party system where the biggest
parties are the conservative Christian Social Union of Bavaria (CSU), which has
dominated politics since 1945 and won every election since then, and the
center-left Social Democratic Party of Germany (SPD). The German green party,
Alliance '90/The Greens is represented in the parliament as well. Since 2008
Germany's liberal party, the Free Democratic Party (FDP) and the Free Voters
are represented in Bavaria's parliament as well. CSU and FDP agreed in October
2008 to form a coalition, while SPD, Free Voters and the Greens form the
opposition. In the 2003 elections the CSU won more than two thirds of the seats
in Landtag—something no party had ever achieved in post-war German history.
In the following 2008 elections the CSU lost its absolute majority in the
Landtag for the first time in 46 years. This loss is probably attributed to its
push for an anti-smoking law, the most stringent in Germany, which became one
of the most controversial laws ever enacted in Bavaria. As result, the CSU
changed its stance and weakened the anti-smoking law to allow some more
loopholes. However, the citizens held a successful petition drive in
November–December 2009 to call for a total smoking ban. The CSU dismissed the
petition and demands as unnecessary and frivolous, but the referendum proceeded
and the voters voted for the smoking ban. German-Bavarian relations. The
"Bayernpartei" (Bavaria Party), which is not represented in parliament,
advocates Bavarian independence from Germany. Bavaria was the only state to
reject the West German constitution in 1949, but this did not prevent the
implementation of the constitution it when it was ratified by the majority of
the other German states. One of Germany's principal political parties, the
Christian Democratic Union (CDU), is replaced in Bavaria by the Christian
Social Union of Bavaria (CSU), but in practice the two parties cooperate fully
in the Bundestag. Bavaria had its own border police force, separate from the
Federal Border Guard, until Austria's EU accession in 1995. Furthermore, the
people from the three northern districts of Bavaria known as Franconia
(Mittelfranken, Oberfranken and Unterfranken), do not all consider themselves
as Bavarian. They have their own history and celebrate their own identity,
which is distinct from southern Bavaria, and symbolized by the Franconian rake
(Fränkischer Rechen). The flag is often seen during local festivals.
Franconian nationalists would also like to see their own Bundesland Franken
"Federal State of Franconia". Economy. Bavaria has long had one of the largest
and healthiest economies of any region in Germany, or Europe for that matter.
Its GDP in 2007 exceeded 434 billion Euros (about 600 bn US$). This makes
Bavaria itself one of the largest economies in Europe and only 17 countries in
the world have higher GDP. Some large companies headquartered in Bavaria
include BMW, Siemens, Rohde & Schwarz, Audi, Munich Re, Allianz, Infineon, MAN,
Wacker Chemie, Puma, and Adidas. Bavaria has a GDP per capita of over $48 000
US, meaning that if it were its own independent country it would rank 7th or
8th in the world. Company names. The motorcycle and automobile makers BMW
("Bayerische Motoren-Werke", or Bavarian Motor Works) and Audi, Allianz,
Grundig (consumer electronics), Siemens (electricity, telephones, informatics,
medical instruments), Continental (Automotive Tire and Electronics), Adidas,
Puma, HypoVereinsbank (UniCredit Group), Infineon and Krauss-Maffei Wegmann
have (or had) a Bavarian industrial base. Bavaria has also given its name to
the largest Colombian brewery (Cervecería Bavaria) and a major Dutch brewery
(Bavaria Bier). Culture. Religion. Bavarian culture ("Altbayern") has a long
and predominant tradition of Roman Catholic faith. The current pope, Benedict
XVI (Joseph Alois Ratzinger), was born in Marktl am Inn in Upper Bavaria and
was Cardinal-Archbishop of Munich and Freising. Otherwise, the culturally
Franconian and Swabian regions of the modern State of Bavaria are historically
more diverse in religiosity, with both Catholic and Protestant traditions. As
of 2010 54.4% of Bavarians still adhere to Roman Catholicism though the number
is on the decline (they were 70.4% in 1970, 56.3% in 2007). 20,4% of the
population adheres to the Evangelical Lutheran Church in Bavaria, and their
number is declining too. Muslims make up 4.0% of the population of Bavaria.
21.2% of Bavarians are irreligious or adhere to other religions. Traditions.
Bavarians commonly emphasize pride in their traditions. Traditional costumes
collectively known as Tracht are worn on special occasions and include in
Altbayern Lederhosen for males and Dirndl for females. Centuries-old folk music
is performed. The Maibaum, or Maypole (which in the Middle Ages served as the
community's yellow pages, as figurettes on the pole represent the trades of the
village), and the bagpipes in the Upper Palatinate region bear witness to the
ancient Celtic and Germanic remnants of cultural heritage of the region. There
are a lot of traditional Bavarian sports disciplines, e.g. the Aperschnalzen is
an old tradition of competitive whipcracking. Whether actually in Bavaria,
overseas or full of citizens from other nations they continue to cultivate
their traditions. They hold festivals and dances to keep their traditions
alive. In New York the German American Cultural Society is a larger umbrella
group for others such as the Bavarian organizations, which represent a specific
part of Germany. They proudly put forth a German Parade called Steuben Parade
each year. Various affiliated events take place amongst its groups, one of
which is the Bavarian Dancers. Food and drink. Bavarians tend to place a great
value on food and drink. In addition to their renowned dishes, Bavarians also
consume many items of food and drink which are unusual elsewhere in Germany;
for example ("white sausage") or in some instances a variety of entrails. At
folk festivals and in many beer gardens, beer is traditionally served by the
litre (the so-called ). Bavarians are particularly proud of the traditional ,
or purity law, initially established by the Duke of Bavaria for the City of
Munich (e.g. the court) in 1487 and the duchy in 1516. According to this law,
only three ingredients were allowed in beer: water, barley, and hops. In 1906
the made its way to all-German law, and remained a law in Germany until the EU
struck it down recently as incompatible with the European common market. German
breweries, however, cling to the principle. Bavarians are also known as some of
the world's most beer-loving people with an average annual consumption of 170
litres per person, although figures have been declining in recent years.
Bavaria is also home to the Franconia wine region, which is situated along the
Main River in Franconia. The region has produced wine ("Frankenwein") for over
1,000 years and is famous for its use of the Bocksbeutel wine bottle. The
production of wine forms an integral part of the regional culture, and many of
its villages and cities hold their own wine festivals (Weinfeste) throughout
the year. Language and dialects. Three German dialects are spoken in Bavaria:
Austro-Bavarian in Old Bavaria (South-East and East), Swabian German (an
Alemannic German dialect) in the Bavarian part of Swabia (South West) and East
Franconian German in Franconia (North). Ethnography. Bavarians consider
themselves to be egalitarian and informal. Their sociability can be experienced
at the annual Oktoberfest, the world's largest beer festival, which welcomes
around six million visitors every year, or in the famous beer gardens. In
traditional Bavarian beer gardens, patrons may bring their own food but only
buy beer from the brewery that runs the beer garden. In the United States,
particularly among German Americans, Bavarian culture is viewed somewhat
nostalgically, and many "Bavarian villages", most notably Frankenmuth,
Michigan, Helen, Georgia and Leavenworth, Washington, have been founded. Since
1962, the latter has been styled with a Bavarian theme; it is also home to "one
of the world's largest collections of nutcrackers" and an Oktoberfest
celebration it claims is among the most attended in the world outside of
Munich. Sports. Football. Bavaria is home to several football clubs including
FC Bayern Munich, 1. FC Nuremberg, FC Augsburg, TSV 1860 München, and SpVgg
Greuther Fürth. Historical buildings. Aschaffenburg File:
Wuerzburger_Residenz_vom_Hofgarten.jpg|Würzburg Residence File:Marienberg
wuerzburg.jpg|Fortress Marienberg and the Alte Mainbrücke in Würzburg File:
Plassenburg oben.jpg|Plassenburg Castle in Kulmbach File:
BambergDom.jpg|Cathedral in Bamberg File:Vierzehnheiligen I.JPG|Basilica of the
Vierzehnheiligen File:Coburg-Veste1.jpg|Castle of Coburg File:
Bayreuth_Festspielhaus_2006-07-16.jpg|Festspielhaus of Richard Wagner in
Bayreuth File:Nuremberg sebald castle f lorenz f s.jpg|Imperial Castle in
Nuremberg File:Kastell Biriciana (Weißenburg in Bayern).jpg|Kastell Biriciana,
Weissenburg close to the Limes File:Kreuztor_Ingoldstadt.jpg|Kreuztor in
Ingolstadt File:Schloss Neuburg.jpg|Castle of Neuburg an der Donau File:
Regensburg-steinerne-bruecke-hytrion-enhanced_1-1024x768.jpg|Old Stone Bridge
and Cathedral of Regensburg File:Walhalla_aussen.jpg|Walhalla temple in
Donaustauf near Regensburg File:Befreiungshalle-kelheim-
aussen.jpg|Befreiungshalle in Kelheim File:Passau Inn Cathedral.JPG|Cathedral
and Oberhaus fortification in Passau File:LandshutTrausnitz01.jpg|Trausnitz
castle, Landshut File:Burghausen.jpg|Burghausen Castle File:
A_rathausplatz.jpg|Townhall in Augsburg File:Munich_skyline.jpg|Frauenkirche in
Munich File:Residenz Ansicht Hofgarten, München.jpg| Residenz in Munich File:
Image-Schloss Nymphenburg Munich CC edit3.jpg|Nymphenburg Palace in Munich
File:Freisinger Dom aussen 01.jpg|Cathedral in Freising File:
Herrenchiem.JPG|Herrenchiemsee Palace File:Linderhof-1.jpg|Linderhof Palace
File:Schloss Hohenschwangau.jpg|Hohenschwangau Castle File:
wieskirche_boenisch_okt_2003.jpg|Wieskirche, Steingaden File:Bartholomae-
2005.jpg|Church of St. Bartholomew at Königssee  Neuschwanstein.
Neuschwanstein was built for King Ludwig II, as a second home. It remains
unfinished.
