Common Era Common Era (also Current Era or Christian Era), abbreviated as CE,
is an alternative naming of the traditional calendar era, "Anno Domini"
(abbreviated AD). BCE is the abbreviation for Before the Common/Current/
Christian Era (an alternative to Before Christ, abbreviated BC). The CE/BCE
designation uses the year-numbering system introduced by the 6th-century
Christian monk Dionysius Exiguus, who started the "Anno Domini" designation,
intending the beginning of the life of Jesus to be the reference date. Neither
notation includes a year zero, and the two notations (CE/BCE and AD/BC) are
numerically equivalent; thus " CE" corresponds to "AD " and "399 BCE"
corresponds to "399 BC". The expression "Common Era" can be found as early as
1708 in English, and traced back to Latin usage among European Christians to
1615, as "vulgaris aerae", and to 1635 in English as "Vulgar Era". At those
times, the expressions were all used interchangeably with "Christian Era", and
"vulgar" meant "not regal" rather than "crudely indecent". Use of the CE
abbreviation was introduced by Jewish academics in the mid-19th century. Since
the later 20th century, use of CE and BCE has been popularized in academic and
scientific publications, and more generally by publishers emphasizing
secularism or sensitivity to non-Christians. The Gregorian calendar, and the
year-numbering system associated with it, is the calendar system with most
widespread use in the world today. For decades, it has been the global
standard, recognized by international institutions such as the United Nations
and the Universal Postal Union. The CE/BCE notation has been adopted by
numerous authors and publishers wishing to be neutral or sensitive to non-
Christians because it does not explicitly make use of religious titles for
Jesus, such as "Christ" and "Domin-" ("Lord"), which are used in the BC/AD
notation, nor does it give implicit expression to the Christian creed that
Jesus was the Christ. Among the reasons given by those who oppose the use of
Common Era notation is that it is selective as other aspects of the Western
calendar have origins in various belief systems (e.g., January is named for
Janus), and claims that its propagation is the result of secularization, anti-
supernaturalism, religious pluralism, and political correctness. History.
Origins. The year numbering system used with Common Era notation was devised by
the Christian monk Dionysius Exiguus in the year 525 to replace the Era of
Martyrs system, because he did not wish to continue the memory of a tyrant who
persecuted Christians. He attempted to number years from an event he referred
to as the Incarnation of Jesus, although scholars today generally agree that he
miscalculated by a small number of years. Dionysius labeled the column of the
Easter table in which he introduced the new era ""Anni Domini Nostri Jesu
Christi."" Numbering years in this manner became more widespread with its usage
by Bede in England in 731. Bede also introduced the practice of dating years
before the supposed year of birth of Jesus, and the practice of not using a
year zero. In 1422, Portugal became the last Western European country to switch
to the system begun by Dionysius. Use of the term "vulgar era". The term
"Common Era" is traced back in English to its appearance as "Vulgar Era" to
distinguish it from the regnal dating systems typically used in national law.
The first use of the Latin equivalent ("vulgaris aerae") discovered so far was
in a 1615 book by Johannes Kepler. Kepler uses it again in a 1616 table of
ephemerides, and again in 1617. A 1635 English edition of that book has the
title page in English – so far, the earliest-found usage of "Vulgar Era" in
English. A 1701 book edited by John LeClerc includes "Before Christ according
to the Vulgar Æra, 6". A 1716 book in English by Dean Humphrey Prideaux says,
"before the beginning of the vulgar æra, by which we now compute the years
from his incarnation." A 1796 book uses the term "vulgar era of the nativity".
The first so-far-discovered usage of "Christian Era" is as the Latin phrase
"aerae christianae" on the title page of a 1584 theology book. In 1649, the
Latin phrase "æræ Christianæ" appeared in the title of an English almanac. A
1652 ephemeris is the first instance so-far-found for English usage of
"Christian Era". The English phrase "common Era" appears at least as early as
1708, and in a 1715 book on astronomy is used interchangeably with "Christian
Era" and "Vulgar Era". A 1759 history book uses "common æra" in a generic
sense, to refer to the common era of the Jews. The first-so-far found usage of
the phrase "before the common era" is in a 1770 work that also uses "common
era" and "vulgar era" as synonyms, in a translation of a book originally
written in German. The 1797 edition of the Encyclopædia Britannica uses the
terms "vulgar era" and "common era" synonymously.  In 1835, in his book "Living
Oracles", Alexander Campbell, wrote: "The vulgar Era, or Anno Domini; the
fourth year of Jesus Christ, the first of which was but eight days", and also
refers to the "common era" as a synonym for "vulgar era" with "the fact that
our Lord was born on the 4th year before the vulgar era, called Anno Domini,
thus making (for example) the 42d year from his birth to correspond with the
38th of the common era..." The "Catholic Encyclopedia" (1909) used the terms
"Christian, Vulgar or Common Era" interchangeably. The phrase "common era", in
lower case, also appeared in the 19th century in a "generic" sense, not
necessarily to refer to the Christian Era, but to any system of dates in common
use throughout a civilization. Thus, "the common era of the Jews", "the common
era of the Mahometans", "common era of the world", "the common era of the
foundation of Rome". When it did refer to the Christian Era, it was sometimes
qualified, e.g., "common era of the Incarnation", "common era of the Nativity",
or "common era of the birth of Christ". An adapted translation of "Common Era"
into Latin as "Era Vulgaris" was adopted in the 20th century by some followers
of Aleister Crowley, and thus the abbreviation "e.v." or "EV" may sometimes be
seen as a replacement for AD. History of the CE/BCE abbreviation. Although Jews
have their own Hebrew calendar, they often find it necessary to use the
Gregorian Calendar as well. Common Era notation has also been in use for Hebrew
lessons for "more than a century". As early as 1825, the abbreviation VE (for
Vulgar Era) was in use among Jews to denote years on the Western calendar.Sivan
5585 AM is June 5, 1825. VE is likely an abbreviation for "Vulgar Era". Some
Jewish academics were already using the "CE" and "BCE" abbreviations by the
mid-19th century, such as in 1856, when Rabbi and historian, Morris Jacob
Raphall used the abbreviation in his book, "Post-Biblical History of The Jews".
The ratio of usage of BCE to BC, CE to AD, Common Era to "Anno Domini", and
Before Common Era to Before Christ in books has changed dramatically between
the years 1800 and 2008, particularly since 1980, with the CE-related variants
becoming used more often. Contemporary usage. Some academics in the fields of
theology, education and history have adopted CE and BCE notation, although
there is some disagreement. The Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society of
Pennsylvania, which is the leading publishing body of Jehovah's Witnesses, has
been using CE and BCE exclusively in its publications (except in quotations)
since "The Watchtower" of 15 April 1964. However, in "The
Watchtower—Simplified English Edition", "the year century ... before Christ"
is used for dates before the common era; "the year ..." is used for other
dates, except in the context of "before Christ," in which case "the year
[century ... after Christ" is used. More visible uses of Common Era notation
have recently surfaced at major museums in the English-speaking world: The
Smithsonian Institution prefers Common Era usage, though individual museums are
not required to use it. Furthermore, several style guides now prefer or mandate
its usage. Even some style guides for Christian churches prefer its use: for
example, the Episcopal Diocese "Maryland Church News". In the United States,
the usage of the BCE/CE notation in textbooks is growing. Some publications
have moved over to using it exclusively. For example, the 2007 World Almanac
was the first edition to switch over to the BCE/CE usage, ending a 138-year
usage of the traditional BC/AD dating notation. It is used by the College Board
in its history tests, and by the Norton Anthology of English Literature. Others
have taken a different approach. The US-based History Channel uses BCE/CE
notation in articles on non-Christian religious topics such as Jerusalem and
Judaism. In June 2006, the Kentucky State School Board reversed its decision
that would have included the designations BCE and CE as part of state law,
leaving education of students about these concepts a matter of discretion at
the local level. In 2002, the BCE/CE notation system was introduced into the
school curriculum in the UK. In 2011 in the UK, the BBC announced it would be
using CE/BCE notation on its programmes and website, permitting usage of either
notation. Numerous British universities, museums, historians, and book
retailers have either dropped BC and AD entirely or are using it alongside the
BCE/CE notation. Also in 2011, media reports suggested that the BC/AD notation
in Australian school textbooks would be replaced by BCE/CE notation. The story
became national news and drew opposition from some politicians and church
leaders. Weeks after the story broke, the Australian Curriculum, Assessment and
Reporting Authority denied the rumour and stated that the BC/AD notation would
remain, with CE and BCE as an optional suggested learning activity. Rationale.
Support. Historically, the use of CE in Jewish scholarship was motivated by the
desire to avoid the implicit "Our Lord" in the abbreviation "AD". Although
other aspects of dating systems are based in Christian origins too, AD stands
out as a particularly direct reference to Jesus as Lord. Proponents of the
Common Era notation assert that the use of BCE/CE shows sensitivity to those
who use the same year numbering system as the one that originated with and is
currently used by Christians, but who are not themselves Christian. Former
United Nations Secretary-General Kofi Annan argued, "he Christian calendar no
longer belongs exclusively to Christians. People of all faiths have taken to
using it simply as a matter of convenience. There is so much interaction
between people of different faiths and cultures – different civilizations, if
you like – that some shared way of reckoning time is a necessity. And so the
Christian Era has become the Common Era." It has been noted that the label
"Anno Domini" is arguably inaccurate; "scholars generally believe that Christ
was born some years before A.D. 1, the historical evidence is too sketchy to
allow a definitive dating." Opposition. Some oppose the Common Era notation for
explicitly religious reasons. Because the BC/AD notation is based on the
traditional year of the conception or birth of Jesus of Nazareth, removing
reference to him in era notation is offensive to some Christians. The Southern
Baptist Convention supports retaining the BC/AD abbreviations as "a reminder of
the preeminence of Christ and His gospel in world history". The Convention has
criticized the use of BCE and CE as being the result of "secularization, anti-
supernaturalism, religious pluralism, and political correctness" and encourages
its members to "retain the traditional method of dating and avoid this
revisionism". There are also secular concerns. English language expert Kenneth
G. Wilson speculated in his style guide that "if we do end by casting aside the
A.D./B.C. convention, almost certainly some will argue that we ought to cast
aside as well the conventional numbering system is, the method of numbering
years itself, given its Christian basis." The short lived French Revolutionary
Calendar, for example, began with the first year of the First French Republic
and rejected the seven day week (with its connections to Genesis) for a ten day
week. Astrobiologist Duncan Steel argues further that if one is going to
replace BC/AD with BCE/CE then one should reject all aspects of the dating
system (including time of day, days of the week and months of the year), as
they all have origins related to pagan, astrological, Jewish, or Christian
beliefs. He rejects secular arguments against Christian-based BC/AD as
selective. Steel makes note of the consistency of the Quaker system (now rarely
used), which removed all such references. Anthropologist Carol Delaney argues
that the substitution of BC/AD to BCE/CE is merely a euphemism that conceals
the political implications without modifying the actual source of contention.
Raimon Panikkar contends that using the designation BCE/CE is a "return... to
the most bigoted Christian colonialism" towards non-Christians, who do not
necessarily consider the time period following the beginning of the calendar to
be a "common era". Some critics assert that the use of identifiers which have
common spellings is more ambiguous than the use of identifiers with divergent
spellings. Both CE and BCE have in common the letters "CE", which is more
likely to cause confusion, they claim, than identifiers with clearly different
spelling. Internet reaction. According to a "Los Angeles Times" report, it was
a student's use of BCE/CE notation, inspired by its use within Wikipedia, which
prompted the history teacher Andrew Schlafly to found Conservapedia, a cultural
conservative wiki. One of its "Conservapedia Commandments" is that users must
always apply BC/AD notation, since its sponsors perceive BCE/CE notation to
"deny the historical basis" of the dating system. Conventions in style guides.
The abbreviation BCE, just as with BC, always follows the year number. Unlike
AD, which traditionally precedes the year number, CE always follows the year
number (if context requires that it be written at all). Thus, the current year
is written as in both notations (or, if further clarity is needed, as CE, or as
AD ), and the year that Socrates died is represented as 399 BCE (the same year
that is represented by 399 BC in the BC/AD notation). The abbreviations are
sometimes written with small capital letters, or with full stops (e.g., "BCE"
or "C.E."). Style guides for academic texts on religion generally prefer BCE/CE
to BC/AD. The terms "Common Era", ""Anno Domini"", "Before the Common Era" and
"Before Christ" in contemporary English can be applied to dates that rely on
either the Julian calendar or the Gregorian calendar. Modern dates are
understood in the Western world to be in the Gregorian calendar, but for older
dates writers should specify the calendar used. Dates in the Gregorian calendar
in the Western world have always used the era designated in English as "Anno
Domini" or "Common Era". Similar conventions in other languages. Several
languages other than English also have both religious and non-religious ways of
identifying the era used in dates. In some communist states during the Cold War
period, usage of non-religious notation was mandated.
