Behavioralism Behavioralism (or behaviouralism) is an approach in political
science, which emerged in the 1930s in the United States. It represents a sharp
break from previous political science. This is because it emphasized an
objective, quantified approach to explain and predict political behavior. It is
associated with the rise of the behavioral sciences, modeled after the natural
sciences. This means that behavioralism tries to explain behavior with an
unbiased, neutral point of view. Behavioralism seeks to examine the behavior,
actions, and acts of "individuals" – rather than the characteristics of
institutions such as legislatures, executives, and judiciaries – and groups
in different social settings and explain this behavior as it relates to the
political system. Origins. Following the Second World War through until the
1960s, behavioralism was a source of controversy. It was the site of discussion
between traditionalist and new emerging approaches to political science. The
origins of behavioralism is often attributed to the work of University of
Chicago professor Charles Merriam, who emphasized the importance of examining
political behavior of individuals and groups rather than only considering how
they abide by legal or formal rules. Behavioralism as a political approach.
Prior to the "behavioralist revolution", political science being a science at
all was disputed. Critics saw the study of politics as being primarily
qualitative and normative, and claimed that it lacked a scientific method
necessary to be deemed a science. Behavioralists used strict methodology and
empirical research to validate their study as a social science. The
behavioralist approach was innovative because it changed the attitude of the
purpose of inquiry. It moved toward research that was supported by verifiable
facts. During its rise in popularity in the 1960s and 70s, behavioralism
challenged the realist and liberal approaches, which the behavioralists called
"traditionalism", and other studies of political behavior that was not based on
fact. To understand political behavior, behavioralism uses the following
methods: sampling, interviewing, scoring and scaling and statistical analysis.
Behavioralism studies how individuals behave in group positions realistically
rather than how they should behave. For example, a study of the United States
Congress might include a consideration of how members of Congress behave in
their positions. The subject of interest is the how Congress becomes an "arena
of actions" and the surrounding formal and informal spheres of power. Meaning
of behavioralism. David Easton in Baer et al. (eds), 1991 : 207 Subsequently,
much of the behavioralist approach has been challenged by the emergence of
postpositivism in political (particularly international relations) theory.
Objectivity and value-neutrality. According to David Easton, behavioralism
sought to be "analytic, not substantive, general rather than particular, and
explanatory rather than ethical." In this, the theory seeks to evaluate
political behavior without "introducing any ethical evaluations"; Rodger
Beehler cites this as "their insistence on distinguishing between facts and
values." Criticism. The approach has come under fire from both conservatives
and radicals for the purported value-neutrality. Conservatives see the
distinction between values and facts as a way of undermining the possibility of
political philosophy. Neal Riemer believes behavioralism dismisses "the task of
ethical recommendation" because behavioralists believe "truth or falsity of
values (democracy, equality, and freedom, etc.) cannot be established
scientifically and are beyond the scope of legitimate inquiry." Christian Bay
believed behavioralism was a pseudopolitical science and that it did not
represent "genuine" political research. Bay objected to empirical consideration
taking precedence over normative and moral examination of politics.
Behavioralism initially represented a movement away from "naive empiricism",
but has been criticized as an approach has been criticized for "naive
scientism". Additionally, radical critics believe that the separation of fact
from value makes the empirical study of politics impossible.
