Belgian Labour Party The Belgian Labour Party, called Belgische
Werkliedenpartij (BWP) in Dutch (English translation: Belgian Workers' Party)
and Parti Ouvrier Belge (POB) in French, was the first socialist party in
Belgium, founded in 1885. History. In April 1885, a meeting of 112 workers took
place in a room of the café "De Zwaan" on the Grand Place in Brussels, at the
same place where the First International had convened, and where Karl Marx had
written the Communist Manifesto. At this meeting the Belgian Labour Party (POB
or BWP) was created. Several groups had been represented at this meeting, among
which also the BSP of Edward Anseele. The members were mainly craftsmen and not
workers from industrial centres (with the exception of Ghent). When drafting a
programme for the new party, it was feared that a radical programme would deter
workers. On that basis it was decided that the word socialism would not be
mentioned in the name of the party, a point of view which was also defended by
Cesar De Paepe (1841–1890). The Charter of Quaregnon (located in this
municipality and not in Mons because of the Civic guard of Mons 'fusillade of
the general strike of 1893), of 1894 provided the doctrinary basis for the
Belgian socialists from 1894 until 1979. Before 1919, the district system at
Belgian elections made it almost impossible for the Labour Party to get
parliamentary seats in Flanders, and the Ghent socialist leader, Edward
Anseele, was elected from Liège. After 1919, universal male suffrage and
proportional representation greatly enhanced the party's parliamentary strength
and it participated in several governments. In the 1919 election, the Belgian
Labour Party won 36,6% of the vote and increased their parliamentary
representation from 26 to 70 seats. This was enough to deny the Catholic Party
the majority it had enjoyed since 1884, which led the Catholic Party to form a
coalition with Labour, forming a cabinet that contained Labour members. The
Belgian Labour Party used this opportunity to demand and to have passed reforms
such as the repeal of a law that prohibited picketing, an 8-hour workday, old-
age pensions, inheritance taxes, and a graduated income tax. The party was a
member of the Labour and Socialist International between 1923 and 1940. After
the second world war, most of the BWP/POB officials joined to found the Belgian
Socialist Party.
