International Socialist Commission The International Socialist Commission, also
known as the International Socialist Committee or the Berne International was a
coordinating committee of socialists parties that adhered to the idea of the
Zimmerwald Conference of 1915. Early History. The Zimmerwald Conference elected
Angelica Balabanoff, Odino Morgari and Charles Naine to the Commission, with
the Swiss socialist Robert Grimm as chairman and Balabanoff as interpreter. The
Committee was charged with setting up a temporary secretariat and publishing a
bulletin. The ISCs initial purpose was to act as an intermediary between the
affiliated groups in their struggle for peace. It was not to act as a
replacement for the International Socialist Bureau and dissolve as soon as the
ISB could begin functioning normally. Other adherents of the Zimmerwald
movement, such as Vladimir Lenin saw it as the beginning of a new
International. The Commissions activity in the first months of its existences
consisted of translating the manifesto and resolutions of the conference and
distributing them as widely as possible. To that end they first forwarded
copies of the first number of their "Bulletin" to the socialist and trade union
papers of the neutral countries. Within the belligerent countries the ISC was
able to have the full documents published in Italy, Russia, France, England and
Bulgaria but only summaries in Austria and Germany. They also sent a circular
to all the parties adhering to the ISB announcing their existence and the
objects of the group. Only the Danish party replied, officially disapproving of
the Zimmerwald venture. However, at the Congress of the Swiss Socialist
Democratic Party at Aarau November 20–21, the delegates declared their
adherence to the ISC and granted the organization 300 francs. On September 27,
1915, ISC sent out a confidential circular (which was nevertheless leaked to
the unfriendly press) suggesting that the adhering groups appoint up to three
extra delegates to join the Commissioners as part of an Enlarged Committee. The
first session of this Enlarged Committee of the International Socialist
Commission was held in Berne February 5–8, 1916. No official list of
attendees was published and sources disagree about who was present. Fainsod
lists the following: Robert Grimm and Fritz Platten from the Swiss Social
Democratic Party; Lenin and Zinoviev from the Bolsheviks; Julius Martov and
Pavel Axelrod from the Mensheviks; David Riazanov of the Mezhraiontsy (also
known as the Inter-District Committee); Feliks Kon and Pawel Lewinson from the
Polish Socialist Party - Left; Bertha Thalheimer, Adolf Hoffman and Georg
Ledebour, dissidents from the German Social Democratic Party; Serrati,
Modigliani and Angelica Balabanoff from the Italian Socialist Party; Christian
Rakovsky from the Social Democratic Party of Romania and Edmondo Peluso from
the Social Democratic Party of Portugal. However, the Hoover Institution adds
Alexander Martynov, for the Mensheviks, Franz Koritschoner, a dissident member
of the Social Democratic Party of Austria; Henri Guilbeaux, editor of the
"Demain"; Karl Radek of the Social Democracy of the Kingdom of Poland and
Lithuania; and Willi Münzenberg, secretary of the International Socialist
Youth League. Furthermore there was apparently a representative of the Dutch
Zimmerwaldists present, or one of the above may have held the Dutch mandate.
The identity of this person remains unclear. After some debate the meeting
decided to issue a circular (though not a full manifesto as the Zimmerwald
Lefts had advocated) on the basis of a draft written by Grimm and extensively
rewritten by a commission consisting of Zinoviev, Rakovsky, Serrati, Martov,
Grimm and two delegates representing Germany and the ISC whose identity is not
apparent. The Lefts were still not entirely satisfied with the circular, but
considered it an improvement over the Zimmerwald Manifesto. The meeting also
decided to arrange a new conference, drew up conditions for participation in it
and a provisional agenda. Kienthal to the Russian Revolution. The ISC set to
work arranging for a new congress of Zimmerald adherents which met at Kienthal,
Switzerland on April 24, 1916. Forty three delegates met at this conference,
representing Germany, France, Italy, Russia, Poland, Switzerland, Serbia,
Portugal and Great Britain. The ISC publicly announced that the Conference was
going to be held in the Netherlands to avoid passport denial or secret police
surveillance, but a number of delegates were prevented from attending anyway.
The Kienthal Conference adopted another manifesto and some important
resolutions, but it declined to advocate a policy to be followed by its
adherents toward the conference of Neutral Socialists scheduled to meet at the
Hague that summer. This was deferred to the second meeting of the ISC Enlarged
Committee on May 2. Each organization that participated in the Kienthal
Conference was represented by one delegate. This meeting "considered some
administrative matters, authenticated the Kienthal resolutions, and discussed
matters of parliamentary action" as well as the Hague Conference. One group,
headed by Martov, advocated participation, arguing that no opportunity should
be missed to expose to the workers the "cause of the failure" of the
International Socialist Bureau. Zinoviev argued against, claiming it would only
confuse the workers. The meeting ultimately became deadlocked, with five votes
for each proposition, so it was decided that each party should make up its own
mind whether to attend, but they should uphold the Zimmerwald resolutions if
they did. The ISC Enlarged Committee attempted to meet again at Olten on
February 1, 1917 to consider a proposed Paris conference of Entente socialist
parties. The ISC called a meeting of the Enlarged Committee members of the
Allied countries, but only those groups with a presence in Switzerland were
able to attend. The meeting therefore, only issued a none binding declaration
recommending its affiliates not to attend. An official list of delegates was,
again, not published, but the official communique stated "only those delegates
of the three Russian socialist parties, who were in Switzerland - the
representatives of the National Committee of the Polish Socialist Party (the
Levitsa) and of the Bund, as well as a representative of "La Vie Ouvriere" in
Paris, who resides in Switzerland - came to the conference." The editors of the
Hoover Institutions "The Bolsheviks and the World War", however, state
specifically that the organizations represented included the Bolsheviks, the
Mensheviks, and the Russian Social Revolutionaries, as well as Henri Guilbeaux
and Willi Münzenberg. The Russian Revolution and Stockholm. After the March
Revolution in Russia the ISC decided to transfer its headquarters to Stockholm,
to be closer to be closer to the center of revolutionary activity. Grimm left
Switzerland on April 20, and arrived at Stockholm on April 24. Three days
before he left, however, Grimm had agreed to an appeal of assistance from the
Central Committee for the Return of Political Exiles to Russia to intervene on
their behalf with the Russian Provisional Government and the Petrograd Soviet
for their return to Russia in exchange for German civil prisoners in Russia.
However, Grimm was denied entry into Russia for the moment on the suspicion
that he was a German spy. In the meantime, Grimm and the ISC learned that
several affiliated parties had declared themselves sympathetic to the movement
for a general socialist congress at Stockholm and issued an appeal on May 10 to
all the European Zimmerwaldist parties to meet in a third Zimmerwaldist
conference in Stockholm for May 31 to decide the Zimmerwald movements attitude
toward the proposed Stockholm Conference. A train full of Russia exiles arrived
from Switzerland in mid-May, carrying fellow ISC member and interpreter
Angelica Balabanoff, as well as Martov, Riazanov, Pavel Axelrod and a number of
other Russian socialist luminaries. Grimm boarded this train and set off for
the Russian frontier. Before he got to the Russian border he learned that the
foreign minister who denied him a visa, Pavel Milyukov had resigned, and three
more socialists had entered the Provisional Government. The new government
issued him a visa but it did not get to him until "after" he had crossed the
Russian border under the protection of the Helsingfors Soviet. Grimm and
Balabanoff arrived in Petrograd in time to speak at the All-Russian Conference
of the Menshevik party and convince that organization to approve attending the
Third Zimmerwald Conference (they also voted to advocate participation at the
proposed Stockholm Congress). On May 28–29 they had an informal conference
with members of Zimmerwaldist parties in the city. According Balabanoffs notes
this was attended by Lenin, Zinoviev and Kamenev of the Bolsheviks; Bobrov of
the Social Revolutionaries; Grigorii Bienstock, Martov, Martynov, and Larin of
the Mensheviks; Raphael Abramovitch of the Bund; Leon Trotsky, Mikhail
Urinovich and Riazanov of the Inter-District Committee; Lapinski of the Polish
Socialist Party - Left and Christian Rakovsky of the Romanian Social Democrats.
According to her notes Trotsky, Kamenev, Zinoviev, Riazanov and herself were
opposed to participation in the purposed Stockholm conference, while Rakovsky,
Grimm, Bobrov and Martynov were for attending. In any case, decision would have
to wait until the next Zimmerwaldist Conference. The Bolshevik delegation also
tried to prevail on the ISC to issue a condemnation of socialists serving as
ministers in the Provisional Government. While most at the meeting who gave an
opinion were against socialist participation in the Provisional Government,
there was also a broad consensus that the ISC did not have the authority to
make such a statement without first consulting its affiliates. The "Grimm
Affair". While in Petrograd both Balabanoff and Grimm were vigorously
criticized in the press as being German agents working for a separate peace
between Germany and Allied countries. Balabanoff was accused of negotiating
with the Germans on behalf the Italian Socialist Party, but the Party quickly
cleared her. However, Robert Grimm faced a more substantial charge. On May 26/
27 he sent a telegram to Swiss Federal Councilor Hermann Hoffmann stating that
there was a general desire for peace in Russia and that the only thing that
could hinder it was a German offensive. Hoffmann responded on June 3, stating
that people he spoke to in the German government would not launch an offensive
while there was still a possibility of peace, as well as comment on possible
territorial exchanges involving Poland, Lithuania and Galicia. The Provisional
Government published these exchanges on June 16 and ordered Grimm deported. The
event caused a scandal and opponents of the Zimmerwaldist movement from many
sides used it as evidence that Zimmerwald movement was part of a German
conspiracy. On June 20 Grimm resigned as Chairman of the International
Socialist Commission. On the same day Carl Hoglund, acting on behalf of the
Swedish Left Social Democratic Party and Youth League, appointed a commission
of three to look after the affairs of the ISC -- Zota Hoglund, Ture Nerman and
Carl Carlson. The first act of this new leadership was to recall Balabanoff
from Russia. She would thenceforth be the secretary of the ISC. The ISC then
appointed a commission of inquiry to look into the "Grimm affair". The
membership of this commission consisted of Carl Lindhagen and Carl Hogland of
Sweden; Kirkov of Bulgaria; Karl Radek of Poland; Christian Rakovsky of
Romania; Orlovsky of Russia; and Karl Moor of Switzerland The commission found
that Grimm had made the telegraphic exchange without the knowledge of
Balabanoff or any of the other Zimmerwaldists in Petrograd, and, while
condemning him for practicing a kind of secret diplomacy, absolved him of
attempting to reach a separate peace with Germany. It also absolved the
International Socialist Commission itself, as no other member besides Grimm
knew about the telegraphs. The "affair" also had repercussions in Switzerland.
Councilor Hoffman resigned on June 19. When Grimm returned he faced another
commission of inquiry, this time appointed by the presidium of the Swiss Social
Democratic Party. On September 1, 1917 the presidium voted 18-15 to accept the
majority report of the commission, which came to most of the same conclusions
as the Stockholm commission and recommended Grimm be restored to his previous
party posts. A minority report signed by Charles Naine, Grimms former ISC
colleague, was more condemnatory and denied the right of the presidium to
restore Grimm to his previous mandates. The Third Zimmerwald Conference.
Meanwhile, the ISC in Stockholm held a meeting at the office of the
"Stormklocken" newspaper on July 3, with representatives of the Soviets to
attempt to clarify the situation. Present at this meeting were Linstrom,
Lindhagen and Hoglund for Sweden; Olausen for Norway; Otto Lang for
Switzerland; Karl Kautsky, Hugo Haase, Lousie Zeitz, and Oskar Cohn for
Germany; Sirola for Finland; Orlovsky, Radek and Hanecki for the Bolsheviks;
Boris Reinstein for the US Socialist Labor Party; Kirkov for Bulgaria and
Balabanoff in her capacity as secretary of the ISC. The representatives of the
Soviet were Goldenberg, Vladimir Rozanov and "Smirnov". At this meeting
Balabanoff, Orlavsky and Reinstien stated their objections to the invitation of
the majority Socialist parties to the proposed Stockholm conference. Goldberg
replied that the proposed conference was open to socialist parties without
conditions, and would include minorities as well as majorities. Radek re-
emphasized the Bolshevik party's disapproval of the Stockholm Conference and
the Party's determination to quit the Zimmerwald movement if the Third
Zimmerwald Conference chose to participate. Haase, of the Independent Socialist
Party of Germany, however, was for the Conference and stated that his party
would attend. Again, Balabanoff reminded everybody that no single party could
dictate the ISCs position, which would be decided by the third Zimmerwald
Conference. On the next day the conclave resumed, this time without the Soviet
delegates. A statement was adopted in the name of the "Bureau of the
International Socialist Commission" to the effect that the Third Zimmerwald
Conference would take place five days before the proposed general Stockholm
Conference, but should the conference not meet by September 15, 1917 the
commission was empowered to call a conference of affiliates anyway. On July 9,
once their meetings with the Dutch-Scandinavian Committee (the organization
planning the Stockholm conference) were finished, the Soviet delegation tried
once again to enlist the ISC in the preparation work for the Stockholm
Conference. This meeting, held at the ISCs "quarters" was between Balabanoff,
Hoglund and Carlson for the ISC and Hendrik Ehrlich and another representative
The Soviet delegation did not get a formal answer until July 11, when the ISC
sent them a formal letter stating that they would not be able to participate in
the preparations because the Stockholm Conference invitations had been
"altered" to include the pro-war socialist parties and that the breaking of the
"civil peace" was not a requirement of the parties to the conference On July
13, according to Fainsod, there was another meeting of the ISC with
Zimmerwaldists in Stockholm. Participants reported included Radek, Alexandra
Kollontai, Orowski, Martinov and Jermanski of Russia, "Mohr of Switzerland",
Sirola of Finland, Storm and Kilborn of Sweden. Radek and Kollantai are
supposed to have argued against going to the proposed Stockholm Conference
while it was still reiterated that only the Third Zimmerwald Conference could
decide that. On July 18 Balabanoff did issue a revised invitation to the Third
Zimmerwald Conference. The invitation gave the date as August 10, 1917 and
included a provisional agenda, stated that the condition for participation were
the same as those published in Bulletin #3 and also included an invitation to a
socialist women's conference to be held in connection with the Zimmerwald
conference On August 1 another meeting of the ISC with Zimmerwald adherents in
Stockholm decided to call the Third Zimmerwald Conference and meet in Stockholm
on September 5 regardless of what happened to the movement for the proposed
general Conference. The participants at this meeting included Lindhagen,
Lindstorm, and Otto Strom of Sweden; Osip Arkadievich Ermanski of the
Menshiviks; Yrjo Sirola of Finland; J. Eads How of the United States; Ledebour
of Germany; and Radek and Hanecki "representing both the Bolsheviks and the
Social Democracy of Poland and Lithuania" Finally, the Third Zimmerwald
Conference met at Stockholm on September 5–12, 1917. It had a smaller number
of participants than any of the previous Zimmerwaldist Conferences, with only
about thirty delegates from Russia, Germany, Poland, Finland, Rumania,
Switzerland, the United States, Sweden and Norway, as well as the members of
the ISC itself. By this point the question of attending the proposed general
Stockholm Conference had been rendered practically moot because of the
inability of the organizers to realize the project. The question was discussed
anyway because some delegates felt that the issues raised by the movement for
the Stockholm Congress were of a "fundamental" nature and the proletarians
needed to be educated as to why the proposal foundered. No resolution was
passed on the issue, though the movement for the Stockholm Conference is
condemned, in passing, in the Conferences manifesto. Final months in Stockholm.
The manifesto itself caused some trouble for the ISC. It was agreed that it
would not be immediately released because it contained a call for co-ordinated
mass action against the war by the proletarians of all countries. The
Conference felt it would be best to postpone publication until all the
Zimmerwaldist groups had consented to this. A messenger was to memorize the
text in English and go to London where he would deliver the manifesto orally.
There it would be translated into French, memorized by another messenger who
would travel to Paris. Meanwhile, on September 28, Louise Zeitz of the German
Independent Socialists arrived in Stockholm and the ISC met to discuss her
request that the publication of the manifesto be postponed further. The ISP had
been getting into trouble lately because of mutinies in the German navy led by
alleged party members. The groups parliamentary leaders denied responsibility
and pleaded that they were only for legal action. The publication of the
manifesto at this time might lead to the dissolution of the party by the
government. Karl Radek, on the other hand, argued for immediate publication.
The Commission decided to postpone issuing the manifesto for the time being.
The ISC would publish it only after personal or telegraphic communication with
the ISP and, barring that, on its own discretion. Radek threatened to publish
the manifesto himself—and he did so, in a Finnish newspaper that November.
The ISC held a meeting with a visiting Serb delegation on October 10. The Serbs
were represented by Kaslerovic and Popvic. In addition to the Serbs, the
following were present: Christian Rakovksy of Romania; Katerina Tinev of the
Bulgarian Trade Union Federation and Kharlokov of the opposition with the
"Broad" Bulgarian socialist party; Radek, Orlovsky and Haneki of the
Bolsheviks; Yrjo Sirola of Finland and Fritz Rosen of the Socialist Propaganda
League of America. No decisions or resolutions appear to have been made at this
meeting. The Serb delegation were there to submit a memorandum to the Dutch-
Scandinavian committee. The ISC held two meetings on November 8, 1917, the day
after the Bolshevik seizure of power in Petrograd. Present, beside the formal
members of the Commission, were Radek, Racovsky, Tinev and Kharlakov. At the
first it was moved that the ISC send a telegram of congratulations to the
Petrograd Soviet in the name of all the affiliated parties. Racovsky protested
against this, suggesting they wait until the situation in Russia was clear and
all the parties were able to take a stand on what happened. He was overruled.
Radek offered an already written appeal that he wanted issued jointly by the
Bolsheviks and the ISC which urged workers around the world to strike and form
soviets to defend the Russian revolution from counter-revolution and defend
peace. It also asked all the parties which approved of the revolution to send
delegates to Stockholm. This was approved. At a second meeting later that night
the publication of the manifesto adopted at the Third Zimmerwald Conference was
approved. The ISC spent the remainder of its existence publishing its
newsletter and other material supportive of the Bolshevik revolution. In March
1918 its published a special illustrated "Zimmerwald Russia Review", "Freiden,
Brot Freiheit" in twelve languages. It also published a pamphlet of Bukharin,
"Thesen uber der sozialistische Revolution und die Aufgaben des Proletariats
wahrend seiner Diktatur in Russland". The final issue of "Nachtrichten" was
published on September 1, 1918 and contained an appeal to the workers in
German, French, Swedish, Italian and English. That month Balabanoff went on a
tour of several countries to try to revive the influence of the ISC and fight
off calls for its return to Switzerland. She was not especially successful,
being expelled from Switzerland and denied reentry into Sweden. As secretary of
the International Socialist Commission, she consented into its formal
dissolution into the Communist International at its first congress in March
1919. Affiliates. Two membership lists of organizations adhering to Zimmerwald
were published in "Bulletins" #3 and #4. Not included in either lists were the
opposition sections within the German and French socialist parties.
Additionally, the Finnish Social Democrats adhered in the summer of 1917. There
were also other groups whose allegiance to the ISC and Zimmerwald was
ambiguous.
