Bertrand–Edgeworth model In microeconomics, the Bertrand–Edgeworth model of
price-setting oligopoly looks at what happens when there is a homogenous
product (i.e. consumers want to buy from the cheapest seller) where there is a
limit to the output of firms which they are able and/or willing to sell at a
particular price. This differs from the Bertrand competition model where it is
assumed that firms are willing and able to meet all demand. The limit to output
can be considered as a physical capacity constraint which is the same at all
prices (as in Edgeworth’s work), or to vary with price under other
assumptions. History. Joseph Louis François Bertrand (1822–1900) developed
the model of Bertrand competition in oligopoly. This approach was based on the
assumption that there are at least two firms producing a homogenous product
with constant (zero) marginal cost. Consumers buy from the cheapest seller. The
Bertrand–Nash equilibrium of this model is to have all (or at least two)
firms setting the price equal to marginal cost (zero). The argument is simple:
if one firm sets a price above marginal cost then another firm can undercut it
by a small amount (often called "epsilon undercutting", where epsilon
represents an arbitrarily small amount) so that the equilibrium is zero (this
is sometimes called the Bertrand paradox). The Bertrand approach assumes that
firms are willing and able to supply all demand: there is no limit to the
amount that they can produce or sell. Francis Ysidro Edgeworth considered the
case where there is a limit to what firms can sell (a capacity constraint): he
showed that if there is a fixed limit to what firms can sell, then there may
exist no pure-strategy Nash equilibrium (this is sometimes called the Edgeworth
paradox) Martin Shubik developed the Bertrand–Edgeworth model to allow for
the firm to be willing to supply only up to its profit maximizing output at the
price which it set (under profit maximization this occurs when marginal cost
equals price). He considered the case of strictly convex costs, where marginal
cost is increasing in output. Shubik showed that if a Nash equilibrium exists,
it must be the perfectly competitive price (where demand equals supply, and all
firms set price equal to marginal cost). However, this can only happen if
market demand is infinitely elastic (horizontal) at the competitive price. In
general, as in the Edgeworth paradox, no pure-strategy Nash equilibrium will
exist. Huw Dixon showed that in general a mixed strategy Nash equilibrium will
exist when there are convex costs. Dixon’s proof used the Existence Theorem
of Partha Dasgupta and Eric Maskin Later developments and related models. There
have been several responses to the non-existence of pure-strategy equilibrium
identified by Francis Ysidro Edgeworth and Martin Shubik. Whilst the existence
of mixed-strategy equilibrium was demonstrated by Huw Dixon, it has not proven
easy to characterize what the equilibrium actually looks like. However, Allen
and Hellwig were able to show that in a large market with many firms, the
average price set would tend to the competitive price.
