Bicameralism In government, bicameralism (Latin "bi", two + "camera", chamber)
is the practice of having two legislative or parliamentary chambers compromise
bills. Bicameralism is an essential and defining feature of the classical
notion of mixed government. Bicameral legislatures tend to require a concurrent
majority to pass legislation. Theory of Bicameral Congress. Although the ideas
on which bicameralism are based can be traced back to the theories developed in
Ancient Sumer and later ancient Greece, ancient India, and Rome, recognizable
bicameral institutions first arose in Medieval Europe where they were
associated with separate representation of different estates of the realm. For
example, one house would represent the aristocracy, and the other would
represent the commoners. The Founding Fathers of the United States also favored
a bicameral legislature. The idea was to have the Senate be wealthier, and
(apparently) wiser. The Senate was created to be a stabilizing force, elected
not by mass electors, but selected by the State legislators. Senators would be
more knowledgeable and more deliberate—a sort of republican nobility—and a
counter to what Madison saw as the "fickleness and passion" that could absorb
the House. He noted further that the "use of the Senate is to consist in its
proceeding with more coolness, with more system and with more wisdom, than the
popular branch". Madison's argument led the Framers to grant the Senate
prerogatives in foreign policy, an area where steadiness, discretion, and
caution were deemed especially important". The Senate was chosen by state
legislators, and senators had to possess a significant amount of property in
order to be deemed worthy and sensible enough for the position. In fact, it was
not until the year 1913 that the 17th Amendment was passed, which "mandated
that Senators would be elected by popular vote rather than chosen by the State
legislatures". As part of the Great Compromise, they invented a new rationale
for bicameralism in which the upper house would have states represented
equally, and the lower house would have them represented by population. In
subsequent constitution making, federal states have often adopted bicameralism,
and the solution remains popular when regional differences or sensitivities
require more explicit representation, with the second chamber representing the
constituent states. Nevertheless, the older justification for second
chambers—providing opportunities for second thoughts about legislation—has
survived. Growing awareness of the complexity of the notion of representation
and the multifunctional nature of modern legislatures may be affording
incipient new rationales for second chambers, though these do generally remain
contested institutions in ways that first chambers are not. An example of
political controversy regarding a second chamber has been the debate over the
powers of the Canadian Senate or the election of the Senate of France. The
relationship between the two chambers varies; in some cases, they have equal
power, while in others, one chamber is clearly superior in its powers. The
first tends to be the case in federal systems and those with presidential
governments. The latter tends to be the case in unitary states with
parliamentary systems. There are two streams of thought: Critics believe
bicameralism makes meaningful political reforms more difficult to achieve and
increases the risk of gridlock—particularly in cases where both chambers have
similar powers—while proponents argue the merits of the "checks and balances"
provided by the bicameral model, which they believe help prevent the passage
into law of ill-considered legislation. Types. Federal. Some countries, such as
Argentina, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Brazil, Canada, Germany, India,
Malaysia, Mexico, Pakistan, Russia, Switzerland, and the United States, link
their bicameral systems to their federal political structure. In the United
States, Australia, and Mexico, for example, each state is given the same number
of seats in the legislature's upper house. This takes account of population
differences between states — it is designed to ensure that smaller states are
not overshadowed by larger states, which have more representation in the lower
house. In Canada, the country as a whole is divided into a number of Senate
Divisions, each with a different number of Senators, based on a number of
factors. These Divisions are Quebec, Ontario, Western Provinces, and the
Maritimes, each with 24 Senators, Yukon, Northwest Territories, Nunavut, each
with 1 Senator, and Newfoundland and Labrador has 6 Senators, making for a
total of 105 Senators. Senators in Canada are not elected by the people but are
appointed by the Governor General on the advice of the Prime Minister. The
Senate does not originate most legislation (although a small fraction of
government bills are introduced in the Senate and Senators may introduce
private members' bills in the same way as MPs) but acts as a chamber of
revision almost always passing legislation approved by the House of Commons,
made up of Members of Parliament (MPs) who are elected. The Senate must pass
legislation before it becomes law and can therefore act as a wise facilitator
or engage in filibuster. The Senate does not have to endure the accountability
and scrutiny of parliamentary elections. Therefore, the bicameral structure of
Canadian parliament is more de "jure" than "de facto". In the German, Indian,
and Pakistani systems, the upper houses (the Bundesrat, the Rajya Sabha, and
the Pakistani Senate respectively) are even more closely linked with the
federal system, being appointed or elected directly by the governments or
legislatures of each German Bundesland, Indian State, or Pakistani Province.
(This was also the case in the United States before the 17th Amendment.) The
Indian Upper House does not have the states represented equally, but on the
basis of their population. In the German Bundesrat, the various Länder have
between three and seven votes; thus, while the less populated states have a
lower weight, they still have a stronger voting power than would be the case in
a system based "purely" on population, as the most populous Land currently has
about 27 times the population of the least populous. There are also instances
of bicameralism in countries that are not federations, but which have upper
houses with representation on a territorial basis. For example in South Africa,
the National Council of Provinces (and before 1997, the Senate) has its members
chosen by each Province's legislature. " In Spain the Spanish Senate functions
as a "de facto" territorial-based upper house, and there has been some pressure
from the Autonomous Communities to reform it into a strictly territorial
chamber. The European Union maintains a bicameral legislative system which
consists of the European Parliament, which is elected in general elections on
the basis of universal suffrage, and the Council of the European Union which
consists of members of the governments of the Member States which are competent
for the relevant field of legislation. Although the European Union is not
considered a state, it enjoys the power to legislate in many areas of politics;
in some areas, those powers are even exclusively reserved to it. Aristocratic.
In a few countries, bicameralism involves the juxtaposition of democratic and
aristocratic elements. The best known example is the British House of Lords,
which includes a number of hereditary peers. The House of Lords represents a
vestige of the aristocratic system which once predominated in British politics,
while the other house, the House of Commons, is entirely elected. Over the
years, there have been proposals to reform the House of Lords, some of which
have been at least partly successful — the House of Lords Act 1999 limited
the number of hereditary peers (as opposed to life peers, appointed by Her
Majesty on the advice of the Prime Minister ) to 92, down from around 700. Of
these 92, 1 is the Earl Marshal, a hereditary office always held by the Duke of
Norfolk, 1 is the Lord Great Chamberlain, a hereditary office held in gross,
currently by the Marquess of Cholmondeley, and the other 90 are elected by
other Hereditary Peers. The ability of the House of Lords to block legislation
is curtailed by the Parliament Acts 1911 and 1949. Peers can introduce bills
except Money Bills, and all legislation must be passed by both Houses of
Parliament. If it is not passed within two sessions, the House of Commons can
override the Lords delay by invoking the Parliament Act. Certain pieces of
legislation however must be approved by both Houses and are not able to be
forced through by the Commons under the Parliament Act. This includes any bill
which would extend the time length of a Parliament, private bills, bills which
are sent to the House of Lords less than one month before the end of a session,
and bills which originate in the House of Lords. Further reform of the Lords
has been proposed, however not supported by many. Members of the House of Lords
all have an aristocratic title, or are from the Clergy. 26 Archbishops and
Bishops of the Church of England sit as Lords Spiritual, being the Archbishop
of Canterbury, Archbishop of York, the Bishop of London, the Bishop of Durham,
the Bishop of Winchester and the next 21 longest-serving Bishops. It is usual
that retiring Archbishops, and certain other Bishops, are appointed to the
Crossbenches and given a life peerage. Until 2009, 12 Lords of Appeal in
Ordinary sat in the House as the highest court in the land. At present, 786
people sit in the House of Lords, with 92 Hereditary, 26 being Bishops or
Archbishops (the Lords Spiritual) and the rest being Life Peers. Membership is
not fixed and only decreases on the death of a life peer. Another example of
aristocratic bicameralism was the Japanese House of Peers, abolished after
World War II and replaced with the present House of Councillors. Unitary
states. Many bicameral countries like the Netherlands, the Philippines, the
Czech Republic, the Republic of Ireland and Romania are examples of bicameral
systems existing in unitary states. In countries such as these, the upper house
generally focuses on scrutinizing and possibly vetoing the decisions of the
lower house. On the other hand, in Italy the Parliament consists of two
chambers that have same role and power: the Senate (Senate of the Republic,
commonly considered the "upper house") and the Chamber of Deputies, considered
the "lower house"). In some of these countries, the upper house is indirectly
elected. Members of France's Senate, Ireland's Seanad Éireann are chosen by
electoral colleges consisting of members of the lower house, local councillors,
the Taoiseach, and graduates of selected universities, while the Netherlands'
Senate is chosen by members of provincial assemblies (which in turn are
directly elected). Norway had a kind of semi-bicameral legislature with two
chambers, or departments, within the same elected body, the Storting. These
were called the Odelsting and Lagting and were abolished after the general
election of 2009. According to Morten Søberg, there was a related system in
the 1798 constitution of the Batavian Republic. In Hong Kong, members of the
unicameral Legislative Council returned from geographical constituencies and
functional constituencies are required to vote separately since 1997 on
motions, bills or amendments to government bills not introduced by the
government. The passage of these motions, bills or amendments to government
bills requires double majority in both groups simultaneously. (Before 2004,
when elections to the Legislative Council from the Election Committee was
abolished, members returned through the Election Committee vote with members
returned from geographical constituencies.) The double majority requirement
does not apply to motions, bills and amendments introduced by the government.
Subnational entities. In some countries with federal systems, individual states
(like those of the United States, Australia and a few States of India) may also
have bicameral legislatures. Only three such states, Nebraska in the US,
Queensland in Australia and Bavaria in Germany have later adopted unicameral
systems. Canadian provinces had all their upper houses abolished. United
States. During the 1930s, the Legislature of the State of Nebraska was reduced
from bicameral to unicameral with the 43 members that once comprised that
state's Senate. One of the arguments used to sell the idea at the time to
Nebraska voters was that by adopting a unicameral system, the perceived evils
of the "conference committee" process would be eliminated. A conference
committee is appointed when the two chambers cannot agree on the same wording
of a proposal, and consists of a small number of legislators from each chamber.
This tends to place much power in the hands of only a small number of
legislators. Whatever legislation, if any, the conference committee finalizes
must then be approved in an unamendable "take-it-or-leave-it" manner by both
chambers. During his term as Governor of the State of Minnesota, Jesse Ventura
proposed converting the Minnesotan legislature to a single chamber with
proportional representation, as a reform that he felt would solve many
legislative difficulties and impinge upon legislative corruption. In his book
on political issues, "Do I Stand Alone?", Ventura argued that bicameral
legislatures for provincial and local areas were excessive and unnecessary, and
discussed unicameralism as a reform that could address many legislative and
budgetary problems for states. Argentina. in Argentina, eight provinces have
bicameral legislatures, with a Senate and a Chamber of Deputies: Buenos Aires,
Catamarca, Corrientes, Entre Ríos, Mendoza, Salta, San Luis (since 1987) and
Santa Fe. Córdoba and Tucumán changed to unicameral systems in 2001 and 2003
respectively. Australia. In Australian states, the lower house was
traditionally elected based on the one-vote-one-value principle, whereas the
upper house was partially appointed and elected, with a bias towards country
voters. In Queensland, the appointed upper house was abolished in 1922, while
in New South Wales there were similar attempts at abolition, before the upper
house was reformed in the 1970s to provide for direct election. Nowadays, the
upper house is elected using proportional voting and the lower house through
preferential voting, except in Tasmania, where proportional voting is used for
the lower house, and preferential voting for the upper house. India. Six Indian
States of Andhra Pradesh, Bihar, Jammu-Kashmir, Karnataka, Maharashtra and
Uttar Pradesh have Bicameral Legislatures, these are called legislative
councils (Vidhan Parishad), one third of who get elected every 6 years, there
are graduate constituencies (members elected exclusively by graduates),
teachers constituencies (members elected exclusively by teachers), municipal
constituencies (members elected exclusively by Mayors and council members of
the city Governments).From 1956 to 1958 the Andhra Pradesh Legislature was
Unicameral and from 1958 when the Council was formed, it became bicameral and
continued until 1 June 1985 when the Legislative Council was abolished.This
continued until March 2007 when the Legislative Council was reestablished and
elections were held for its seats. Since then the Andhra Pradesh Legislature
has become once again Bicameral. Germany. The German Land of Bavaria had a
bicameral legislature from 1946 to 1999, when the Senate was abolished by a
referendum amending the state's constitution. The other 15 Länder have used a
unicameral system since their founding. Russia. Under Soviet regime regional
and local Soviets were unicameral. After the adoption of 1993 Russian
Constitution bicameralism was introduced in some regions. Bicameral regional
legislatures are still technically allowed by federal law but this clause is
dormant now. The last region to switch from bicameralism to unicameralism was
Sverdlovsk Oblast in 2012. Reform. Arab political reform. A 2005 report on
democratic reform in the Arab world by the US Council on Foreign Relations co-
sponsored by former Secretary of State Madeleine Albright urged Arab states to
adopt bicameralism, with upper chambers appointed on a 'specialised basis'. The
Council claimed that this would protect against the 'Tyranny of the majority',
expressing concerns that without a system of checks and balances extremists
would use the single chamber parliaments to restrict the rights of minority
groups. In 2002, Bahrain adopted a bicameral system with an elected lower
chamber and an appointed upper house. This led to a boycott of parliamentary
elections that year by the Al Wefaq party, who said that the government would
use the upper house to veto their plans. Many secular critics of bicameralism
were won around to its benefits in 2005, after many MPs in the lower house
voted for the introduction of so-called morality police. Romania. A referendum
on introducing a unicameral Parliament instead of the current bicameral
Parliament was held in Romania on 22 November 2009. The turnout rate was
50.95%, with 77.78% of "Yes" votes for a unicameral Parliament. This referendum
had a consultative role, thus requiring a parliamentary initiative and another
referendum to ratify the new proposed changes.
