Big Mac Index The Big Mac Index is published by "The Economist" as an informal
way of measuring the purchasing power parity (PPP) between two currencies and
provides a test of the extent to which market exchange rates result in goods
costing the same in different countries. It "seeks to make exchange-rate theory
a bit more digestible". The index takes its name from the Big Mac, a hamburger
sold at McDonald's restaurants. Overview. The Big Mac index was introduced in
"The Economist" in September 1986 by Pam Woodall as a semi-humorous
illustration and has been published by that paper annually since then. The
index also gave rise to the word "burgernomics". UBS Wealth Management Research
has expanded the idea of the Big Mac index to include the amount of time that
an average worker in a given country must work to earn enough to buy a Big Mac.
The working-time based Big Mac index might give a more realistic view of the
purchasing power of the average worker, as it takes into account more factors,
such as local wages. One suggested method of predicting exchange rate movements
is that the rate between two currencies should naturally adjust so that a
sample basket of goods and services should cost the same in both currencies
(PPP). In the Big Mac index, the basket in question is a single Big Mac burger
as sold by the McDonald's fast food restaurant chain. The Big Mac was chosen
because it is available to a common specification in many countries around the
world as local McDonald's franchisees at least in theory have significant
responsibility for negotiating input prices. For these reasons, the index
enables a comparison between many countries' currencies. The Big Mac PPP
exchange rate between two countries is obtained by dividing the price of a Big
Mac in one country (in its currency) by the price of a Big Mac in another
country (in its currency). This value is then compared with the actual exchange
rate; if it is lower, then the first currency is under-valued (according to PPP
theory) compared with the second, and conversely, if it is higher, then the
first currency is over-valued. The Eurozone is mixed, as prices differ widely
in the EU area. As of April 2009, the Big Mac is trading in Germany at , which
translates into , which would imply that the Euro is slightly trading above the
PPP, with the difference being 10.9%. Variants. "The Economist" sometimes
produces variants on the theme. For example in January 2004, it showed a "Tall
Latte index" with the Big Mac replaced by a cup of Starbucks coffee. In 2007,
an Australian bank's subsidiary, Commonwealth Securities, adapted the idea
behind the Big Mac index to create an "iPod index." The bank's theory is that
since the iPod is manufactured at a single place, the value of iPods should be
more consistent globally. However, this theory can be criticised for ignoring
shipping costs, which will vary depending on how far the product is delivered
from its "single place" of manufacture in China. Bloomberg L.P. introduced the
Billy index where they convert local prices of Ikea's Billy bookshelf into US
dollars and compare the prices. Limitations. While economists widely cite the
Big Mac index as a reasonable real-world measurement of purchasing power
parity, the burger methodology has some limitations. In many countries, eating
at international fast-food chain restaurants such as McDonald's is relatively
expensive in comparison to eating at a local restaurant, and the demand for Big
Macs is not as large in countries like India as in the United States. Social
status of eating at fast food restaurants like McDonald's in a local market,
what proportion of sales might be to expatriates, local taxes, levels of
competition, and import duties on selected items may not be representative of
the country's economy as a whole. In addition, there is no theoretical reason
why non-tradable goods and services such as property costs should be equal in
different countries: this is the theoretical reason for PPPs being different
from market exchange rates over time. The relative cost of high-margin
products, such as essential pharmaceutical products, or cellular telephony
might compare local capacity and willingness to pay, as much as relative
currency values. Nevertheless, McDonald's is also using different commercial
strategies which can result in huge differences for a product. Overall, the
price of a Big Mac will be a reflection of its local production and delivery
cost, the cost of advertising (considerable in some areas), and most
importantly what the local market will bear - quite different from country to
country, and not all a reflection of relative currency values. In some markets,
a high-volume and low-margin approach makes most sense to maximize profit,
while in others a higher margin will generate more profit. Thus the relative
prices reflect more than currency values. For example, a hamburger sandwich
costs only in France, and in Belgium, but overall, McDonald's restaurants are
cheaper in Belgium. Prices of Big Macs can also vary greatly between different
areas within a country. For example, a Big Mac sold in New York City will be
more expensive than one sold at a McDonald's located in a rural area of a
neighboring state. Manipulation. Critics of the presidency of Cristina
Fernández de Kirchner in Argentina and many economists believe that the
government has for years falsified consumer price data to understate the
country's true inflation rate. "The Economist" stated in January 2011 that Big
Mac index "does support claims that Argentina’s government is cooking the
books. The gap between its average annual rate of burger inflation (19%) and
its official rate (10%) is far bigger than in any other country." That year the
press began reporting on unusual behavior by the more than 200 Argentinean
McDonald's. The restaurants no longer prominently advertise Big Macs for sale
and the sandwich, both individually and as part of value meals, is sold for an
unusually low price compared to other items. Guillermo Moreno, Secretary of
Commerce in the Kirchner government, reportedly forced McDonald's to sell the
Big Mac at an artificially low price to manipulate the country's performance on
the Big Mac index. In June 2012 the price of the Big Mac value meal suddenly
rose by 26%, closer to that of other meals, after "The Economist", "The New
York Times", and other media reported on the unusual pricing. A Buenos Aires
newspaper stated "Moreno loses the battle". Comparison issues. The Big Mac (and
virtually all sandwiches) vary from country to country with differing
nutritional values, weights and even nominal size differences. Not all Big Mac
burgers offered by the chain are exclusively beef. In India — which is a
predominantly Hindu country — beef burgers are not available at any
McDonald's outlets. The chicken Maharaja Mac serves as a substitute for the Big
Mac. There is a lot of variance with the exclusively Beef "Big Mac": the
Australian version of the Big Mac has 22% less energy than the Canadian
version, and is 8% lighter than the version sold in Mexico. In October 2009, it
was reported that all three of the McDonald's in Iceland would be closing
primarily due to the chain's high cost of importing most of the chain's meat
and vegetables from the Eurozone. At the time, a Big Mac in Iceland cost 650
krona ($5.29), and the 20% price increase that would have been needed to stay
in business would have increased that cost to 780 krona ($6.36). Figures. Five
most expensive (12 January 2012) (not considering the fact that the buyer's
equivalent purchasing power is different) Six most affordable (12 January 2012)
(not considering the fact that the buyer's equivalent purchasing power is
different and not including the Indian Big Mac which contains chicken instead
of beef) Ten fastest earned (July 2009) Ten slowest earned (July 2009)
