Big push model The big push model is a concept in development economics or
welfare economics that emphasizes that a firm's decision whether to
industrialize or not depends on its expectation of what other firms will do. It
assumes economies of scale and oligopolistic market structure and explains when
industrialization would happen. The originator of this theory was Paul
Rosenstein-Rodan in 1943. Further contributions were made later on by Murphy,
Shleifer and Robert W. Vishny in 1989. Analysis of this economic model usually
involves using game theory. The theory of the model emphasizes that
underdeveloped countries require large amounts of investments to embark on the
path of economic development from their present state of backwardness. This
theory proposes that a 'bit by bit' investment programme will not impact the
process of growth as much as is required for developing countries. In fact,
injections of small quantities of investments will merely lead to a wastage of
resources. Paul Rosenstein-Rodan, approvingly quotes a Massachusetts Institute
of Technology study in this regard, "There is a minimum level of resources that
must be devoted to... a development programme if it is to have any chance of
success. Launching a country into self-sustaining growth is a little like
getting an airplane off the ground. There is a critical ground speed which must
be passed before the craft can become airborne..." Rosenstein-Rodan argued that
the entire industry which is intended to be created should be treated and
planned as a massive entity (a firm or trust). He supports this argument by
stating that the social marginal product of an investment is always different
from its private marginal product, so when a group of industries are planned
together according to their social marginal products, the rate of growth of the
economy is greater than it would have otherwise been. The three
indivisibilities. According to Rosenstein-Rodan, there exist three
indivisibilities in underdeveloped countries. These indivisibilities are
responsible for external economies and thus justify the need for a big push.
The externalities are as follows- Indivisibility in production function. These
lead to increasing returns (i.e., economies of scale), and may require a high
optimum size of a firm. This can be achieved even in developing countries since
at least one optimum scale firm can be established in many industries. But
investment in social overhead capital comprises investment in all basic
industries (like power, transport or communications) which must necessarily
come before directly productive investment activities. Investment in social
overhead capital is 'lumpy' in nature. Such capital requirements cannot be
imported from other nations. Therefore, heavy initial investment necessarily
needs to be made in social overhead capital (this is approximated to be about
30 to 40 percent of the total investment undertaken by underdeveloped
countries). Indivisibility (or complementarity) of demand. Developing countries
are characterized by low per-capita income and purchasing power. Markets in
these countries are therefore small. In a closed economy, modernization and
increased efficiency in a single industry has no impact on the economy as a
whole since the output of that industry will fail to find a market. A large
number of industries need to be set up simultaneously so that people employed
in one industry consume the output of other industries and thus create
complementary demand. To illustrate this, Rosenstein Rodan gives the example of
a shoe industry. If a country makes large investments in the shoe industry, all
the disguisedly employed labor from the other industries find work and a source
of income, leading to a rise in production of shoes and their own incomes. This
increased income will not be expended only on buying shoes. It is conceivable
that the increased incomes will lead to increased spending on other products
too. However, there is no corresponding supply of these products to satisfy
this increased demand for the other goods. Following the basic market forces of
demand and supply, the prices of these commodities will rise. To avoid such a
situation, investment must be spread out amongst different industries. The
situation may be different in an open economy as the output of the new industry
may replace former imports or possibly find its market by way of exports. But
even if the world market acts as a substitute for domestic demand, a big push
is still needed (though its required size may now be reduced due to the
presence of international trade). Indivisibility in the supply of savings. High
levels of investment require a corresponding high level of savings. We cannot
always rely on foreign aid as the huge levels of investments in the different
sectors need to be made not only once, but multiple number of times. Hence
domestic savings are a must. But in an underdeveloped economy,this is a
challenge due to the low income levels.Marginal rate of savings needs to be
increased following the rise in incomes due to higher investment. How the big
push works. Consider a country whose economy is characterized by a large number
of sectors which are so small that any increase in the productivity of one
sector has no impact on the economy as a whole. Each sector can either rely on
traditional methods or switch to modern methods of production which would
increase its efficiency. Let us assume that there are formula_1 workers in the
economy and formula_2 sectors. Each sector therefore has formula_3 workers.
"Using traditional technology", a sector would produce formula_3 amount of
output, with each worker producing one unit of the commodity. "Using modern
technology" a sector would produce more as the productivity would be greater
than one unit per worker. However, a modern sector would require some of the
workers (say formula_5) to perform administrative tasks. In figure 1, the x-
axis represents the labor employed and the y-axis represents the level of
production. The production in the traditional sector is given by the curve T
and the production in the modern sector is given by M. The curve M has a
positive intercept on the x-axis, implying that even with zero production,
there is a minimum level of formula_5 workers who still remain employed for
carrying out administrative activities. With our assumption of formula_7
workers in the economy, the modern sector will have a higher level of
productivity than the traditional sector. The production function of the modern
sector is steeper than that of the traditional sector because of the higher
productivity of workers in the former. The slope of both production functions
is formula_8, where formula_9 is the marginal labor required to produce an
additional unit of output. This level of formula_9 is lower for the modern
sector than it is for the traditional sector. Assume that the traditional
sector pays workers one unit of output which is subsequently spent equally by
them in all sectors. The modern sector pays higher wages to workers. If all the
workers are employed by the traditional sector, then the demand generated for
the output of each sector is formula_11. Indivisibilities and external
economies. The concept of externalities is relevant for the Industrialization
of underdeveloped countries, where decisions are to be made regarding
distribution of savings among alternative investment opportunities. These arise
from the interdependence in market economies. Pecuniary economies are external
economies transmitted through the price system, as prices are the signalling
device (under conditions of perfect competition in a market economy). They
arise in an industry (say industry X) due to internal economies of overcoming
technical indivisibilities. This reduces the price of its product, which will
benefit another industry (say industry Y) which use this output as an input or
a factor of production. Subsequently, the profits of industry Y will rise,
leading to its expansion and generating demand for the output of industry X. As
a result, industry X's production and profits also expand. This justifies the
need for centralized pan-industry planning of investment in Developing
countries, as the private sector cannot undertake such planning. Enlargement of
the market size is another important externality which arises from the
complementarity of industries. There exists an incentive to expand the scale of
operations because the employees of one industry become the customers of
another industry. In terms of products too (as in the above example of
industries X and Y), one industry generates demand for the output of the other
when the scale of operations increase. Availability of skilled labour is an
externality which arises when industrialization occurs, as workers acquire
better training and skills. This is not achievable by mere establishment of a
few industries, but requires a large program of industrial growth. It is one of
the most important external economies because absence of skilled labor is a
strong impediment to industrialization. Role of the State. The large-scale
programme of industrialization advocated by this model requires huge
investments which are beyond the means of the private sector. The investment in
infrastructure and basic industries (like power, transport and communications)
is 'lumpy' and has long gestation periods. The role of the state in this theory
is therefore critical for investment in social overhead capital. Even if the
private sector had the requisite resources to invest in such a programme, it
would not do so since it is driven by profit motives. Many investments are
profitable in terms of social marginal net product but not in terms of private
marginal net product. Due to this there is no incentive for individual
entrepreneurs to invest and take advantage of external economies. Criticisms.
The theory has been criticized by Hla Myint and Celso Furtado, among others,
primarily on the grounds of the massive effort required to be taken by
underdeveloped countries to move along the path of industrialization. Some of
the major criticisms are as follows.
