Thermoeconomics Thermoeconomics, also referred to as biophysical economics, is
a school of heterodox economics that applies the laws of thermodynamics to
economic theory. The term "thermoeconomics" was coined in 1962 by American
engineer Myron Tribus, and developed by the statistician and economist Nicholas
Georgescu-Roegen. Thermoeconomics can be thought of as the statistical physics
of economic value. Basis. Thermoeconomics is based on the proposition that the
role of energy in biological evolution should be defined and understood through
the second law of thermodynamics but in terms of such economic criteria as
productivity, efficiency, and especially the costs and benefits (or
profitability) of the various mechanisms for capturing and utilizing available
energy to build biomass and do work. Thermodynamics. Thermoeconomists maintain
that human economic systems can be modeled as thermodynamic systems. Then,
based on this premise, theoretical economic analogs of the first and second
laws of thermodynamics are developed. In addition, the thermodynamic quantity
exergy, i.e. measure of the useful work energy of a system, is one measure of
value. In thermodynamics, thermal systems exchange energy by heat, and work,
and exchange mass with their surroundings; in this direction, relations between
the energy associated with the production, distribution, and consumption of
goods and services can be determined. Economic systems. Thermoeconomists argue
that economic systems always involve matter, energy, entropy, and information.
Moreover, the aim of many economic activities is to achieve a certain
structure. In this manner, thermoeconomics applies the theories in non-
equilibrium thermodynamics, in which structure formations called dissipative
structures form, and information theory, in which information entropy is a
central construct, to the modeling of economic activities in which the natural
flows of energy and materials function to create scarce resources. In
thermodynamic terminology, human economic activity may be described as a
dissipative system, which flourishes by consuming free energy in
transformations and exchange of resources, goods, and services.
