Biological imperative Biological imperatives are the needs of living organisms
required to perpetuate their existence: to survive. Include the following
hierarchy of logical imperatives for a living organism: , territorialism,
competition, reproduction, quality of life-seeking, and group forming. Living
organisms that do not attempt to follow or do not succeed in satisfying these
imperatives are described as maladaptive; those that do are adaptive.
Territorialism. Territorialism is a fairly fundamental feature of all living
organisms, by simple virtue of the fact we live in a physical universe.
Bacteria evidently acquire territory as they spread out in a Petri dish.
Observing living organisms in nature suggests that the step before procreation
is to establish a territory within which they may hunt, breed, and ensure the
growth of their offspring. Competition. Competition is one of the environmental
factors that constitute natural selection. Individual organisms compete for
food and mates; groups of living organisms compete for control of territory and
resources; species though, do not so much compete, as passively adapt to their
environment. Reproduction. Biological imperatives are important to the study of
evolution. In order for species to persist, they must by definition reproduce
to ensure the continuation of their species. Without reproduction the species
ceases to exist. The capacity for reproduction and the drive to do so whenever
physiological and environmental conditions allow it are universal among living
organisms and are expressed in a multitude of ways by the spectrum of living
organisms. Relationships between potentially conflicting biological
imperatives, such as self-preservation and reproduction are similarly resolved
in an extraordinary variety of fashions by different organisms, from those who
sacrifice themselves to procreate or increase the survival chances of their
offspring to those who will abandon their descendants to their own luck when
threatened so they may live and successfully procreate another day.
Notwithstanding the evolutionary emergence of conscious voluntary action in
some forms of life, the urge to procreate is an involuntary and unconscious
biological drive which first emerged as an inherent property of living cells
and is echoed in the upper levels of organization of multicellular organisms.
In psychology, genetic imperative is important as a way of understanding family
structure and gender interactions. It has been theorised that genetic
imperative is the basis for the dominance of polygyny over polyandry in most
polygamous human cultures. The theory states that since it is biologically
feasible for a male to impregnate many women in a shorter amount of time, while
the female reproductive cycle is limited to intervals longer than nine months,
the male genetic imperative compels males to seek multiple sexual partners,
while the female genetic imperative compels the female to seek the fittest
possible male who will help with the process of bringing the child to
adulthood. Genetic imperative is also theorised to be the basis of exclusivity
in sexual relationships. Since genetic imperative works in an organism by
causing the organism to wish to spread its own genes, the organism tries to
prevent other organisms from spreading their genes in the same territory. This
behavior is theorized to be exhibited by humans in the exclusivity of many
human sexual relationships, also known as monogamy. The same theory can also be
used to explain many other observed behaviours, especially relating to
nutrition and available food sources. For example sheep (herbivores) killing
animals and chewing on their bones to supply needed calcium for their diet. It
is theorised that many of the cravings women sometimes have for strange foods
during pregnancy can be attributed to important nutrients that are required.
Quality-of-life-seeking. A living organisms' need to improve their quality of
life seems to serve the purpose of improving their chances of survival.
Quality-of-life-seeking also includes reducing the levels of stress experienced
by an individual organism. Stress can cause both physiological and mental
illness. Stress can be due to crime: threat and acts against the person; threat
and acts against property. Health in general comes under this category:
individual organisms that seek to maintain and improve their health are
improving their chances of survival. Group-forming. It is observable that most
organisms form groups in order to enhance their chances of survival. Groups can
be of simply two or of huge numbers. Group-forming is complex, and involves
territorialism; notions of identity; culture. Group-forming is what leads us as
humans to form families, clans, tribes, and nations. This group-forming in
Humans is the result of biology: due to the size of our brains, children are
dependent on their parents for much longer than most animals; the result of
this is that the biological couplings necessary for reproduction linger so that
the parents can ensure the survival of the offspring. This necessary time
investment and larger brain-size, coupled with our ability to communicate
precipitates the evolution of social constructions such as the family. After
several generations, many more families exist with varied connections to each
other; a common ancestry, evidenced by their phenotype, unites these clans.
More generations later with multiple clans, tribes form; then the non-
biological group-forming can take place where tribes can split due to geography
and demand for resources. As an aside, this is also the stage where different
dialects of language forming. As tribes enlarge, the benefits of being part of
a larger group become evident and systems of managing these larger populations
are required, this is the stage at which civilisation begins to emerge. In
primitive societies, religion fills this role: first animistic; later theistic.
The earliest civilisations were these religious centres with influence
emanating from an urbanised centre. Such as at Angkor Wat in Cambodia, or in
ancient Egypt. This religious system perpetuated the essentially tribal systems
of oligarchy and monarchy. Competition for resources and territory led to
investment in knowledge-seeking; education precipitates the gradual evolution
of economic systems and of democratic systems and of the nation. The next
logical step is the formation of an organised species-wide group, as population
pressure compels the species to seek new resources and territory, and
technology enables us to look beyond our current territory as a species to find
new resources and territory beyond the Earth. Living organisms enhance their
survivability by acquiring information about their environment. Humans are not
alone in their ability to acquire and exchange information and learn new
skills. Termites build huge structures; bees dance; mating rituals are
exchanges of information; otters, parrots and chimpanzees use tools and pass on
this knowledge. Humans form religions as a way of managing a growing tribal
group. The principles of Biological Imperatives have been used to formulate
political ideas such as Nativism.
