Bipartisanship Bipartisanship is a political situation, usually in the context
of a two-party system, in which opposing political parties find common ground
through compromise. Usage. The adjective "bipartisan" can refer to any bill,
act, resolution, or other political act in which both of the two major
political parties agree about all or many parts of a political choice.
Bipartisanship involves trying to find common ground, but there is debate
whether the issues needing common ground are peripheral or central ones. Often,
compromises are called bipartisan if they reconcile the desires of both parties
from an original version of legislation or other proposal. Failure to attain
bipartisan support in such a system can easily lead to gridlock, often angering
each other and their constituencies. An analysis in "The New York Times" in
March 2010 suggested that the present state of American politics is marked by
"oppositional politics" which has left voters cynical about the process.
Bipartisanship requires "hard work", is "sometimes dull", and entails trying to
find "common ground" but enables "serious problem solving", according to
editorial writers at the "Christian Science Monitor" in 2010. Feature of two-
party system. According to political analyst James Fallows in "The Atlantic",
bipartisanship is a phenomenon belonging to a two-party system such as the
political system of the United States and does not apply to a parliamentary
system such as Great Britain, since the minority party is not involved in
helping write legislation or voting for it. Fallows argues that in a two-party
system, the minority party can be obstructionist and thwart the actions of the
majority party. However, analyst Anne Applebaum in "The Washington Post"
suggested that partisanship had been rampant in the United Kingdom and
described it as "a country in which the government and the opposition glower at
each other from opposite sides of the House of Commons, in which backbenchers
jeer when their opponents speak." Applebaum suggested there was
"bipartisanship" in Britain, meaning a coalition in 2010 between the opposing
major parties, but that it remained to be seen whether the coalition can stay
together to solve serious problems such as tackling Britain's financial crisis.
Bipartisanship (in the context of a two-party system) is the opposite of
partisanship which is characterized by a lack of cooperation between rival
political parties. Framer James Madison argued in the Federalist Papers that a
danger to democracies were factions, which he defined as a group that pushed
its interests to the detriment of the national interest. While the framers of
the Constitution did not think that political parties would play a role in
American politics, political parties have long been a major force in American
politics, and the nation has alternated between periods of intense party
rivalry and partisanship, as well as periods of bipartisanship. According to
Robert Siegel of "National Public Radio", there has been virtually no
cooperation between Democrats and Republicans in the U.S. during the few years
before 2010. Bipartisanship can also be between two or more opposite groups
(e.g. liberal and conservative) to agree and determine a plan of action on an
urgent matter that is of great importance to voters. This interpretation brings
bipartisanship closer to the more applied notion of postpartisan decision-
making; a solution-focused approach that creates a governance model with third-
party arbiters used to detect bias. In U.S. politics. There have been periods
of bipartisanship in American politics, such as when the Senate Republicans
supported legislation by Democratic President Johnson in the early 1960s, and
when Democrats worked with Republican President Reagan in the early 1980s. In
the United States in 2010, however, there was wide disagreement between the
Republicans and Democrats because the minority party has been voting as a block
against major legislation, according to James Fallows in "The Atlantic". In
2010, the minority party has the ability to "discipline its ranks" so that none
join the majority, and this situation in the Congress is unprecedented,
according to Fallows. He sees this inability to have bipartisanship as evidence
of a "structural failure of American government." Adviser to President Obama,
Rahm Emanuel, said the period from 2008–2010 was marked by extreme
partisanship. After the U.S. election of 2010, with sizeable gains by
Republicans in the House and Senate, analyst Charles Babington of the
"Associated Press" suggested that both parties remained far apart on major
issues such as immigration and Medicare while there may be chances for
agreement about lesser issues such as electric cars, nuclear power, and tax
breaks for businesses; Babington was not optimistic about chances for
bipartisanship on major issues in the next few years. While analyst Benedict
Carey writing in "The New York Times" agrees political analysts tend to agree
that government will continue to be divided and marked by paralysis and
feuding, there was research suggesting that humans have a "profound capacity
through which vicious adversaries can form alliances," according to Berkeley
professor Dacher Keltner. A call for bipartisanship is often made by presidents
who "can't get their way in Congress," according to one view. Military policies
of the Cold war and actions like the Iraq war were promoted and supported,
through the mass media, as bipartisan acts. Criticisms. Bipartisanship has been
criticized because it can obscure the differences between parties, making
voting for candidates based on policies difficult in a democracy. Additionally,
the concept of bipartisanship has been criticized as discouraging agreements
between more than two parties, thus exercising a tyranny of the majority by
forcing voters to side with one of the two largest parties.
