Black populism Following the collapse of Reconstruction, African Americans
created a broad-based independent political movement in the South: Black
Populism. Beginnings. Between 1886 and 1898 Black farmers, sharecroppers, and
agrarian laborers organized their communities to combat the rising tide of Jim
Crow laws. As Black Populism asserted itself and grew into a regional force, it
met fierce resistance from the white planter and business elite that, through
the Democratic Party and its affiliated network of courts, militias, sheriffs,
and newspapers, maintained tight control of the region. Violence against Black
Populism was organized through the Ku Klux Klan, among other white terrorist
organizations designed to halt or reverse the advance of black civil and
political rights. Goals. Black Populism found early expression in various
agrarian organizations, including the Colored Agricultural Wheels, the southern
Knights of Labor, the Cooperative Workers of America, and the Colored Farmers'
Alliance. However, facing the limitations in attempting to implement their
reforms absent of engaging the electoral process, Black Populists helped to
launch the People’s Party and used the then left-of-centre Republican Party
in fusion campaigns. (Today though, after the Republican Party moved to the
right, and the Democratic Party in the South was abandoned by the White
Populist Dixiecrats who had opposed integration in the 1960s, most African
Americans who vote cast ballots for Democratic Party candidates). Resistance
and failure. By the late 1890s, under relentless attack – propaganda
campaigns warning of a “second Reconstruction” and “Negro rule,”
physical intimidation, violence, and assassinations of leaders and foot
soldiers – the movement was crushed. A key figure in the attack on Black
Populism was Ben Tillman, the leader of South Carolina's white farmers'
movement. As realistic politicians, the Southern Populist knew that they had
only two possible alternatives in the fight against the ruling Bourbon
Democrats. They must choose between trying to win the Negro votes or working to
eliminate it entirely. The Tillman group in South Carolina sought the latter
method. They were completely reactionary on the Negro question and stood with
the Bourbons in disregarding the principles of the Fifteenth Amendment.
Elsewhere the populists sought to win Negro votes, either through fusion with
the Republican minority or through the raising of issues with a broad appeal to
the Negro farmers.It was no accident that in the South the third-party movement
was strongest in those states where it sought not only Negro votes but active
Negro support. The notion that the black man had somehow betrayed Populism
would constantly haunt the Georgia People's Party from the very beginning
Populists had realized the political importance of blacks. Of the state's forty
thousand Republicans voters, a considerable majority were former bondsmen. If
the white votes were to split, they might decide the outcome of any state
election. But therein lay a predicament. How were Populists to court the black
votes without losing the whites? How were they to keep whites form thinking of
them the "nigger party," The party willing to truckle to the former slaves?
Clearly, however, an attempt had to be made to win over blacks. It was
dangerous scheme, but it contained a degree of precedent of in state politics.
In the 1870s and 1880s, democrats and independents had sometimes used the same
device when the white votes splits. In those days many whites where willing to
allow the black man the ballot, specially when it could be sometimes bought for
as little as a dime or a mouthful of whiskey. Black Populism was destroyed,
marking the end of organized political resistance to the return of White
supremacy in the South in the late 19th century. Nevertheless, Black Populism
stands as the largest independent political uprising in the South until the
modern Civil Rights movement.
