Black–Scholes The Black–Scholes model or Black–Scholes–Merton is a
mathematical model of a financial market containing certain derivative
investment instruments. From the model, one can deduce the Black–Scholes
formula, which gives the price of European-style options. The formula led to a
boom in options trading and legitimised scientifically the activities of the
Chicago Board Options Exchange and other options markets around the world. lt
is widely used by options market participants. Many empirical tests have shown
the Black–Scholes price is “fairly close” to the observed prices,
although there are well-known discrepancies such as the “option smile”. The
model was first articulated by Fischer Black and Myron Scholes in their 1973
paper, “The Pricing of Options and Corporate Liabilities", published in the
"Journal of Political Economy". They derived a partial differential equation,
now called the Black–Scholes equation, which governs the price of the option
over time. The key idea behind the derivation was to hedge perfectly the option
by buying and selling the underlying asset in just the right way and
consequently "eliminate risk". This hedge is called delta hedging and is the
basis of more complicated hedging strategies such as those engaged in by Wall
Street investment banks. The hedge implies there is only one right price for
the option and it is given by the Black–Scholes formula. Robert C. Merton was
the first to publish a paper expanding the mathematical understanding of the
options pricing model and coined the term Black–Scholes options pricing
model. Merton and Scholes received the 1997 Nobel Prize in Economics ("The
Sveriges Riksbank Prize in Economic Sciences in Memory of Alfred Nobel") for
their work. Though ineligible for the prize because of his death in 1995, Black
was mentioned as a contributor by the Swedish academy. Assumptions. From these
assumptions, Black and Scholes showed that “it is possible to create a hedged
position, consisting of a long position in the stock and a short position in
the option, whose value will not depend on the price of the stock.” Several
of these assumptions of the original model have been removed in subsequent
extensions of the model. Modern versions account for changing interest rates
(Merton, 1976), transaction costs and taxes (Ingersoll, 1976), and dividend
payout. Notation. Let Finally we will use formula_12 which denotes the standard
normal cumulative distribution function, formula_14 which denotes the standard
normal probability density function, The Black–Scholes equation. Derivation.
The following derivation is given in Hull's "Options, Futures, and Other
Derivatives". That, in turn, is based on the classic argument in the original
Black–Scholes paper. Per the model assumptions above, the price of the
underlying asset (typically a stock) follows a geometric Brownian motion. That
is, where "W" is Brownian motion. Note that "W", and consequently its
infinitesimal increment "dW", represents the only source of uncertainty in the
price history of the stock. Intuitively, "W(t)" is a process that "wiggles up
and down" in such a random way that its expected change over any time interval
is 0. (In addition, its variance over time "T" is equal to "T"; see Wiener
process: Basic properties); a good discrete analogue for "W" is a simple random
walk. Thus the above equation states that the infinitesimal rate of return on
the stock has an expected value of "μ dt" and a variance of formula_18. The
payoff of an option formula_19 at maturity is known. To find its value at an
earlier time we need to know how formula_20 evolves as a function of formula_1
and formula_10. By Itō's lemma for two variables we have Now consider a
certain portfolio, called the delta-hedge portfolio, consisting of being short
one option and long formula_24 shares at time formula_10. The value of these
holdings is Notice that the formula_33 term has vanished. Thus uncertainty has
been eliminated and the portfolio is effectively riskless. The rate of return
on this portfolio must be equal to the rate of return on any other riskless
instrument; otherwise, there would be opportunities for arbitrage. Now assuming
the risk-free rate of return is formula_6 we must have over the time period
formula_10 With the assumptions of the Black–Scholes model, this second order
partial differential equation holds for any type of option as long as its price
function formula_20 is twice differentiable with respect to formula_1 and once
with respect to formula_10. Different pricing formulae for various options will
arise from the choice of payoff function at expiry and appropriate boundary
conditions. Black–Scholes formula. The Black–Scholes formula calculates the
price of European put and call options. This price is consistent with the
Black–Scholes equation as above; this follows since the formula can be
obtained by solving the equation for the corresponding terminal and boundary
conditions. Interpretation. The terms formula_51 are the "probabilities of the
option expiring in-the-money" under the equivalent exponential martingale
probability measure (numéraire=stock) and the equivalent martingale
probability measure (numéraire=risk free asset), respectively. The risk
neutral probability density for the stock price formula_52 is where formula_54
is defined as above. Specifically, formula_55 is the probability that the call
will be exercised provided one assumes that the asset drift is the risk-free
rate. formula_56, however, does not lend itself to a simple probability
interpretation. formula_57 is correctly interpreted as the present value, using
the risk-free interest rate, of the expected asset price at expiration, given
that the asset price at expiration is above the exercise price. For related
discussion – and graphical representation – see section "Interpretation"
under Datar–Mathews method for real option valuation. The equivalent
martingale probability measure is also called the . Note that both of these are
"probabilities" in a measure theoretic sense, and neither of these is the true
probability of expiring in-the-money under the . To calculate the probability
under the real (“physical”) probability measure, additional information is
required—the drift term in the physical measure, or equivalently, the market
price of risk. Derivation. We now show how to get from the general
Black–Scholes PDE to a specific valuation for an option. Consider as an
example the Black–Scholes price of a call option, for which the PDE above has
boundary conditions The last condition gives the value of the option at the
time that the option matures. The solution of the PDE gives the value of the
option at any earlier time, formula_61. To solve the PDE we transform the
equation into a diffusion equation which may be solved using standard methods.
To this end we introduce the change-of-variable transformation Then the
Black–Scholes PDE becomes a diffusion equation The terminal condition
formula_66 now becomes an initial condition Using the standard method for
solving a diffusion equation we have which, after some manipulations, yields
where Reverting formula_72 to the original set of variables yields the above
stated solution to the Black–Scholes equation. Other derivations. Above we
used the method of arbitrage-free pricing (“delta-hedging”) to derive the
Black–Scholes PDE, and then solved the PDE to get the valuation formula. It
is also possible to derive the latter directly using a Risk neutrality
argument. This method gives the price as the expectation of the option payoff
under a particular probability measure, called the risk-neutral measure, which
differs from the real world measure. For the underlying logic see section "risk
neutral valuation" under Rational pricing as well as section " under
Mathematical finance; for detail, once again, see Hull. The Greeks. “The
Greeks” measure the sensitivity to change of the option price under a slight
change of a single parameter while holding the other parameters fixed.
Formally, they are partial derivatives of the option price with respect to the
independent variables (technically, one Greek, gamma, is a partial derivative
of another Greek, called delta). The Greeks are not only important for the
mathematical theory of finance, but for those actively involved in trading. Any
trader worth his or her salt will know the Greeks and make a choice of which
Greeks to hedge to limit exposure. Financial institutions will typically set
limits for the Greeks that their trader cannot exceed. Delta is the most
important Greek and traders will zero their delta at the end of the day. Gamma
and vega are also important but not as closely monitored. The Greeks for
Black–Scholes are given in closed form below. They can be obtained by
straightforward differentiation of the Black–Scholes formula. Note that the
gamma and vega formulas are the same for calls and puts. This can be seen
directly from put-call parity. In practice, some sensitivities are usually
quoted in scaled-down terms, to match the scale of likely changes in the
parameters. For example, rho is often reported multiplied by 10,000 (1bp rate
change), vega by 100 (1 vol point change), and theta by 365 or 252 (1 day decay
based on either calendar days or trading days per year). Extensions of the
model. The above model can be extended for variable (but deterministic) rates
and volatilities. The model may also be used to value European options on
instruments paying dividends. In this case, closed-form solutions are available
if the dividend is a known proportion of the stock price. American options and
options on stocks paying a known cash dividend (in the short term, more
realistic than a proportional dividend) are more difficult to value, and a
choice of solution techniques is available (for example lattices and grids).
Instruments paying continuous yield dividends. For options on indexes, it is
reasonable to make the simplifying assumption that dividends are paid
continuously, and that the dividend amount is proportional to the level of the
index. The dividend payment paid over the time period formula_73 is then
modelled as for some constant formula_75 (the dividend yield). Under this
formulation the arbitrage-free price implied by the Black–Scholes model can
be shown to be and where now and Exactly the same formula is used to price
options on foreign exchange rates, except that now "q" plays the role of the
foreign risk-free interest rate and "S" is the spot exchange rate. This is the
Garman–Kohlhagen model (1983). Instruments paying discrete proportional
dividends. It is also possible to extend the Black–Scholes framework to
options on instruments paying discrete proportional dividends. This is useful
when the option is struck on a single stock. A typical model is to assume that
a proportion formula_82 of the stock price is paid out at pre-determined times
formula_83. The price of the stock is then modelled as where formula_85 is the
number of dividends that have been paid by time formula_10. The price of a call
option on such a stock is again where now is the forward price for the dividend
paying stock. American options. The problem of finding the price of an American
option is related to the optimal stopping problem of finding the time to
execute the option. Since the American option can be exercised at any time
before the expiration date, the Black-Scholes equation becomes an inequality of
the form With the terminal and (free) boundary conditions: formula_90 and
formula_91 where formula_92 denotes the payoff at stock price formula_1 In
general this inequality does not have a closed form solution, though an
American call with no dividends is equal to a European call and the Roll-Geske-
Whaley method provides a solution for an American call with one dividend.
Barone-Adesi and Whaley is a further approximation formula. Here, the
stochastic differential equation (which is valid for the value of any
derivative) is split into two components: the European option value and the
early exercise premium. With some assumptions, a quadratic equation that
approximates the solution for the latter is then obtained. This solution
involves finding the critical value, formula_94, such that one is indifferent
between early exercise and holding to maturity. Bjerksund and Stensland provide
an approximation based on an exercise strategy corresponding to a trigger
price. Here, if the underlying asset price is greater than or equal to the
trigger price it is optimal to exercise, and the value must equal formula_95,
otherwise the option “boils down to: (i) a European up-and-out call option…
and (ii) a rebate that is received at the knock-out date if the option is
knocked out prior to the maturity date.” The formula is readily modified for
the valuation of a put option, using put call parity. This approximation is
computationally inexpensive and the method is fast, with evidence indicating
that the approximation may be more accurate in pricing long dated options than
Barone-Adesi and Whaley. Black–Scholes in practice. The Black–Scholes model
disagrees with reality in a number of ways, some significant. It is widely
employed as a useful approximation, but proper application requires
understanding its limitations – blindly following the model exposes the user
to unexpected risk. In short, while in the Black–Scholes model one can
perfectly hedge options by simply Delta hedging, in practice there are many
other sources of risk. Results using the Black–Scholes model differ from real
world prices because of simplifying assumptions of the model. One significant
limitation is that in reality security prices do not follow a strict stationary
log-normal process, nor is the risk-free interest actually known (and is not
constant over time). The variance has been observed to be non-constant leading
to models such as GARCH to model volatility changes. Pricing discrepancies
between empirical and the Black–Scholes model have long been observed in
options that are far out-of-the-money, corresponding to extreme price changes;
such events would be very rare if returns were lognormally distributed, but are
observed much more often in practice. Useful approximation: although volatility
is not constant, results from the model are often helpful in setting up hedges
in the correct proportions to minimize risk. Even when the results are not
completely accurate, they serve as a first approximation to which adjustments
can be made. Basis for more refined models: The Black–Scholes model is
"robust" in that it can be adjusted to deal with some of its failures. Rather
than considering some parameters (such as volatility or interest rates) as
"constant," one considers them as "variables," and thus added sources of risk.
This is reflected in the Greeks (the change in option value for a change in
these parameters, or equivalently the partial derivatives with respect to these
variables), and hedging these Greeks mitigates the risk caused by the non-
constant nature of these parameters. Other defects cannot be mitigated by
modifying the model, however, notably tail risk and liquidity risk, and these
are instead managed outside the model, chiefly by minimizing these risks and by
stress testing. Explicit modeling: this feature mean that, rather than
"assuming" a volatility "a priori" and computing prices from it, one can use
the model to solve for volatility, which gives the implied volatility of an
option at given prices, durations and exercise prices. Solving for volatility
over a given set of durations and strike prices one can construct an implied
volatility surface. In this application of the Black–Scholes model, a
coordinate transformation from the "price domain" to the "volatility domain" is
obtained. Rather than quoting option prices in terms of dollars per unit (which
are hard to compare across strikes and tenors), option prices can thus be
quoted in terms of implied volatility, which leads to trading of volatility in
option markets. The volatility smile. One of the attractive features of the
Black–Scholes model is that the parameters in the model (other than the
volatility) — the time to maturity, the strike, the risk-free interest rate,
and the current underlying price – are unequivocally observable. All other
things being equal, an option's theoretical value is a monotonic increasing
function of implied volatility. By computing the implied volatility for traded
options with different strikes and maturities, the Black–Scholes model can be
tested. If the Black–Scholes model held, then the implied volatility for a
particular stock would be the same for all strikes and maturities. In practice,
the volatility surface (the 3D graph of implied volatility against strike and
maturity) is not flat. The typical shape of the implied volatility curve for a
given maturity depends on the underlying instrument. Equities tend to have
skewed curves: compared to at-the-money, implied volatility is substantially
higher for low strikes, and slightly lower for high strikes. Currencies tend to
have more symmetrical curves, with implied volatility lowest at-the-money, and
higher volatilities in both wings. Commodities often have the reverse behavior
to equities, with higher implied volatility for higher strikes. Despite the
existence of the volatility smile (and the violation of all the other
assumptions of the Black–Scholes model), the Black–Scholes PDE and
Black–Scholes formula are still used extensively in practice. A typical
approach is to regard the volatility surface as a fact about the market, and
use an implied volatility from it in a Black–Scholes valuation model. This
has been described as using "the wrong number in the wrong formula to get the
right price." This approach also gives usable values for the hedge ratios (the
Greeks). Even when more advanced models are used, traders prefer to think in
terms of volatility as it allows them to evaluate and compare options of
different maturities, strikes, and so on. Valuing bond options. Black–Scholes
cannot be applied directly to bond securities because of pull-to-par. As the
bond reaches its maturity date, all of the prices involved with the bond become
known, thereby decreasing its volatility, and the simple Black–Scholes model
does not reflect this process. A large number of extensions to Black–Scholes,
beginning with the Black model, have been used to deal with this phenomenon.
See Bond option: Valuation. Interest-rate curve. In practice, interest rates
are not constant – they vary by tenor, giving an interest rate curve which
may be interpolated to pick an appropriate rate to use in the Black–Scholes
formula. Another consideration is that interest rates vary over time. This
volatility may make a significant contribution to the price, especially of
long-dated options.This is simply like the interest rate and bond price
relationship which is inversely related. Short stock rate. It is not free to
take a short stock position. Similarly, it may be possible to lend out a long
stock position for a small fee. In either case, this can be treated as a
continuous dividend for the purposes of a Black–Scholes valuation, provided
that there is no glaring asymmetry between the short stock borrowing cost and
the long stock lending income. Criticism. Espen Gaarder Haug and Nassim
Nicholas Taleb argue that the Black–Scholes model merely recast existing
widely used models in terms of practically impossible "dynamic hedging" rather
than "risk," to make them more compatible with mainstream neoclassical economic
theory. Similar arguments were made in an earlier paper by Emanuel Derman and
Nassim Taleb. In response, Paul Wilmott has defended the model. Jean-Philippe
Bouchaud argues: Reliance on models based on incorrect axioms has clear and
large effects. The Black–Scholes model, for example, which was invented in
1973 to price options, is still used extensively. But it assumes that the
probability of extreme price changes is negligible, when in reality, stock
prices are much jerkier than this. Unwarranted use of the model spiralled into
the worldwide October 1987 crash; the Dow Jones index dropped 23% in a single
day, dwarfing recent market hiccups. Using the Student's t-distribution in
place of the normal distribution as basis for the valuation of options can
better take in account extreme events. Remarks on notation. It is also used in
the meaning of (4) with a subscript denoting time, but here the subscript is
merely a mnemonic. In the partial derivatives, the letters in the numerators
and denominators are, of course, real variables, and the partial derivatives
themselves are, initially, real functions of real variables. But after the
substitution of a stochastic process for one of the arguments they become
stochastic processes. The Black–Scholes PDE is, initially, a statement about
the stochastic process formula_1, but when formula_1 is reinterpreted as a real
variable, it becomes an ordinary PDE. It is only then that we can ask about its
solution. The parameter formula_99 that appears in the discrete-dividend model
and the elementary derivation is not the same as the parameter formula_7 that
appears elsewhere in the article. For the relationship between them see
Geometric Brownian motion.
