Body politic A body politic is a metaphor in which a nation is considered to be
a corporate entity, being likened to a human body. Confusingly, the word
"politic" in this phrase is a postpositive adjective; so it is "a body of a
nature" rather than "a politic of a bodily nature". A body politic comprises
all the people in a particular country considered as a single group. The
analogy is typically continued by reference to the apex of government as the
head of state, but may be extended to other anatomical parts, as in political
readings of the Aesop's fable, "The Belly and the Members". The metaphor also
appears in the French language as the "corps-état". The metaphor developed in
Renaissance times, as the medical knowledge based upon the classical work of
Galen was being challenged by new thinkers such as William Harvey. Analogies
were made between the supposed causes of disease and disorder and their
equivalents in the political field which were considered to be plagues or
infections which might be remedied by purges and nostrums. Literal
manifestation. In one use "body politic" derives from the mediæval political
concept of "the king's two bodies" first noted, as a point of theology as much
as statehood, by the fifteenth-century judge Sir John Fortescue in "The
Difference between an Absolute and a Limited Monarchy", written from exile in
about 1462. He explains that the "character angelus" of the king is his royal
power, derived from angels and separate from the frail physical powers of his
body. However, he uses the phrase "body politic" itself only in its modern
sense, to describe the realm, or shared rule, of Brutus, mythical first king of
England, and how he and his fellow exiles had covenanted to form a body
politic. Unusually for the time Fortescue was writing in English and not Latin:
"made a body pollitike callid a reawme". In 1550 the jurist Edmund Plowden
merged Fortescue's concepts, at the same time removing them from abstraction
into a real, physical manifestation in the body of the king. Plowden reports
how lawyers codified this notion in an examination of a case of land-ownership
turning on a disputed gift by an earlier monarch; they determined that the
"Body politic…that cannot be seen or handled…constituted for the direction
of the People…[and these two bodies are incorporated in one person…the Body
politic includes the [king's] Body natural." In 1609 Attorney General Edward
Coke pronounced his dissenting opinion, that mortal power was God-made while
the immortality of royal power existed only as a man-made concept; Coke later
succeeded in limiting the royal power of Charles I with his "Petition of
Right". When the monarchy, in the person of Charles II, was restored at the end
of the Commonwealth the idea remained current and royalty continued to use the
notion, as a buttress to its authority, until an assertion of the rights of
Parliament brought about the Glorious Revolution of 1688. The pre-revolutionary
monarchy of France also sought legitimacy from the principle, extending it to
include the idea that the king's heir assimilated the "body politic" of the old
king, in a physical "transfer of corporeality", on accession.
