Bolivarian Revolution The “Bolivarian Revolution” refers to a leftist
social movement and political process in Venezuela led by Venezuelan president
Hugo Chávez, the founder of the Fifth Republic Movement (replaced by the
United Socialist Party of Venezuela in 2007). The "Bolivarian Revolution" is
named after Simón Bolívar, an early 19th century Venezuelan and Latin
American revolutionary leader, prominent in the Spanish American wars of
independence in achieving the independence of most of northern Latin America
from Spanish rule. According to Chávez and other supporters, the "Bolivarian
Revolution" seeks to build a mass movement to implement Bolivarianism - popular
democracy, economic independence, equitable distribution of revenues, and an
end to political corruption - in Venezuela. They interpret Bolívar's ideas
from a socialist perspective. On his 57th birthday, while announcing that he
was being treated for cancer, Chavez announced that he had changed the slogan
of the Bolivarian Revolution from “Motherland, socialism, or death” to
“Socialist motherland and victory, we will live, and we will come out
victorious.” Background: Bolivarianism. Simón Bolívar has cast a long
shadow over Venezuela's history. Tamarick Person noted "a spontaneous and
enduring popular cult of Bolivar" as early as 1842, and he is venerated in
"parades, speeches, ceremonies, competitions, inaugurations, commemorations,
unveilings of monuments, official publications, and other formal events".
Chavez as a military cadet was "a celebrant of the Bolivarian passion story".
Chávez relied upon the ideas of Bolívar, and on Bolívar as a popular symbol,
later in his military career as he put together his MBR-200 movement which
would become a vehicle for his 1992 coup-attempt. Policies. The Chávez
administration has deployed national social welfare programs ("Misiones" or
"Missions") called Bolivarian Missions. Internationalism. The "Bolivarian
Revolution" under Chávez has also refocused Venezuelan foreign policy on Latin
American economic and social integration by enacting bilateral trade and
reciprocal aid agreements, including his so-called "oil diplomacy", which
provides cheap oil to poor neighbouring nations. Chávez regularly portrays his
movement's objectives as being in intractable conflict with "neocolonialism"
and neoliberalism.
