Bolshevik The Bolsheviks, originally also Bolshevists (; derived from
"bol'shinstvo", "majority") were a faction of the Marxist Russian Social
Democratic Labour Party (RSDLP) which split apart from the Menshevik faction at
the Second Party Congress in 1903. The Bolsheviks were the majority faction in
a crucial vote, hence their name. They ultimately became the Communist Party of
the Soviet Union. The Bolsheviks came to power in Russia during the October
Revolution phase of the Russian Revolution of 1917, and founded the Russian
Soviet Federative Socialist Republic which would later in 1922 become the chief
constituent of the Soviet Union. The Bolsheviks, founded by Vladimir Lenin and
Alexander Bogdanov, were by 1905 a mass organization consisting primarily of
workers under a democratic internal hierarchy governed by the principle of
democratic centralism, who considered themselves the leaders of the
revolutionary working class of Russia. Their beliefs and practices were often
referred to as Bolshevism. Bolshevik revolutionary leader Leon Trotsky commonly
used the terms "Bolshevism" and "Bolshevist" after his exile from the Soviet
Union to differentiate between what he saw as true Leninism and the state and
party as they existed under Joseph Stalin's leadership. History of the split.
In the 2nd Congress of the Russian Social Democratic Labour Party, held in
Brussels and London during August 1903, Lenin and Julius Martov disagreed over
the membership rules. Lenin wanted members "who recognise the Party Programme
and support it by material means and by personal participation in one of the
party's organisations." Julius Martov suggested "by regular personal assistance
under the direction of one of the party's organisations." Lenin advocated
limiting party membership to a smaller core of active members, as opposed to
"card carriers" who might only be active in party branches from time to time or
not at all. This active base would develop the cadre, a core of "professional
revolutionaries", consisting of loyal communists who would spend most of their
time organising the party toward a mass revolutionary party capable of leading
a workers' revolution against the Tsarist autocracy. The base of active and
experienced members would be the recruiting ground for this professional core.
Sympathizers would be left outside and the party would be organised based on
the concept of democratic centralism. Martov, until then a close friend of
Lenin, agreed with him that the core of the party should consist of
professional revolutionaries, but argued that party membership should be open
to sympathizers, revolutionary workers and other fellow travelers. The two had
disagreed on the issue as early as March–May 1903, but it was not until the
Congress that their differences became irreconcilable and split the party.
Although at first the disagreement appeared to be minor and inspired by
personal conflicts, for example, Lenin's insistence on dropping less active
editorial board members from "Iskra" or Martov's support for the Organizing
Committee of the Congress which Lenin opposed, the differences quickly grew and
the split became irreparable. Origins of the name. The two factions were
originally known as "hard" (Lenin's supporters) and "soft" (Martov's
supporters). Soon, however, the terminology changed to "Bolsheviks" and
"Mensheviks", from the Russian "bolshinstvo" (majority) and "menshinstvo"
(minority), based on the fact that Lenin believed that most of the party stood
behind him. On the other hand, Martov's supporters won the vote concerning the
question of party membership. Neither Lenin nor Martov had a firm majority
throughout the Congress as delegates left or switched sides. At the end, the
Congress was evenly split between the two factions. From 1907 on, English
language articles sometimes used the term "Maximalist" for "Bolshevik" and
"Minimalist" for "Menshevik", which proved confusing since there was also a
"Maximalist" faction within the Russian Socialist-Revolutionary Party in
1904–1906 (which after 1906 formed a separate Union of Socialists-
Revolutionaries Maximalists) and then again after 1917. Composition of the
party. The average party member was very young. In 1907, 22% of Bolsheviks were
under 20, 37% were 20-24 and 16% were 25-29. By 1905, 62% of the members were
industrial workers (3% of the population in 1897). 22% of Bolsheviks were
gentry (1.7% of the total population), 38% were uprooted peasants, compared
with 19% and 26% for the Mensheviks. In 1907 78.3% of the Bolsheviks were
Russian and 10% were Jewish (34 and 20% for the Mensheviks). Total membership
was 8,400 in 1905, 13,000 in 1906 and 46,100 by 1907 (8,400, 18,000, 38,200
respectively for the Mensheviks). By 1910 both factions together had fewer than
100,000 members. Beginning of the 1905 Revolution (1903–1905). The two
factions were in a state of flux in 1903–1904 with many members changing
sides. The founder of Russian Marxism, Georgy Plekhanov, who was at first
allied with Vladimir Lenin and the Bolsheviks, parted ways with them by 1904.
Leon Trotsky at first supported the Mensheviks, but left them in September 1904
over their insistence on an alliance with Russian liberals and their opposition
to a reconciliation with Lenin and the Bolsheviks. He remained a self-described
"non-factional social democrat" until August 1917 when he joined Lenin and the
Bolsheviks as their positions assembled and he came to believe that Lenin was
right on the issue of the party. All but one members of the Central Committee
were arrested in Moscow in early 1905. The remaining member, with the power of
appointing a new one, was won over by the Bolsheviks. The lines between the
Bolsheviks and the Mensheviks hardened in April 1905 when the Bolsheviks held a
Bolsheviks-only meeting in London, which they called the Third Party Congress.
The Mensheviks organised a rival conference and the split was thus formalised.
The Bolsheviks played a relatively minor role in the 1905 Revolution, and were
a minority in the St. Petersburg Soviet of Workers' Deputies led by Trotsky.
The less significant Moscow Soviet, however, was dominated by the Bolsheviks.
These soviets became the model for those formed in 1917. The Mensheviks ("The
minority") (1906–1907). As the Russian Revolution of 1905 progressed,
Bolsheviks, Mensheviks and smaller non-Russian social democratic parties
operating within the Russian Empire attempted to reunify at the Fourth
(Unification) Congress of the RSDLP held at Folkets hus, Norra Bantorget in
Stockholm, April 1906. When the Mensheviks struck an alliance with the Jewish
Bund, the Bolsheviks found themselves in a minority. However, all factions
retained their respective factional structure and the Bolsheviks formed the
Bolshevik Center, the de facto governing body of the Bolshevik faction within
the RSDLP. At the Fifth Congress held in London in May 1907, the Bolsheviks
were in the majority, but the two factions continued functioning mostly
independently of each other. Split between Lenin and Bogdanov (1908–1910).
With the defeat of the revolution in mid-1907 and the adoption of a new, highly
restrictive election law, the Bolsheviks began debating whether to boycott the
new parliament known as the Third Duma. Lenin, Grigory Zinoviev, Lev Kamenev
and others argued for participating in the Duma while Alexander Bogdanov,
Anatoly Lunacharsky, Mikhail Pokrovsky and others argued that the social
democratic faction in the Duma should be recalled. The latter became known as
recallists ("otzovists" in Russian). A smaller group within the Bolshevik
faction demanded that the RSDLP central committee should give its sometimes
unruly Duma faction an ultimatum, demanding complete subordination to all party
decisions. This group became known as "ultimatists" and was generally allied
with the recallists. With most Bolshevik leaders either supporting Bogdanov or
undecided by mid-1908 when the differences became irreconcilable, Lenin
concentrated on undermining Bogdanov's reputation as a philosopher. In 1909 he
published a scathing book of criticism entitled "Materialism and
Empiriocriticism" (1909), assaulting Bogdanov's position and accusing him of
philosophical idealism. In June 1909, Bogdanov proposed the formation of Party
Schools as "Proletarian Universities" at a Bolshevik mini-conference in Paris
organised by the editorial board of the Bolshevik magazine "Proletary" in June
1909. However this was not accepted and Lenin tried to expel him from the
Bolshevik faction. Bogdanov was then involved with setting up Vpered, which ran
the Capri Party School from August to December 1909. Final attempt at party
unity (1910). With both Bolsheviks and Mensheviks weakened by splits within
their ranks and by Tsarist repression, they were tempted to try to re-unite the
party. In January 1910, Leninists, recallists and various Menshevik factions
held a meeting of the party's Central Committee in Paris. Kamenev and Zinoviev
were dubious about the idea, but were willing to give it a try under pressure
from "conciliator" Bolsheviks like Victor Nogin. Lenin was firmly opposed to
any re-unification, but was outvoted within the Bolshevik leadership. The
meeting reached a tentative agreement and one of its provisions made Trotsky's
Vienna-based "Pravda" a party-financed 'central organ'. Kamenev, Trotsky's
brother-in-law, was added to the editorial board from the Bolsheviks, but the
unification attempts failed in August 1910 when Kamenev resigned from the board
amid mutual recriminations. Forming a separate party (1912). The factions
permanently broke off relations in January 1912 after the Bolsheviks organised
a Bolsheviks-only Prague Party Conference and formally expelled Mensheviks and
recallists from the party. As a result, they ceased to be a faction in the
RSDLP and instead declared themselves an independent party, called Russian
Social Democratic Labour Party (bolsheviks) - or RSDLP(b). Unofficially the
Party has been referred to as the "Bolshevik Party". Throughout the century,
the Party adopted a number of different names. In 1918, RSDLP(b) became (All-
)Russian Communist Party (bolsheviks) and remained so until 1925. From 1925-52
the name was All-Union Communist Party (bolsheviks), and from 1952-91 Communist
Party of the Soviet Union. Although the Bolshevik leadership decided to form a
separate party, convincing pro-Bolshevik workers within Russia to follow suit
proved difficult. When the first meeting of the Fourth Duma was convened in
late 1912, only one out of six Bolshevik deputies, Matvei Muranov, (another
one, Roman Malinovsky, was later exposed as an Okhrana secret police agent)
voted to break away from the Menshevik faction within the Duma on 15 December
1912. The Bolshevik leadership eventually prevailed and the Bolsheviks formed
their own Duma faction in September 1913. "Bolshevik" as an obsolete term. In
1952, at the 19th Party Congress, Stalin declared: "There are no more
Mensheviks. Why should we call ourselves Bolsheviks? We are not the majority,
but the whole party." According to his suggestion, the Bolshevik party was
renamed the Communist Party of Soviet Union. Since that time, the term
Bolshevik has been regarded as obsolete, and relevant only to the pre-
Revolutionary times, during the Russian Revolution itself and the Russian Civil
War which followed. Derogatory usage of "Bolshevik". "Bolo" was used as
derogatory expression for Bolsheviks used by British service personnel in the
North Russian Expeditionary Force which intervened against the Red Army during
the Russian Civil War. Adolf Hitler, Joseph Goebbels and other Nazi leaders
used it in reference to the worldwide political movement coordinated by the
Comintern. During the days of the Cold War in the United Kingdom, labour union
leaders and other leftists were sometimes derisively described as "Bolshies".
The usage is roughly equivalent to the term "Commie", "Red" or "pinko" in the
United States during the same period. The term "Bolshie" later became a slang
term for anyone who was rebellious, aggressive or truculent.
