Bourgeoisie Bourgeoisie (Eng.: ; ) is a word from the French, used in the
fields of political economy, political philosophy, sociology, and history,
which denotes the wealthy stratum of the middle class that originated during
the latter part of the Middle Ages (AD 500–1500). The utilisation and
specific application of the word is from the realm of the social sciences. In
sociology and in political science, the noun bourgeoisie and the adjective
bourgeois are terms that describe a historical range of socio-economic classes.
As such, in the Western world, since the late 18th century, the bourgeoisie
describes a social class “characterized by their ownership of capital, and
their related culture”; hence, the personal terms bourgeois (masculine) and
bourgeoise (feminine) culturally identify the man or woman who is a member of
the wealthiest social class of a given society; and their materialistic
worldview ("Weltanschauung"). In Marxist philosophy, the term “bourgeoisie”
denotes the social class who own the means of production, and whose societal
concerns are the value of property and the preservation of capital, in order to
ensure the perdurance of their economic supremacy in society. In contemporary
social theory the term bourgeoisie denotes the ruling class of capitalist
societies. Etymology. The Modern French word "bourgeois" derived from the Old
French "burgeis" (walled city), which derived from "bourg" (market town), from
the Old Frankish "burg" (town); in other European languages, the etymologic
derivations are the Middle English "burgeis", the Middle Dutch "burgher", the
German "Bürger" (burgess), and the Polish "burżuazja", which occasionally is
synonymous with the intelligentsia. In English, “bourgeoisie” (a French
citizen-class) identified a social class oriented to economic materialism and
hedonism, and to upholding the extreme political and economic interests of the
capitalist class ruling class. In the 18th century, before the French
Revolution (1789–99), in the French feudal order, the masculine and feminine
terms "bourgeois" and "bourgeoise" identified the rich men and women who were
members of the urban and rural Third Estate — the common people of the French
realm, who violently deposed the absolute monarchy of the Bourbon King Louis
XVI (r. 1774–91), his clergy, and his aristocrats. Hence, since the 19th
century, the term "bourgeoisie" usually is politically and sociologically
synonymous with the ruling upper class of a capitalist society. Historically,
the mediæval French word "bourgeois" denoted the inhabitants of the "bourgs"
(walled market-towns), the craftsmen, artisans, merchants, and others, who
constituted "the bourgeoisie", they were the socio-economic class between the
peasants and the landlords, between the workers and the owners of the means of
production. Resultantly, as the economic managers of the (raw) materials, the
goods, and the services, and thus the capital (money) produced by the feudal
economy, the term "bourgeoisie" evolved to also denote the middle class — the
businessmen and businesswomen who accumulated, administered, and controlled the
capital that made possible the development of the bourgs into cities.
Contemporarily, the terms "bourgeoisie" and "bourgeois" identify the ruling
class in capitalist societies, as a social stratum; while "bourgeois" describes
the "Weltanschauung" (worldview) of men and women whose way of thinking is
socially and culturally determined by their economic materialism and
philistinism, a social identity catalogued and described in "drame bourgeois"
(bourgeois drama), which satirizes buying the trappings of a noble-birth
identity as the means climbing the social ladder. (See: "Le Bourgeois
gentilhomme", 1670) History. In the 11th century, the bourgeoisie emerged as a
historical and political phenomenon, when the "bourgs" of Central and Western
Europe developed into cities dedicated to commerce. The organised economic
concentration that made possible such urban expansion derived from the
protective self-organisation into guilds, which became necessary when
individual businessmen (craftsmen, artisans, merchants, "et alii") conflicted
with their rent-seeking feudal landlords who demanded greater-than-agreed
rents. In the event, by the end of the Middle Ages (ca. AD 1500), under
régimes of the early national monarchies of Western Europe, the bourgeoisie
acted in self-interest, and politically supported the king or the queen against
the legal and financial disorder caused by the greed of the feudal lords. In
the late-16th and early 17-th centuries, the bourgeoisies of England and the
Netherlands had become the financial — and thus political — forces that
deposed the feudal order; economic power had vanquished military power in the
realm of politics. During the 17th and 18th centuries, the bourgeoisie were the
politically progressive social class who supported the principles of
constitutional government and of natural right, against the Law of Privilege
and the claims of rule by divine right that the nobles and prelates had
autonomously exercised during the feudal order. The motivations for the English
Civil War (1642–51), the American War of Independence (1775–83), and French
Revolution (1789–99) partly derived from the desire of the bourgeoisie to rid
themselves of the feudal trammels and royal encroachments upon their personal
liberty, commercial rights, and the ownership of property. In the 19th century,
the bourgeoisie propounded liberalism, and gained political rights, religious
rights, and civil liberties for themselves and the lower social classes; thus
was the bourgeoisie then a progressive philosophic and political force in
modern Western societies. By the middle of the 19th century, subsequent to the
Industrial Revolution (1750–1850), the great expansion of the bourgeoisie
social class caused its self-stratification — by business activity and by
economic function — into the "haute bourgeoisie" (bankers and industrialists)
and the "petite bourgeoisie" (tradesmen and white-collar workers). Moreover, by
the end of the 19th century, the capitalists (the original bourgeoisie) had
ascended to the upper class (people whose money works for them), whilst the
developments of technology and the technical occupations thereby engendered,
allowed the ascension of working-class men and women to the lower strata of the
bourgeoisie; yet the social progress was incidental. In the event, despite its
initial philosophic progressivism — from feudalism to liberalism to
capitalism — like all ruling political establishments, the bourgeoisie social
class (haute and petite) became reactionary in their refusal to allow the
ascendance (economic, social, political) of people from the proletariat
(peasants and urban workers) in order to remain predominant, as the political
Establishment of their society. Denotations. In the Middle Ages (AD
500–1500), the bourgeois usually was a self-employed businessman —
proprietor, merchant, banker, entrepreneur, "et alii" — whose economic role
in society was being the financial intermediary to the feudal landlord and the
peasant who worked the fief, the land of the lord. Yet, by the 18th century,
the time of the Industrial revolution (1750–1850) and of industrial
capitalism, the bourgeoisie had become the economic ruling class who owned the
means of production (capital and land), and who controlled the means of
coercion (armed forces and legal system, police forces and prison system). In
such a society, the bourgeoisie’s ownership of the means of production
enabled their employment and exploitation of the wage-earning working class
(urban and rural), people whose sole economic means is labour; and the
bourgeois control of the means of coercion suppressed the socio-political
challenges of the lower classes, and so preserved the economic status quo;
workers remained workers, and employers remained employers. In the 19th
century, the German economist Karl Marx distinguished two types of bourgeois
capitalist: (i) the functional capitalist, the business administrator of the
means of production; and (ii) the rentier capitalist whose livelihood derives
either from the rent of property or from the interest-income produced by
finance capital, or both. In the course of economic relations, the working
class and the bourgeoisie continually engage in class struggle, wherein the
capitalists exploit the workers, whilst the workers resist their economic
exploitation, which occurs because the worker owns no means of production, and,
to earn a living, he or she seeks employment from the bourgeois capitalist; the
worker produces goods and services that are property of the employer, who sells
them for a price. The money generated by the sale of the goods and services
yields three sums (i) the wages of the worker, (ii) the costs of production,
and (iii) profit (surplus value). Thereby, the capitalist profits (makes extra
money) by selling the surplus value of the labour of the workers; hence is new
wealth created through work. Besides describing the social class who own the
means of production, the Marxist usage of the term "bourgeois" also describes
the consumerist style of life derived from the ownership of capital and real
property. As an economist Karl Marx acknowledged the bourgeois industriousness
that created wealth, yet criticised the moral hypocrisy of the bourgeoisie when
they ignored the true origins of their wealth — the exploitation of the
proletariat, the urban and rural workers. Further sense denotations of
“bourgeois” describe ideologic concepts such as “bourgeois freedom”,
which is opposed to substantive forms of freedom; “bourgeois independence”;
“bourgeois personal individuality”; the “bourgeois family”; et cetera,
all derived from owning capital and property. (See: "The Communist Manifesto",
1848) In the 20th century, communist states developed the nomenklatura, a state
bourgeoisie constituted by the bureaucrats who administrated the country’s
government, industry, agriculture, education, system of state capitalism, et
cetera. Modern history. Because of their ascribed cultural excellence as a
social class, the Italian fascist régime (1922–45) of Prime Minister Benito
Mussolini regarded the bourgeoisie as an obstacle to Modernism in aid to
transforming Italian society. Nonetheless, despite such intellectual and social
hostility, the Fascist State ideologically exploited the Italian bourgeoisie
and their materialistic, middle-class spirit, for the more efficient cultural
manipulation of the upper (aristocratic) and the lower (working) classes of
Italy. In 1938, Prime Minister Mussolini gave a speech wherein he established a
clear ideological distinction between capitalism (the social function of the
bourgeoisie) and the bourgeoisie (as a social class), whom he dehumanized by
reducing them into high-level abstractions: a moral category and a state of
mind. Culturally and philosophically, Mussolini isolated the bourgeoisie from
Italian society by portraying them as social parasites upon the Fascist Italian
State and “The People”; as a social class who drained the human potential
of Italian society, in general, and of the working class, in particular; as
exploiters who victimized the Italian nation with an approach to life
characterised by hedonism and materialism. Nevertheless, despite the slogan
"The Fascist Man Disdains the ″Comfortable″ Life", which epitomized the
anti-bourgeois principle, in its final years of power, for mutual benefit and
profit, the Mussolini Fascist régime transcended ideology in order to merge
the political and financial interests of Prime Minister Benito Mussolini with
the political and financial interests of the bourgeoisie, the Catholic social
circles who constituted the ruling class of Italy. The economic security,
financial freedom, and social mobility of the bourgeoisie threatened the
philosophic integrity of Italian Fascism, the ideologic monolith that was the
régime of Prime Minister Benito Mussolini. Any assumption of legitimate
political power (government and rule) by the bourgeoisie represented a Fascist
loss of totalitarian State power for social control through political unity —
one people, one nation, one leader. Sociologically, to the fascist man, to
become a bourgeois was a character flaw inherent to the masculine mystique;
therefore, the ideology of Italian Fascism scornfully defined the bourgeois man
as “spiritually castrated”. Bourgeois culture. Karl Marx said that the
culture of a society is dominated by the mores of the ruling-class, wherein
their superimposed value system is abided by each social class (the upper, the
middle, the lower) regardless of the socio-economic results it yields to them.
In that sense, contemporary societies are bourgeois to the degree that they
practice the mores of the small-business “shop culture” of early modern
France; which the writer Émile Zola (1840–1902) naturalistically presented,
analysed, and ridiculed in the twenty-two-novel series (1871–1893) about "Les
Rougon-Macquart" family; the thematic thrust is the necessity for social
progress, by subordinating the economic sphere to the social sphere of life.
The critical analyses of the bourgeois mentality by the German intellectual
Walter Benjamin (1892–1940) indicated that the shop culture of the petite
bourgeoisie established the sitting room as the centre of personal and family
life; as such, the English bourgeois culture is a sitting-room culture of
prestige through conspicuous consumption. The material culture of the
bourgeoisie concentrated upon mass-produced luxury goods of high quality;
generationally, the only variance was the materials with which the goods were
manufactured. In the early part of the 19th century, the bourgeois house
contained a home that first was stocked and decorated with hand-painted
porcelain, machine-printed cotton fabrics, machine-printed wallpaper, and
Sheffield steel (crucible and stainless), the utility of which was inherent to
its practical functions. Whereas, in the latter part of the 19th century, the
bourgeois house contained a home that had been remodelled by conspicuous
consumption, whereby the goods were bought to display wealth (discretionary
income), rather than for their practical utility. The bourgeoisie had
transposed the wares of the shop window to the sitting room, where the clutter
of display signalled bourgeois success. (See: "Culture and Anarchy", 1869) Two
spatial constructs manifest the bourgeois mentality: (i) the shop-window
display, and (ii) the sitting room. In English, the term “sitting-room
culture” is synonymous for “bourgeois mentality”, a philistine cultural
perspective from the Victorian Era (1837–1901), especially characterised by
the repression of emotion and of sexual desire; and by the construction of an
regulated social-space where “propriety” is the key personality trait
desired in men and women. Nonetheless, from such a psychologically constricted
worldview, regarding the rearing of children, contemporary sociologists claim
to have identified “progressive” middle-class values, such as respect for
non-conformity, self-direction, autonomy, gender equality and the encouragement
of innovation; as in the Victorian Era, the transposition to the U.S. of the
bourgeois system of social values has been identified as a requisite for
employment success in the professions. Beyond the intellectual realms of
political economy, history, and political science that discuss, describe, and
analyse the bourgeoisie as a social class, the colloquial usages of the
sociological terms bourgeois and bourgeoise describe the social stereotypes of
the Old Money and of the "Nouveau riche" man and woman who is a politically
timid conformist satisfied with a wealthy, consumerist style of life
characterised by conspicuous consumption and the continual striving for
prestige. As such, the cultures of the world describe the philistinism of the
middle-class personality, produced by the excessively rich life of the
bourgeoisie, is examined and analysed in comedic and dramatic plays, novels,
and films. (See: Authenticity) "Le Bourgeois gentilhomme" (The Would-be
Gentleman, 1670) by Molière (Jean-Baptiste Poquelin), is a comedy-ballet that
satirizes Monsieur Jourdain, the prototypical nouveau riche man who buys his
way up the social-class scale, in order to realise his aspirations of becoming
a gentleman, to which end he studies dancing, fencing, and philosophy, the
trappings and accomplishments of a gentleman, in order to be able to pose as a
man of noble birth, someone who, in 17th-century France, was a man to the manor
born; Jourdain’s self-transformation also requires managing the private life
of his daughter, so that her marriage can also assist his social ascent.
"Buddenbrooks" (1901), by Thomas Mann (1875–1955), chronicles the moral,
intellectual, and physical decay of a rich family through its declines,
material and spiritual, in the course of four generations, beginning with the
patriarch Johann Buddenbrook Sr. and his son, Johann Buddenbrook Jr., who are
typically successful German businessmen; each is a reasonable man of solid
character. Yet, in the children of Buddenbrook Jr., the materially comfortable
style of life provided by the dedication to solid, middle-class values elicits
decadence: The fickle daughter, Toni, lacks and seeks no purpose in life; son
Christian is honestly decadent, and lives the life of a ne’er-do-well; and
the businessman son, Thomas, who assumes command of the Buddenbrook family
fortune, occasionally falters from middle-class solidity by being interested in
art and philosophy, the impractical life of the mind, which, to the
bourgeoisie, is the epitome of social, moral, and material decadence. "Babbitt"
(1922), by Sinclair Lewis (1885–1951), satirizes the American bourgeois
George Follansbee Babbitt, a middle-aged realtor, booster, and joiner in the
Midwestern city of Zenith, who — despite being unimaginative, self-important,
and hopelessly conformist and middle-class — is aware that there must more to
life than money and the consumption of the best things that money can buy.
Nevertheless, he fears being excluded from the mainstream of society more than
he does living for himself, by being true to himself — thus, his heart-felt
flirtations with independence, dabbling in liberal politics and a love affair
with a pretty widow, come to nought, because he is existentially afraid. The
comedy films by the Spanish film director Luis Buñuel (1900–83) examine the
mental and moral effects of the bourgeois mentality, its culture, and the
stylish way of life it provides for its practitioners. image:
L'Age_d'Or.jpg|"The Golden Age" (1930) image:Discreet charm of the bourgeoisie
poster3.jpg|"The Discreet Charm of the Bourgeoisie" (1972) image:
Obscureobjectdesireposter.jpg|"That Obscure Object of Desire" (1977)
