Brahmana The "Brāhmaṇa"s (Devanagari: ) are part of the Hindu "śruti"
literature. They are commentaries on the four Vedas, detailing the proper
performance of rituals. Each Vedic "shakha" (school) had its own Brahmana, and
it is not known how many of these texts existed during the Mahajanapadas
period. A total of 19 Brahmanas are extant at least in their entirety: two
associated with the Rigveda, six with the Yajurveda, ten with the Samaveda and
one with the Atharvaveda. Additionally, there are a handful of fragmentarily
preserved texts. They vary greatly in length; the edition of the Shatapatha
Brahmana fills five volumes of the "Sacred Books of the East", while the Vamsa
Brahmana can be printed on a single page. The Brahmanas are glosses on the
mythology, philosophy and rituals of the Vedas. Whereas the Rig Veda expressed
uncertainty and was not dogmatic, the Brahmanas express confidence in the
infallible power of the mantras. The Brahmanas hold the view that, if expressed
correctly, the texts will not fail. They were composed during a period of
urbanisation and considerable social change.During the first millennium bce the
people who composed the Veda gradually abandoned their nomadic lifestyle and
began to build. During this time the rituals became more complex, giving rise
to developments in mathematics, geometry, animal anatomy and grammar. The
Brahmanas were seminal in the development of later Indian thought and
scholarship, including Hindu philosophy, predecessors of Vedanta, law,
astronomy, geometry, linguistics (Pāṇini), the concept of Karma, or the
stages in life such as brahmacarya, grihastha and eventually, sannyasi. Some
Brahmanas contain sections that are Aranyakas or Upanishads in their own right.
The language of the Brahmanas is a separate stage of Vedic Sanskrit, younger
than the text of the samhitas (the "mantra" text of the Vedas proper) but for
the most part older than the text of the Sutras. It dates to 900- 700 BC. with
some of the younger Brahmanas (such as the Shatapatha Brahmana) , dating to
about the 6th century BC. Historically, this corresponds to the emergence of
great kingdoms or Mahajanapadas out of the earlier tribal kingdoms during the
later Vedic period.
