Brights movement The Brights movement distinguishes itself from traditional
membership organizations by focusing on the development of a broad public
constituency capable of including members of many narrower categories. For
example: atheists, agnostics, humanists, skeptics, and members of religious
traditions who observe the cultural practices without believing literally in a
deity might all pursue shared civic goals respecting egalitarian laws and a
political discourse informed by the natural sciences. Also, unlike a typical
membership organization, the Brights movement does not appoint individuals
empowered to speak for the whole; individual brights speak for themselves or
speak collectively by proposing statements to which all registered Brights may
join in assent (or not) as they see fit. Instead, the focus is on making
visible to society the largest possible constituency of people who hold a
naturalistic worldview. The noun "bright" was coined by Geisert as a positive-
sounding umbrella term, and Futrell defined it as "an individual whose
worldview is naturalistic (free from supernatural and mystical elements)".
Daniel Dennett has since suggested that people that believe in the supernatural
could choose to be referred to as "supers". As of 2009, the Brights' tagline is
"Illuminating and Elevating the Naturalistic Worldview". History. Paul Geisert
was a biology teacher in Chicago in the 1960s, a professor in the 1970s, an
entrepreneur and writer in the 1980s, and the co-developer of learning
materials and a web site regarding teaching about religion in public schools in
the 1990s. In deciding to attend the "Godless Americans March on Washington" in
2002, Paul disliked the label "godless" and resolved to identify a better term
to unite the "community of reason." He sought a new, positive word that might
become well-accepted, in the same way that the term "gay" has come to mean
"homosexual." In late 2002, Paul coined the noun "bright," but did not announce
it immediately. Working with Mynga Futrell, the co-founders of the Brights
movement wanted to connect and galvanize the many individuals who were non-
religious, but who were not associated with the many philosophical
organisations already in existence. To achieve this they created not only the
definition of "a bright," but also the idea of a civic constituency that would
coalesce through the Internet. Having tested this idea during the early months
of 2003, they launched the Brights' Net website on June 4, 2003. The movement
gained early publicity through articles by Richard Dawkins in "The Guardian"
and "Wired", and by Daniel Dennett in "The New York Times". Within a year,
registered Brights numbered in five figures and spanned 85 nations. The
movement has continued to grow and experienced accelerated registrations
following media debate around "new atheism" prompted by a series of book
releases in late 2006 including "The God Delusion", "", "God Is Not Great",
"The End of Faith", and "Letter to a Christian Nation". As of January 2010 over
50,000 Brights registered from 186 nations. The Brights' Net. The Brights' Net
web site serves as the hub of communication and action projects in the Brights
movement. The Brights' Net recommends project priorities and facilitates the
formation of local groups, known as Brights' Local Constituencies (BLCs). There
are BLCs in London, Paris, several cities in the United States and Canada, and
various other locations worldwide. However, Brights act autonomously in doing
their part for the furtherance of the Brights movement. No person or entity,
including The Brights' Net co-directors, can speak for all Brights. Brights.
Within the definition of "bright", many, but not all, brights also identify
variously under other terms or identities, including atheist, humanist, secular
humanist, freethinker, objectivist, rationalist, naturalist, materialist,
agnostic, skeptic, apatheist, or even naturalistic pantheists or classical
Deists, and so on. Even so, the "movement is not associated with any defined
beliefs," as written on The Brights' Net website. One of the purposes of the
Brights' Net is to include the umbrella term "bright" in the vocabulary of this
existing "community of reason". However, "the broader intent is inclusive of
the many-varied persons whose worldview is naturalistic" but are in the
"general population", as opposed to associating solely with the "community of
reason". So persons who can declare their naturalistic worldview using the term
"bright" extend beyond the familiar secularist categories, as long as they do
not hold theistic worldviews. Registrations even include some members of the
clergy, such as Presbyterian ministers and a Church History Professor and
ordained priest. Gay is succinct, uplifting, positive: an "up" word, where
homosexual is a down word, and queer, faggot and pooftah are insults. Those of
us who subscribe to no religion; those of us whose view of the universe is
natural rather than supernatural; those of us who rejoice in the real and scorn
the false comfort of the unreal, we need a word of our own, a word like "gay".
... Like gay, it should be a noun hijacked from an adjective, with its original
meaning changed but not too much. Like gay, it should be catchy: a potentially
prolific meme. Like gay, it should be positive, warm, cheerful, bright. Despite
the explicit difference between the noun and adjective, there have been
comments on the comparison. In his "Wired" article Dawkins states, "Whether
there is a statistical tendency for brights to be bright [adjective is a matter
for research." Daniel Dennett, in his book "Breaking the Spell", suggests that
if non-naturalists are concerned with this connotation of the word "bright",
then they should invent an equally positive sounding word for themselves, like
"supers" (i.e., one whose worldview contains supernaturalism). Geisert and
Futrell maintain that the neologism has always had a kinship with the
Enlightenment, an era which celebrated science, free inquiry, and a spirit of
skepticism; they have endorsed the use of "super" as the antonym to "bright".
Notable brights include biologists Richard Dawkins and Richard J. Roberts,
cognitive scientist Steven Pinker, philosopher Daniel Dennett, and stage
magicians and debunkers James Randi and Penn & Teller. Other brights include
Amy Alkon, Sheldon Lee Glashow, Babu Gogineni, Edwin Kagin, Mel Lipman,
Piergiorgio Odifreddi, Air America Radio talk show host Lionel and Massimo
Pigliucci. Symbology. The Brights' avatar represents a celestial body viewed
from space. As there is no up or down or right or left in outer space, the
arrangement of planet and darkness and starlight is changeable. Although the
symbol is open to the viewer’s interpretation, it is generally meant to
invoke transition and a sense of gradual illumination. The intentional
ambiguity of avatar is meant to symbolically reflect an important question: Is
the future of humankind becoming luminous or more dim? The Brights “wish to
take the promising route, whereby the imagery brings to mind a gradually
increasing illumination for this earth of ours, an escalation of
enlightenment.”. Criticism. The movement has been criticised by some (both
religious and non-religious) who have objected to the adoption of the title
"bright" because they believe it suggests that the individuals with a
naturalistic worldview are more intelligent ("brighter") than non-naturalists,
such as philosophical skeptics or idealists, believers in the paranormal,
philosophical theists or the religious. For example, the Committee for
Skeptical Inquiry published an article by Chris Mooney titled "Not Too
'Bright'" in which he stated that, although he agreed with the movement,
Richard Dawkins' and Daniel Dennett's "campaign to rename religious unbelievers
'brights' could use some rethinking" because of the possibility that the term
would be misinterpreted. The journalist and noted atheist Christopher Hitchens
likewise found it a "cringe-making proposal that atheists should conceitedly
nominate themselves to be called 'brights.'" Dennett posed the idea that
"super" may serve well as a positive title for those who believe in the
supernatural. He also suggested this during his presentation at the Atheist
Alliance International '07 convention. Similarly, Michael Shermer, who is an
Enthusiastic Bright, has nevertheless resisted using the term to describe
himself, saying, "I don't call myself a 'Bright'.” 'Bright' is also a term
used in 'Star, Bright' a science fiction story by Ross Rocklynne, featured on
the April 10, 1956 episode of radio show 'X-1' that featured humans who
developed vastly superior intellects. 'Brights' is the name they choose for
themselves in the story, while 'Tween' is the term the 'Brights' used for
humans of ordinary intelligence. Whether or not this is known to proponents of
the term currently is unknown but it adds some weight to the suggestion that
the term has a connotation to it that could be seen as superior. Dennett,
Daniel. "Breaking The Spell" (2006). London: Penguin. p.21. Another common
criticism of the Bright movement is that the proposed terminology is
superfluous, being virtually synonymous with already accepted descriptive terms
such as secular humanist, naturalist, and rationalist.
