Politics of the United Kingdom The United Kingdom is governed within the
framework of a constitutional monarchy, in which the Monarch is the head of
state and the Prime Minister of the United Kingdom is the head of government.
Executive power is exercised by Her Majesty's Government, on behalf of and by
the consent of the Monarch, as well as by the devolved Governments of Scotland
and Wales, and the Northern Ireland Executive. Legislative power is vested in
the two chambers of the Parliament of the United Kingdom, the House of Commons
and the House of Lords, as well as in the Scottish parliament and Welsh and
Northern Ireland assemblies. The judiciary is independent of the executive and
the legislature. The highest national court is the Supreme Court of the United
Kingdom. The UK political system is a multi-party system. Since the 1920s, the
two largest political parties have been the Conservative Party and the Labour
Party. Before the Labour Party rose in British politics the Liberal Party was
the other major political party along with the Conservatives. Though coalition
and minority governments have been an occasional feature of parliamentary
politics, the first-past-the-post electoral system used for general elections
tends to maintain the dominance of these two parties, though each has in the
past century relied upon a third party to deliver a working majority in
Parliament. With the partition of Ireland, Northern Ireland received home rule
in 1920, though civil unrest meant direct rule was restored in 1972. Support
for nationalist parties in Scotland and Wales led to proposals for devolution
in the 1970s though only in the 1990s did devolution actually happen. Today,
Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland each possess a legislature and executive,
with devolution in Northern Ireland being conditional on participation in
certain all-Ireland institutions. The United Kingdom remains responsible for
non-devolved matters and, in the case of Northern Ireland, co-operates with the
Republic of Ireland. It is a matter of dispute as to whether increased autonomy
and devolution of executive and legislative powers has contributed to a
reduction in support for independence. The principal pro-independence party,
the Scottish National Party, won an overall majority of MSPs at the 2011
Scottish parliament elections and now forms the Scottish Government
administration, with plans to hold a referendum on negotiating for
independence. In Northern Ireland, the largest Pro-Belfast Agreement party,
Sinn Féin, not only advocates Northern Ireland's unification with the Republic
of Ireland, but also abstains from taking their elected seats in the
Westminster government, as this would entail taking a pledge of allegiance to
the British monarch. The constitution of the United Kingdom is uncodified,
being made up of constitutional conventions, statutes and other elements. This
system of government, known as the "Westminster system", has been adopted by
other countries, especially those that were formerly parts of the British
Empire. The United Kingdom is also responsible for several dependencies, which
fall into two categories: the Crown dependencies, in the immediate vicinity of
the UK, and British Overseas Territories, which originated as colonies of the
British Empire. The Crown. The British Monarch, currently Her Majesty Queen
Elizabeth II is the Chief of State of the United Kingdom. Though she takes
little direct part in government, the Crown remains the fount in which ultimate
executive power over Government lies. These powers are known as Royal
Prerogative and can be used for a vast amount of things, such as the issue or
withdrawal of passports, to the dismissal of the Prime Minister or even the
Declaration of War. The powers are delegated from the Monarch personally, in
the name of the Crown, and can be handed to various ministers, or other
Officers of the Crown, and can purposely bypass the consent of Parliament. The
head of Her Majesty's Government; the Prime Minister, also has weekly meetings
with the sovereign, where she may express her feelings, warn, or advise the
Prime Minister in the Governments work. Domestic Powers Foreign Powers
Executive. Executive power in the United Kingdom is exercised by the Sovereign,
Queen Elizabeth II, via Her Majesty's Government and the devolved national
authorities - the Scottish Government, the Welsh Assembly Government and the
Northern Ireland Executive. The United Kingdom Government. The monarch appoints
a Prime Minister as the head of Her Majesty's Government in the United Kingdom,
guided by the strict convention that the Prime Minister should be the member of
the House of Commons most likely to be able to form a Government with the
support of that House. In practice, this means that the leader of the political
party with an absolute majority of seats in the House of Commons is chosen to
be the Prime Minister. If no party has an absolute majority, the leader of the
largest party is given the first opportunity to form a coalition. The Prime
Minister then selects the other Ministers which make up the Government and act
as political heads of the various Government Departments. About twenty of the
most senior government ministers make up the Cabinet and approximately 100
ministers in total comprise the government. In accordance with constitutional
convention, all ministers within the government are either Members of
Parliament or peers in the House of Lords. As in some other parliamentary
systems of government (especially those based upon the Westminster System), the
executive (called "the government") is drawn from and is answerable to
Parliament - a successful vote of no confidence will force the government
either to resign or to seek a parliamentary dissolution and a general election.
In practice, members of parliament of all major parties are strictly controlled
by whips who try to ensure they vote according to party policy. If the
government has a large majority, then they are very unlikely to lose enough
votes to be unable to pass legislation. The Prime Minister and the Cabinet. The
Prime Minister is the most senior minister in the Cabinet. S/he is responsible
for chairing Cabinet meetings, selecting Cabinet ministers (and all other
positions in Her Majesty's government), and formulating government policy. The
Prime Minister is the de facto leader of the UK government, since s/he
exercises executive functions that are nominally vested in the sovereign (by
way of the Royal Prerogatives). Historically, the British monarch was the sole
source of executive powers in the government. However, following the rule of
the Hanoverian monarchs, an arrangement of a "Prime Minister" chairing and
leading the Cabinet began to emerge. Over time, this arrangement became the
effective executive branch of government, as it assumed the day-to-day
functioning of the British government away from the sovereign. Theoretically,
the Prime Minister is "primus inter pares" (,i.e. Latin for "first among
equals") among his/her Cabinet colleagues. While the Prime Minister is the
senior Cabinet Minister, s/he is theoretically bound to make executive
decisions in a collective fashion with the other Cabinet ministers. The
Cabinet, along with the PM, consists of Secretaries of State from the various
government departments, the Lord High Chancellor, the Lord Privy Seal, the
President of the Board of Trade, the Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster and
Ministers without portfolio. Cabinet meetings are typically held weekly, while
Parliament is in session. Government departments and the Civil Service. The
Government of the United Kingdom contains a number of ministries known mainly,
though not exclusively as departments, e.g., Ministry of Defence. These are
politically led by a Government Minister who is often a Secretary of State and
member of the Cabinet. He or she may also be supported by a number of junior
Ministers. In practice, several government departments and Ministers have
responsibilities that cover England alone, with devolved bodies having
responsibility for Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland, (for example - the
Department of Health), or responsibilities that mainly focus on England (such
as the Department for Education). Implementation of the Minister's decisions is
carried out by a permanent politically neutral organisation known as the civil
service. Its constitutional role is to support the Government of the day
regardless of which political party is in power. Unlike some other democracies,
senior civil servants remain in post upon a change of Government.
Administrative management of the Department is led by a head civil servant
known in most Departments as a Permanent Secretary. The majority of the civil
service staff in fact work in executive agencies, which are separate
operational organisations reporting to Departments of State. "Whitehall" is
often used as a synonym for the central core of the Civil Service. This is
because most Government Departments have headquarters in and around the former
Royal Palace Whitehall. Devolved national administrations. Scottish Government.
The Scottish Government is responsible for all issues that are not explicitly
reserved to the United Kingdom Parliament at Westminster, by the Scotland Act;
including NHS Scotland, education, justice, rural affairs, and transport. It
manages an annual budget of more than £25 billion. The government is led by
the First Minister, assisted by various Ministers with individual portfolios
and remits. The Scottish Parliament nominates a Member to be appointed as First
Minister by the Queen. The First Minister then appoints his Ministers (now
known as Cabinet Secretaries) and junior Ministers, subject to approval by the
Parliament. The First Minister, the Ministers (but not junior ministers), the
Lord Advocate and Solicitor General are the Members of the 'Scottish
Executive', as set out in the Scotland Act 1998. They are collectively known as
"the Scottish Ministers". Welsh Government. The Welsh Government and the
National Assembly for Wales have more limited powers than those devolved to
Scotland, although following the passing of the Government of Wales Act 2006
and the Welsh devolution referendum, 2011, the Assembly can now legislate in
some areas through an Act of the National Assembly for Wales. Following the
2011 election, Welsh Labour held exactly half of the seats in the Assembly,
falling just short of an overall majority. A Welsh Labour Government was
subsequently formed headed by Carwyn Jones. Northern Ireland Executive. The
Northern Ireland Executive and Assembly have powers closer to those already
devolved to Scotland. The Northern Ireland Executive is led by a diarchy,
currently First Minister Peter Robinson (Democratic Unionist Party) and deputy
First Minister Martin McGuinness (Sinn Féin). Legislatures. The UK Parliament
is the supreme legislative body in the United Kingdom (i.e., there is
parliamentary sovereignty), and Government is drawn from and answerable to it.
Parliament is bicameral, consisting of the House of Commons and the House of
Lords. There is also a devolved Scottish Parliament and devolved Assemblies in
Wales and Northern Ireland, with varying degrees of legislative authority. UK
Parliament. House of Commons. The Countries of the United Kingdom are divided
into parliamentary constituencies of broadly equal population by the four
Boundary Commissions. Each constituency elects a Member of Parliament (MP) to
the House of Commons at General Elections and, if required, at by-elections. As
of 2010 there are 650 constituencies (there were 646 before that year's general
election. Of the 650 MPs, all but one - Lady Sylvia Hermon - belong to a
political party. In modern times, all Prime Ministers and Leaders of the
Opposition have been drawn from the Commons, not the Lords. Alec Douglas-Home
resigned from his peerages days after becoming Prime Minister in 1963, and the
last Prime Minister before him from the Lords left in 1902 (the Marquess of
Salisbury). One party usually has a majority in Parliament, because of the use
of the First Past the Post electoral system, which has been conducive in
creating the current two party system. The monarch normally asks a person
commissioned to form a government simply whether it can "survive" in the House
of Commons, something which majority governments are expected to be able to do.
In exceptional circumstances the monarch asks someone to 'form a government'
"with a parliamentary minority" which in the event of no party having a
majority requires the formation of a coalition government. This option is only
ever taken at a time of national emergency, such as war-time. It was given in
1916 to Andrew Bonar Law, and when he declined, to David Lloyd George and in
1940 to Winston Churchill. A government is not formed by a vote of the House of
Commons, it is a commission from the monarch. The House of Commons gets its
first chance to indicate confidence in the new government when it votes on the
Speech from the Throne (the legislative programme proposed by the new
government). House of Lords. The House of Lords was previously a largely
hereditary aristocratic chamber, although including life peers, and Lords
Spiritual. It is currently mid-way through extensive reforms, the most recent
of these being enacted in the House of Lords Act 1999. The house consists of
two very different types of member, the Lords Temporal and Lords Spiritual.
Lords Temporal include appointed members (life peers with no hereditary right
for their descendants to sit in the house) and ninety-two remaining hereditary
peers, elected from among, and by, the holders of titles which previously gave
a seat in the House of Lords. The Lords Spiritual represent the established
Church of England and number twenty-six: the Five Ancient Sees (Canterbury,
York, London, Winchester and Durham), and the 21 next-most senior bishops. The
House of Lords currently acts to review legislation initiated by the House of
Commons, with the power to propose amendments, and can exercise a suspensive
veto. This allows it to delay legislation if it does not approve it for twelve
months. However, the use of vetoes is limited by convention and by the
operation of the Parliament Acts 1911 and 1949: the Lords may not veto the
"money bills" or major manifesto promises (see Salisbury convention).
Persistent use of the veto can also be overturned by the Commons, under a
provision of the Parliament Act 1911. Often governments will accept changes in
legislation in order to avoid both the time delay, and the negative publicity
of being seen to clash with the Lords. However the Lords still retain a full
veto in acts which would extend the life of Parliament beyond the 5 year term
limit introduced by the Parliament Act 1911. The Constitutional Reform Act 2005
outlined plans for a Supreme Court of the United Kingdom to replace the role of
the Law Lords. The House of Lords was replaced as the final court of appeal on
civil cases within the United Kingdom on 1 October 2009, by the Supreme Court
of the United Kingdom. Devolved national legislatures. Though the UK parliament
remains the sovereign parliament, Scotland has a parliament and Wales and
Northern Ireland have assemblies. De jure, each could have its powers
broadened, narrowed or changed by an Act of the UK Parliament. However,
Scotland has a tradition of popular sovereignty as opposed to parliamentary
sovereignty and the fact that the Scottish parliament was established following
a referendum would make it politically difficult to significantly alter its
powers without popular consent. The UK is therefore a unitary state with a
devolved system of government. This contrasts with a federal system, in which
sub-parliaments or state parliaments and assemblies have a clearly defined
constitutional "right" to exist and a "right" to exercise certain
constitutionally guaranteed and defined functions and cannot be unilaterally
abolished by Acts of the central parliament. All three devolved institutions
are elected by proportional representation: the Additional Member System is
used in Scotland and Wales, and Single Transferable Vote is used in Northern
Ireland. England, therefore, is the only country in the UK not to have a
devolved English parliament. However, senior politicians of all main parties
have voiced concerns in regard to the West Lothian Question, which is raised
where certain policies for England are set by MPs from all four constituent
nations whereas similar policies for Scotland or Wales might be decided in the
devolved assemblies by legislators from those countries alone. Alternative
proposals for English regional government have stalled, following a poorly
received referendum on devolved government for the North East of England, which
had hitherto been considered the region most in favour of the idea, with the
exception of Cornwall, where there is widespread support for a Cornish
Assembly, including all five Cornish MPs. England is therefore governed
according to the balance of parties across the whole of the United Kingdom. The
government has no plans to establish an English parliament or assembly although
several pressure groups are calling for one. One of their main arguments is
that MPs (and thus voters) from different parts of the UK have inconsistent
powers. Currently an MP from Scotland can vote on legislation which affects
only England but MPs from England (or indeed Scotland) cannot vote on matters
devolved to the Scottish parliament. Indeed, the former Prime Minister Gordon
Brown, who is an MP for a Scottish constituency, introduced some laws that only
affect England and not his own constituency. This anomaly is known as the West
Lothian question. The policy of the UK Government in England was to establish
elected regional assemblies with no legislative powers. The London Assembly was
the first of these, established in 2000, following a referendum in 1998, but
further plans were abandoned following rejection of a proposal for an elected
assembly in North East England in a referendum in 2004. Unelected regional
assemblies remain in place in eight regions of England. Scottish Parliament.
The Scottish Parliament is the national, unicameral legislature of Scotland,
located in the Holyrood area of the capital Edinburgh. The Parliament,
informally referred to as "Holyrood" (cf. "Westminster"), is a democratically
elected body comprising 129 members who are known as Members of the Scottish
Parliament, or MSPs. Members are elected for four-year terms under the mixed
member proportional representation system. As a result, 73 MSPs represent
individual geographical constituencies elected by the plurality ("first past
the post") system, with a further 56 returned from eight additional member
regions, each electing seven MSPs. The current Scottish Parliament was
established by the Scotland Act 1998 and its first meeting as a devolved
legislature was on 12 May 1999. The parliament has the power to pass laws and
has limited tax-varying capability. Another of its roles is to hold the
Scottish Government to account. The "devolved matters" over which it has
responsibility include education, health, agriculture, and justice. A degree of
domestic authority, and all foreign policy, remains with the UK Parliament in
Westminster. The public take part in Parliament in a way that is not the case
at Westminster through Cross-Party Groups on policy topics which the interested
public join and attend meetings of alongside Members of the Scottish Parliament
(MSPs). The resurgence in Celtic language and identity, as well as 'regional'
politics and development, has contributed to forces pulling against the unity
of the state. This was clearly demonstrated when - although some argue it was
influenced by general public dillusionment with Labour - the Scottish National
Party (SNP) became the largest party in the Scottish Parliament by one seat.
Alex Salmond (leader of SNP) has since made history by becoming the first First
Minister of Scotland from a party other than Labour. The SNP govern as a
minority administration at Holyrood. Nevertheless, recent opinion polls have
suggested that nationalism (i.e., a desire to break up the UK) is rising within
Scotland and England. However, the polls have been known to be inaccurate in
the past (for example, in the run up to the 1992 General Election). Moreover,
polls carried out in the 1970s and the 1990s showed similar results, only to be
debunked at elections. While support for breaking up the UK was strongest in
Scotland, there was still a clear lead for unionism over nationalism. However,
an opinion poll in April 2008 suggested the result of any referendum on
Scottish independence could be close as support for independence had reached
41% with just 40% supporting retention of the Union. Welsh Assembly. The
National Assembly for Wales is the devolved assembly with power to make
legislation in Wales. The Assembly comprises 60 members, who are known as
Assembly Members, or AMs (). Members are elected for four-year terms under an
additional members system, where 40 AMs represent geographical constituencies
elected by the plurality system, and 20 AMs from five electoral regions using
the d'Hondt method of proportional representation. The Assembly was created by
the Government of Wales Act 1998, which followed a referendum in 1997. On its
creation, most of the powers of the Welsh Office and Secretary of State for
Wales were transferred to it. The Assembly had no powers to initiate primary
legislation until limited law-making powers were gained through the Government
of Wales Act 2006. Its primary law-making powers were enhanced following a Yes
vote in the referendum on 3 March 2011, making it possible for it to legislate
without having to consult the UK parliament, nor the Secretary of State for
Wales in the 20 areas that are devolved. Northern Ireland assembly. The
government of Northern Ireland was established as a result of the 1998 Good
Friday Agreement. This created the Northern Ireland Assembly. The Assembly is a
unicameral body consisting of 108 members elected under the Single Transferable
Vote form of proportional representation. The Assembly is based on the
principle of power-sharing, in order to ensure that both communities in
Northern Ireland, unionist and nationalist, participate in governing the
region. It has power to legislate in a wide range of areas and to elect the
Northern Ireland Executive (cabinet). It sits at Parliament Buildings at
Stormont in Belfast. The Assembly has authority to legislate in a field of
competences known as "transferred matters". These matters are not explicitly
enumerated in the Northern Ireland Act 1998 but instead include any competence
not explicitly retained by the Parliament at Westminster. Powers reserved by
Westminster are divided into "excepted matters", which it retains indefinitely,
and "reserved matters", which may be transferred to the competence of the
Northern Ireland Assembly at a future date. Health, criminal law and education
are "transferred" while royal relations are all "excepted". While the Assembly
was in suspension, due to issues involving the main parties and the Provisional
Irish Republican Army (IRA), its legislative powers were exercised by the UK
government, which effectively had power to legislate by decree. Laws that would
normally be within the competence of the Assembly were passed by the UK
government in the form of Orders-in-Council rather than legislative acts. There
has been a significant decrease in violence over the last twenty years, though
the situation remains tense, with the more hard-line parties such as Sinn Féin
and the Democratic Unionist Party now holding the most parliamentary seats (see
Demographics and politics of Northern Ireland). Judiciary. The United Kingdom
does not have a single legal system due to it being created by the political
union of previously independent countries with the terms of the Treaty of Union
guaranteeing the continued existence of Scotland's separate legal system. Today
the UK has three distinct systems of law: English law, Northern Ireland law and
Scots law. Recent constitutional changes saw a new Supreme Court of the United
Kingdom come into being in October 2009 that took on the appeal functions of
the Appellate Committee of the House of Lords. The Judicial Committee of the
Privy Council, comprising the same members as the Supreme Court, is the highest
court of appeal for several independent Commonwealth countries, the UK overseas
territories, and the British crown dependencies. England, Wales and Northern
Ireland. Both English law, which applies in England and Wales, and Northern
Ireland law are based on common-law principles. The essence of common-law is
that law is made by judges sitting in courts, applying their common sense and
knowledge of legal precedent ("stare decisis") to the facts before them. The
Courts of England and Wales are headed by the Senior Courts of England and
Wales, consisting of the Court of Appeal, the High Court of Justice (for civil
cases) and the Crown Court (for criminal cases). The Supreme Court of the
United Kingdom is the highest court in the land for both criminal and civil
cases in England, Wales, and Northern Ireland and any decision it makes is
binding on every other court in the hierarchy. Scotland. Scots law, a hybrid
system based on both common-law and civil-law principles, applies in Scotland.
The chief courts are the Court of Session, for civil cases, and the High Court
of Justiciary, for criminal cases. The Supreme Court of the United Kingdom
serves as the highest court of appeal for civil cases under Scots law. Sheriff
courts deal with most civil and criminal cases including conducting criminal
trials with a jury, known that as Sheriff solemn Court, or with a Sheriff and
no jury, known as (Sheriff summary Court). The Sheriff courts provide a local
court service with 49 Sheriff courts organised across six Sheriffdoms.
Electoral systems. The use of the first-past-the-post to elect members of
Parliament is unusual among European nations. The use of the system means that
MPs are sometimes elected from individual constituencies with a plurality
(receiving more votes than any other candidate, but not an absolute majority of
50 percent plus one vote), due to three or more candidates receiving a
significant share of the vote. Elections and political parties in the United
Kingdom are affected by Duverger's law, the political science principle which
states that plurality voting systems, such as first-past-the-post, tend to lead
to the development of two-party systems. The UK, like several other states, has
sometimes been called a "two-and-a-half" party system, because parliamentary
politics is dominated by the Labour Party and Conservative Party, with the
Liberal Democrats holding a significant number of seats (but still
substantially less than Labour and the Conservatives), and several small
parties (some of them regional or nationalist) trailing far behind in number of
seats. In the last few general elections, voter mandates for Westminster in the
40% ranges have been swung into 60% parliamentary majorities. No single party
has won a majority of the popular vote since the Third National Government of
Stanley Baldwin in 1935. On two occasions since World War II - 1951 and
February 1974 - a party that came in second in the popular vote actually came
out with the larger number of seats. Electoral reform for parliamentary
elections have been proposed many times. The Jenkins Commission report in
October 1998 suggested implementing the Alternative Vote Top-up (also called
Alternative Vote Plus or AV+) in parliamentary elections. Under this proposal,
most MPs would be directly elected from constituencies by the alternative vote,
with a number of additional members elected from "top-up lists." However, no
action was taken by the Labour government and the time. There are a number of
groups in the UK campaigning for electoral reform, including the Electoral
Reform Society, Make Votes Count Coalition and Fairshare. The 2010 general
election resulted in a hung parliament (no single party being able to command a
majority in the House of Commons). This was only the second general election
since World War II to return a hung parliament, the first being the February
1974 election. The Conservatives gained the most seats (ending 13 years of
Labour government) and the largest percentage of the popular vote, but fell 20
seats short of a majority. The Conservatives and Liberal Democrats entered into
a new coalition government, headed by David Cameron. Under the terms of the
coalition agreement the government committed itself to hold a referendum in May
2011 on whether to change parliamentary elections from first-past-the-post to
AV. Electoral reform was a majority priority for the Liberal Democrats, who
favour proportional representation but were able to negotiate only a referendum
on AV with the Conservatives. The coalition partners plan to campaign on
opposite sides, with the Liberal Democrats supporting AV and the Conservatives
opposing it. Voter turnout in the 2010 general election with 65 percent.
Political parties. Three parties currently dominate the national political
landscape in Britain: the Conservative Party, the Labour Party, and the Liberal
Democrats. The modern Conservative Party was founded in 1834 and is an
outgrowth of the Tory movement or party, which began in 1678. Today it is still
colloquially referred to as the Tory Party and its members as "Tories". The
Liberal Democrats were formed in 1988 by a merger of the Liberal Party and the
Social Democratic Party (SDP), a Labour breakaway formed in 1981. The Liberals
and SDP had contested elections together as the SDP–Liberal Alliance for
seven years before. The modern Liberal Party had been founded in 1859 as an
outgrowth of the Whig movement or party (which began at the same time as the
Tory party and was its historical rival) as well as the Radical and Peelite
tendencies. The Liberal Party was one of the two dominant parties (along with
the Conservatives) from its founding until the 1920s, when it rapidly declined
and was supplanted on the left by the Labour Party, which was founded in 1900
and formed its first government in 1924. Since that time, the Labour and
Conservatives parties have been dominant, with the Liberal Democrats also
holding a significant number of seats and increasing their share of the vote in
parliamentary general elections in the four elections 1992. In the most recent
general election in 2010, the result amounted to a hung parliament, and after
several days of negotiations, the Labour Party left the government with the
Conservatives and the Liberal Democrats operating a coalition government.
Conservatives (Tories). The Conservative Party won the largest number of seats
at the 2010 general election, returning 307 MPs, though not enough to make an
overall majority. As a result of negotiations following the election, they
entered a formal coalition with the Liberal Democrats to form a majority
government. The Conservative party can trace its origin back to 1662, with the
Court Party and the Country Party being formed in the aftermath of the English
Civil War. The Court Party soon became known as the Tories, a name that has
stuck despite the official name being 'Conservative'. The term "Tory"
originates from the Exclusion Bill crisis of 1678-1681 - the Whigs were those
who supported the exclusion of the Roman Catholic Duke of York from the thrones
of England, Ireland and Scotland, and the Tories were those who opposed it.
Both names were originally insults: a "whiggamore" was a horse drover (See
Whiggamore Raid), and a "tory" ("Tóraidhe") was an Irish term for an outlaw,
later applied to Irish Confederates and Irish Royalists, during the Wars of the
Three Kingdoms. Generally, the Tories were associated with lesser gentry and
the Church of England, while Whigs were more associated with trade, money,
larger land holders (or "land magnates"), expansion and tolerance of
Catholicism. The Rochdale Radicals were a group of more extreme reformists who
were also heavily involved in the cooperative movement. They sought to bring
about a more equal society, and are considered by modern standards to be left-
wing. After becoming associated with repression of popular discontent in the
years after 1815, the Tories underwent a fundamental transformation under the
influence of Robert Peel, himself an industrialist rather than a landowner, who
in his 1834 "Tamworth Manifesto" outlined a new "Conservative" philosophy of
reforming ills while conserving the good. Though Peel's supporters subsequently
split from their colleagues over the issue of free trade in 1846, ultimately
joining the Whigs and the Radicals to form what would become the Liberal Party,
Peel's version of the party's underlying outlook was retained by the remaining
Tories, who adopted his label of Conservative as the official name of their
party. The crushing defeat of the 1997 election saw the Conservative Party lose
over half their seats from 1992 and saw the party re-align with public
perceptions of them. In 2008, the Conservative Party formed a pact with the
Ulster Unionist Party to select joint candidates for European and House of
Commons elections; this angered the DUP as by splitting the Unionist vote,
republican parties will be elected in some areas. After thirteen years as the
official opposition, the Party returned to power as part of a coalition with
the Liberal Democrats in 2010. Historically, the party has been the mainland
party most pre-occupied by British Unionism, as attested to by the party's full
name, the Conservative & Unionist Party. This resulted in the merger between
the Conservatives and Joseph Chamberlain's Liberal Unionist Party, composed of
former Liberals who opposed Irish home rule. The unionist tendency is still in
evidence today, manifesting sometimes as a scepticism or opposition to
devolution, firm support for the continued existence of the United Kingdom in
the face of separatist nationalism, and a historic link with the cultural
unionism of Northern Ireland. Labour. The Labour Party won the second largest
number of seats in the House of Commons at the 2010 general election, with 258
MPs. The history of the Labour party goes back to 1900 when a Labour
Representation Committee was established which changed its name to "­­The
Labour Party" in 1906. After the First World War, this led to the demise of the
Liberal Party as the main reformist force in British politics. The existence of
the Labour Party on the left of British politics led to a slow waning of energy
from the Liberal Party, which has consequently assumed third place in national
politics. After performing poorly in the elections of 1922, 1923 and 1924, the
Liberal Party was superseded by the Labour Party as the party of the left.
Following two brief spells in minority governments in 1924 and 1929–1931, the
Labour Party had its first true victory after World War II in the 1945 "khaki
election". Throughout the rest of the twentieth century, Labour governments
alternated with Conservative governments. The Labour Party suffered the
"wilderness years" of 1951-1964 (three straight General Election defeats) and
1979-1997 (four straight General Election defeats). During this second period,
Margaret Thatcher, who became leader of the Conservative party in 1975, made a
fundamental change to Conservative policies, turning the Conservative Party
into an economic neoliberal party. In the General Election of 1979 she defeated
James Callaghan's troubled Labour government after the winter of discontent.
For most of the 1980s and the 1990s, Conservative governments under Thatcher
and her successor John Major pursued policies of privatization, anti-trade-
unionism, and, for a time, monetarism, now known collectively as Thatcherism.
The Labour Party elected left-winger Michael Foot as their leader after their
1979 election defeat, and he responded to dissatisfaction with the Labour Party
by pursuing a number of radical policies developed by its grass-roots members.
In 1981 several right-wing Labour MPs formed a breakaway group called the
Social Democratic Party (SDP), a move which split Labour and is widely believed
to have made Labour unelectable for a decade. The SDP formed an alliance with
the Liberal Party which contested the 1983 and 1987 general elections as a
centrist alternative to Labour and the Conservatives. After some initial
success, the SDP did not prosper (partly due to its unfavourable distribution
of votes in the FPTP electoral system), and was accused by some of splitting
the anti-Conservative vote. The SDP eventually merged with the Liberal Party to
form the Liberal Democrats in 1988. Support for the new party has increased
since then, and the Liberal Democrats (often referred to as LibDems) in 1997
and 2001 gained an increased number of seats in the House of Commons. The
Labour Party was badly defeated in the Conservative landslide of the 1983
general election, and Michael Foot was replaced shortly thereafter by Neil
Kinnock as leader. Kinnock expelled the far left Militant tendency group (now
called the Socialist Party of England and Wales) and moderated many of the
party's policies. Yet he was in turn replaced by John Smith after Labour
defeats in the 1987 and 1992 general elections. Tony Blair became leader of the
Labour party after John Smith's sudden death from a heart attack in 1994. He
continued to move the Labour Party towards the 'centre' by loosening links with
the unions and embracing many of Margaret Thatcher's liberal economic policies.
This, coupled with the professionalising of the party machine's approach to the
media, helped Labour win a historic landslide in the 1997 General Election,
after 18 years of Conservative government. Some observers say the Labour Party
had by then morphed from a democratic socialist party to a social democratic
party, a process which delivered three general election victories but alienated
some of its core base. Liberal Democrats. The Liberal Democrats won the third
largest number of seats at the 2010 general election, returning 57 MPs. The
Conservative Party failed to win an overall majority, and the Liberal Democrats
entered government for the first time as part of a coalition. The Liberal
Democrats were formed in 1988 by a merger of the Liberal Party with the Social
Democratic Party, but can trace their origin back to the Whigs and the Rochdale
Radicals who evolved into the Liberal Party. The term 'Liberal Party' was first
used officially in 1868, though it had been in use colloquially for decades
beforehand. The Liberal Party formed a government in 1868 and then alternated
with the Conservative Party as the party of government throughout the late 19th
century and early 20th century. The Liberal Democrats are heavily a party on
Constitutional and Political Reforms, including changing the voting system for
General Elections (UK Alternative Vote referendum, 2011), abolishing the House
of Lords and replacing it with an 300 member elected Senate, introducing Fixed
Five Year Parliaments, and introducing a National Register of Lobbyists. Some
members have been described as obsessed with House of Lords Reform, including
the party's leader, Nick Clegg. Scottish and Welsh Nationalists. Members of the
Scottish National Party and Plaid Cymru work together as a single parliamentary
group following a formal pact signed in 1986. This group currently has 9 MPs.
The Scottish National Party has enjoyed parliamentary representation
continuously since 1967 and had 6 MPs elected at the 2010 election. Following
the 2007 Scottish parliament elections, the SNP emerged as the largest party
with 47 MSPs and formed a minority government with Alex Salmond the First
Minister. After the 2011 Scottish election, the SNP won enough seats to form a
majority government. Plaid Cymru has enjoyed parliamentary representation
continuously since 1974 and had 3 MPs elected at the 2010 election. Following
the 2007 Welsh Assembly elections, they joined Labour as the junior partner in
a coalition government, but have fallen down to the third largest party in the
Assembly after the 2011 Assembly elections, and become an opposition party.
Northern Ireland parties. The Democratic Unionist Party had 8 MPs elected at
the 2010 election. Founded in 1971 by Ian Paisley, it has grown to become the
larger of the two main unionist political parties in Northern Ireland. Other
Northern Ireland parties represented at Westminster include the Social
Democratic and Labour Party (3 MPs), the Alliance Party of Northern Ireland (1
MP) and Sinn Féin (5 MPs). Sinn Féin MPs refuse to take their seats and sit
in a 'foreign' parliament. Other parliamentary parties. The Green Party of
England and Wales gained its second MP, Caroline Lucas, in the 2010 General
Election (the first MP was Cynog Dafis, Ceredigion 1992 who was elected on a
joint Plaid Cyru/Green Party ticket). It also has seats in the European
Parliament, two seats on the London Assembly and around 120 local councillors.
The Respect party, a left-wing group that came out of the anti-war movement has
one MP, George Galloway. It also has a small number of seats on local councils
across the country. Non-Parliamentary political parties. Other UK political
parties exist, but generally do not succeed in returning MPs to Parliament. The
United Kingdom Independence Party (UKIP) has 13 seats in the European
Parliament as well as seats in the House of Lords and a number of local
councillors. On 22 April 2008 it welcomed the defection of Bob Spink MP for
Castle Point, to date its only MP. However, Bob Spink later claimed to have
never joined UKIP and does not sit as a UKIP MP. Two UKIP members were elected
to the London Assembly in 2000, but they quit the party in February 2005 to
join Veritas which they quit in September 2005 to sit as One London members.
They were not re-elected in 2008. The Scottish Green Party has 2 MSPs in the
Scottish Parliament and a number of local councillors. The Green Party
(Ireland) has one MLAs in the Northern Ireland Assembly as well as local
councillors. The British National Party (BNP) has two seats in the European
Parliament, a seat on the London Assembly as well as a number of councillors.
The English Democrats, which wants a parliament for England, has some local
councillors and had its candidate elected mayor of Doncaster in 2009. Other
parties include: the Free England Party, the Communist Party of Britain, the
Socialist Party (England and Wales), the Socialist Workers Party, the Scottish
Socialist Party, the Liberal Party, Mebyon Kernow (a Cornish nationalist party)
in Cornwall, Veritas,the Communist Left Alliance (in Fife) and the Pirate Party
UK Several local parties contest only within a specific area, a single county,
borough or district. Examples include the Better Bedford Independent Party,
which was one of the dominant parties in Bedford Borough Council and led by
Bedford's former Mayor, Frank Branston. The most notable local party is Health
Concern, which controlled a single seat in the UK Parliament from 2001 to 2010.
The Jury Team, launched in March 2009 and described as a "non-party party", is
an umbrella organisation seeking to increase the number of independent members
of both domestic and European members of Parliament in Great Britain. The
Official Monster Raving Loony Party was founded in 1983. The OMRLP are
distinguished by having a deliberately bizarre manifesto, which contains things
that seem to be impossible or too absurd to implement – usually to highlight
what they see as real-life absurdities. In spite of (or perhaps because of) a
reputation more satirical than serious, they have routinely been successful in
local elections. Current political landscape. Since the 2005 General Election,
each of the main political parties has changed party leader: David Cameron was
elected leader of the Conservatives in 2005, Gordon Brown was elected unopposed
to lead the Labour Party (and therefore become Prime Minister) in June 2007,
and Nick Clegg was elected leader of the Liberal Democrats in December 2007.
The Conservatives under David Cameron have seen their popularity grow, as shown
by their success at the Local Elections in May 2008, the London Mayoral
Election and opinion polls which show a strong lead over Labour. They also won
a by election in Crewe and Nantwich with a swing of 17.6%. In Scotland, the
Scottish National Party made some strong advances, winning the Scottish
parliamentary election in May 2007 and gaining support in most national opinion
polls since then. In July 2008, the SNP achieved a remarkable by-election
victory in Glasgow East, winning the third safest Labour seat in Scotland with
a swing of 22.54%. However, in October of the same year, despite confident
public predictions by the SNP's leader Alex Salmond that they would win another
by-election in Glenrothes, the seat was comfortably won by Labour with a
majority of 6,737 and an increased share of the vote. Given that the SNP won
the equivalent Scottish Parliament seat of Central Fife in 2007 this was viewed
as a significant step back for the SNP. More recently, the SNP significantly
out-polled the Labour Party in the 2009 European election. Local government.
The UK is divided into a variety of different types of Local Authorities, with
different functions and responsibilities. England has a mix of two-tier and
single-tier councils in different parts of the country. In Greater London, a
unique two-tier system exists, with power shared between the London borough
councils, and the Greater London Authority which is headed by an elected mayor.
Unitary Authorities are used throughout Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland.
European Union. The United Kingdom first joined the European Economic Community
in January 1973, and has remained a member of the European Union (EU) that it
evolved into; UK citizens, and other EU citizens resident in the UK, elect 78
members to represent them in the European Parliament in Brussels and
Strasbourg. The UK's membership in the Union has been objected to over
questions of sovereignty, and in recent years there have been divisions in both
major parties over whether the UK should form greater ties within the EU, or
reduce the EU's supranational powers. Opponents of greater European integration
are known as "Eurosceptics", while supporters are known as "Europhiles".
Division over Europe is prevalent in both major parties, although the
Conservative Party is seen as most divided over the issue, both whilst in
Government up to 1997 and after 2010, and between those dates as the
opposition. However, the Labour Party is also divided, with conflicting views
over UK adoption of the euro whilst in Government (1997–2010), although the
party is largely in favour of further integration where in the country's
interest. UK nationalists have long campaigned against European integration.
The strong showing of the eurosceptic United Kingdom Independence Party (UKIP)
in the 2004 European Parliament elections has shifted the debate over UK
relations with the EU. In March 2008, Parliament decided to not hold a
referendum on the ratification of the Treaty of Lisbon, signed in December
2007. This was despite the Labour government promising in 2004 to hold a
referendum on the previously proposed Constitution for Europe.
