Brown Berets (Watsonville) The Brown Berets are a race based political
extremist youth organization and secret society based in Watsonville,
California modeled after the Brown Berets of the Civil Rights Movement. An
excerpt from their website states, "we serve as a community defense force
acting for the liberation and amelioration of our barrios". Their beliefs are
anti-military, anti-police, and anti-border patrol. Their members are
encouraged to study the Black Panthers and American Militant Resistance.. Brown
Beret member and former Watsonville Mayor Oscar Rios was quoted in an interview
as saying,"It (California) belonged to us, Mexico, 1848. It was taken away
okay, so it's no surprise we're taking it back slowly but surely." Background.
On April 6, 1994 a group of Chicano students from Watsonville, inspired by the
legacy of the Mexican nationalist-tinged community activism of the original
Brown Berets, decided to resurrect the movement. They felt that similar
conditions existed there in 1994 that had existed in 1967, and wanted to
respond to the gang-related murders of 9-year-old Jessica Cortez and her 16-
year-old brother, George. In order to address the increasing gang violence, the
Watsonville Brown Berets organized an annual march that passed through all the
different barrios of Watsonville in order to bring the message of "Peace and
Unity." In doing this, the Brown Berets believed that young people involved in
gangs could redirect that energy into more constructive avenues — cultural
awareness and social-political activism leading to grassroots local change.
Since then, the group has established firm relations with other left-wing
community organizations such as Students Against War (UCSC), Barrios Unidos,
and the Resource Center for Non-Violence of Santa Cruz. In 2004, the
Watsonville Brown Berets opened "Liberation School", which provides tutoring
and career guidance as well as an extensive revolutionary library. Watsonville
city councilman and Brown Beret member Oscar Rios claimed, “The Watsonville
Brown Berets have been one of the strongest youth organizations in this
community and have led by example by providing our young people with
constructive alternatives and the tools to make progressive change.” On May
27, 2005, the Watsonville Brown Berets organized their fourth annual "Youth and
Power" event, which took place at the Vets Hall in Watsonville. Over 400 young
people were in attendance. The event featured counter-military recruitment
activist Fernando Suarez del Solar. Over 20 organizations hosted information
tables providing literature about college opportunities as well as political,
community and environmental activism. “It is events like this that empower
our young people and remind them that their voice is a powerful weapon,” said
Brown Beret member Jennifer Laskin.
