Bullionism Bullionism is an economic theory that defines wealth by the amount
of precious metals owned. Bullionism is an early or primitive form of
mercantilism. It was derived, in the 16th century, from the observation that
the English state possessed large amounts of gold and silver, in spite of the
fact that there was no mining of precious metals on English soil, because of
its large trade surplus. Examples of bullionists. Thomas Milles (1550-1627) and
others recommended increasing exports in order to get a trade surplus,
converting it into precious metals and hindering the drain of money and
precious metal to other countries. Although England practised the interdiction
of exportation of £ or precious metals at about 1600, Milles desired to return
to staple ports in order to force merchants from abroad to use their assets to
buy English goods and to prevent them from transferring gold or silver from
England homewards. But Milles may have been viewed as one who did not have any
valuable words to say on the subject, as one of his contemporaries wrote:
“…Milles was so much out of step with the time that his pamphlets had
little influence...” Gerard de Malynes (1586 - 1641), another bullionist,
published a book, called "A Treatise of the Canker of England's Common Wealth",
in which he asserted that the exchange of foreign currency had been a trade of
value rather than exchanging the weight of metals. Therefore the unfair
exchanging of precious metals by bankers and money changers, would result in
the deficit of English balance of trade. In order to ban the flow of exchange
rates, he demanded the strict fixing of exchange rates for coins, only by the
concentration of precious metals and weights and for strict regulation and
monitoring of foreign trade. But de Malynes did not convince his contemporaries
“…that the cambists were responsible for gold outflow or to elicit
enthusiasm for a monopoly sale of exchange, par pro pari, by the royal
exchanger…" But he succeeded in creating the first economic controversy:
Edward Misselden opposed him 1623 in his book "The Circle of Commerce: Or, the
Balance of Trade".
