Bureaucracy A bureaucracy is a group of specifically non-elected officials
within a government or other institution that implements the rules, laws,
ideas, and functions of their institution ROBERT K. MERTON emphasized its red
tape and inefficiency due to blind conformity to procedures. More recent
theories have stressed the role of managerial cliques, occupational interest
groups, or individual power-seekers in creating politicized organizations
characterized by internal conflict. In other words, a government administration
should carries out the decisions of the legislature or democratically-elected
representation of a state but not their own institution. Bureaucracy may also
be defined as a form of government: "government by many bureaus,
administrators, and petty officials. A government is defined as: "the political
direction and control exercised over the actions of the members, citizens, or
inhabitants of communities, societies, and states; direction of the affairs of
a state, community, etc." On the other hand democracy is defined as:
"government by the people; a form of government in which the supreme power is
vested in the people and exercised directly by them or by their elected agents
under a free electoral system", thus not by non-elected bureaucrats. Term
"bureaucracy" was created from words: fr. bureau – desk or office and gr.
κράτος "kratos" – rule or political power. Development. Bureaucracies
date back to ancient societies across the globe. Modern world. Weberian
bureaucracy. Weberian bureaucracy has its origin in the works by Max Weber
(1864-1920), a notable German sociologist, political economist, and
administrative scholar who contributed to the study of bureaucracy and
administrative discourses and literatures during the late 1800s and early
1900s. Max Weber belongs to the Scientific School of Thought, who discussed
such topics as specialization of job-scope, merit system, uniform principles,
structure and hierarchy. His contemporaries include Frederick Taylor (1856-
1915), Henri Fayol (1841-1925), Elton Mayo (1880-1949), and later scholars,
such as Herbert A. Simon (1916-2001), Dwight Waldo (1913-2000), and others.
Weber described many ideal types of public administration and government in his
magnum opus "Economy and Society" (1922). His critical study of the
bureaucratisation of society became one of the most enduring parts of his work.
It was Weber who began the studies of bureaucracy and whose works led to the
popularization of this term. Many aspects of modern public administration go
back to him, and a classic, hierarchically organized civil service of the
Continental type is called "Weberian civil service". As the most efficient and
rational way of organizing, bureaucratization for Weber was the key part of the
rational-legal authority, and furthermore, he saw it as the key process in the
ongoing rationalization of the Western society. Weber listed several
precondititions for the emergence of bureaucracy. The growth in space and
population being administered, the growth in complexity of the administrative
tasks being carried out, and the existence of a monetary economy requires a
more efficient administrative system. Development of communication and
transportation technologies makes more efficient administration possible but
also in popular demand, and democratization and rationalization of culture
resulted in demands that the new system treats everybody equally. Weber's ideal
bureaucracy is characterized by hierarchical organization, delineated lines of
authority in a fixed area of activity, action taken on the basis of and
recorded in written rules, bureaucratic officials need expert training, rules
are implemented by neutral officials, career advancement depends on technical
qualifications judged by organization, not individuals. While recognizing
bureaucracy as the most efficient form of organization, and even indispensable
for the modern state, Weber also saw it as a threat to individual freedoms, and
the ongoing bureaucratization as leading to a "polar night of icy darkness", in
which increasing rationalization of human life traps individuals in the
aforementioned "iron cage" of bureaucratic, rule-based, rational control. In
order to counteract bureaucrats, the system needs entrepreneurs and
politicians.
