By-election A by-election (occasionally also spelled bye-election, and known in
the United States and the Philippines as a special election) is an election
held to fill a political office that has become vacant between regularly
scheduled elections. Usually, a by-election occurs when the incumbent has died
or resigned. It may also occur when the incumbent becomes ineligible to
continue in office, for example because of a recall, ennoblement, a serious
criminal conviction, failure to maintain a minimum attendance, bankruptcy or
mental incapacity. By-elections have also been called as a result of a
constituency election being invalidated by voting irregularities; see Oldham
East and Saddleworth election petition. Historically, members of some
parliaments were required to seek re-election upon being appointed to a
ministerial post. The subsequent by-elections were termed ministerial by-
elections. These by-elections were usually a formality as they were normally,
but not always, uncontested by opposition parties. The requirement for Members
of Parliament (MPs) to resign their seats and re-offer upon being appointed to
Cabinet was done away with as an anachronism in most Westminster systems by the
mid-20th century. In single-member constituencies. By-elections are held in
most nations that elect their parliaments through single-member constituencies,
whether with or without a runoff round. This includes most Commonwealth
countries, such as the United Kingdom, Canada and Pakistan, as well as non-
Commonwealth countries such as France. In the United States they are called
special elections, and are held when a seat in Congress, a state legislature or
at the local level becomes vacant. In multi-member constituencies. When one
seat in a proportional representation constituency becomes vacant, the
consequences vary. For example, a by-election may be held to fill just the
vacancy or all the seats in the constituency become up for grabs in the by-
election held. Scotland and New Zealand still hold by-elections, despite having
adopted the mixed-member proportional representation system, in which members
are also chosen by party lists. In both countries, actual by-elections where
voters go to the polls to vote for their preferred candidate only take place to
fill a vacancy in a constituency seat, such as on the death of Donald Dewar,
which resulted in a by-election for the constituency of Glasgow Anniesland. In
the event of the vacancy arising from the death or resignation of a list
member, the next unelected candidate on the party list is offered the seat, and
upon accepting, is elected. If the next unelected candidate has died or
declines the offer, it is offered to each subsequent candidate on the list
until one accepts the seat, such as was the case upon the resignation of Darren
Hughes in March 2011, where Louisa Wall was elected after the five list
candidates above her on the New Zealand Labour Party's list declined the seat.
The Republic of Ireland holds by-elections despite electing members in multi-
member constituencies by the single transferable vote. For the Australian
Senate (where each State forms a multi-seat constituency voting by single
transferable vote), the State Parliament appoints a replacement; in 1977 a
referendum amended the Constitution to require that the person appointed must
belong to the same political party (if any) as the Senator originally elected
to that seat. Those Australian States with an Upper House elected by PR-STV
(NSW, Victoria and South Australia) copy the federal Senate model, except for
Western Australia, which holds a recount of ballots with sitting members being
immune from defeat). Consequences. By-elections can become crucial when the
ruling party has only a small margin. In parliamentary systems, party
discipline is strong enough so that the one common scenario for a vote of no
confidence to occur is after the governing party loses enough by-elections to
become a minority government. Examples include the Labour government of James
Callaghan 1976–1979 and the Conservative government of John Major
1992–1997. In the United States, Scott Brown's election in 2010 ended the
filibuster-proof majority formerly enjoyed by Democrats. By-elections can also
be important if a minority party needs to gain one or more seats in order to
gain official party status or the balance of power in a minority or coalition
situation. For example, Andrea Horwath's win in an Ontario provincial by-
election in 2004 allowed the Ontario NDP to regain official party status with
important results in terms of parliamentary privileges and funding. As
harbingers and breakthroughs. By-election upsets can have a psychological
impact by creating a sense of momentum for one party or a sense of impending
defeat for a government. Deborah Grey's 1989 by-election victory in Beaver
River was seen as evidence that the newly formed Reform Party of Canada would
be a serious political contender and that it posed a serious political threat
for the ruling Progressive Conservatives. It also provided important momentum
for the new party. Similarly, the upset 1960 by-election victory of Walter
Pitman in Peterborough as a "New Party" candidate was seen as a significant
boost for the movement to replace the Co-operative Commonwealth Federation with
an unnamed "New Party" which would be integrated with the labour movement.
Pitman's candidacy in a riding in which the CCF was traditionally weak was seen
as a test of this concept and his upset victory was used to convince the CCF
and the labour movement to proceed with the founding of the New Democratic
Party (NDP). By-elections may occur singly, or in small bunches, especially if
the authority responsible for calling them has discretion over the timing and
can procrastinate. They are sometimes bunched to save money as holding multiple
by-elections is likely to cost more than holding a by-election to fill the
vacancies all at once. In Canada, in 1978, 15 by-elections were held on a
single date, restoring the House of Commons to 264 members. The media called it
a "mini-election", a test of the Liberal government's popularity with a general
election due in less than a year. The 15 districts stretched from Newfoundland
to British Columbia, and produced some unexpected results, for example, an NDP
candidate winning in Newfoundland for the first time. Upsets. In Canada, the
most recent example of a cabinet minister appointed from outside of parliament
having to resign after losing a by-election was in 1975 when Minister of
Communications Pierre Juneau was appointed to Pierre Trudeau's Liberal cabinet
directly from the private sector and tried to enter parliament through a by-
election in Hochelaga. Juneau was upset by the Progressive Conservative
candidate and resigned from cabinet ten days after his by-election defeat.
General Andrew McNaughton was appointed to Cabinet as Minister of Defence on
November 1, 1944 without having a seat in parliament after his predecessor
resigned during the Conscription Crisis of 1944. A by-election was arranged in
Grey North which the opposition Progressive Conservative party contested. The
major campaign issue became the government's policy of "limited conscription"
during World War II which McNaughton supported and which the Conservatives
counterposed with a call for "full conscription". McNaughton was upset in the
February 5, 1945 by-election. As a result, with confidence in his government
undermined, Prime Minister William Lyon Mackenzie King called the 1945 federal
election several weeks later when he had originally intended to wait until
after the end of the war. McNaughton sought a seat in the federal election and
resigned after he was again defeated. In 1942, new Conservative Party leader
Arthur Meighen sought to enter the Canadian House of Commons through a by-
election in York South. His surprise defeat at the hand of Joseph Noseworthy of
the Co-operative Commonwealth Federation ended his political career, and may
also have been a factor in the Conservative Party's decision to move to the
left and rebrand itself the Progressive Conservative Party under Meighen's
replacement. Noseworthy's victory was also a significant breakthrough for the
CCF giving it credibility as a national party where it has previously been seen
as a Western Canadian regional protest party. In the Canadian province of
Ontario, John Tory, leader of the Progressive Conservative Party of Ontario ran
in a 2009 by-election in Haliburton—Kawartha Lakes—Brock, after he
convinced one of his caucus members to step down, in hopes of re-entering the
Ontario legislature. His by-election defeat resulted in his resignation as
party leader. A Massachusetts special Senate election held in January 2010
produced a significant upset when Republican Scott Brown won the United States
Senate seat formerly held for 48 years by Democratic Party stalwart Ted
Kennedy. Republicans term the result the "Massachusetts Miracle" and argue that
it is a harbinger of a revival in the party's fortunes. 1986 Northern Ireland
by-elections. In Northern Ireland there were fifteen by-elections held on 23
January 1986, to fill vacancies in the Parliament of the United Kingdom caused
by the resignation in December 1985 of all sitting Unionist Members of
Parliament (MPs). The MPs, from the Ulster Unionist Party, Democratic Unionist
Party and Ulster Popular Unionist Party, did this to highlight their opposition
to the Anglo-Irish Agreement. Each of their parties agreed not to contest seats
previously held by the others, and each outgoing MP stood for re-election. All
but one of the Unionists were re-elected, many with extremely large majorities,
against pro-Agreement or in some cases Irish Republican opponents. In some
seats, a fictitious candidate named after Peter Barry, the Irish foreign
minister appeared on the ballot paper. The largest of all majorities went to
Ian Paisley in North Antrim. He won 97.4% of the vote, the highest percentage
polled by any candidate in a UK by-election since the 1940 Middleton and
Prestwich by-election. The sole exception to this pattern was the Newry and
Armagh by-election, where Seamus Mallon of the Irish nationalist and pro Anglo-
Irish Agreement Social Democratic and Labour Party (SDLP) was able to take the
seat. The results of the fifteen by-elections were cited by Unionists as a
rejection of the Agreement by the Northern Irish electorate, but the action did
not succeed in persuading the government of Margaret Thatcher to repeal the
accord. 2010 Hong Kong by-elections. Territory-wide by-elections were held on
16 May 2010 in Hong Kong. The by-elections were triggered by the resignation of
five members of the Legislative Council, one each from the territory's five
constituencies, three of them from the League of Social Democrats, and the
other two from the Civic Party. It was meant to be a "de facto" referendum on
the territory's electoral reform. Thirty seats in the 60-seat legislature are
elected from "geographical constituencies". As in 2010 there were five multi-
member constituencies. Elections are held using the largest remainder method of
the proportional representation system. A by-election is necessary whenever a
seat is vacant.
