Cacerolazo A cacerolazo, cacerolada or casserole is a form of popular protest
practised in certain Spanish-speaking countries – in particular Argentina,
Chile, Uruguay, Spain – and most recently English-speaking countries which
consists in a group of people creating noise by banging pots, pans, and other
utensils in order to call for attention. What is peculiar about this type of
demonstration is that the people protest from their own homes, thus achieving a
high level of support and participation. The word comes from Spanish
"cacerola", which means "stew pot". The derivative suffix "-azo" denotes a
hitting (punching or striking) action, and has been extended metaphorically to
any sort of shock demonstration. This type of manifestation started in 1971 in
Chile, against the shortages of industrial products during the administration
of Salvador Allende.. When this manner of protest was practised in Canada, in
English it was referred to by most media as "casseroles" rather than the
Spanish term "cacerolazo". Argentina. 2001-2002. One of the largest and most
recent cacerolazos occurred in Argentina during 2001, consisting largely of
protests and demonstrations by middle-class people who had seen their savings
trapped in the so-called "corralito" (a set of restrictive economic measures
that effectively froze all bank accounts, initially as a short-term fix for the
massive draining of bank deposits). The "corralito" meant that many people who
needed a large amount of cash immediately, or who simply lived off the
interests from their deposits, suddenly found their savings unavailable. As
court appeals were slow and ineffective, people resorted to protest in the
streets. As the Argentine peso quickly devalued and foreign currency fled the
country, the government decreed a forced conversion of dollar-denominated
accounts into pesos at an arbitrary exchange rate of 1.4 pesos per dollar. At
this point the unavailability of cash for people trapped in the "corralito"
compounded with the continuous loss of value of their savings, and the
unresponsiveness of the appeal authorities (minor courts and the Supreme Court
itself) further angered the protesters. The first "cacerolazos" were
spontaneous and non-partisan. While in Argentina most demonstrations against
government measures are customarily organized by labour union activists and
low-level political recruiters among the lower classes, and often featuring an
assortment of large banners, drums and pyrotechnic devices, "cacerolazos" were
composed mostly of spontaneously gathered middle-class workers, housewives and
professionals, who used not to be involved in grassroots political action of
any kind. After a time, however, the "cacerolazo" became an organized
phenomenon, often of a violent nature, directed against the banks. Many of
these were attacked, their facades spray-painted, their windows broken, their
entrances blocked by tire fires, or even their facilities occupied by force at
times. In order to avoid further violence, especially with the deadly December
2001 riots still fresh in the memories of Argentines, the government decided
not to use active police force against the "cacerolazos" unless absolutely
necessary, and to restrict most police presence to barricades in critical
spots, a policy that was followed also with "piquetero" marches of unemployed
people asking for state welfare and jobs. Isolated "cacerolazos" also featured
during the "apagón" ("blackout") of September 24, 2002, to protest against
increases in public service fees requested by the providers. As the financial
and macroeconomic conditions became more stable, the government loosened the
restrictions on the withdrawal of deposits, and the "cacerolazos" died out.
2008. On March 25, a group led by Luis D'Elia, a supporter of the Kirchner
administration, and a cacerolazo violently faced each other during the
demonstrations pro and against the export tax policy of Cristina Kirchner's
government. 2012. On May 31, a cacerolazo, with a following far less reduced
than those of 2001-2, but generalized among middle-class neighborhood,
organized through the internet protested against the introduction of controls
on the foreign currency exchange market by Cristina Kirchner's government,
rampant insecurity, a sense of disruption and infringement of civil right’s
due to a new control of the afip(irs) to Argentine travelers which is not on
its organic mandate, fiscal reform in the most populated Argentine province
that would more than triple current land property tax and many allegedly
corruption charges against government and policymakers On June 01, there was
another cacerolazo in similar conditions. On June 7, 2012 there was a big
cacerolazo. A very big concentration which was in the several thousand people
showed up in plaza de Mayo, also widespread among the city’s important
avenues intersection. The following week, June 14, another concentration in
Plaza de Mayo was attended by a few hundred. On May 31 and June 1, cacerolazos
in high class neighbourhoods were organized through the internet in protest to
a diversity of reasons, not existing a single cohesive one. The most prominent
was the introduction of controls on the foreign currency exchange market by
Cristina Kirchner's government. With a lesser extent it was a protest against
crime, fiscal reform on land property tax and allegedly national government
corruption cases On June 7, there was a cacerolazo with a concentration of
around a thousand people in Plaza de Mayo and in Buenos Aires's avenues
intersections of high class neighbourhoods. The following week, June 14,
another concentration in Plaza de Mayo was attended by a just a few hundreds.
On September 13, thousands of Argentines marched in the largest protests since
2008 against the government of President Cristina Fernandez, who, according to
an opinion poll by Management & Fit, has lost popularity since her landslide
re-election the previous year (this point of view is not shared by public
opinion research company Equis, whose CEO Artemio López said that the
popularity indexes remain stable). The event raised a noticeable polemic, as
news coverage from most government-aligned newspapers and TV broadcasters was
reduced to a minumun, and government officials' claim ragarding that the
cacerolazo only represented a small and minoritary portion of the population.
Another protest was made on November 8, commonly known as 8N amongst the
country, principally in the Obelisco and the Plaza de Mayo, and around the
world in the major cities of Spain, the US, Canada, Brazil, France, the UK and
bordering countries. The latter was also called within Facebook and Twitter,
though in contrast to the one on September 13, to which assisted over 50,000
people, 250,000 were present at the 8N. The main complaints were, again the
February rail accident victims, the inflation and the reject to the possible
"re-re-election" of Kirchner, but also insecurity and the Ley de Medios. Again,
Todo Noticias dedicated to transmit it completely, while other media supporting
the president, such as América TV and C5N, in which a reporter was knocked
down were also present. Canada. In 2012 in Québec, a province of Canada,
citizens were using cacerolazo after the adoption on 18 May of Bill 78, an act
which restricts rights to assemble after violent riots erupted in Montreal and
Victoriaville. Bill 78, aimed at restoring access to education for peaceful
students and at protecting businesses and citizens from violence by some
student protesters, has been criticized by the United Nations, the Quebec Bar
Association, Amnesty International, and others. The controversial UN criticism
has been sharply rebuked by both the Quebec and federal governments as out of
line. Court challenges against the bill are underway. Several "Casseroles" or
"Pots and pans demonstrations" were held in towns and cities across the
province, primarily concentrated in Montreal's various neighbourhoods. , though
smaller protests outside the Province of Quebec were held in solidarity with
the student protesters, including cities such as Calgary, Saskatoon, Winnipeg,
Hamilton and Sudbury. Chile. 1971-1989. Cacerolazos began in Chile in 1971 in
protest at shortages during the Salvador Allende administration. By 1973 they
had become commonplace as protests against the administration intensified amid
increasing shortages. After Augusto Pinochet seized power in 1973 cacerolazos
disappeared for a time until the economic crisis of 1982-83 set in. Thereafter
cacerolazos continued up until the Pinochet regime lost a plebiscite in 1988
that put him out of office two years later. 2011. "Cacerolazos" were organized
in 2011 for two different reasons. On 15 May there was pot-banging in several
cities in protest of the HidroAysén dam project. Then in August there were two
"cacerolazos" across the country in support of student protests, the first in
August 4 and a second one in August 8. Iceland. The protests following the
financial crisis that started in 2008 are sometimes called The Kitchenware
Revolution, because people took to the streets banging on pots and pans and
other household utensils. Mexico. In 2006, during the Oaxaca protests that saw
thousands occupy their city following the police repression of teachers'
strikes, 5000 women marchers banged pots and pans with spoons and meat
tenderizers. Their march took them through the city squares and to outside the
state-run television station channel 9. The women demanded a one hour slot to
report on the people's story of what was happening in Oaxaca; a story that was
censored and skewed by government propaganda against the protesters. When the
station refused the women, still carrying their pots and pans, entered the
building and took over the station. They carried out live broadcasts of the
people's struggles. Spain. More than 90% of the Spaniards were against the Iraq
War and provoked during 2003 cacerolazo-fashioned protests against the
government decision to support it. People protested from their homes turning
lights on and off, making noise with whistles and klaxons and hitting stew
pots. In Huesca lamp posts of 16 streets were turned off in protest during 15
minutes.
