Campaign for Innocent Victims in Conflict Campaign for Innocent Victims in
Conflict (CIVIC) is a Washington, D.C.-based non-profit organization and
advocacy founded in 2003 by Marla Ruzicka. CIVIC works on behalf of war
victims, providing research and advocating policymakers. CIVIC is a part of the
Making Amends Campaign. Foundations. Campaign for Innocent Victims in Conflict
(CIVIC) was founded by Marla Ruzicka in 2003. Marla, with the help of Senator
Patrick Leahy, created the first-ever US-funded aid program dedicated to
helping rebuild the lives of civilians unintentionally harmed by US combat
operations. CIVIC works closely with the military and organizations such as
NATO. Although Marla was killed by a suicide bomb in Baghdad in April 2005, her
colleagues, friends and family continue to run CIVIC. A staff was hired in
early 2006 and the organization expanded its mandate in early 2007 beyond Iraq
and Afghanistan. CIVIC achievements include persuading the US Congress to
develop programs that aid victims caught in the middle of widespread conflict.
Findings. CIVIC released a report in 2009 on civilian harm in Northwest
Pakistan. It was based on a United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
report that estimated a 40% increase in the number of civilian deaths in 2008.
Civic report concludes that civilian harm is compounded by widespread poverty
and that while the Pakistani government does make amends most do not receive
any due to deficiencies in compensation mechanisms and no effort from the US.
Another survey released by an individual associated with CIVIC counted two
thousand killed and four thousand injured. CIVICs reports suggest that the
number of civilians killed and injured in war conflicts exceeds the number that
the United States admits to. Mandate. CIVICs goals are to urge warring parties
to take responsibility and provide help to civilians they've harmed, to adopt a
new international norm dictating recognition and making amends to war victims
and to be the voice for war victims. They work to achieve these goals by
creating US-funded programs to aid war victims in Iraq and Afghanistan and are
working with NATO to develop compensation funds. They also try to focus media
attention onto victims of war and create a wider recognition of war victims
among policy-makers. CIVIC actively gathers stories from war victims in an
attempt to show the human cost of conflict. Accomplishments. CIVIC partnered
with the United States military to train U.S. soldiers shipping out to Iraq and
Afghanistan on avoiding civilians and how to compensate for any harm caused.
CIVIC also worked with the American Civil Liberties Union to analyze civilian
claims of damages and craft legislation to address shortfalls in the current
system (the Civilian Claims Act). CIVIC successfully pressed the North Atlantic
Treaty Organization member states to develop, fund, and ensure that a trust
fund for war victims was in place. CIVIC provided a military lawyer that worked
with Harvard University to document US efforts to make amends to civilians
suffering losses. They also organised for someone living in Afghanistan to help
coordinate delivery of aid from NATO and the US to war victims. Over one-third
of contributions to CIVIC come from individual contributions. CIVIC received 10
million dollars from Congress as part of their initiative to advocate and help
design a new US program for Pakistani war victims. CIVIC has conducted
interviews with Pakistani and US policymakers, humanitarians and officials from
international organizations, and over 160 Pakistani civilians. Note.
Photographer Julien Bryan described the scene: "As we drove by a small field at
the edge of town we were just a few minutes too late to witness a tragic event,
the most incredible of all. Seven women had been digging potatoes in a field.
There was no flour in their district, and they were desperate for food.
Suddenly two German planes appeared from nowhere and dropped two bombs only two
hundred yards away on a small home. Two women in the house were killed. The
potato diggers dropped flat upon the ground, hoping to be unnoticed. After the
bombers had gone, the women returned to their work. They had to have food. But
the Nazi fliers were not satisfied with their work. In a few minutes they came
back and swooped down to within two hundred feet of the ground, this time
raking the field with machine-gun fire. Two of the seven women were killed. The
other five escaped somehow. While I was photographing the bodies, a little ten-
year old girl came running up and stood transfixed by one of the dead. The
woman was her older sister. The child had never before seen death and couldn't
understand why her sister would not speak to her... The child looked at us in
bewilderment. I threw my arm about her and held her tightly, trying to comfort
her. She cried. So did I and the two Polish officers who were with me..."
Bryan, Julien. "Warsaw: 1939 Siege; 1959 Warsaw Revisited."
