Camp Trans Camp Trans is an annual demonstration and event held outside the
Michigan Womyn's Music Festival by trans women and their allies to protest the
Festival's policy of excluding trans women from attending. Background. Michigan
Womyn's Music Festival has its roots in lesbian-feminist and lesbian-separatist
analysis of patriarchy, and is intended to provide a week-long safe space for
attendees to enjoy music created exclusively by women, immerse themselves in
woman's culture and celebrate their womanhood in a safe environment without
domination, oppression or interference by men. Its primary organizers adhere to
a belief that a defining quality of womanhood comes from being born and raised
in a female body. History. Camp Trans was sparked by a 1991 incident in which a
woman named Nancy Burkholder was ejected from the festival after her
transsexual status became known to festival security guards Although the
festival has maintained a women-born-women policy since its inception, as
evidenced by posters from the first festival in 1975 , the 1991 incident
falsely led to the belief that the policy was only articulated as a means of
preventing transsexual women from attending. Each year afterwards a group of
women, both trans and female assigned at birth, protested the exclusion of
trans women from the event. Initially these protests were small and sometimes
carried on inside of the camp. A more organized group of trans women and their
allies began camping and holding demonstrations outside the gate. After a five-
year hiatus, Camp Trans returned in 1999, led by transgender activists Riki Ann
Wilchins and Leslie Feinberg, as well as many members of the Boston and Chicago
Lesbian Avengers The events of this year drew attention and controversy,
culminating in tensions as a small group of transgender activists were admitted
into the festival to exchange dialogue with organizers and to negotiate a
short-lived compromise allowing only post-operative trans women on the festival
land. In the early 1980s and in 1999, a stealth transgender musician who had
transitioned 10 years earlier did perform in MWMF, and during 1999's Camp Trans
event, a number of trans women purchased tickets and were admitted to MWMF. A
similar claim of victory was published by Camp Trans that year. Events of 2006.
By 2005, activists at Camp Trans and MWMF had become frustrated with the
boycott effort and felt that a combined effort of external and internal
activism on the grounds of MWMF might be more effective in securing inclusion.
In 2006, a trans woman organizer of Camp Trans named Lorrraine Donaldson was
sold a ticket to the 31st annual Michigan Womyn's Music Festival. On Tuesday,
August 8, 2006, Donaldson approached the workers at the front gate of the
festival and asked if she could purchase a ticket. She was instructed to read
an outdated handout that was printed by the festival office in 2000 following
the controversial events surrounding the Michigan 8 protest. This paper
indicated that the festival was still enforcing a policy of exclusion for
transsexual women. When Donaldson pointed out that the document was outdated
and asked for a current version from the workers, they told her that none was
available. Donaldson requested that the workers seek up-to-date policy
information in writing from the office and informed them that she would return
the next morning. That same day, the newly organized Yellow Armbands pro-
inclusion support group held their first meeting at the Watermelon Tree in the
common dining area of the festival. On the morning of Wednesday, August 9,
Donaldson again approached the box office workers near the front gate and asked
to purchase a ticket. She was met at the gate by three members of the Yellow
Armbands and one organizer of Camp Trans, all of whom witnessed Donaldson
disclosing her trans status to the box office manager, before being sold a
ticket and given an orange wristband that designated her as a "festie".
Donaldson attended the festival for the remainder of the week and participated
at a trans inclusion workshop that was presented by trans woman Emilia
Lombardi, who was also an organizer with Camp Trans and who was sold a ticket
to the festival on Friday, August 11, as well. The workshop was listed as part
of the official festival program and both Donaldson and Lombardi were open
about being trans women at the workshop that was attended by over 50 people.
Donaldson and Lombardi also continued to join the Yellow Armbands mealtime
gatherings, where they were met with support from festies and workers. The
conclusion of the 2006 festivals in Hart, Michigan was marked with noted
optimism and collaborative spirit between Camp Trans constituents and their
pro-inclusion supporters at MWMF, as was noted immediately by members of the
community and media. A camper also captured the good news as it was presented
onstage by a Camp Trans committee member and later posted it on YouTube. 2006
press release controversy and resulting organizational changes. Following the
2006 festival, a small group of Camp Trans organizers issued a press release
that stated that the MWMF had "ended its policy of exclusion." A disagreement
ensued within the Camp Trans and Yellow Armbands organizations over whether or
not this press release was ethical due to issues of transparency and consent.
Camp Trans argued that the press release was a deliberate and necessary tactic
designed to bait Vogel into responding with a transphobic press release which
would make the parameters of the "wbw-policy" officially known. Supporters of
this tactic felt that because Vogel hadn't given the Camp Trans organization
permission to republish the letter, nor was the policy (or what Vogel referred
to as an "intention") available in writing on the MichFest website or
elsewhere, that this was the only way that Camp Trans could ostensibly prove
that the policy actually existed. Others felt that the motivation behind the
press release was nebulous and not supportive or inclusive of Donaldson or
others who were involved in the positive developments that occurred in the
summer of 2006. They also believed that the press release caused unnecessary
conflict between inclusion activists and the festival office and they preferred
to focus on the larger community who were clearly supportive of trans women
attending in 2006. Regardless, Vogel did in fact issue a response where she
stated again that the festival is intended for women-born-women, and that they
hope and expect trans women to respect that intention. Following the press
release fallout, Donaldson resigned from Camp Trans and joined the Yellow
Armbands as an organizer. In 2007, the Yellow Armbands blog was frozen by an
organizer who resigned from the activism due to lingering issues regarding lack
of transparency in the inclusion movement. Other activists also resigned over
concerns that Camp Trans was privileging the voices of trans men over trans
women in their organization. The remaining inclusion activists at Yellow
Armbands created a new online community and blog and renamed their organization
Fest For All Womyn. Donaldson returned to MWMF in 2007 with the newly renamed
Fest For All Womyn/Yellow Armbands and camped in The Twilight Zone area of the
festival along with other trans women and female assigned at birth inclusion
supporters. 2007 was also a landmark year for Camp Trans, because for the first
time in their 16-year history, they held elections for their organizational
positions. Camp Trans organizers celebrated this as a positive step in the
right direction when the majority of elected positions were filled by trans
women. Allegations of Violence and Vandalism During 2010 Festivals. According
to an online news site, Anarchist News, there were several incidents of
violence and vandalism during the 2010 festivals. A printed version of the
statements found at Anarchist News, as well as further details regarding the
incidents was first published by Pink and Black Attack in early September 2010.
A confrontation ensued between attendees of Camp Trans and a tow-truck driver
near the gates of MichFest during a reading of the history of Camp Trans. In
the Pink and Black #6 zine issue, the publishers included the following
description of the vandalism left at one of the Michigan kitchens: ""August 7.
Hart , MI: Vandalism at Michfest This year at MichFest, the words “Real Womyn
Have Cocks” were painted on the MichFest kitchen and other damage was
allegedly done to MichFest property. A flyer was distributed with the following
text: 'Second-Wave ‘Feminists’, A hot load from my monstrous tranny-cock
embodies womanhood more than the pieces of menstral (sic) art your transphobic
cunts could ever hope to create. Love, Womyn-born-Monsters"" Despite these
unofficial statements, neither the MichFest office nor the Camp Trans
organization has confirmed the veracity of these accounts, nor whether the
vandalism occurred at the worker or main kitchen. Although workshops were
allegedly held to resolve the matter, no one has specified whether or not Lisa
Vogel made an official response. A thread from the MichFest bulletin board
created on August 9, 2011 contains statements from numerous long time MichFest
attendees and workers, who confirmed that trans women attended the festival in
2011. There has been no comment from Camp Trans in regards to their attendance
or participation in the 2011 festival. As of 2012. Camp Trans doesn't exist. As
seen above, Camp Trans was a protest. The goal of that protest was to educate
and gain access for trans women to Michfest. The struggle continues, as
Michfest continues to exclude many trans women, and has not issued a statement
retracting their transmisogynist policies. There have been groups created "on
the land" like Trans Women Belong Here for support, care, and acquiring space
within fest that is a "safer space".
