Candidate "Nomination" is part of the process of selecting a candidate for
either election to an office by a political party, or the bestowing of an honor
or award. This person is called a "nominee," though nominee often is used
interchangeably with "candidate." "Presumptive nominee" is a term used when a
person or organization believes that the nomination is inevitable. The act of
being a candidate in a race for either a party nomination or for electoral
office is called a "candidacy." ""Candidate"" is a derivative of the Latin
""candida"" (white). In Ancient Rome, people running for political office would
usually wear togas chalked and bleached to be bright white at speeches,
debates, conventions, and other public functions. Candidates in elections. In
the context of elections for public office in a representational partisan
democracy, a candidate who has been selected by a political party is normally
said to be the nominee of that party. The party's selection (that is, the
nomination) is typically accomplished either based on one or more primary
elections according to the rules of the party and any applicable election laws.
Candidates also may be described as "incumbents", if they are already serving
in the office for which they are seeking re-election or "challengers", if they
are seeking to unseat an incumbent. In the context of elections for public
office in a direct democracy, a candidate can be nominated by any eligible
person -- and if parliamentary procedures are used, the nomination has to be
seconded, i.e., receive agreement from a second person. In some non-partisan
representative systems (e.g., administrative elections of the Bahá'í Faith),
no nominations (or campaigning, electioneering, etc.) take place at all, with
voters free to choose any person at the time of voting--with some possible
exceptions such as through a minimum age requirement--in the jurisdiction. In
such cases, it is not required (or even possible) that the members of the
electorate be familiar with all of the eligible persons in their area, though
such systems may involve indirect elections at larger geographic levels to
ensure that some first-hand familiarity among potential electees can exist at
these levels (i.e., among the elected delegates). Presumptive nominee. The
presumptive nominee, in the politics of the United States, is the candidate who
has not yet received the official nomination of their political party at the
party's nominating convention, but who is the undisputed front-runner and is
widely, or even unanimously, presumed to be the candidate that party will
nominate. The term is applied widely on the national level, notably in regard
to the U.S. presidential nominating conventions and the statewide level. A
candidate may be considered a presumptive nominee after all other major
competitors have dropped out and it is considered unlikely that the candidate
will withdraw, be usurped, or be otherwise removed from the race.
Alternatively, in presidential elections, a candidate may be deemed the
presumptive nominee after having accumulated enough delegate commitments
through the primary elections and caucuses to be virtually assured of the
eventual nomination at the convention. Age of candidacy. The age of candidacy
refers to the minimum age at which a person can legally qualify to hold certain
elected government offices. The United States Constitution sets minimum age
requirements, as do state constitutions. In the United States, a person must be
at least thirty-five years of age to be President or Vice President, thirty
years of age to be a senator, or twenty-five years of age to be a
representative, as specified in the United States Constitution.
