Capital (economics) In economics, capital, capital goods, or real capital are
those already-produced durable goods that are used in production of goods or
services. The capital goods are not significantly consumed, though they may
depreciate in the production process. Capital is distinct from land in that
capital must itself be produced by human labor before it can be a factor of
production. At any moment in time, total physical capital may be referred to as
the capital stock (which is not to be confused with the capital stock of a
business entity.) In a fundamental sense, capital consists of any produced
thing that can enhance a person's power to perform economically useful work—a
stone or an arrow is capital for a caveman who can use it as a hunting
instrument, and roads are capital for inhabitants of a city. Capital is an
input in the production function. Homes and personal autos are not capital but
are instead durable goods because they are not used in a production effort. In
Marxian economics, capital is used to buy something only in order to sell it
again to realize a financial profit, and for Marx capital only exists within
the process of economic exchange—it is wealth that grows out of the process
of circulation itself and forms the basis of the economic system of capitalism.
In narrow and broad uses. In classical and neoclassical economics, capital is
one of the factors of production. The others are land, labour and, according to
some proponents, organization, entrepreneurship, or management. These
distinctions of convenience have carried over to contemporary economic theory.
There was the further clarification that capital is a stock. As such, its value
can be estimated at a point in time. By contrast, investment, as production to
be added to the capital stock, is described as taking place over time ("per
year"), thus a flow. Earlier illustrations often described capital as physical
items, such as tools, buildings, and vehicles that are used in the production
process. Since at least the 1960s economists have increasingly focused on
broader forms of capital. For example, investment in skills and education can
be viewed as building up human capital or knowledge capital, and investments in
intellectual property can be viewed as building up intellectual capital. These
terms lead to certain questions and controversies discussed in those articles.
In part as a result, separate literatures have developed to describe both
natural capital and social capital. Such terms reflect a wide consensus that
nature and society both function in such a similar manner as traditional
industrial infrastructural capital, that it is entirely appropriate to refer to
them as different types of capital in themselves. In particular, they can be
used in the production of other goods, are not used up immediately in the
process of production, and can be enhanced (if not created) by human effort.
There is also a literature of intellectual capital and intellectual property
law. However, this increasingly distinguishes means of capital investment, and
collection of potential rewards for patent, copyright (creative or individual
capital), and trademark (social trust or social capital) instruments. Capital
(all types collectively) is often the tool that is leveraged in order to build
wealth both personal and corporate. Interpretations. Some thinkers, such as
Werner Sombart and Max Weber, locate the concept of capital as originating in
double-entry bookkeeping, which is thus a foundational innovation in
capitalism, Sombart writing in "Medieval and Modern Commercial Enterprise"
that: Within classical economics, Adam Smith ("Wealth of Nations", Book II,
Chapter 1) distinguished fixed capital from circulating capital. The former
designated physical assets not consumed in the production of a product (e.g.
machines and storage facilities), while the latter referred to physical assets
consumed in the process of production (e.g. raw materials and intermediate
products). For an enterprise, both were types of capital. Karl Marx adds a
distinction that is often confused with David Ricardo's. In Marxian theory,
variable capital refers to a capitalist's investment in labor-power, seen as
the only source of surplus-value. It is called "variable" since the amount of
value it can produce varies from the amount it consumes, "i.e.", it creates new
value. On the other hand, constant capital refers to investment in non-human
factors of production, such as plant and machinery, which Marx takes to
contribute only its own replacement value to the commodities it is used to
produce. It is constant, in that the amount of value committed in the original
investment, and the amount retrieved in the form of commodities produced,
remains constant. Investment or capital accumulation, in classical economic
theory, is the production of increased capital. Investment requires that some
goods be produced that are not immediately consumed, but instead used to
produce other goods as a means of production. Investment is closely related to
saving, though it is not the same. As Keynes pointed out, saving involves not
spending all of one's income on current goods or services, while investment
refers to spending on a specific type of goods, "i.e.", capital goods. Austrian
School economist Eugen von Böhm-Bawerk maintained that capital intensity was
measured by the roundaboutness of production processes. Since capital is
defined by him as being goods of higher-order, or goods used to produce
consumer goods, and derived their value from them, being future goods.
References. [[war:Kapital (ekonomika)
