Carnival Against Capital The Global Carnival Against Capital took place on
Friday, 18th June, 1999. It was an international day of protest timed to
coincide with the 25th G8 summit in Cologne, Germany. The carnival was inspired
by the 1980s Stop the City protests and the Global Street Party, which happened
at the same time as the 24th G8 Summit in Birmingham, England in 1998. The
rallying slogan was "Our Resistance is as Transnational as Capital". Before the
day. Organisation. Preparations took many months. The day became known as
simply J18. In London, the open organising group met every month. The day was
also discussed in the open weekly meetings of London Reclaim the Streets. There
were between 10 and 100 people at these discussions. An international email
discussion list was set up. Fund-raising was carried out by collecting
anonymous donations and running a series of benefit gigs. "There is only so
much that can be learned from how J18 was organised. J18 and the many other
successful and inspiring anti-capitalist events in recent history were produced
by a free flowing convergence of events and political currents combined with
sheer luck." Publicity. In London, a concerted publicity campaign was carried
out, using colourful stickers and 10,000 posters. Workers were encouraged to
phone in sick. An eighteen minute promotional video was made and distributed
globally. "Squaring up to the Square Mile" was a 32 page pamphlet produced by
Reclaim the Streets and Corporate Watch which gave details of financial
institutions. An A3 map of the City of London (the "Square Mile") showed where
they were located. 4,000 copies were produced. "Evading Standards". A spoof
version of the Evening Standard, daily London-based newspaper was produced.
30,000 copies were printed and distributed on June 17 and 18 to City workers.
The cover resembled the layout of the actual newspaper and the inner pages
contained agitprop and humour. The newspaper was handed out for free. The
headline read "Global Market Meltdown", followed by a spoof report of the
collapse of the world's financial markets. The mainstream media. On January 29,
1999, The Daily Mirror ran a full page article entitled "Police spy bid to
smash the anti-car protesters." Closer to the day, stories abounded in the
media about possible violent scenarios. Reaction of the City. It was clear that
the City was taking things very seriously. All leave was cancelled for City of
London Police officers on the day. The Corporation of London sent letters out
to the Managing Director of every firm in the square mile (and many outside it)
with instructions to circulate the warning of "major disruption" and the need
for extra security measures to be taken on June 18th to all staff. June 18.
London. In London, there was a large march planned for midday and autonomous
actions in the morning. Among other actions, a Critical Mass bicycle ride
brought the City of London traffic to a standstill in rush hour. The Campaign
Against Arms Trade closed down a Lloyds bank with a 'die-in'. The march. At
twelve, the protesters met at Liverpool Street train station. Food Not Bombs
gave out free food and a samba band played. Carnival masks were distributed in
four different colours and five processions set off in different directions
(there were four marches planned and another occurred spontaneously). The
spontaneous procession erupted in anger at London Wall when a woman was hit by
a reversing police van and had her leg broken. Between two and three o'clock,
the marches came together and an estimated 5,000 people converged on the London
International Financial Futures Exchange (LIFFE). A fire hydrant was set off,
symbolising the freeing of the Walbrook river, and the lower entrance to the
LIFFE was bricked up. Banners were hung, reading "Global Ecology Not Global
Economy", and "The Earth Is A Common Treasury For All", the latter a quote from
Gerrard Winstanley of the seventeenth century Diggers movement. Graffiti
messages were sprayed and CCTV cameras were disabled. Then sound systems set up
and drum & bass music and punk bands played. In the early afternoon a small
group of protesters broke into the Cannon Bridge building, smashed up the
reception area and tried to access the LIFFE trading floor, but were repelled
by LIFFE traders in hand-to-hand fighting on the escalators. The police arrived
late on the scene and made a number of arrests; monitors from the Legal Defence
and Monitoring Group attempted to keep track of who the police were arresting
and why. "We’d failed in our under-ambition. Unprepared, we never imagined we
could get so close to occupying a trading floor in one of the City’s major
exchanges. We’d planned the wall, and built it. We’d planned to free the
Walbrook, and done it. But we’d stopped short of planning a full-scale
occupation." (Wat Tyler, 2003). The rest of the afternoon became a battle as
police using horses and personal incapacitant spray containing CS gas pushed
the protesters down Lower Thames Street and out of the City of London. In the
aftermath, protesters gathered peacefully in Trafalgar Square. Internet
coverage and documentary. Using techniques which at the time were new and would
soon form the basis of the Indymedia network, the day's events were transmitted
live by VJ Matt Black over the internet until the servers were blocked up by
the sheer volume of traffic. One June 23rd 1999 Undercurrents the alternative
news organisation premiered a 30minute documentary in Oxford about the day
produced from the pooled footage of a dozen video operators in London. The
documentary was shown at festivals and social centres all over the UK during
the following months. The electronic civil disobedience group called for a
virtual sit-in of the Mexican embassy in London and brought the embassy website
to a standstill. Global. In Nigeria, 10,000 people took to the streets of Port
Harcourt. A street was renamed in honour of Ken Saro-Wiwa and his younger
brother Owens addressed the crowd. Katherine Ainger, "GIobal Carnival Against
Capital", "Z Magazine", September 1999. In total there were protests in 40
countries, these included Tel Aviv, Minsk, Madrid, Valencia, Prague, Hamburg,
Köln, Milan, Rome, Siena, Florence, Ancona, Amsterdam, Glasgow, Edinburgh,
Lancaster, Zürich, Geneva, Toronto, Vancouver, Ottawa, Washington, New York,
Los Angeles, Austin, Boston, and Eugene. After the day. Arrests. In the United
Kingdom, James Borek pled guilty in January 2004 to Section 20 Unlawful
Wounding (GBH) and two violent disorder charges, plus an additional charge of
skipping bail in 2000. He received a four and a half year sentence. A total of
sixteen people were arrested on the day. The Metropolitan Police made a website
listing 138 photographs of those wanted for further questioning. Using CCTV
footage extensively, they had arrested a further 50 people one year on. In
Eugene, Oregon Rob Thaxton was sentenced to 88 months in jail after throwing a
rock at a police officer while trying to avoid being arrested. Others who had
been identified at the Carnival were arrested at later events, particularly the
30 November WTO protests.
