Cartel A cartel is a formal agreement among "competing" firms. It is a formal
organization where there is a small number of sellers and usually involve
homogeneous products. Cartel members may agree on such matters as price fixing,
total industry output, market shares, allocation of customers, allocation of
territories, bid rigging, establishment of common sales agencies, and the
division of profits or combination of these. The aim of such collusion (also
called the cartel agreement) is to increase individual members' profits by
reducing competition. One can distinguish private cartels from public cartels.
In the public cartel a government is involved to enforce the cartel agreement,
and the government's sovereignty shields such cartels from legal actions.
Inversely, private cartels are subject to legal liability under the antitrust
laws now found in nearly every nation of the world. Furthermore, the purpose of
private cartels is to benefit only those individuals who constitute it, public
cartels, in theory, work to pass on benefits to the populace as a whole.
Competition laws often forbid private cartels. Identifying and breaking up
cartels is an important part of the competition policy in most countries,
although proving the existence of a cartel is rarely easy, as firms are usually
not so careless as to put collusion agreements on paper. Several economic
studies and legal decisions of antitrust authorities have found that the median
price increase achieved by cartels in the last 200 years is around 25%. Private
international cartels (those with participants from two or more nations) had an
average price increase of 28%, whereas domestic cartels averaged 18%. Fewer
than 10% of all cartels in the sample failed to raise market prices. Origin.
The term cartel originated for "alliances of enterprises" roughly around 1880
in Germany. The name was imported into the Anglosphere during the 1930s. Before
this, other, less precise terms were common to denominate cartels, for
instance: "association", "combination", "combine" or "pool". In the 1940s the
name "cartel" got an Anti-German bias, being the economic system of the enemy.
"Cartels" were the economic structure the American antitrust campaign struggled
to ban globally. Private vs public cartel. A distinction is sometimes drawn
between "public" and "private" cartels, though there is no evidence that public
cartels are less harmful to the general good, and being government backed, they
are much more effective and, hence, potentially harmful. In the case of public
cartels, the government may establish and enforce the rules relating to prices,
output and other such matters. Export cartels and shipping conferences are
examples of public cartels. In many countries, depression cartels have been
permitted in industries deemed to be requiring price and production stability
and/or to permit rationalization of industry structure and excess capacity. In
Japan for example, such arrangements have been permitted in the steel, aluminum
smelting, ship building and various chemical industries. Public cartels were
also permitted in the United States during the Great Depression in the 1930s
and continued to exist for some time after World War II in industries such as
coal mining and oil production. Cartels also played an extensive role in the
German economy during the inter-war period. International commodity agreements
covering products such as coffee, sugar, tin and more recently oil (OPEC) are
examples of international cartels with publicly entailed agreements between
different national governments. "Crisis cartels" have also been organized by
governments for various industries or products in different countries in order
to fix prices and ration production and distribution in periods of acute
shortages. Murray Rothbard considered the federal reserve as a public cartel of
private banks. In contrast, private cartels entail an agreement on terms and
conditions that provide members mutual advantage, but that are not known or
likely to be detected by outside parties. Private cartels in most jurisdictions
are viewed as violating antitrust laws. Long-term unsustainability of cartels.
Game theory suggests that cartels are inherently unstable, as the behaviour of
members of a cartel is an example of a prisoner's dilemma. Each member of a
cartel would be able to make more profit by breaking the agreement (producing a
greater quantity or selling at a lower price than that agreed) than it could
make by abiding by it. However, if all members break the agreement, all will be
worse off. The incentive to cheat explains why cartels are generally difficult
to sustain in the long run. Empirical studies of 20th century cartels have
determined that the mean duration of discovered cartels is from 5 to 8 years.
However, one private cartel operated peacefully for 134 years before
disbanding. There is a danger that once a cartel is broken, the incentives to
form the cartel return and the cartel may be re-formed. Whether members of a
cartel choose to cheat on the agreement depends on whether the short-term
returns to cheating outweigh the long-term losses from the possible breakdown
of the cartel. (The equilibrium of a prisoner's dilemma game varies according
to whether it is played only once or repeatedly.) The relative size of these
two factors depends in part on how difficult it is for firms to monitor whether
the agreement is being adhered to by other firms. If monitoring is difficult, a
member is likely to get away with cheating (and making higher profits) for
longer, so members are more likely to cheat and the cartel will be more
unstable. Number of firms in industry. The fewer the number of firms in the
industry, the easier for the members of the cartel to monitor the behaviour of
other members. Given that detecting a price cut becomes harder as the number of
firms increases, the bigger are the gains from price cutting. The greater the
number of firms, the more probable it is that one of those firms is a
"maverick" firm; that is, a firm known for pursuing aggressive and independent
pricing strategy. Even in the case of a concentrated market, with few firms,
the existence of such a firm may undermine the collusive behaviour of the
cartel. Characteristics of products sold. Cartels that sell homogeneous
products are more stable than those that sell differentiated products. Not only
do homogeneous products make agreement on prices and/or quantities easier to
negotiate, but also they facilitate monitoring. If goods are homogeneous, firms
know that a change in their market share is probably due to a price cut (or
quantity increase) by another member. Instead, if products are differentiated,
changes in quantity sold by a member may be due to changes in consumer
preferences or demand. Production costs. Similar cost structures of the firms
in a cartel make it easier for them to co-ordinate, as they will have similar
maximizing behaviour as regards prices and output. Instead, if firms have
different cost structures then each will have different maximizing behaviour,
so they will have an incentive to set a different price or quantity. Changes in
cost structure (for example when a firm introduces a new technology) also give
a cost advantage over rivals, making co-ordination and sustainability more
difficult. Behavior of demand. If an industry is characterized by a varying
demand (that is, a demand with cyclical fluctuations), it is more difficult for
the firms in the cartel to detect whether any change in their sales volume is
due to a demand fluctuation or to cheating by another member of the cartel.
Therefore, in a market with demand fluctuations, monitoring is more difficult
and cartels are less stable. Characteristics of sales. If each firm's sales
consist of a small number of high-value contracts, then it can make a
relatively large short-term gain from cheating on the agreement and thereby
winning more of these contracts. If, instead, its sales are high-volume and
low-value, then the short-term gain is smaller. Therefore, low frequency of
sales coupled with high value in each of these sales make cartels less
sustainable. When the demand of the product is fluctuating, parties that are in
a cartel are less interested to remain in the cartel, because they are not able
to make regular profit. Antitrust law on cartels. General view. International
competition authorities forbid cartels, but the effectiveness of cartel
regulation and antitrust law in general is disputed by economic libertarians.
United States. The Sherman Antitrust Act of 1890 outlawed all contracts,
combinations and conspiracies that unreasonably restrain interstate and foreign
trade. This includes cartel violations, such as price fixing, bid rigging, and
customer allocation. Sherman Act violations involving agreements between
competitors are usually punishable as federal crimes. European Union. The EU's
competition law explicitly forbids cartels and related practices in its article
81 of the Treaty of Rome. Since the Treaty of Lisbon came into effect, the 81
EC is replaced by 101 TFEU. The article reads: 1. The following shall be
prohibited as incompatible with the common market: all agreements between
undertakings, decisions by associations of undertakings and concerted practices
which may affect trade between Member States and which have as their object or
effect the prevention, restriction or distortion of competition within the
common market, and in particular those that: 2. Any agreements or decisions
prohibited pursuant to this article shall be automatically void. 3. The
provisions of paragraph 1 may, however, be declared inapplicable in the case
of: Article 81 explicitly forbids price fixing and limitation/control of
production, the two more frequent cartel-types of collusion. The EU competition
law also has regulations on the amount of fines for each type of cartel and a
leniency policy by which, if a firm in a cartel, is the first to denounce the
collusion agreement it is free of any responsibility. This mechanism has helped
a lot in detecting cartel agreements in the EU. Published by Routledge, 1999
ISBN 0-415-18717-6, ISBN 978-0-415-18717-6 page 348 or gain political power
