Convergence (economics) The idea of convergence in economics (also sometimes
known as the catch-up effect) is the hypothesis that poorer economies' per
capita incomes will tend to grow at faster rates than richer economies. As a
result, all economies should eventually converge in terms of per capita income.
Developing countries have the potential to grow at a faster rate than developed
countries because diminishing returns (in particular, to capital) aren't as
strong as in capital rich countries. Furthermore, poorer countries can
replicate production methods, technologies and institutions currently used in
developed countries. In the economic growth literature the term "convergence"
can have two meanings however. The first kind (sometimes called "sigma-
convergence") refers to a reduction in the dIspersion of levels of income
across economies. "Beta-convergence" on the other hand, occurs when poor
economies grow faster than rich ones. Economists say that there is "conditional
beta-convergence" when economies experience "beta-convergence" but conditional
on other variables being held constant. They say that "conditional beta-
convergence" exists when the growth rate of an economy declines as it
approaches its steady state. Limitations. The fact that a country is poor does
not guarantee that catch-up growth will be achieved. Moses Abramovitz
emphasised the need for 'Social Capabilities' to benefit from catch-up growth.
These include an ability to absorb new technology, attract capital and
participate in global markets. According to Abramovitz, these prerequisites
must be in place in an economy before catch-up growth can occur, and explain
why there is still divergence in the world today. The theory also assumes that
technology is freely traded and available to developing countries that are
attempting to catch-up. Capital that is expensive or unavailable to these
economies can also prevent catch-up growth from occurring, especially given
that capital is scarce in these countries. This often traps countries in a low-
efficiency cycle whereby the most efficient technology is too expensive to be
acquired. The differences in productivity techniques is what separates the
leading developed nations from the following developed nations, but by a margin
narrow enough to give the following nations an opportunity to catch-up. This
process of catch-up continues as long as the following nations have something
to learn from the leading nations, and will only cease when the knowledge
discrepancy between the leading and following nations becomes very small and
eventually exhausted. According to professor Jeffrey Sachs, the reason for the
convergence not occurring everywhere is that some developing countries have a
closed economic policy, and free trade and openness would solve the problem. In
a study of 111 countries in 1970 - 1989, Sachs and Andrew Warner concluded that
the industrialized countries had a growth of 2.3%/year/capita, open economy
developing countries 4.5% and closed economy developing countries only 2%.
Robert Lucas stated the «Lucas Paradox» which is the observation that capital
is not flowing from developed countries to developing countries despite the
fact that developing countries have lower levels of capital per worker. This
statement, however, has received recently serious objections. Examples. There
are many examples of countries which have converged with developed countries
which validate the catch-up theory. In the 1960s and 1970s the East Asian
Tigers rapidly converged with developed economies. These include Singapore,
Hong Kong, South Korea and Taiwan - all of which are today considered developed
countries or cities. In the post-war period (1945–1960) examples include West
Germany, France and Japan, which were able to quickly regain their prewar
status by replacing capital that was lost during World War II. Some economists
criticise the theory, stating that endogenous factors, such as government
policy, are much more influential in economic growth than exogenous factors.
For example, Alexander Gerschenkron states that governments can substitute for
missing prerequisites to trigger catch-up growth. A hypothesis by economic
historians Kenneth Sokoloff and Stanley Engerman suggested that factor
endowments are a central determinant of structural inequality that impedes
institutional development in some countries. Kenneth Sokoloff and Stanley
Engerman proposed that in the 19th century, countries such as Brazil and Cuba
with rich factor endowments such as soil and climate are predisposed to a
guarded franchise with limited institutional growth. Land that is suitable for
sugar and coffee such as Cuba experienced economies of scale from the
establishment of plantation that in turn created the small elite families with
vested interest in guarded franchise. The exogenous suitability of land for
wheat versus sugar determines the growth rate for many countries. Therefore,
countries with land that is suitable for sugar converge with other countries
that also have land that is suitable for growing sugar. Sokoloff and Engerman
explained this convergence in their article "History Lessons: Institutions,
Factor Endowments, and Paths of Development in the New World." They explained
that the United States and Canada started out as two of the poorest colonies in
the New World but grew faster than other countries as a result of their soil
qualities. They argued that the United States and Canada had land suitable for
growing wheat which meant that they had small scale farming, since wheat does
not benefit from economies of scale, and this led to a relatively equal
distribution of wealth and political power enabling the population to vote for
broad public education. This differentiated them from countries such as Cuba
that had land suitable for growing sugar and coffee. Such countries did benefit
from economies of scale and so had large plantation agriculture with slave
labor, large income and class inequalities, and limited voting rights. This
difference in political power led to little spending on the establishment of
institutions such as public schools and slowed down their progress. As a
result, countries with relative equality and access to public education grew
faster and were able to converge on countries with inequality and limited
education.
