Celine's laws Celine's Laws are a series of three laws regarding government and
social interaction attributed to the fictional character Hagbard Celine from
Robert Anton Wilson's "Illuminatus! Trilogy". Celine, a gentleman anarchist,
serves as a mouthpiece for Wilson's libertarian, anarchist and sometimes
completely uncategorizable ideas about the nature of mankind. Celine's Laws are
outlined in the trilogy by a manifesto titled "Never Whistle While You're
Pissing." Wilson later goes on to elaborate on the laws in his nonfiction book,
"Prometheus Rising," as being inherent consequences of average human
psychology. A piece entitled "Celine's Laws" appears in Robert Anton Wilson's
"The Illuminati Papers", which features articles written by Wilson under the
guise of many of his characters from the "Illuminatus! Trilogy" alongside
interviews with the author himself. One article pulls from another, as well as
from the original Trilogy. Celine, in his manifesto, recognizes these are
generalities, but also says that their basic principles can be used to find the
source of every great decline and fall of nations, and goes on to claim they
are as universal as Newton's Laws in applying to everything. Celine's First
Law. National Security is the chief cause of national insecurity. Reflecting
the paranoia of the Cold War, Celine's First Law focuses around the common idea
that to have national security, one must create a secret police. Since internal
revolutionaries and external foes would make the secret police a prime target
for infiltration, and because the secret police would by necessity have vast
powers to blackmail and intimidate other members of the government, another
higher set of secret police must be created to monitor the secret police. And
an even higher set of secret police must then be created to monitor the higher
order of secret police. Repeat ad nauseam. This seemingly infinite regress goes
on until every person in the country is spying on another, or "the funding runs
out." And since this paranoid and self monitoring situation inherently makes
targets of a nation's own citizens, the average person in the nation is more
threatened by the massive secret police complex than by whatever foe they were
seeking to protect themselves from. Wilson points out that the Soviet Union,
which suffered from this in spades, got to the point that it was terrified of
painters and poets who could do little harm to them in reality. At the same
time, given the limitation of funding and scale, the perfect security state
never truly emerges, leaving the populace still vulnerable from the original
threat while also being threatened by the vast and Orwellian secret police.
Celine's Second Law. Accurate communication is possible only in a non-punishing
situation. Wilson rephrases this himself many times as "communication occurs
only between equals." Celine calls this law "a simple statement of the obvious"
and refers to the fact that everyone who labors under an authority figure tends
to lie to and flatter that authority figure in order to protect themselves
either from violence or from deprivation of security (such as losing one's
job). In essence, it is usually more in the interests of any worker to tell his
boss what he wants to hear, not what is true. In any hierarchy, every level
below the highest carries a subtle burden to see the world in the way their
superiors expect it to be seen and to provide feedback to their superiors that
their superiors want to hear. In the end, any hierarchical organization
supports what its leaders already think is true more than it challenges them to
think differently. The levels below the leaders are more interested in keeping
their jobs than telling the truth. Wilson, in "Prometheus Rising," uses the
example of J. Edgar Hoover's FBI. Hoover saw communist infiltrators and spies
everywhere, and he told his agents to hunt them down. Therefore, FBI agents
began seeing and interpreting everything they could as parts of the communist
conspiracy. Some even went as far as framing people as communists, making
largely baseless arrests and doing everything they could to satisfy Hoover's
need to find and drive out the communist conspiracy. The problem is, such a
conspiracy never existed in any form. Hoover thought it did, but any agent who
dared point out the lack of evidence to Hoover would be at best denied
promotions, and at worst labeled a communist himself and lose his job. Any
agent who knew the truth would be very careful to hide the fact. Meanwhile, the
FBI was largely ignoring the problem of organized crime (the Mafia), because
Hoover insisted that organized crime did not exist on the national scale. Not
only does the leader of the hierarchy see what he wants to see, but he also
does not see what he does not want to see. Agents who pursued the issue of
organized crime were sometimes marginalized within the organization or hounded
into retirement. In the end, Celine states, any hierarchy acts more to conceal
the truth from its leaders than it serves to find the truth. Celine's Third
Law. An honest politician is a national calamity. Celine recognizes that the
third law seems preposterous from the beginning. While a dishonest politician
is interested only in bettering his own lot through abusing the public trust,
an honest politician is far more dangerous since he is honestly interested in
bettering society through political action, and that means writing and
implementing more and more laws. Celine argues that creating more laws simply
creates more criminals. Laws inherently restrict individual freedom, and the
explosive rate at which laws are being created means that every citizen in the
course of his daily life does not have the research capacity to not violate at
least one of the plethora of laws. It is only through honest politicians trying
to change the world through laws that true tyranny can come into being through
excessive legislation. Corrupt politicians simply line their own pockets.
Honest idealist politicians cripple the people's freedom through enormous
amounts of laws. So corrupt politicians are preferable according to Celine,
despite the possibility of an honest politician who honestly opposes the
formation of new laws (or wants to do away with some). See also. Quis custodiet
ipsos custodes%3F
