Celtic Tiger Celtic Tiger refers to the economy of the Republic of Ireland
between 1995 and 2007, a period of rapid economic growth. The Irish economy
expanded at an average rate of 9.4% between 1995 and 2000. It continued to grow
at an average rate of 5.9% during the following decade until 2008, when it fell
into recession. The expansion underwent a dramatic reversal from 2008, with GDP
contracting by 14% and unemployment levels rising to 14% by 2010. Moody's
proceeded to downgrade Ireland's government bond ratings to junk in mid-2011.
Term. The colloquial term "Celtic Tiger" has been used to refer to the country
itself, and to the years associated with the boom. The first recorded use of
the phrase is in a 1994 Morgan Stanley report by Kevin Gardiner. The term
refers to Ireland's similarity to the "East Asian Tigers"; South Korea,
Singapore, Hong Kong, and Taiwan during their periods of rapid growth in the
late 1980s and early 1990s. The Celtic Tiger period has also been called "The
Boom" or "Ireland's Economic Miracle". During that time, Ireland experienced a
boom in which it was transformed from one of Europe's poorer countries into one
of its wealthiest. The causes of Ireland's growth are the subject of some
debate, but credit has been primarily given to state-driven economic
development: social partnership between employers, government and unions,
increased participation in the labour force of women, decades of investment in
domestic higher education; targeting of foreign direct investment; a low
corporation tax rate; an English-speaking workforce, and membership of the
European Union which provided transfer payments and export access to the Single
Market. By mid-2007 in the wake of the growing global financial crisis the
Tiger had all but died. Some critics, such as David McWilliams who had been
warning about impending collapse for some time concluded that: "The case is
clear: an economically challenged government, perniciously influenced by the
interests of the housing lobby, blew it. The entire Irish episode will be
studied internationally in years to come as an example of how not to do
things." "We have gone from the Celtic Tiger to an era of financial fear with
the suddenness of a Titanic-style shipwreck, thrown from comfort, even luxury,
into a cold sea of uncertainty." In February 2010, a report by Davy Research
concluded that Ireland had "largely wasted” its years of high income during
the boom, with private enterprise investing its wealth "in the wrong places",
comparing Ireland's growth to other small Euro zone countries such as Finland
and Belgium - noting that the physical wealth of those countries exceeds that
of Ireland, because of their "vastly superior" transport infrastructure,
telecommunications network and public services. The aspiration to become a
Celtic Tiger has also been expressed by leaders of the other Celtic countries.
Addressing the Council on Foreign Relations in New York in October 2007, Alex
Salmond, the SNP First Minister of Scotland, said "we have everything it takes
for a Celtic Lion economy to take off in Scotland" (the "lion rampant" is the
heraldic symbol of Scotland). The onset of the Irish economic crisis and bank
bailout prompted Scottish Labour Party leader Iain Gray to ridicule Salmond's
aspiration, telling the Scottish Parliament in 2010 that "Scotland’s banking
sector is ten times the size of Ireland’s. The Royal Bank of Scotland alone
had a balance sheet 15 times the size of the Scottish economy. Alex Salmond
just does not get it. Everyone in Scotland knows that in a separate Scotland
our two biggest banks would have gone and with them all the jobs, all the
savings, all the pensions, all the mortgages and all the salaries." Celtic
Tiger. From 1995 to 2000 GDP rate growth ranged between 7.8 and 11.5%. The rate
then slowed to between 4.4 to 6.5% from 2001 to 2007. During that period the
Irish GDP per capita rose dramatically to equal then eventually surpass that of
all but one state in Western Europe. Although the GDP does not represent the
standard of living, and the GNP remained lower than the GDP, in 2007 the GNP
achieved the same level as of some other Western European countries. Causes.
Tax. Many economists credit Ireland's growth to a low corporate taxation rate
(10 to 12.5 percent throughout the late 1990s), and to net transfer payments
from members of the European Union like Germany and France that were as high as
4% of gross national product. Since 1956, successive Irish governments have
pursued low taxation policies. EU Aid. The EU aid was used to increase
investment in the education system and physically helping infrastructure. The
increased productive capacity of the Irish economy is sometimes attributed to
these investments, which made Ireland more attractive to high-tech businesses,
though the libertarian Cato Institute has suggested that the EU transfer
payments were economically inefficient and may have actually slowed growth. The
conservative Heritage Foundation also attributed transfer payments with no
significant role in causing growth. Ireland's membership in the European Union
since 1973 helped the country gain access to Europe's large markets. Ireland's
trade had previously been predominantly with the United Kingdom. Industrial
Policies. In the 1990s, the provision of subsidies and investment capital by
Irish state organisations (such as IDA Ireland) encouraged high-profile
companies like Dell, Intel, and Microsoft to locate in Ireland. These companies
were attracted to Ireland because of its European Union membership, relatively
low wages, government grants and low tax rates. Enterprise Ireland, a state
agency, provides financial, technical and social support to start-up
businesses. The building of the International Financial Services Centre in
Dublin led to the creation of 14,000 high-value jobs in the accounting, legal
and financial management sectors. In July 2003 the government established the
Science Foundation Ireland on a statutory basis to promote education for
highly-skilled careers, particularly in biotechnology and
information&communications technology, with the additional purpose to invest in
science initiatives that aim to further Ireland's knowledge economy. Geography
and Demographics. A favourable time zone difference allows Irish and British
employees to work the first part of each day while U.S. workers sleep. U.S.
firms were drawn to Ireland by cheap wage costs compared to the UK, and by the
limited government intervention in business compared to other EU members, and
particularly to countries in Eastern Europe. Growing stability in Northern
Ireland brought about by the Good Friday Agreement further established
Ireland's ability to provide a stable business environment. Irish workers can
communicate effectively with Americans — especially compared to other low-
wage EU nations such as Portugal and Spain. This factor was vital to U.S.
companies choosing Ireland for their European headquarters. It has also been
argued that the demographic dividend from the rising ratio of workers to
dependents due to falling fertility, and increased female labour market
participation, increased income per capita. Consequences. Ireland was
transformed from one of the poorest countries in Western Europe to one of the
wealthiest. Disposable income soared to record levels, enabling a huge rise in
consumer spending. Unemployment fell from 18% in the late 1980s to 4.5% by the
end of 2007, and average industrial wages grew at one of the highest rates in
Europe. Inflation brushed 5% per annum towards the end of the 'Tiger' period,
pushing Irish prices up to those of Nordic Europe, even though wage rates are
roughly the same as in the UK. The National debt had remained constant during
the boom, but the GDP to Debt ratio has risen, due to the dramatic rise in GDP.
". The new wealth resulted in large investments in modernising Irish
infrastructure and cities. The National Development Plan led to improvements in
roads, and new transport services were developed, such as the Luas light rail
lines, the Dublin Port Tunnel, and the extension of the Cork Suburban Rail.
Local authorities enhanced city streets, and built monuments like the Spire of
Dublin. Ireland's trend of net emigration was reversed as the republic became a
destination for immigrants. This significantly changed Irish demographics and
resulted in expanding multiculturalism, particularly in the Dublin, Cork,
Limerick and Galway areas. It was estimated in 2007 that 10% of Irish residents
were foreign-born. Most of the new arrivals were citizens of Poland and the
Baltic states, many of whom found work in the retail and service sectors.
Within Ireland, many young people left the rural countryside to live and work
in urban centres. The growing success of Ireland's economy encouraged
entrepreneurship and risk-taking, qualities that had been dormant during poor
economic periods. However, whilst some semblance of a culture of
entrepreneurship exists, foreign-owned companies account for 93% of Ireland's
exports. Many people in Ireland believe that growing consumerism during the
boom years eroded the country's culture, with the adoption of American
capitalist ideals. While Ireland's historical economic ties to the United
Kingdom had often been the subject of criticism, Peader Kirby argues that the
new ties to the U.S. economy were met with a "satisfied silence." Nevertheless,
voices on the left have decried the "closer to Boston than Berlin" philosophy
of the government parties. Writers such as William Wall, Mike McCormick and
Gerry Murphy have satirised these developments. Similarly, many Irish people
maintain what they consider a pragmatic approach to immigration, saying that it
is necessary to bring about further GDP growth and that Ireland, as a nation
with a long history of emigration, has an obligation to accept immigrants.
Growing wealth was blamed for rising crime levels among youths, particularly
alcohol-related violence resulting from increased spending power. However it
was also accompanied by rapidly increased life expectancy and very high quality
of life ratings (indeed, the country ranked first in The Economist's quality of
life index). Banking Scandals. The New York Times in 2005 described Ireland as
the "Wild West of European finance", a perception that helped prompt the
creation of the Irish Financial Services Regulatory Authority. Despite its
mandate for stricter oversight, the agency never imposed major sanctions on any
Irish institution, even though Ireland had experienced several major banking
scandals in overcharging of their customers. Industry representatives disputed
the idea that Ireland may be home to unchecked financial frauds. In December
2008, irregularities in directors loans, that were kept off a bank's balance
sheet for eight years forced the resignation of the financial regulator.
Economic commentator David McWilliams has described the collapse of Anglo Irish
Bank as Ireland's Enron. Downturn, 2001–2003. The Celtic Tiger's momentum
slowed sharply in 2002, after seven years of high growth. The Irish economic
downturn was in line with the worldwide downturn. The economy was impacted by a
large reduction in investment in the worldwide information technology (IT)
industry. The industry had over-expanded in the late 1990s, and its stock
market equity declined sharply. Ireland was a major player in the IT industry:
In 2002, it had exported US$10.4 billion worth of computer services, compared
to $6.9 billion from the United States. Ireland accounted for approximately 50
percent of all mass-market packaged software sold in Europe in 2002 (OECD,
2002; OECD, 2004). Foot and mouth disease and the September 11, 2001 attacks
damaged Ireland's tourism and agricultural sectors, deterring U.S. and British
tourists. Several companies moved operations to Eastern Europe and the People's
Republic of China because of a rise in Irish wage costs, insurance premiums,
and a general reduction in Ireland's economic competitiveness. The rising value
of the Euro hit non-EMU exports, particularly those to the U.S. and the United
Kingdom. At the same time, economies globally experienced a slowdown. The
economy of the United States grew only 0.3% in April, May and June 2002 from a
year earlier. The Federal Reserve made 11 rate cuts that year in an attempt to
stimulate the U.S. economy. In Europe, the EU scarcely grew throughout the
whole of 2002, and many governments (notably Germany and France) lost control
of public finances, causing large deficits that broke the terms of the EMU
Stability and Growth Pact. The economic downturn in Ireland was not a recession
but a slowdown in the rate of economic expansion. Signs of a recovery became
evident in late 2003 as U.S. investment levels increased once again. Many
senior economists have heavily criticised the Government and the economic
imbalance in favour of the construction industry and the prospect of sustaining
economic growth in the future. Post-2003 resurgence. After the slowdown in 2001
and 2002, Irish economic growth began to accelerate again in late 2003 and
2004. Some of the media considered that an opportunity to document the return
of the Celtic Tiger — occasionally referred to in the press as the "Celtic
Tiger 2" and "Celtic Tiger Mark 2". In 2004, Irish growth was the highest, at
4.5%, of the EU-15 states, and a similar figure was forecast for 2005. Those
rates contrast with growth rates of 1% to 3% for many other European economies,
including Germany, France, and Italy. In 2006 there was a surge in Foreign
Direct Investment and a net increase of 3,795 in IDA supported jobs with
International and Financial Services having the highest growth rate. The
reasons for the continuation of the Irish economic boom were somewhat
controversial within Ireland. Sceptics said that the recent growth was merely
due to a great increase in property values, and to catch-up growth in
employment in the construction sector. Globally, the U.S. recovery boosted
Ireland's economy due to Ireland's close economic ties to the U.S. The decline
in tourism as a result of foot and mouth disease and the September 11, 2001
attacks had reversed itself. The recovery of the global information technology
industry was also a factor: Ireland produced 25% of all European PCs, and Dell,
IBM, Apple and HP all had sizeable Irish operations, with Dell having its major
European manufacturing plant in Limerick. There has been a renewed investment
by multi-national firms. Intel had resumed its Irish expansion, Google created
an office in Dublin, Abbott Laboratories was building a new Irish facility and
Bell Labs were to open a future facility. Domestically, a new state body,
Science Foundation Ireland, was established to promote new science companies in
Ireland Maturing funds from the SSIA government savings scheme relaxed
consumers' concerns about spending and thus fuelled retail sales growth. In
September 2009, Tánaiste Mary Coughlan, said Ireland had lost ground in
international competitiveness every year since 2000. Challenges. Property
market. The return of the boom in 2004 is claimed to be primarily the result of
the large construction sector catching up with the demand caused by the first
boom. The construction sector represented nearly 12% of GDP and a large
proportion of employment among young, unskilled men. A number of sources,
including "The Economist," warned of excessive Irish property values. 2004 saw
the construction of 80,000 new homes, compared to the United Kingdom's 160,000
– a nation that has 15 times Ireland's population. It is estimated that home
completions in 2006 may have reached 90,000. In January 2009 UCD economist
Morgan Kelly predicted that house prices would fall by 80 per cent from peak to
trough in real terms. Loss of competitiveness. Rising wages, inflation and
excessive public spending led to a loss of competitiveness in the Irish
economy. Irish wages are now substantially above the EU average, particularly
in the Dublin region. Low-paid sectors such as retail and hospitality remained
below the EU-15 average however. The pressures primarily affect unskilled,
semi-skilled, and manufacturing jobs. Outsourcing of professional jobs is also
increasing, with Poland in 2008 gaining several hundred former Irish jobs from
the accountancy division of Philips and Dell. Promotion of indigenous industry.
One of the major challenges facing Ireland is the successful promotion of
indigenous industry. Although Ireland boasts a few large international
companies, such as AIB, CRH, Kerry Group, Smurfit Kappa Group, Élan and
Ryanair, there are few companies with over one billion euros in annual revenue.
The government has charged Enterprise Ireland with the task of boosting
Ireland's indigenous industry. The government launched a Web site in 2003 with
the objective of streamlining and marketing the process of starting a business
in Ireland. Reliance on foreign energy sources. Ireland relies on imported
fossil fuels for over 80% of its energy. Ireland for many years in the middle
twentieth century limited its dependence on external energy sources by
developing its peat bogs, building various hydroelectric projects including a
dam at Ardnacrusha on the River Shannon in 1928, and developing offshore gas
fields and diversifying into coal in the 1970s. Gas, peat and hydroelectric
power have been almost fully exploited in Ireland. This situation has led to a
continuously increasing need for fossil fuels at a time of increasing concerns
about security of supply and global warming. One solution is to develop
alternative energy sources including wind power and, to a lesser extent, wave
power. Wind however is not a panacea as it needs to have conventional plants to
augment it. An offshore wind farm is currently under construction off the east
coast near Arklow, and many remote locations in the west show potential for
wind farm development. A report by Sustainable Energy Ireland indicated that if
wind power were properly developed, Ireland could one day be exporting excess
wind power if the natural difficulties of integrating wind power into the
national grid are solved. Wind power by November 2009 already accounted for
15.4% of total installed generating capacity in the state. By 2020 the Irish
government forecasts that 40% of the country's energy needs will come from
renewable sources, well above the EU average. Distribution of wealth. Ireland's
new wealth is not evenly distributed. The United Nations reported in 2004 that
Ireland was second only to the United States in inequality among Western
nations. There is some opposition to the theory that Ireland's wealth has been
unusually unevenly distributed, among them economist and journalist David
McWilliams. He cites Eurostat figures which indicate that Ireland is just above
average in terms equality by one type of measurement. However, while it is
better off by this measurement than generally less developed and/or more free
market countries like Britain, the Mediterranean and the new accession states,
Ireland is still more unequal than the Scandinavan countries, Germany and
France. Moreover, Ireland's inequality persists by other measurements.
According to an ESRI report published in December 2006 is the 22nd best out of
the 26 richest countries in terms of the level of its child poverty; and the
2nd most unequal country in Europe. Downturn and ESRI forecast. In an economic
analysis, the Economic and Social Research Institute (ESRI) on June 24, 2008
forecast that there was a possibility the Irish economy would experience
marginal negative growth in 2008. This would be the first time since 1983.
Outlining possible prospects for the economy for 2008, the ESRI said output of
goods and services may fall that year—which would be the Irish definition of
a mild recession. It also predicted a recovery in 2009 and 2010. In September
2008, Ireland became the first eurozone country to officially enter recession.
The recession was confirmed by figures from the Central Statistics Office
showing the bursting of the property bubble and a collapse in consumer spending
terminated the boom that was the Celtic Tiger. The figures show the gross
domestic product (GDP), which measures the value of all the goods and services
produced in the State, fell 0.8% in the second three months of 2008 compared
with the same quarter of 2007. That was the second successive quarter of
negative economic growth, which is the definition of a recession. This is the
first time since 1983, that the economy has been hit by falling growth, or
recession. In a November 2008 interview in Hot Press in a grim assessment of
where Ireland stood, Taoiseach Brian Cowen said that many people still did not
realise how badly shaken the public finances were. By 30 January 2009,
Ireland’s government debt had become the riskiest in the euro zone,
surpassing Greece’s sovereign bonds, according to credit-default swap prices.
In February 2009, Taoiseach Brian Cowen said that Ireland's economy appeared on
course to contract by 6.5 percent in 2009. Aftermath. Former Taoiseach Garret
FitzGerald has blamed Ireland's dire economic state in 2009 on a series of
"calamitous" government policy errors. Between the years of 2000 and 2003 the
then Finance Minister Charlie McCreevy boosted public spending by 48% while
cutting income tax. A second problem occurred when government policies allowed,
or even encouraged, a housing bubble to develop, "on an immense scale". Nobel
laureate Paul Krugman had a bleak prediction, "“As far as responding to the
recession goes, Ireland appears to be really, truly without options, other than
to hope for an export-led recovery, if and when the rest of the world bounces
back.”" The International Monetary Fund in mid April 2009 forecasted a very
poor outlook for Ireland. It projected that the Irish economy would contract by
8 per cent in 2009 and by 3 per cent in 2010 – and that might be on the
optimistic side. Unemployment in Ireland was forecasted to rise almost 17
percent in 2010, the Economic and Social Research Institute (ESRI) stated in a
report published on 2009-04-28, however the unemployment rate in 2010 steadied
at a rate of 14%. On November 19, 2010, The Irish Government had begun talks on
a multi-billion-dollar economic assistance package with experts from the
International Monetary Fund (IMF) and the European Union. References. http://
www.economist.com/media/pdf/QUALITY_OF_LIFE.pdf
