Censorship Censorship is the suppression of speech or other public
communication which may be considered objectionable, harmful, sensitive, or
inconvenient as determined by a government, media outlet, or other controlling
body. It can be done by governments and private organizations or by individuals
who engage in self-censorship. It occurs in a variety of different contexts
including speech, books, music, films and other arts, the press, radio,
television, and the Internet for a variety of reasons including national
security, to control obscenity, child pornography, and hate speech, to protect
children, to promote or restrict political or religious views, to prevent
slander and libel, and to protect intellectual property. It may or may not be
legal. Many countries provide strong protections against censorship by law, but
none of these protections are absolute and it is frequently necessary to
balance conflicting rights in order to determine what can and cannot be
censored. Types. Political. Strict censorship existed in the Eastern Bloc.
Throughout the bloc, the various ministries of culture held a tight rein on
their writers. Cultural products there reflected the propaganda needs of the
state. Party-approved censors exercised strict control in the early years. In
the Stalinist period, even the weather forecasts were changed if they had the
temerity to suggest that the sun might not shine on May Day. Under Nicolae
Ceauşescu in Romania, weather reports were doctored so that the temperatures
were not seen to rise above or fall below the levels which dictated that work
must stop. Independent journalism did not exist in the Soviet Union until
Mikhail Gorbachev became its leader; all reporting was directed by the
Communist Party or related organizations. Pravda, the predominant newspaper in
the Soviet Union, had a monopoly. Foreign newspapers were available only if
they were published by Communist Parties sympathetic to the Soviet Union.
Possession and use of copying machines was tightly controlled in order to
hinder production and distribution of samizdat, illegal self-published books
and magazines. Possession of even a single samizdat manuscript such as a book
by Andrei Sinyavsky was a serious crime which might involve a visit from the
KGB. Another outlet for works which did not find favor with the authorities was
publishing abroad. The People's Republic of China employs sophisticated
censorship mechanisms, referred to as the Golden Shield Project, to monitor the
internet. Popular search engines such as Baidu also remove politically
sensitive search results.Baidu’s Internal Monitoring and Censorship Document
Leaked (2)Baidu’s Internal Monitoring and Censorship Document Leaked (3) Iraq
under Baathist Saddam Hussein had much the same techniques of press censorship
as did Romania under Nicolae Ceauşescu but with greater potential violence.
Cuban media is operated under the supervision of the Communist Party's
"Department of Revolutionary Orientation", which "develops and coordinates
propaganda strategies". Connection to the Internet is restricted and censored.
Censorship also takes place in capitalist nations, such as Uruguay. In 1973, a
military coup took power in Uruguay, and the State practiced censorship. For
example, writer Eduardo Galeano was imprisoned and later was forced to flee.
His book Open Veins of Latin America was banned by the right-wing military
government, not only in Uruguay, but also in Chile and Argentina. Critics of
the Campaign finance reform in the United States claim that this reform imposes
widespread restrictions on political speech. State secrets and prevention of
attention. In wartime, explicit censorship is carried out with the intent of
preventing the release of information that might be useful to an enemy.
Typically it involves keeping times or locations secret, or delaying the
release of information (e.g., an operational objective) until it is of no
possible use to enemy forces. The moral issues here are often seen as somewhat
different, as the proponents of this form of censorship argues that release of
tactical information usually presents a greater risk of casualties among one's
own forces and could possibly lead to loss of the overall conflict. During
World War I letters written by British soldiers would have to go through
censorship. This consisted of officers going through letters with a black
marker and crossing out anything which might compromise operational secrecy
before the letter was sent. The World War II catchphrase "Loose lips sink
ships" was used as a common justification to exercise official wartime
censorship and encourage individual restraint when sharing potentially
sensitive information. An example of "sanitization" policies comes from the
USSR under Joseph Stalin, where publicly used photographs were often altered to
remove people whom Stalin had condemned to execution. Though past photographs
may have been remembered or kept, this deliberate and systematic alteration to
all of history in the public mind is seen as one of the central themes of
Stalinism and totalitarianism. Censorship is occasionally carried out to aid
authorities or to protect an individual, as with some kidnappings when
attention and media coverage of the victim can sometimes be seen as unhelpful.
Religion. Censorship by religion is a form of censorship where freedom of
expression is controlled or limited using religious authority or on the basis
of the teachings of the religion. This form of censorship has a long history
and is practiced in many societies and by many religions. Examples include the
Galileo affair, Edict of Compiègne, the Index Librorum Prohibitorum (list of
prohibited books) and the condemnation of Salman Rushdie's novel "The Satanic
Verses" by Iranian leader Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini. Educational sources. The
content of school textbooks is often the issue of debate, since their target
audience is young people, and the term "whitewashing" is the one commonly used
to refer to removal of critical or conflicting events. The reporting of
military atrocities in history is extremely controversial, as in the case of
The Holocaust (or Holocaust denial), Bombing of Dresden, the Nanking Massacre
as found with Japanese history textbook controversies, the Armenian Genocide,
the Tiananmen Square protests of 1989, and the Winter Soldier Investigation of
the Vietnam War. In the context of secondary school education, the way facts
and history are presented greatly influences the interpretation of contemporary
thought, opinion and socialization. One argument for censoring the type of
information disseminated is based on the inappropriate quality of such material
for the young. The use of the "inappropriate" distinction is in itself
controversial, as it changed heavily. A Ballantine Books version of the book
Fahrenheit 451 which is the version used by most school classes contained
approximately 75 separate edits, omissions, and changes from the original
Bradbury manuscript. In February 2006 a National Geographic Magazine cover was
censored by the Nashravaran Journalistic Institute. The offending cover was
about the subject of love and a picture of an embracing couple was hidden
beneath a white sticker. Copy, picture, and writer approval. Copy approval is
the right to read and amend an article, usually an interview, before
publication. Many publications refuse to give copy approval but it is
increasingly becoming common practice when dealing with publicity anxious
celebrities. Picture approval is the right given to an individual to choose
which photos will be published and which will not. Robert Redford is well known
for insisting upon picture approval. Writer approval is when writers are chosen
based on whether they will write flattering articles or not. Hollywood
publicist Pat Kingsley is known for banning certain writers who wrote
undesirably about one of her clients from interviewing any of her other
clients. Creative censorship. There are many ways that censors exhibit
creativity, but a specific variant is of concern in which censors rewrite
texts, giving these texts secret co-authors. This form of censorship is
discussed in George Orwell's novel "Nineteen Eighty-Four". Self-censorship.
According to a Pew Research Center and the "Columbia Journalism Review" survey,
"About one-quarter of the local and national journalists say they have
purposely avoided newsworthy stories, while nearly as many acknowledge they
have softened the tone of stories to benefit the interests of their news
organizations. Fully four-in-ten (41%) admit they have engaged in either or
both of these practices." Censorship by medium. Books. Book censorship can be
enacted at the national or sub-national level, and can carry legal penalties
for their infraction. Books may also be challenged at a local, community level.
As a result, books can be removed from schools or libraries, although these
bans do not extend outside of that area. Films. Aside from the usual
justifications of pornography and obscenity, some films are censored due to
changing racial attitudes or political correctness in order to avoid ethnic
stereotyping and/or ethnic offense despite its historical or artistic value.
One example is the still withdrawn "Censored Eleven" series of animated
cartoons, which may have been innocent then, but are "incorrect" now. Music.
Music censorship has been implemented by states, religions, educational
systems, families, retailers and lobbying groups – and in most cases they
violate international conventions of human rights. Maps. Censorship of maps is
often employed for military purposes. For example, the technique was used in
former East Germany, especially for the areas near the border to West Germany
in order to make attempts of defection more difficult. Censorship of maps is
also applied by Google maps, where certain areas are grayed out or blacked or
areas are purposely left out-dated with old imagery. Internet. [Censorship
World Map.svg|right|500px|thumb|OpenNet Initiative [http://opennet.net/
research/data "Summarized global Internet filtering data spreadsheet", 8
November 2011 and "Country Profiles", the OpenNet Initiative is a collaborative
partnership of the Citizen Lab at the Munk School of Global Affairs, University
of Toronto; the Berkman Center for Internet & Society at Harvard University;
and the SecDev Group, Ottawa Internet censorship is control or suppression of
the publishing or accessing of information on the Internet. It may be carried
out by governments or by private organizations either at the behest of
government or on their own initiative. Individuals and organizations may engage
in self-censorship on their own or due to intimidation and fear. The issues
associated with Internet censorship are similar to those for offline censorship
of more traditional media. One difference is that national borders are more
permeable online: residents of a country that bans certain information can find
it on websites hosted outside the country. Thus censors must work to prevent
access to information even though they lack physical or legal control over the
websites themselves. This in turn requires the use of technical censorship
methods that are unique to the Internet, such as site blocking and content
filtering. Unless the censor has total control over all Internet-connected
computers, such as in North Korea or Cuba, total censorship of information is
very difficult or impossible to achieve due to the underlying distributed
technology of the Internet. Pseudonymity and data havens (such as Freenet)
protect free speech using technologies that guarantee material cannot be
removed and prevents the identification of authors. Technologically savvy users
can often find ways to access blocked content. Nevertheless, blocking remains
an effective means of limiting access to sensitive information for most users
when censors, such as those in China, are able to devote significant resources
to building and maintaining a comprehensive censorship system. The poll found
that nearly four in five (78%) Internet users felt that the Internet had
brought them greater freedom, that most Internet users (53%) felt that "the
internet should never be regulated by any level of government anywhere", and
almost four in five Internet users and non-users around the world felt that
access to the Internet was a fundamental right (50% strongly agreed, 29%
somewhat agreed, 9% somewhat disagreed, 6% strongly disagreed, and 6% gave no
opinion). Implementation. The former Soviet Union maintained a particularly
extensive program of state-imposed censorship. The main organ for official
censorship in the Soviet Union was the "Chief Agency for Protection of Military
and State Secrets" generally known as the "Glavlit", its Russian acronym. The
"Glavlit" handled censorship matters arising from domestic writings of just
about any kind—even beer and vodka labels. "Glavlit" censorship personnel
were present in every large Soviet publishing house or newspaper; the agency
employed some 70,000 censors to review information before it was disseminated
by publishing houses, editorial offices, and broadcasting studios. No mass
medium escaped "Glavlit"'s control. All press agencies and radio and television
stations had "Glavlit" representatives on their editorial staffs. Sometimes, a
specific and unique information whose very existence is barely known to the
public, is kept in a subtle, near-censorship situation, being regarded as
"subversive" or "inconvenient". Michel Foucault's 1978 text "Sexual Morality
and the Law" (later republished as "The Danger of Child Sexuality"), for
instance - originally published as "La loi de la pudeur" [literally, "the law
of decency"], defends the decriminalization of statutory rape and the abolition
of age of consent laws. When a publisher comes under pressure to suppress a
book, but has already entered into a contract with the author, they will
sometimes effectively censor the book by deliberately ordering a small print
run and making minimal, if any, attempts to publicize it. This practice became
known in the early 2000s as "privishing" (private publishing). Censorship by
country. Censorship by country collects information on censorship, Internet
censorship, Freedom of the Press, Freedom of speech, and Human Rights by
country and presents it in a sortable table, together with links to articles
with more information. In addition to countries, the table includes information
on former countries, disputed countries, political sub-units within countries,
and regional organizations. See also. Related articles Freedoms
