Center for Science in the Public Interest Center for Science in the Public
Interest (CSPI) is a Washington, D.C.-based non-profit watchdog and consumer
advocacy group focusing on nutritional education and awareness. History and
funding. CSPI is a consumer advocacy organization. Its focus is nutrition and
health, food safety, and alcohol policy. CSPI is headed by Michael F. Jacobson,
who founded the group in 1971 along with James Sullivan and Albert Fritsch, two
fellow scientists from Ralph Nader's Center for the Study of Responsive Law. In
the early days, CSPI focused on various aspects such as nutrition,
environmental issues, and nuclear energy. However, after the 1977 departure of
Fritsch and Sullivan, CSPI began to focus exclusively on nutrition and food
safety. CSPI has 501(c)(3) status. Its chief source of income is its "Nutrition
Action Health Letter", which has about 900,000 subscribers and does not accept
corporate advertising. The organization receives about 5 to 10 percent of its
$17 million annual budget from grants by private foundations. Programs and
campaigns. Nutrition and food labeling. CSPI has advocated more accurately
defined nutrition and food labeling. For example, labeling of "low-fat" or
"heart healthy" foods in restaurants must now meet specific requirements
established by the Food and Drug Administration as of May 2, 1997. In 1994, the
group first brought the issue of high saturated fat in movie popcorn to the
public attention. In 2003, it worked with lawyer John F. Banzhaf III to
pressure ice cream retailers to display nutritional information about their
products. Most recently, CSPI has focused on nutrition labeling at chain
restaurants and has helped introduce menu labeling legislation in several U.S.
cities and states. Its guidelines include detailed nutrition labeling, a
prohibition on trans fats additives, and reducing the amount of sodium in
processed foods. In 1989, CSPI was instrumental in convincing fast-food
restaurants to stop using animal fat for frying, promoting the use of trans
fats instead. They would later reverse their position on the use of trans fats.
In 1998, the Center published a report entitled "Liquid Candy: How Soft Drinks
are Harming Americans' Health". It examined statistics relating to the soaring
consumption of soft drinks, particularly by children, and the consequent health
ramifications including tooth decay, nutritional depletion, obesity, type-2
(formerly known as "adult-onset") diabetes, and heart disease. It also reviewed
soft drink marketing and made various recommendations aimed at reducing soft
drink consumption, in schools and elsewhere. A second, updated edition of the
report was published in 2005. Among the actions they advocate taxing soft
drinks. Food Safety Initiative. One of CSPI's largest projects is its Food
Safety initiative, directed to reduce food contamination and foodborne illness.
In addition to publishing "Outbreak Alert!", a compilation of food-borne
illnesses and outbreaks, the project supports the establishment of a new Food
Safety Administration that would combine the food safety functions of the U.S.
Food and Drug Administration (FDA), Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), and
Department of Agriculture (USDA) into a single agency. Alcohol Policies
Project. The group's "Alcohol Policies Project" advocates against what it
considers adverse societal influences of alcohol, such as marketing campaigns
that target young drinkers, and promotes turning self-imposed advertising bans
by alcohol industry groups into law. The project is run by long-time director
George Hacker, a lawyer who also co-directs the Coalition for the Prevention of
Alcohol Problems. One of the main activities of the project is the "Campaign
for Alcohol-Free Sports TV". Launched in 2003 with support of at least 80 other
local and national groups, the campaign asked schools to pledge to prohibit
alcohol advertising on local sports programming and to work toward eliminating
alcohol advertising from televised college sports programs. It also sought
Congressional support for such a prohibition. In addition, CSPI has pressured
alcoholic beverage companies with lawsuits. In one such lawsuit, filed in
September 2008, the Center "sueMillerCoors Brewing Company over its malt
beverage Sparks, arguing that the caffeine and guarana in the drink are
additives that have not been approved by the FDA," and that the combination of
those ingredients with alcohol resulted in "more drunk driving, more injuries,
and more sexual assaults." Criticisms. CSPI's public policy recommendations,
and sometimes the organization's motivation for making them, have been
challenged by various parties, particularly those within the food industry that
have been the most directly affected. Of past advocacy. One example surrounds
the organization's reversal of position on the question of trans fats during
the 1980 and 1990s. During the 1980s, CSPI's campaign "Saturated Fat Attack"
advocated the replacement of beef tallow, palm oil and coconut oil at fast food
restaurants, while maintaining that trans fat were comparatively benign. In a
1986 pamphlet entitled "The Fast-Food Guide", it praised chains such as KFC
that had converted to partially hydrogenated vegetable oils, which are lower in
saturated fat but high in trans fat. As a result of this pressure, many
restaurants such as McDonald's made the switch. From the mid-1990s onward,
however, CSPI identified trans fats as the greater public health danger. CSPI
executive director Michael Jacobson went on record saying, "Twenty years ago,
scientists (including me) thought trans was innocuous. Since then, we've
learned otherwise." In response, three trade groups — the National Restaurant
Association, the National Association of Margarine Manufacturers and the
Institute of Shortening and Edible Oils — "said the evidence was
contradictory and inconclusive, and accused CSPI of jumping to a premature
conclusion." (Numerous studies and public health agencies have since supported
the view that trans fats carry health risks.) A "Wall Street Journal" editorial
acknowledged the risks, but argued, based on its reversal, that CSPI itself was
to blame for creating the problem. Of policies. Other critics — such as the
restaurant, food, and tobacco industry-funded Center for Consumer Freedom—
refer to CSPI as "the Food Police," and suggest its focus on food manufacturers
and retailers distracts from "real culprits... a lack of exercise and people's
unwillingness to take personal responsibility for their own diets." Former U.S.
Representative Bob Barr (a libertarian-leaning Republican) accused CSPI of
pursuing "a pre-existing political agenda" and pointed to individual
responsibility for dietary choices. Cato Institute (a Washington D.C.-based
libertarian think tank) scholar Walter Olson wrote that the group's "longtime
shtick is to complain that businesses like McDonald’s, rather than our own
choices, are to blame for rising obesity," and called CSPI's suit against
McDonald's on behalf of a California mother a "new low in responsible
parenting" In 2002, food industry lobbyist Rick Berman, who is also the
executive director of the Center for Consumer Freedom, announced a series of
print and radio ads designed in part to drive traffic to the CCF website. A
"San Francisco Chronicle" article identified CSPI as "one of two groups singled
out the CCF for full-on attack," and said, "What's not mentioned on the Web
site is that it's one of a cluster of such nonprofits started... by Berman." Of
science. Criticism has even come, on occasion, from CSPI alumni. For instance,
Doug Gurian-Sherman (former science director for CSPI's biotechnology project,
now a member of the Union of Concerned Scientists) responded to a 2005 position
paper on the regulation of genetically engineered crops by saying, "CSPI’s
assumption that these crops should take less time is inconsistent with its own
positions and clearly misunderstands the science involved."
