Centrism In politics, centrism or the centre describes a political outlook or
specific position that involves acceptance or support of a balance of a degree
of social equality and a degree of social hierarchy or social inequality, while
opposing political changes which would result in a significant shift of society
strongly towards the left or the right. Centre left and centre right politics
both involve a general association with centrism combined while leaning
somewhat to their respective sides of the spectrum. Definitions. Voters may
identify with moderation for a number of reasons: pragmatic, ideological or
otherwise. It has even been suggested that individuals vote for ‘centrist’
parties for purely statistical reasons. Usage by political parties by country.
Belgium. The utmost centrist party of Flanders has been the "Volksunie", which
not only embraced social liberalism but also displayed the national sentiment
of the Dutch speaking Belgians who felt culturally suppressed by Francophones.
The New Flemish Alliance is the largest, and since 2009, the only successor of
that party. Among French speaking Belgians the Humanist Democratic Centre is a
centre-right or centre party as it is considerably less conservative than its
Flemish counterpart, Christian Democratic & Flemish. Another party in the
centre of the political spectrum is the liberal Reformist Movement. France.
France has a tradition of parties that call themselves "centrist". The most
notable centrist party, often also called liberal, was the Union for French
Democracy, created in 1978. Among its successors belongs the small Centrist
Alliance, the most successful of them is the Democratic Movement of François
Bayrou, founded in 2007. Germany. "Zentrismus" is a term merely known to
experts and may be confused with "Zentralismus" (as opposite to federalism);
the usual term in German is "politische Mitte" (political centre).
Historically, the most centrist party of all German parties with a
parliamentary representation may have been the social-liberal German Democratic
Party of the Weimar Republic (1918–1933). "Zentrum" was the name of the party
of the Catholics, founded in 1870. It united left-wing and right-wing Catholics
and is considered the first German "Volkspartei" (catch-all party), but it was
not neutral on religious issues (such as on secular education). "Zentrum" had
its name from the fact that its representatives sat between the liberals (left)
and the conservatives (right). The successor of "Zentrum", the Christian
Democratic Union (since 1945), describes itself as centrist, as does the
classical liberal Free Democratic Party. The representatives of the Social
Democratic Party of Germany feel less at ease in describing their party as
centrist. Alliance '90/The Greens was found in 1993 as a merger from the East
German Alliance 90, a group of civil rights activists, and the (West) German
Green. The Latter was a coalition of various unorthodox-left politicians and
more liberal "realists". This Bundestag party also hesitates in using the term
"center", and in distancing itself thereby from the word "left". The party sits
in the Bundestag between Social Democrats and Christian Democrats, while the
FDP has its seats at the right of the Christian Democrats. In the state
parliaments are another parties. The South Schleswig Voter Federation of Danes
and Frisians in the state of Schleswig-Holstein has a centrist position,
although in the past the party usually leaned to the left. In the German
presidential elections of 2009, 2010 and 2012, it supported the candidates of
Social Democrats and Greens. In Bavaria, the Free Voters are represented in the
state parliament, they can be seen as centrist as well. Ireland. In the
Republic of Ireland, the two main political parties, Fianna Fáil and Fine
Gael, both claim the political centre ground, but seem to mostly consist of
right wing beliefs. ). They have shared broadly similar policies in the past,
with their primary division perceived as being steeped in Irish Civil War
politics. Fine Gael is aligned to Christian democratic parties in Europe via
its membership of the European People's Party, and is described internationally
as centre-right by the likes of Reuters. Netherlands. In the Netherlands, four
parties have, more than once, sent members into the cabinet. From them, the
Christian Democratic Appeal (CDA) tends to be centre-right and the Democrats 66
(D66) centrist. D66 calls itself a social liberal party and avoids positioning
itslef explicitly as left or right. Livable Netherlands was originally a
centrist political movement of local grass-root parties with an anti-
establishment touch similar to early D66. However, the party entered in 2002
national parliament with a right-wing populist programme and security and
immigration as the major issues. The fundamentalist Protestant ChristianUnion
has a certain centrist position in so far it is leftish on social issues,
immigration and environment but right wing when it comes to issues such as
drugs and euthanasia. Nordic countries. In most of the Nordic countries, there
are Nordic agrarian parties. These share in addition to the centrist position
on the socio-economic left-right scale a clear, separate ideology. This
position is centered around decentralisation, a commitment to small business
and environmental protection. Centrists have aligned themselves with the
Liberal International and European Liberal Democrat and Reform Party.
Historically, all of these parties were farmers' parties committed to
maintaining rural life. In the 1960s, these parties broadened their scope to
include non-farmer related issues and renamed themselves Centre Party. Neither
the Centre Democrats and the Liberal Alliance in Denmark are rooted in
agrarianism. United Kingdom. In the late 1990s, the traditionally social-
democratic Labour Party under the leadership of Tony Blair began to move
towards a centrist Third Way policy platform, creating New Labour. Generally
the party in UK politics most seen as holding the centre ground is the Liberal
Democrats who are a social liberal party who are often placed between centre-
left and the radical centre in terms of the political spectrum. In March 2011
the leader of the Liberal Democrats and Deputy Prime Minister of the United
Kingdom, Nick Clegg, stated that he believed that his party belonged to the
radical centre. Clegg also quoted John Meynard Keynes, William Beveridge, Jo
Grimond, David Lloyd George and John Stuart Mill, implying that they may also
have belonged to the radical centre. He pointed to liberalism as an ideology of
people, and he described the political spectrum and his party's position on it
as follows: "For the left, an obsession with the state. For the right, a
worship of the market. But as liberals, we place our faith in people. People
with power and opportunity in their hands. Our opponents try to divide us with
their outdated labels of left and right. But we are not on the left and we are
not on the right. We have our own label: Liberal. We are liberals and we own
the freehold to the centre ground of British politics. Our politics is the
politics of the radical centre." United States. Independent candidate H. Ross
Perot garnered nearly 19% of the popular vote in the 1992 Presidential
election. His "get under the hood" campaign focusing on balancing the budget
has been one of the most successful centrist efforts in U.S. history, but he
did not carry a single state in the Electoral College. A late 2011 Gallup poll
of Americans' attitudes towards government reported that 17% expressed
conservative views, 22% expressed libertarian views, 20% expressed
communitarian views, 17% expressed centrist views, and 24% expressed liberal
views. Americans Elect, a coalition of American centrists, launched an effort
in mid-2011 to create a national 'virtual primary' that would challenge the
current two-party system. The group aims to nominate a presidential ticket of
centrists with names that would be on ballots in all 50 states. The group banks
on broad cultural dissatisfaction with the partisan gridlock in Washington,
D.C. "The Christian Science Monitor" has stated that "the political climate
couldn't be riper for a serious third-party alternative" such as their effort,
but the "hurdles Americans Elect faces are daunting" to get on ballots.
Journalist and political commentator E.J. Dionne wrote in his book "Why
Americans Hate Politics", published on the eve of the 1992 Presidential
election, that he believes American voters are looking for a "New Political
Center" that intermix "liberal instincts" and "conservative values." He labeled
people in this center position as "tolerant traditionalists". He described them
as believers in conventional social morality that ensure family stability, as
tolerant within reason to those that challenge those morals, and as
pragmatically supportive of government intervention in spheres such as
education, child care, health care as long as budgets are balanced. In
addition, Washington Political Journalist Linda J Killian describes the current
situation in her book "The Swing Vote." She writes that Americans are
frustrated with Congress and its dysfunction and inability to do its job. A
growing number of Americans are not satisfied with the political process
because a number of factors from influx of money into politics and the
influence of special interests and lobbyists. The book classifies four types of
independent voters including "NPR Republicans", "America First Democrats", "The
Facebook Generation" and "Starbucks Moms and Dads" who will be big determinates
of Swing votes in the 2012 Presidential election. New Zealand. In New Zealand,
United Future is the centrist party with currently one seat in parliament.
Spain. The national party which voters consider to be closest to the centre,
according to several opinion polls; is Union, Progress and Democracy. Electors
also consider the two most important nationalist parties: Convergence and Union
from Catalonia and Basque Nationalist Party from the Basque Country, to be
centred.
