Center for Biological Diversity The Center for Biological Diversity (Center)
based in Tucson, Arizona, is a nonprofit membership organization with
approximately 220,000 members and online activists, known for its work
protecting endangered species through legal action and scientific petitions.
The Center has offices and staff in New Mexico, Arizona, Nevada, California,
Oregon, Illinois, Minnesota, Alaska, Vermont and Washington, D.C. It was
founded in 1989 by Kieran Suckling, Peter Galvin, Todd Schulke, and Robin
Silver. Background. Given a small grant by the Fund for Wild Nature, the
organization started in 1989 as a small group by the name of "Greater Gila
Biodiversity Project", with the objective to protect endangered species and
critical habitat in the southwest. The organization later grew and became the
Center for Biological Diversity. Kieran Suckling, Peter Galvin, and Todd
Schulke founded the organization in response to what they perceived as a
failure on the part of the United States Forest Service to protect imperiled
species from logging, grazing, and mining. As surveyors in New Mexico, the
three men discovered "a rare Mexican Spotted Owl nest in an old-growth tree",
but their discovery was overshadowed by Forest Service plans to lease the land
to timber companies; Suckling, Galvin, and Schulke believed that it was within
the Forest Service’s mission to save sensitive species like the Mexican
Spotted Owl from harm, and that the government had shirked its duty in
deference to corporate interests. Suckling, Galvin, and Schulke went to the
media to register their outrage; the old-growth tree was allowed to stand, and
this success led to the founding of the Center for Biological Diversity.
Initially, the Center focused on issues specific to the Southwestern United
States, but today its mission encompasses far-reaching problems such as global
threats to biological diversity and climate change. The Center employs a group
of paid and pro bono attorneys to use litigation to effect change, and claims a
93 percent success rate for their lawsuits. Press. On 13 June 2007, the Center
spoke out against a Bush administration proposal to reduce the protected area
for spotted owls in the United States Pacific Northwest. According to Noah
Greenwald, the group's representative in the Northwest, the proposed habitat
cut is "typical of an administration that is looking to reduce protections for
endangered species at every turn." Greenwald said that the rollback is part of
a series of "sweetheart deals," in which the administration settles an
environmental lawsuit out of court and, "at the industry's wishes, reduces the
critical habitat." According to the Center, the move conforms to a broad trend
that includes at least 25 earlier Bush administration decisions on habitat
protections for endangered species. In those cases, the protected areas were
reduced an average of 36 percent. On 16 December 2008, the Center announced
intent to sue the United States government for introducing "regulations... that
would eviscerate our nation’s most successful wildlife law by exempting
thousands of federal activities, including those that generate greenhouse
gases, from review under the Endangered Species Act." The lawsuit, which is
critical of U.S. Interior Department Secretary Dirk Kempthorne and President
George W. Bush, was filed in the Northern District of California by the Center,
Greenpeace and Defenders of Wildlife. According to the Center, "The lawsuit
argues that the regulations violate the Endangered Species Act and did not go
through the required public review process. The regulations, first proposed on
August 11th, were rushed by the Bush administration through an abbreviated
process in which more than 300,000 comments from the public were reviewed in 2-
3 weeks, and environmental impacts were analyzed in a short and cursory
environmental assessment, rather than a fuller environmental impact statement."
August 26, 2009 letter with 300+ Groups Ask Senate for Stronger Climate Bill,
included the Center.
