Ceteris paribus or is a Latin phrase, literally translated as "with other
things the same," or "all other things being equal or held constant." It is an
example of an ablative absolute and is commonly rendered in English as "all
other things being equal." A prediction, or a statement about causal or logical
connections between two states of affairs, is qualified by "ceteris paribus" in
order to acknowledge, and to rule out, the possibility of other factors that
could override the relationship between the antecedent and the consequent. A
"ceteris paribus" assumption is often fundamental to the "predictive" purpose
of scientific inquiry. In order to formulate scientific laws, it is usually
necessary to rule out factors which interfere with examining a specific causal
relationship. Under scientific experiments, the "ceteris paribus" assumption is
realized when a scientist controls for all of the independent variables other
than the one under study, so that the effect of a "single" independent variable
on the dependent variable can be isolated. By holding all the other relevant
factors constant, a scientist is able to focus on the unique effects of a given
factor in a complex causal situation. Such assumptions are also relevant to the
"descriptive" purpose of modeling a theory. In such circumstances, analysts
such as physicists, economists, and behavioral psychologists apply simplifying
assumptions in order to devise or explain an analytical framework that does not
necessarily prove cause and effect but is still useful for describing
fundamental concepts within a realm of inquiry. Economics. Clause. One of the
disciplines in which "ceteris paribus" clauses are most widely used is
economics, in which they are employed to simplify the formulation and
description of economic outcomes. When using "ceteris paribus" in economics,
assume all other variables except those under immediate consideration are held
constant. For example, it can be predicted that if the price of beef
"increases"—"ceteris paribus"—the quantity of beef demanded by buyers will
"decrease". In this example, the clause is used to operationally describe
everything surrounding the relationship between both the "price" and the
"quantity demanded" of an ordinary good. This operational description
intentionally ignores both known and unknown factors that may also influence
the relationship between price and quantity demanded, and thus to assume
"ceteris paribus" is to assume away any interference with the given example.
Such factors that would be intentionally ignored include: the relative change
in price of substitute goods, (e.g., the price of beef vs pork or lamb); the
level of risk aversion among buyers (e.g., fear of mad cow disease); and the
level of overall demand for a good regardless of its current price level (e.g.,
a societal shift toward vegetarianism). The clause is often loosely translated
as "holding all else constant." Two uses. The above passage by Marshall
highlights two ways in which the "ceteris paribus" clause may be used: The one
is "hypothetical", in the sense that some factor is assumed fixed in order to
analyse the influence of another factor in isolation. This would be
hypothetical isolation. An example would be the hypothetical separation of the
income effect and the substitution effect of a price change, which actually go
together. The other use of the "ceteris paribus" clause is to see it as a means
for obtaining an approximate solution. Here it would yield a substantive
isolation. Substantive isolation has two aspects: Temporal and causal. Temporal
isolation requires the factors fixed under the "ceteris paribus" clause to
actually move so slowly relative to the other influence that they can be taken
as practically constant at any point in time. So, if vegetarianism spreads very
slowly, inducing a slow decline in the demand for beef, and the market for beef
clears comparatively quickly, we can determine the price of beef at any instant
by the intersection of supply and demand, and the changing demand for beef will
account for the price changes over time (→Temporary Equilibrium Method). The
other aspect of substantive isolation is causal isolation: Those factors frozen
under a "ceteris paribus" clause should not significantly be affected by the
processes under study. If a change in government policies induces changes in
consumers' behavior on the same time scale, the assumption that consumer
behaviour remains unchanged while policy changes is inadmissible as a
substantive isolation (→Lucas critique). Philosophy. So-called "ceteris
paribus" clauses are also important in philosophy, particularly in ethics and
moral psychology (where they are often used in the analysis of the relation
between mental states and behavior), as well as in the philosophy of science
(where they are often used in the analysis of laws of nature, causation, and
related topics). As an example: It seems that we can say that, if a person
wants to get her hat off of the roof, and she knows that the easiest way to do
this is by putting a ladder up against the wall and climbing it, then she
"will" place the ladder up against the wall and climb it—and, if she does
"not" act in that way, then that seems to be as good a reason as any to say
that she did not really "want" to get her hat back, or did not believe that
climbing up the ladder was the easiest way to do it, after all. But a little
consideration shows that we can assert this as an analytic truth "only if" it
is qualified by a ""ceteris paribus" clause"—since there are myriad other
factors that might prevent her from climbing up the ladder, without making us
retract the claim that she did want her hat—for example, she might have a
crippling fear of heights, or she might want to get to work on time much more
than she wants to get her hat back. Nevertheless, it seems that when we do add
the "ceteris paribus" qualification, there is at least a good case to be made
that the principle so qualified is an "a priori" principle of moral psychology.
However, there is some meta-philosophical debate on analyses of this sort.
Although many philosophers have relied on them (either explicitly or
implicitly), some philosophers allege that any analysis that depends on a
"ceteris paribus" clause is philosophically suspect. In order to understand the
worry, a distinction should be made between two different ways for a statement
to be qualified by a "ceteris paribus" clause: some "ceteris paribus" clauses
are "in principle eliminable" by further analysis, whereas other clauses are
"ineliminable". So, for example, if I say "If the current month is
February—"ceteris paribus"—then it will last only 28 days," then the
"ceteris paribus" clause is added in order to exclude the possibility that it
is a leap year. Since there is a fixed set of rules that define whether or not
the present year is a leap year, one could (in principle) eliminate the
"ceteris paribus" clause from the analysis by rephrasing the sentence to "If
the current month is February, "and" the current year is not evenly divisible
by 4, "then" it will last only 28 days." (Actually the rules for determining a
leap year are more complex than that; but there "is" a "finite" number of
rules, and you could "in principle" include them all in the sentence.) Another
example of this would be: if the exchange rate of Jamaican dollars to US
dollars is 1 USD = 88 JMD, and a telephone service provider provides coverage
at $1.30 per minute, then "ceteris paribus" the telephone service provider's
coverage is $114.40 JMD per minute in Jamaica. Philosophers who worry about
"ceteris paribus" analyses do "not" worry about this sort; their worries are
focused on "ceteris paribus" clauses that are not even eliminable "in
principle". For example, in the philosophy of science, it is common to say that
there is a natural law that events of kind A cause events of kind B "if and
only if" an event of kind A, "ceteris paribus", is always followed by an event
of kind B—in order to rule out the possibility of other causal phenomena
overriding the ordinary effect of the event of kind A. But, in order to
eliminate the "ceteris paribus" clause in "this" analysis, a philosopher would
need to know "every" sort of causal event that could possibly override "any
other" sort of causal event—and, even if there is "in principle" some finite
list that exhausts all of these possibilities (a philosophically controversial
claim), that list is, for certain, "not" known to the person claiming to be
giving a definition of causality. So there is no-one who can say just what is
being ruled out by the "ceteris paribus" clause in this analysis. (Even if an
omniscient physicist "could" spell it all out in a finite period of time, "we"
are the ones purporting to understand how to use the words, and "we" see these
things only through a glass, darkly.) But, if it is not even possible in
principle to "say" just what is being ruled out by the "ceteris paribus" clause
in these examples, then (these philosophers worry) it is no longer clear that
the analysis is "philosophically informative." The suspicion of "ceteris
paribus" arises because it seems sometimes to be used to conceal a sort of
conceptual "blank spot" in the analysis, and (these philosophers allege) the
existence of such a "blank spot" is as good a reason as any to think that an
analysis that depends on it is "not" the right direction to take in analyzing a
particular concept. This is not to say that such "ceteris paribus" statements
are "not" analytically true. The argument is, instead, that the clause shows
that their truth "depends on" a proper analysis of the concept, which has yet
to be done. For example, consider the analysis of causation as B following A
"ceteris paribus". If the analyst is asked to pin down "just what" condition
the "ceteris paribus" is imposing, and the "ceteris paribus" clause is
genuinely ineliminable, then it looks as though all that can be said is
something like, "A causes B if and only if A is followed by B "in a cause-like
pattern"". And "that" is for certain true, but it would be hard to give it as
an analysis of causation with a straight face. The charge, then, is that
ineliminable "ceteris paribus" clauses in an analysis conceal a conceptual
circularity. Jerry Fodor in "Psychosemantics" states that a statement of the
form "Ceteris paribus A" is equivalent to saying, "A...unless not A", making
them vacuously true and really rather pointless. On the other hand, it might be
argued that the objections to "ceteris paribus" analyses depend on problematic
expectations about the methods and results of conceptual analysis. Some
philosophers, in particular, worry that the arguments against "ceteris paribus"
analyses depend on a tacit reductionism about analysis: The assumption seems to
be that, in order to give a conceptual analysis of a concept C, you must be
able to explain C entirely in terms that have nothing to do with C. For these
philosophers, a "ceteris paribus" clause may be indicative of "virtuous"
circularity in an analysis rather than "vicious" circularity: That is, that we
cannot ultimately explain (say) causation in terms that do not tacitly or
explicitly have causal implications; but rather than indicating the need for
further analysis, they argue, the ineliminable dependence on "ceteris paribus"
clauses or further causal talk may just show that causality cannot be explained
in non-causal terms, but rather that terms like "natural law" and "cause" and
"accident" can be explained only in terms of "one another," by elucidating the
connections between them. "Science stands today on something of a divide. For
two centuries it has been exploring systems that are either intrinsically
simple or capable of being analysed into simple components. The fact that such
a dogma as »vary the factors one at a time« could be accepted for a century
shows that scientists were largely concerned in investigating such systems as
allowed this method, for this method is often fundamentally impossible in the
complex systems. Not until Sir Ronald Fisher's work in the 1920s, with
experiments conducted on agricultural soils, did it become clearly recognised
that there are complex systems that just do not allow the varying of only one
factor at a time — they are so dynamic and interconnected that the alteration
of one factor immediately acts as cause to evoke alterations in others, perhaps
in a great many others. Until recently, science tended to evade the study of
such systems, focusing its attention on those that were simple and, especially,
reducible (S.4/14)."
