Chandragupta Maurya Chandragupta Maurya (), (born c. 340 BCE, ruled c. 320 BCE,
– 298 BCE) was the founder of the Maurya Empire. He succeeded in conquering
almost all of the Indian subcontinent and is considered the first unifier of
India as well as its first genuine emperor. In foreign Greek and Latin
accounts, Chandragupta is known as Sandrokyptos ("Σανδρόκυπτος"),
Sandrokottos ("Σανδρόκοττος") or Androcottus. Prior to
Chandragupta's consolidation of power, small regional kingdoms dominated the
northwestern subcontinent, while the Nanda Dynasty dominated the middle and
lower basin of the Ganges. After Chandragupta's conquests, the Maurya Empire
extended from Bengal and Assam in the east, to Afghanistan and Balochistan,some
part of the eastern and south-east Iran in the west, to Kashmir and Nepal in
the north, and to the Deccan Plateau in the south. Tradition holds that
Chandragupta abdicated his throne to become a Digambara Jain monk and led such
an ascetic life that he starved himself to death. He was succeeded by his son
Bindusara in 298 BC. Chandragupta's achievements, which ranged from conquering
Macedonian satrapies in the northwest and conquering the Nanda Empire by the
time he was only about 20 years old, to achieving an alliance with Seleucus I
Nicator and establishing centralized rule throughout the Indian Subcontinent,
remain some of the most celebrated in the history of India. Over two thousand
years later, the accomplishments of Chandragupta stand out in the history of
India. Origins. Many Indian literary traditions connect him with the Nanda
Dynasty of Magadha in modern day Bihar in eastern India. More than half a
millennium later, the Sanskrit drama Mudrarakshasa calls him a "Nandanvaya"
i.e. the descendant of Nanda (Act IV). Again more than a millennium later,
Dhundiraja, a commentator of 18th century on Mudrarakshasa states that
Chandragupta was the son of the Nanda king Sarvarthasiddhi by a wife named
Mura, daughter of a Vrishala (Shudra). Mudrarakshasa uses terms like "kula-
hina" and "Vrishala" for Chandragupta's lineage. This reinforces Justin's
contention that Chandragupta had a humble origin. On the other hand, the same
play describes the Nandas as of Prathita-kula, i.e. illustrious, lineage. The
medieval commentator on the Vishnu Purana informs us that Chandragupta was the
son of a Nanda prince and a () named Mura. The poets Kshmendra and Somadeva
call him Purvananda-suta, son of the genuine Nanda, as opposed to Yoga-Nanda,
i.e. pseudo-Nanda. The Nanda dynasty was started by Mahapadma Nanda, who is
considered the first Shudra king of Magadha. The Buddhist text the Mahavamsa
calls Chandragupt a member of a division of the Khattiya (Kshatriya) clan
called the Moriya (Maurya). Divyāvadāna calls Bindusara, son of Chandragupt,
an anointed Kshatriya, Kshatriya Murdhabhishikata, and in the same work King
Ashoka, son of Bindusara, is also styled a Kshatriya. The Mahaparinibbana Sutta
states that the Moriyas (Mauryas) belonged to the Kshatriya community of
Pippalivana. These traditions indicate that Chandragupt came from a Kshatriya
lineage. The "Mahavamshatika" connects him with the Shakya clan of the Buddha,
a clan which also belongs to the race of Ādityas. A medieval inscription
represents the Maurya clan as belonging to the solar race of Kshatriyas. It is
stated that the Maurya line sprang from Suryavamsi Mandhatri, son of prince
Yuvanashva of the solar race. chandragupt was a student of chankya. Early life.
Very little is known about Chandragupt's youth. What is known is gathered from
later classical Sanskrit literature, as well as classical Greek and Latin
sources which refer to Chandragupta by the names "Sandracottos" or
"Andracottus". According to this text, the encounter would have happened around
326 BCE, suggesting a birth date for Chandragupta around 340 BCE. Plutarch and
other Greco-Roman historians appreciated the gravity of Chandragupta Maurya's
conquests. Junianus Justinus (Justin) describes the humble origins of
Chandragupta, and explains how he later led a popular uprising against the
Nanda king. Foundation of the Maurya Empire. Chandragupt Maurya, with the help
of Chanakya, defeated the Magadha kings and the army of the Chandravanshi clan.
Following his victory, the defeated generals of Alexander settled in Gandhara
(the Kamboja kingdom), today's Afghanistan. At the time of Alexander's
invasion, Chanakya was a teacher in Takshasila. The king of Takshasila and
Gandhara, Ambhi (also known as Taxiles), made a peace treaty with Alexander.
Chanakya, however, planned to defeat the foreign invasion and sought help from
other kings to unite and fight Alexander. Parvateshwara (Porus), a king of
Punjab, was the only local king who was able to challenge Alexander at the
Battle of the Hydaspes River, but he was defeated. Chanakya then went further
east to Magadha, to seek the help of Dhana Nanda, who ruled the vast Nanda
Empire which extended from Bihar and Bengal in the east to Punjab and Sindh in
the west, but Dhana Nanda refused to help him. After this incident, Chanakya
began to persuade his disciple Chandragupta of the need to build an empire that
could protect Indian territories from foreign invasion. It is also said that
Chandragupta was sent to Greece in Europe by Chanakya to receive military and
war training. Nanda army. In order to defeat the powerful Nanda army,
Chandragupta needed to raise a formidable army of his own. Conquest of the
Nanda Empire. Chanakya had trained and guided Chandragupta and together they
planned the destruction of Dhana Nanda. The "Mudrarakshasa" of Visakhadutta as
well as the Jain work "Parisishtaparvan" talk of Chandragupta's alliance with
the Himalayan king Parvatka, sometimes identified with Porus. It is noted in
the "Chandraguptakatha" that Chandragupta and Chanakya were initially rebuffed
by the Nanda forces. Regardless, in the ensuing war, Chandragupta faced off
against Bhadrasala, the commander of Dhana Nanda's armies. He was eventually
able to defeat Bhadrasala and Dhana Nanda in a series of battles, culminating
in the siege of the capital city Pataliputra and the conquest of the Nanda
Empire around 321 BCE, thus founding the powerful Maurya Empire in Northern
India by the time he was about 20 years old. Expansion. By the time he was only
about 20 years old, Chandragupta, who had succeeded in defeating the Macedonian
satrapies in India and conquering the Nanda Empire, had founded a vast empire
that extended from the Bay of Bengal in the east, to the Indus River in the
west. In later years he would expand this empire. Conquest of Seleucus' eastern
territories. The exact details of engagement are not known. As noted by
scholars such as R. C. Majumdar and D. D. Kosambi, Seleucus appears to have
fared poorly, having ceded large territories west of the Indus to Chandragupta.
Due to his defeat, Seleucus surrendered Arachosia, Gedrosia, Paropamisadae, and
Aria. Mainstream scholarship asserts that Chandragupta received vast territory
west of the Indus, including the Hindu Kush, modern day Afghanistan, and the
Balochistan province of Pakistan. Archaeologically, concrete indications of
Mauryan rule, such as the inscriptions of the Edicts of Ashoka, are known as
far as Kandhahar in southern Afghanistan. It is generally thought that
Chandragupta married Seleucus's daughter to formalize an alliance. In a return
gesture, Chandragupta sent 500 war-elephants, a military asset which would play
a decisive role at the Battle of Ipsus in 302 BCE. In addition to this treaty,
Seleucus dispatched an ambassador, Megasthenes, to Chandragupta, and later
Deimakos to his son Bindusara, at the Mauryan court at Pataliputra (modern
Patna in Bihar state). Later Ptolemy II Philadelphus, the ruler of Ptolemaic
Egypt and contemporary of Ashoka the Great, is also recorded by Pliny the Elder
as having sent an ambassador named Dionysius to the Mauryan court. Jainism and
Sallekhana. Chandragupt gave up his throne in 298 BCE, when he was 42 years
old, and became an ascetic under the Jain saint Acharya Bhadrabahu, migrating
south with them and ending his days in "sallekhana" at Śravaṇa Beḷgoḷa
in present day Karnataka, though fifth-century inscriptions in the area support
the concept of a larger southern migration around that time. A small temple
marks the cave (Bhadrabahu Cave) where he is said to have died by fasting.
There are two hills in Śravaṇa Beḷgoḷa, Chandragiri (Chikkabetta) and
Vindyagiri. The last shruta-kevali, Bhadrabahu and his pupil Chandragupta
Maurya, are believed to have meditated there. Chandragupta Basadi, which was
dedicated to Chandragupta Maurya, was originally built there by Emperor Ashoka
in the third century BCE. Successors. Chandragupta Maurya renounced his throne
to his son, [[vaman ], who became the new Mauryan Emperor. Bindusara's son
Ashoka the Great became one of the most influential kings in India's history
due to his important role in the history of Buddhism. In popular culture.
Chanakya's role in the formation of the Mauryan Empire is the essence of a
historical/spiritual novel "The Courtesan and the Sadhu" by Dr. Mysore N.
Prakash. Santosh Sivan's 2001 epic Hindi language film Asoka, portrays the last
moments of Chandragupt as emperor. The sword of Chandragupt plays an important
role in the film. The television series "Chanakya" is archetypal account of the
life and times of Chanakya, based on the play "Mudra Rakshasa" (The Signet Ring
of "Rakshasa"). There is a television series on Imagine TV called Chandragupt
Maurya The Indian Postal Service issued a commemorative postage stamp honoring
Chandragupta Maurya in 2001.
