Chanakya Chanakya (c. 370–283 BCE) was an Indian teacher, philosopher and
royal advisor. Originally a teacher at the ancient Takshashila University,
Chanakya managed the first Maurya emperor Chandragupta's rise to power at a
young age. He is widely credited for having played an important role in the
establishment of the Maurya Empire, which was the first empire in
archaeologically recorded history to rule most of the Indian subcontinent.
Chanakya served as the chief advisor to both Chandragupta and his son
Bindusara. Chanakya is traditionally identified as Kautilya or Vishnu Gupta,
who authored the ancient Indian political treatise called Arthaśāstra. As
such, he is considered as the pioneer of the field of economics and political
science in India, and his work is thought of as an important precursor to
Classical Economics. Chanakya is often called the "Indian Machiavelli",
although his works predate Machiavelli's by about 1,800 years. His works were
lost near the end of the Gupta dynasty and not rediscovered until 1915. Origin.
Birth. Chanakya's birthplace is a matter of controversy, and there are multiple
theories about his origin. According to one theory, he was born in Pataliputra
or a town near it, Kusumpur. According to the Buddhist text "Mahavamsa Tika",
his birthplace was Taxila. The Jain scriptures, such as "Adbidhana Chintamani",
mention him as a "Dramila", implying that he was a native of South India.
According to some other Jaina accounts, Chanakya was born in the village of
Canaka to Caṇin and Caṇeśvarī, a Brahmin couple. Other sources mention
his father's name as Chanak and state that Chanakaya's name derives from his
father's name. Identitification with Kautilya or Vishnugupta. The ancient
treatise "Arthashastra" has been traditionally attributed to Chanakya by a
number of scholars. The "Arthaśhāstra" identifies its author by the name
Kautilya, except for one verse that refers to him by the name Vishnugupta.
Kautilya is presumably the name of the author's gotra (clan). One of the
earliest Sanskrit literatures to identify Chanakya with Vishnugupta explicitly
was Vishnu Sharma's "Panchatantra" in the 3rd century BC. K.C. Ojha puts
forward the view that the traditional identification of Vishnugupta with
Kautilya was caused by a confusion of the text's editor and its originator. He
suggests that Vishnugupta was a redactor of the original work of Kautilya.
Thomas Burrow goes even further and suggests that Chanakya and Kautilya may
have been two different people. Early life. Chanakya was educated at
Takshashila, an ancient center of learning located in north-western ancient
India (present-day Pakistan). He later became a teacher ("acharya") at the same
place. Chanakya's life was connected to two cities: Takshashila and Pataliputra
(present-day Patna in Bihar, India). Pataliputra was the capital of the Magadha
kingdom, which was connected to Takshashila by the northern high road of
commerce. Role in the fall of the Nanda empire. Chankaya and Chandragupta have
been credited with defeating the powerful Nanda Empire and establishing the new
Maurya Empire. "Mudrarakshasa" ("The Signet of the Minister"), a play dated
variously from the late 4th century to the early 8th century, narrates the
ascent of Chandragupta Maurya to power: Sakatala, an unhappy royal minister,
introduced Chanakya to the Nanda king, knowing that Chanakya would not be
treated well in the court. Insulted at the court, Chanakya untied the sikha
(lock of hair) and swore that he would not tie it back till he destroyed the
Nanda kingdom. According to "Mudrarakshasa", Chandragupta was the son of a
royal concubine named Mura and spent his childhood in the Nanda palace.
Chanakya and Chandragupta signed a pact with Parvataka (identified with King
Porus by some scholars) of north-west India that ensured his victory over the
Nanda empire. Their combined army had Shaka, Yavana (Greek), Kirata, Kamboja
and Vahlik soldiers. Following their victory, the territories of the Nanda
empire were divided between Parvataka and Chanakya's associate Chandragupta.
However, after Parvataka's death, his son Malayaketu sought control of all the
former Nanda territories. He was supported by Rakshasaa, the former Nanda
minister, several of whose attempts to kill Chandragupta were foiled by
Chanakya. As part of their game plan, Chanakya and Chandragupta faked a rift
between themselves. As a sham, Chandragupta removed Chanakya from his
ministerial post, while declaring that Rakshasa is better than him. Chanakya's
agents in Malayaketu's court then turned the king against Rakshasa by
suggesting that Rakshasa was poised to replace Chanakya in Chandragupta's
court. The activities by Chanakya's spies further widened the rift between
Malayaketu and Rakshasa. His agents also fooled Malayaketu into believing that
five of his allies were planning to join Chandragupta, prompting Malayaketu to
order their killings. In the end, Rakshasa ends up joining Chandragupta's side,
and Malayaketu's coaliation is completely undone by Chanakya's strategy.
According to the Buddhist texts, Chandragupta was the son of the chief of the
Moriya clan of Pippalivana. Chanakya once saw him leading a band of local youth
and was highly impressed. He picked Chandragupta as the leader of the anti-
Nanda revolt. Several modern adaptions of the legend narrate the story of
Chanakya in a semi-fictional form, extending these legends. In "Chandragupta"
(1911), a play by Dwijendralal Ray, the Nanda king exiles his half-brother
Chandragupta, who joins the army of Alexander the Great. Later, with help from
Chanakya and Katyayan (the former Prime Minister of Magadha), Chandragupta
defeats Nanda, who is put to death by Chanakya. Twenty-first-century works such
as "Chanakya" (2001) by B. K. Chaturvedi and "Chanakya's Chant" (2010) by
Ashwin Sanghi also present semi-fictional narratives of Chanakya's life.
According to these, Chanakya's father Chanak was a friend of Shaktar, the Prime
Minister of the Magadha kingdom, and Chanakya loved Shaktar's daughter
Suvashini. Shaktar had lost much of his political clout to another courtier
called Rakshasa, and one night, Shaktar was imprisoned by the King Dhana Nanda.
The rivalry of the Chanakya's family with King Dhana Nanda started when Chanak
openly criticized the misrule of the king. After the execution of Chanak by the
King, the former Magadha minister Katyayan sent Chanakya to Acharya
Pundarikaksha of Takshashila. Chanakya completed his education at Takshashila
and became a teacher there. After some years, he returned to Pataliputra to
meet his mother, only to learn that she was dead. He also learnt that the Nanda
administration had further deteriorated under the growing influence of
Rakshasa, who had made Suvashini his mistress. When Chanakya visited the royal
court to advise him, he was insulted and imprisoned by the king. Chanakya was
rescued by the men of General Maurya, another person who despised with the
king's rule. Chanakya took Chandragupta Maurya to Takshashila, where he trained
the young man. King Ambhi, the ruler of Takshashila, had allied with the
invader Alexander the Great to defeat Parvataka. Chanakya and Chandragupta
gathered a band of people discontented with Ambhi's rule and formed an alliance
with Parvataka to defeat the Nanda king. Their initial attempts at conquering
Magadha were unsuccessful. Once, Chanakya came across a mother scolding her
child for burning himself by eating from the middle of a bowl of porridge
rather than the cooler edge. Chanakya realized his initial strategic error: he
was attacking Magadha, the center of the Nanda territory. He then changed his
strategy and focused on capturing the areas located at the peripharies of the
Nanda empire. With help from Suvashini, he drove a wedge between the king and
Rakshasa. Finally, he defeated the last Nanda king and established a new empire
with Chandragupta Maurya as the emperor. After the establishment of the Maurya
Empire. Chanakya continued to serve as an advisor to Chandragupta after the
establishment of the Maurya Empire. According to a popular legend mentioned in
the Jain texts, Chanakya used to add small doses of poison to the food eaten by
Emperor Chandragupta Maurya in order to make him immune to the poisoning
attempts by the enemies. Unaware, Chandragupta once fed some of his food to his
queen, Durdhara, who was seven days away from delivery. The queen, not immune
to the poison, collapsed and died within a few minutes. In order to save the
heir to the throne, Chanakya cut the queen's belly open and extracted the
foetus just as she died. The baby was named Bindusara, because he was touched
by a drop ("bindu") of blood having poison. When Bindusara was in his youth,
Chandragupta gave up the throne and followed the Jain saint Bhadrabahu to
present day Karnataka and settled in the place of Shravana Belagola. He lived
as an ascetic for some years and died of voluntary starvation according to Jain
tradition. Chanakya meanwhile stayed in the court as an advisor to Bindusara.
Death. The real cause of Chanakya's death is unknown and disputed. According to
a legend, Subandhu, one of Bindusara's ministers, did not like Chanakya. One
day he told Bindusara that Chanakya was responsible for the murder of his
mother. Bindusara asked the nurses, who confirmed the story of his birth.
Bindusara was horrified and enraged. Chanakya, who was an old man by this time,
learnt that the King was angry with him, he decided to end his life. In
accordance with the Jain tradition, he decided to starve himself to death. By
this time, the King learnt the full story: Chanakya was not directly
responsible for his mother's death, which was an accident. He asked Subandhu to
convince Chanakya to give up his plan to kill himself. However, Subandhu,
pretending to conduct a ceremony for Chanakya, burnt Chanakya alive. Literary
works. Two books are attributed to Chanakya: "Arthashastra" and "Neetishastra"
(also known as "Chanakya Niti"). The "Arthashastra" discusses monetary and
fiscal policies, welfare, international relations, and war strategies in
detail. The text also outlines the duties of a ruler. Some scholars believe
that "Arthashastra" is actually a compilation of a number of earlier texts
written by various authors, and Chanakya might have been "one" of these
authors. "Neetishastra" is a treatise on the ideal way of life, and shows
Chanakya's deep study of the Indian way of life. Chanakya also developed
"Neeti-Sutras" (aphorisms - pithy sentences) that tell people how they should
behave. Of these well-known 455 sutras, about 216 refer to "raja-neeti" (the
dos and don'ts of running a kingdom). Apparently, Chanakya used these sutras to
groom Chandragupta and other selected disciples in the art of ruling a kingdom.
Legacy. Chanakya is regarded as a great thinker and diplomat in India. Many
Indian nationalists regard him as one of the earliest people who envisaged the
united India spanning the entire subcontinent. In October 2012, after about two
thousand years from its composition, India's National Security Advisor Shiv
Shankar Menon praised Chanakya's Arthashastra for its clear and precise rules
which apply even today. Furthermore, he recommended reading of the book for
broadening the vision on strategic issues. The diplomatic enclave in New Delhi
is named Chanakyapuri in honour of Chanakya. Institutes named after him include
Training Ship Chanakya, Chanakya National Law University and Chanakya Institute
of Public Leadership.
