Charismatic authority Charismatic authority is one of three forms of authority
laid out by sociologist Max Weber's in his tripartite classification of
authority, the other two being traditional authority and rational-legal
authority. Max Weber defined charismatic authority as "resting on devotion to
the exceptional sanctity, heroism or exemplary character of an individual
person, and of the normative patterns or order revealed or ordained by him."
The concept has acquired wide usage among sociologists. Other terms used are
"charismatic domination" and "charismatic leadership". Characteristics.
Charisma. Weber applies the term charisma to Legitimization. Charismatic
authority is As such, it rests almost entirely on the leader. The absence of
that leader for any reason can lead to the authority's power dissolving.
However, due to its idiosyncratic nature and lack of formal organization,
charismatic authority depends much more strongly on the perceived legitimacy of
the authority than Weber’s other forms of authority. For instance, a
charismatic leader in a religious context might require an unchallenged belief
that the leader has been touched by God, in the sense of a guru or prophet.
Should the strength of this belief fade, the power of the charismatic leader
can fade quickly, which is one of the ways in which this form of authority
shows itself to be unstable. In contrast to the current popular use of the term
"charismatic leader", Weber saw charismatic authority not so much as character
traits of the charismatic leader but as a relationship between the leader and
his followers. The validity of charism is founded on its "recognition" by the
leader's followers (or "adepts" - "Anhänger"). This recognition His charisma
risks disappearing if he is "abandoned by God" or if "his government doesn't
provide any prosperity to those whom he dominates". Routinizing charisma.
Charismatic authority almost always endangers the boundaries set by traditional
or rational (legal) authority. It tends to challenge this authority, and is
thus often seen as revolutionary. Usually this charismatic authority is
incorporated into society. Hereby the challenge that it presents to society
will subside. The way in which this happens is called "routinization". By
routinization, the charismatic authority changes: A religion which evolves its
own priesthood and establishes a set of laws and rules is likely to lose its
charismatic character and move towards another type of authority. For example,
Muhammad, who had charismatic authority as "The Prophet" among his followers,
was succeeded by the traditional authority and structure of Islam, a clear
example of routinization. In politics, charismatic rule is often found in
various authoritarian states, autocracies, dictatorships and theocracies. In
order to help to maintain their charismatic authority, such regimes will often
establish a vast personality cult. When the leader of such a state dies or
leaves office, and a new charismatic leader does not appear, such a regime is
likely to fall shortly thereafter, unless it has become fully routinized.
Charismatic succession. Because the authority is centralized around one leader,
the death of the charismatic leader would constitute the destruction of the
government unless prior arrangements were made. A society that faces the end of
their charismatic leader can chose to move to another format of leadership or
to have a transference of charismatic authority to another leader by means of
succession. According to Max Weber, the methods of succession are: search,
revelation, designation by original leader, designation by qualified staff,
hereditary charisma, and office charisma. These are the various ways in which
an individual and a society can contrive to maintain the unique energy and
nature of charisma in their leadership. Search. "The search for a new
charismatic leader (takes place) on the basis of the qualities which will fit
him for the position of authority." An example of this search method is the
search for a new Dalai Lama. "It consists in a search for a child with
characteristics which are interpreted to mean that he is a reincarnation of the
Buddha." This search is an example of the way in which an original charismatic
leader can be made to "live on" through a replacement. Revelation. "In this
case the legitimacy of the new leader is dependent on the legitimacy of the
technique of selection." The technique of selection is the "modus operandi" of
the selection process. In ancient times, oracles were believed to have special
access to "divine judgment" and thus their technique in selection was perceived
to be legitimate. Their choice was imbued with the charismatic authority that
came with the oracle's endorsement. Designation by original leader. In this
form, the original holder of charismatic authority is perceived to have passed
their authority to another. An excellent example is Joseph Stalin's claim that
Vladmir Lenin had designated him to be his successor as leader of the USSR.
Insofar as people believed in this claim, Stalin gained Lenin's charismatic
authority. Designated by qualified staff. "A successor (may be designated) by
the charismatically qualified administrative staff... (T)his process should not
be interpreted as 'election' or 'nomination'... It is not determined by merely
a majority vote...Unanimity (is) often required." A case example of this form
of succession is the papal conclave of cardinals to choose a new pope. The
cardinals taking part in the papal conclave are viewed to be charismatically
qualified by their Roman Catholic congregations and thus their choice is imbued
with charismatic authority. Hereditary charisma. Charisma can be perceived as
"a quality transmitted by heredity." This method of succession is present in
Kim il Sung's charisma being passed on to his son, Kim Jong Il. This type of
succession is a difficult undertaking and often results in a movement toward
traditionalization and legalization in authority. Office charisma. "The concept
of charisma may be transmitted by ritual means from one bearer to another...It
involves a dissociation of charisma from a particular individual, making it an
objective, transferable entity." Priestly consecration is believed to be a
modus through which priestly charisma to teach and perform other priestly
duties is transferred to a person. In this way, priests inherit priestly
charisma and are subsequently perceived by their congregations as having the
charismatic authority that comes with the priesthood. Application of Weber's
theories. Weber’s model of charismatic leadership giving way to
institutionalization is endorsed by several academic sociologists. New
religious movements. Eileen Barker discusses the tendency for new religious
movements to have founders or leaders who wield considerable charismatic
authority and are believed to have special powers or knowledge. Charismatic
leaders are unpredictable, Barker says, for they are not bound by tradition or
rules and they may be accorded by their followers the right to pronounce on all
aspects of their lives. Barker warns that in these cases the leader may lack
any accountability, require unquestioning obedience, and encourage a dependency
upon the movement for material, spiritual and social resources. George D.
Chryssides asserts that not all new religious movements have charismatic
leaders, and that there are differences in the hegemonic styles among those
movements that do. Narcissism. Len Oakes, an Australian psychologist who wrote
a dissertation about charisma, had eleven charismatic leaders fill in a
psychometric test, which he called the "adjective checklist", and found them as
a group quite ordinary. Following the psychoanalyst Heinz Kohut, Oakes argues
that charismatic leaders exhibit traits of narcissism and also argues that they
display an extraordinary amount of energy, accompanied by an inner clarity
unhindered by the anxieties and guilt that afflict more ordinary people. He did
however not fully follow Weber's framework of charismatic authority. Examples
of charismatic leaders. Political leaders. Some examples of American
charismatic leaders from the 18th through 20th centuries include Founding
Fathers George Washington, Thomas Jefferson and Benjamin Franklin, presidents
Abraham Lincoln, Theodore Roosevelt, Harry S. Truman, Franklin D. Roosevelt,
Bill Clinton and Barack Obama and generals Robert E. Lee, Douglas MacArthur,
George C. Marshall and George S. Patton. Cult leaders. Examples of American
cult leaders (the dark side of charismatic authority) include Jim Jones (leader
of the Peoples Temple), David Koresh (leader of the Branch Davidians), Charles
Manson (leader of the Manson Family), and Theodore Rinaldo (leader of Eden
Farms).
