Charity shop A charity shop, thrift shop, thrift store, hospice shop (U.S.,
Canada), resale shop (when not meaning consignment shop U.S.) or op shop
(Australia/N.Z.) (from "opportunity shop") is a retail establishment run by a
charitable organization to raise money. Charity shops are a type of social
enterprise. They usually sell mainly used goods donated by members of the
public, and are often staffed by volunteers. Because the items for sale were
obtained for free, and business costs are low, the items can be sold at
competitive prices. After costs are paid, all remaining income from the sales
is used in accord with the organization's stated charitable purpose. Costs
include purchase and/or depreciation of fixtures (clothing racks, bookshelves,
counters, etc.), operating costs (maintenance, municipal service fees,
electricity, telephone, limited advertising) and the building lease or
mortgage. It is widely recognized that quality thrift store merchandise is
priced 50-75% below the original retail price, offering significant bargains.
Popularity of charity shops. Charity shops are often popular with people who
are frugal . In the United States, shopping at a charity store has become
popular enough to earn a slang term: thrifting. Environmentalists may prefer
buying second-hand goods as this uses fewer natural resources and would appear
do less damage to the environment than by buying new goods would, in part
because the goods are usually collected locally. In addition, reusing second-
hand items is a form of recycling, and thus reduces the amount of waste going
to landfill sites. People who oppose sweat shops often purchase second-hand
clothing as an alternative to supporting clothing companies with dubious
ethical practices. Alot of online E-Commerce thrift stores have been popping up
as of late as well. Stores such as TnT Kasik, and many others Second-hand goods
are considered to be quite safe. The South Australian Public Health Directorate
says that the health risk of buying used clothing is very low. It explains that
washing purchased items in hot water is just one of several ways to eliminate
the risk of contracting infectious diseases. New goods sold at charity shops.
Some charity shops, such as the British Heart Foundation, also sell a range of
new goods which may be branded to the charity, or have some connection with the
cause the charity supports. Oxfam stores, for example, sell fair trade food and
crafts. Other stores may sell new Halloween supplies and decorations where old
vintage clothes are popular for use as costumes. Some stores specialise in
selling books, music, or bridalwear. Charity shops may receive overstock or
obsolete goods from local for-profit businesses; the for-profit businesses
benefit by taking a tax write-off and clearing unwanted goods from their store
instead of throwing the goods out, which is costly. United Kingdom. The first
Oxfam charity shop in the United Kingdom was established in Broad Street,
Oxford, and began trading in December 1947 (although the shop itself did not
open until February 1948). Oxfam opened some of the first charity shops.
However, pre-dating this, one of the first Red Cross shops was opened at 17 Old
Bond Street, London, as early as 1941. In total, over two hundred
“permanent” (for the duration of the war) Red Cross gift shops and about
150 temporary Red Cross shops were opened during the war years. A condition of
the shop licence issued by the Board of Trade was that all goods offered for
sale were gifts. Purchase for re-sale was forbidden. The entire proceeds from
sales had to be passed to the Duke of Gloucester’s Red Cross and St John
Fund. Most premises were lent free of rent and in some cases owners also met
the costs of heating and lighting. There is also evidence that the
Wolverhampton Society for the Blind (now called the Beacon Centre for the
Blind) opened up a shop in Wolverhampton in 1899 to sell goods made by blind
people to raise money for the Society. During World War I, similar fund-raising
activities occurred such as a bazaar in Shepherd Market, London, which made
£50,000 for the Red Cross. Oxfam has the largest number of charity shops in
the UK with over 700 stores. Many Oxfam shops also sell books, and the
organization now operates over 70 specialist Oxfam Bookshops, making them the
largest retailer of second-hand books in Britain. Other Oxfam affiliates also
have stores, such as Jersey, Germany, Ireland (45 shops in NI/ROI), the
Netherlands and Hong Kong. Other charities with a strong presence on high
streets in the UK include YMCA, British Heart Foundation, Barnardos, Cancer
Research UK, Roy Castle Lung Cancer Foundation, Age UK (formerly Age Concern
and Help the Aged), Oxfam, Save the Children, Scope and Sue Ryder Care. Many
local hospices also operate charity shops to raise funds. There are over 9,000
charity shops in the UK and Republic of Ireland. Their locations can be found
on the Charity Retail Association (CRA) website, along with information on
charity retail, what shops can and can't accept, etc. The CRA is a member
organisation for charities which run shops. British charity shops are mainly
staffed by unpaid volunteers, with a paid shop manager. Goods for sale are
predominantly from donations - 87% according to the official estimate.
Donations should be taken directly to a charity shop during opening hours, as
goods left on the street may be stolen or damaged by passers-by or inclement
weather. In expensive areas, donations include a proportion of good quality
designer clothing and charity shops in these areas are sought out for cut-price
fashions. 'Standard' charity shops sell a mix of clothing, books, music and
bric-a-brac (like cutlery and ornaments). Some shops specialise in certain
areas, like vintage clothing, furniture, electrical items, or records. Almost
all charity shops sell on their unsold textiles (i.e. unfashionable, stained or
damaged fabric) to textile processors. Each charity shop saves an average or 40
tonnes of textiles every year, by selling them in the shop, or passing them on
to these textile merchants for recycling or reuse. This grosses to around
363,000 tonnes across all charity shops in the UK; based on 2010 landfill tax
value at £48 per tonne, the value of textiles reused or passed for recycling
by charity shops in terms of savings in landfill tax is £17,424,000 p.a. Gift
Aid is a UK tax incentive for individual donors where, subject to a signed
declaration being held by the charity, income tax paid on donations can be
reclaimed by the charity. Although initially intended only for cash donations,
the scheme now (since 2006) allows tax on the income earned by charity shops
acting as agent for the donor to be reclaimed. Sue Ryder Care was the first to
'Gift Aid' its donations with a pioneering new system developed with
Eproductive Ltd. Charity shops in the UK get mandatory 80% relief on business
rates on their premises, which is funded by central government (not by local
ratepayers) and is one illustration of their support for the charity sector and
the role of charity shops in raising funds for charities. Charities can apply
for discretionary relief on the remaining 20%, which is an occasional source of
criticism from retailers which have to pay in full. Australia. In Australia,
major national opportunity shop chains include the St. Vincent de Paul Thrift
Store (trading as Vinnies), the Salvation Army (trading as Salvos), the Red
Cross, MS Australia, and the Brotherhood of St. Laurence. Many local charitable
organisations, both religious and secular, run opportunity shops. Common among
these are missions and animal shelters. United States and Canada. In the United
States, major national thrift shop operators include Arc Thrift Stores,
Goodwill Industries, Salvation Army, St. Vincent de Paul Thrift Stores, ReStore
(see Habitat for Humanity International), Deseret Industries (in the western
U.S.), and Value Village (see Savers). Regional operators include Deseret
Industries in the western United States, and those run by the Bethesda Lutheran
Home in the Upper Midwest. Many local charitable organizations, both religious
and secular, operate thrift shops. Common among these are missions, children's
homes, homeless shelters, and animal shelters. In addition, some charity shops
are operated by churches, and are fundraising venues that support activities
including, in some cases, missionary activities in other countries. Several
U.S. stores are for-profit, with the charity that collected the goods making
money from the wholesale of those items to the store. In July 2009, a U.S.
government report revealed that several lenders were judging their customers'
financial status based on where they shopped, and were assuming that those who
shopped at thrift stores and other low-cost retailers were struggling
financially. In response, the lender were increasing interest rates, lowering
their credit limit, or even damaging their overall credit score, which may have
caused other credit issuers to further harm the shopper by taking similar
actions (universal default), or denying credit applications altogether. Laws
were passed by Congress in 2009 to stop issuers from these practices. Thrift
stores. Thrift stores are generally owned by a charity but run as an
independent business under contract: they are licensed by the charity, which
provides the merchandise for sale, and benefits by the sale of these goods
directly to the contractor who operates the shop. The shop may then make a
profit from this arrangement. In some cases, e.g. 'Savers' and 'Value Village'
they pay a small percentage of the profit to the charity. Charities in the US
are supported by tax legislation (see 501(c)(3)) but this does not extend to
the 'for profit' thrift shop. Unlike directly charity-run shops run by
volunteers, thrift shops pay taxes, and must under their contract have
employees with proper contracts of employment. In many countries around the
world, not just exclusively in the Third World, second-hand clothing that is
initially donated, are resold and is considered a commodity throughout the
world. Some countries forbid it as it harms the local textile industry, as it
is in the case in the Philippines. In other cases countries increase tariffs to
reduce imports. Some countries ban the sale of second-hand clothing because
unwashed used clothing is seen as a potential threat of spreading disease. The
author of an article, Karen Transberg Hansen, suggested that in Zambia,
however, "salaula", or the selling of second-hand clothing actually helps the
local economy in generating income. Hansen said the trade provided more jobs
(handling, cleaning, repairing, and restyling). It has also provided
governments with revenue from tariffs.
