Chicago school of economics The Chicago school of economics is a neoclassical
school of thought within the academic community of economists, with a strong
focus around the faculty of the University of Chicago, some of whom have
constructed and popularized its principles. In the context of macroeconomics,
it is connected to the freshwater school of macroeconomics, in contrast to the
saltwater school based in coastal universities (notably Harvard, MIT, and
Berkeley). Chicago macroeconomic theory rejected Keynesianism in favor of
monetarism until the mid-1970s, when it turned to new classical macroeconomics
heavily based on the concept of rational expectations. The freshwater-saltwater
distinction is largely antiquated today, as the two traditions have heavily
incorporated ideas from each other. Specifically, New Keynesian economics was
developed as a response to new classical economics, electing to incorporate the
insight of rational expectations without giving up the traditional Keynesian
focus on imperfect competition and sticky wages. The University of Chicago
department, considered one of the world's foremost economics departments, has
fielded more Sveriges Riksbank Prize in Economic Sciences in Memory of Alfred
Nobel laureates and John Bates Clark medalists in economics than any other
university. Terminology. The term was coined in the 1950s to refer to
economists teaching in the Economics Department at the University of Chicago,
and closely related academic areas at the University such as the Booth School
of Business and the Law School. They met together in frequent intense
discussions that helped set a group outlook on economic issues, based on price
theory. The 1950s saw the height of popularity of the Keynesian school of
economics, so the members of the University of Chicago were considered outside
the mainstream. Besides what is popularly known as the "Chicago school", there
is also an "Old Chicago" school of economics, consisting of an earlier
generation of economists such as Frank Knight, Henry Simons, Paul Douglas and
others, most of whom leaned to the left and also held strongly Keynesian views.
Nonetheless, these scholars had an important influence on the thought of
Friedman and Stigler, most notably in the development of price theory and
transaction cost economics. However, their relationship to the modern
macroeconomists (the third wave of Chicago economics), led by Robert Lucas and
Eugene Fama, is more blurred. Scholars. Frank Knight. Frank Knight
(1885–1972) was an early member of the University of Chicago department. His
most influential work was "Risk, Uncertainty and Profit" (1921) from which was
coined the term Knightian uncertainty. Knight's perspective was iconoclastic,
and markedly different from later Chicago school thinkers. He believed that
while the free market could be inefficient, government programs were even less
efficient. He drew from other economic schools of thought such as Institutional
economics to form his own nuanced perspective. Ronald Coase. Ronald Coase (b.
1910) is the most prominent economic analyst of law and the 1991 Nobel Prize-
winner. His first major article, "The Nature of the Firm" (1937), argued that
the reason for the existence of firms (companies, partnerships, etc.) is the
existence of transaction costs. Rational individuals trade through bilateral
contracts on open markets until the costs of transactions mean that using
corporations to produce things is more cost-effective. His second major
article, "The Problem of Social Cost" (1960), argued that if we lived in a
world without transaction costs, people would bargain with one another to
create the same allocation of resources, regardless of the way a court might
rule in property disputes. Coase used the example of an 1879 London legal case
about nuisance named Sturges v Bridgman, in which a noisy sweetmaker and a
quiet doctor were neighbours; the doctor went to court seeking an injunction
against the noise produced by the sweetmaker. Coase said that regardless of
whether the judge ruled that the sweetmaker had to stop using his machinery, or
that the doctor had to put up with it, they could strike a mutually beneficial
bargain that reaches the same outcome of resource distribution. Only the
existence of transaction costs may prevent this. So the law ought to pre-empt
what "would" happen, and be guided by the most efficient solution. The idea is
that law and regulation are not as important or effective at helping people as
lawyers and government planners believe. Coase and others like him wanted a
change of approach, to put the burden of proof for positive effects on a
government that was intervening in the market, by analysing the costs of
action. George Stigler. George Stigler (1911–1991) was tutored for his thesis
by Frank Knight and won the Nobel Prize in Economics in 1982. He is best known
for developing the "Economic Theory of Regulation", also known as capture,
which says that interest groups and other political participants will use the
regulatory and coercive powers of government to shape laws and regulations in a
way that is beneficial to them. This theory is an important component of the
Public Choice field of economics. He also carried out extensive research into
the history of economic thought. His 1962 article "Information in the Labor
Market" developed the theory of search unemployment. Milton Friedman. Milton
Friedman (1912–2006) stands as one of the most influential economists of the
late twentieth century. A student of Frank Knight, he won the Nobel Prize in
Economics in 1976 for, among other things, "A Monetary History of the United
States" (1963). Friedman argued that the Great Depression had been caused by
the Federal Reserve's policies through the 1920s, and worsened in the 1930s.
Friedman argued that laissez-faire government policy is more desirable than
government intervention in the economy. Governments should aim for a neutral
monetary policy oriented toward long-run economic growth, by gradual expansion
of the money supply. He advocated the quantity theory of money, that general
prices are determined by money. Therefore active monetary (e.g. easy credit) or
fiscal (e.g. tax and spend) policy can have unintended negative effects. In
"Capitalism and Freedom" (1967) Friedman wrote, The slogan that "money matters"
has come to be associated with Friedman, but Friedman had also leveled harsh
criticism of his ideological opponents. Referring to Thorstein Veblen's
assertion that economics unrealistically models people as "lightning calculator
of pleasure and pain", Friedman wrote, Robert Fogel. Robert Fogel (b.1926), a
co-winner of the Nobel Prize in 1993, is well known for his historical analysis
and his introduction of New economic history, and "invention of cliometrics, a
notation system for quantitative data". In his tract, "Railroads and American
Economic Growth: Essays in Econometric History" (1964) Fogel set out to rebut
comprehensively the idea that railroads contributed to economic growth in the
19th century. And in "" (1974) he argued that slaves in the Southern states of
America had a higher standard of living than the industrial proletariat of the
Northern states before the American civil war. Fogel believes that slavery was
morally wrong, but argues that it was not necessarily less efficient than wage-
labour. Gary Becker. Gary Becker (b. 1930) is a Nobel Prize-winner from 1992
and is known in his work for applying economic methods of thinking to other
fields, such as crime, sexual relationships, slavery and drugs, assuming that
people act rationally. His work was originally focused in labour economics. His
work partly inspired the popular economics book "Freakonomics". Richard Posner.
Richard Posner (b. 1939) is known primarily for his work in law and economics,
though Robert Solow describes Posner's grasp of economics as "precarious". A
lawyer rather than an economist, Posner's main work, "Economic Analysis of Law"
attempts to apply rational choice models to areas of law. He has chapters on
tort, contract, corporations, labor law, but also criminal law, discrimination
and family law. Posner goes so far as to say that Robert E. Lucas. Robert Lucas
(b. 1937), who won the Nobel Prize in 1995, has dedicated his life to unwinding
Keynesianism. His major contribution is the argument that macroeconomics should
not be seen as a separate mode of thought from microeconomics, and that
analysis in both should be built on the same foundations. Lucas's works cover
several topics in macroeconomics, included economic growth, asset pricing, and
monetary Economics. Eugene Fama. Eugene Fama (b. 1939) is an American economist
who has spent all of his teaching career at the University of Chicago. He is
well known as the father of the Efficient Market Hypothesis. Starting with his
1965 Ph.D. thesis, "The Behavior of Stock Market Prices", Fama concluded that
stock prices are unpredictable and follow a random walk pattern of movement. He
solidified this idea in his 1970 article, "Efficient Capital Markets: A Review
of Theory and Empirical Work", which brought the idea of efficient markets into
the forefront of modern economic theory. Friedrich Hayek. Libertarian economist
Friedrich Hayek was teaching in another department at Chicago in the 1950s and
had little intellectual interaction with the economics department. However he
and Friedman did work together in supporting a national student organization
devoted to libertarian ideas, the Intercollegiate Society of Individualists.
Hayek is not considered a member of the Chicago School but rather the Austrian
School. Discussion. Some claim that Chicago School economists are associated
with Washington Consensus, which John Williamson says is "disappointing". A
significant body of economists and policy-makers argues that what was wrong
with the Washington Consensus as originally formulated by Williamson had less
to do with what was "included" than with what was "missing". Economists
overwhelmingly agree that the Washington Consensus was "incomplete", and that
countries in Latin America and elsewhere need to move beyond "first generation"
macroeconomic and trade reforms to a stronger focus on productivity-boosting
reforms and direct programs to support the poor. Criticisms. The Chicago
school's methodology has historically produced conclusions that favor free
market policies and little government intervention (albeit within a strict,
government-defined monetary regime). These policies came under attack in the
wake of the financial crisis of 2007–2010. The school has been blamed for
growing income inequality in the United States. Economist Brad DeLong of the
University of California, Berkeley says the Chicago School has experienced an
"intellectual collapse", while Nobel laureate Paul Krugman of Princeton
University, says that recent comments from Chicago school economists are "the
product of a Dark Age of macroeconomics in which hard-won knowledge has been
forgotten." Critics have also charged that the school's belief in human
rationality contributed to bubbles such as the recent financial crisis, and
that the school's trust in markets to self-regulate has offered no aid to the
economy in the wake of the crisis. In response, Chicago economists such as
James Heckman have conceded that there were excesses in the use of Chicago
school theory by politicians and public commentators, but that this represented
a small fraction of the contributions of Chicago school economics. In
particular, Heckman points out that the alleged failures or misapplications of
efficient market hypothesis is a fault of Chicago's contributions to financial
economics, which are conceptually distinct from its widely praised
contributions to microeconomics and macroeconomics.
