Child advocacy Child advocacy refers to a range of individuals, professionals
and advocacy organizations who promote the optimal development of children. An
individual or organization engaging in advocacy typically seeks to protect
children's rights which may be abridged or abused in a number of areas. Rights.
Rights can be divided into two categories: negative (rights to be free from)
and positive (rights to). Children's negative rights are violated when some
dangerous or harmful action is taken directly against them. What child
advocates do. One type of children's advocate typically represents or gives
voice to an individual or group whose concerns and interests are not being
heard. A child advocate will try to prevent children from being harmed and may
try to obtain justice for those who have already been injured in some way. A
child advocate may also seek to ensure that children have access to positive
influences or services which will benefit their lives such as education,
childcare and proper parenting. Malnutrition is another form of harm-there are
many children who go to bed without eating and it is looked over by child
welfare or the police. Another form of child advocacy happens at the policy
level and aims at changing the policies of governments or even transnational
policies. These advocates do lobbying, policy research, file lawsuits and
engage in other types of policy change techniques. Many use Internet based
techniques to influence decision makers. Where child advocates can be found.
Several countries have established Children's Ombudsman agencies, at national,
sub-national or local levels, as independent public bodies promoting and
protecting the rights of children. Other child advocates exist in school,
community, and home environments, and work on an individual, group or
governmental level(s) to protect and nurture children. In most circumstances,
mothers, fathers, family and teachers all advocate on behalf of children,
although it is well recognized that we all have the ability and responsibility
to advocate on behalf of children. In Wales the Welsh Assembly Government has
set up the National Advocacy Meic helpline which allows children to talk
directly to advocates. These independent advocates support and represent the
concerns of children. Eight Canadian provinces, including Ontario, have an
official child advocate whose job it is to protect the interests and welfare of
all the children in the province. Within the criminal justice system, child
advocates are concerned with the developmental needs of children and young
people, and can play an important role in ensuring due process rights for young
people in conflict with the law. They can help provide a voice for children and
young people, ensure just and humane conditions of custody, and guard the
privacy rights surrounding record provisions. They can also work to ensure that
the special legal protections assigned to young people are provided with
dignity and fairness. Child Advocacy Centers. Child Advocacy Centers are
neutral, safe locations where multidisciplinary teams investigate disclosures
of child sexual or severe physical abuse. These multidisciplinary teams are
made up of law enforcement officers, child protective service personnel,
prosecutors, and advocates. Children who have disclosed abuse are interviewed
by a forensic interviewer at such centers. Referrals for medical or mental
health treatment are also made for the child and their family members. Voices
for America's Children is a national advocacy organization with more than 60
members committed to speaking up for the well-being of children. The Child
Advocate is a national not for profit organization with connections to hundreds
of other organizations and resources to address sexual abuse but also many
other advocacy needs for children and families. Their goals are to serve the
needs of children, families and professionals while addressing mental health,
medical, educational, legal and legislative issues. The multidisciplinary
approach to child abuse investigations is designed with the intention of
reducing the secondary trauma associated with the disclosure and subsequent
investigation of abuse. Child Advocacy Centers are accredited by the National
Children's Alliance. Child Advocacy organizations at the policy level exist at
state and national levels and as transnational NGOs. The organizations that
they work in vary from smaller organizations at the local level to
multinational voluntary organizations concerned about international child
rights. The United Nations. On the international stage, the United Nations has
long advocated on behalf of children through UNICEF, whose position on children
was formulated and publicly formalized in the Convention on the Rights of the
Child. The convention sets out a summary of collective ideals and a covenant of
commitments to all children on the planet. Philosophy. One thing that all child
advocates have in common is healthy respect for young children. There is also
recognition that in most countries, children are not seen as having the full
citizenship status which confers certain rights and responsibilities as adults.
