China watcher China watcher, or, less frequently, Pekingologist, is a person
who monitors current events and power struggles in People's Republic of China.
During the Cold War, China Watchers centered in Hong Kong, especially American
government officials or journalists. Mutual distrust between the United States
and the PRC and the prohibition of travel between the countries meant they did
not have access to press briefings or interviews. They therefore adopted
techniques from Kremlinology, such as the close parsing of official
announcements for hidden meanings, movements of officials reported in
newspapers, and analysis of photographs of public appearances. One analyst for
the American Central Intelligence Agency explained it was "no semantic accident
that observers of the Chinese political scene are more often called 'China-
watchers' than 'Sinologists,' while analysts of the Soviet Union are frequently
referred to as 'Kremlinologists.'" She went on, the "art of China-watching is
imprecise at best, and hardly deserves yet to be called Sinology." Those
sympathetic to the Chinese Revolution sometimes criticized the China Watchers
for their Cold War views. In the years since the opening of China, China
watchers can live in China and take advantage of normal sources of information.
Others remained in Hong Kong, however. The Hong Kong Chinese journalist Willy
Wo-Lap Lam has been called the "quintessential China watcher, practised in the
art of Pekingology," whose "scope is wide, but the focus of his analysis is the
Zhongnanhai and factional manoeuvring among the political elite." Sinologist in
general usage sometimes loosely refers to anyone who studies China, but,
especially in the United States, more frequently refers to those who study
classical language, literature, or civilization. In other languages where the
term "Pekingologist" doesn't exist, the usage of these terms are less rigidly
delineated. In French for instance, a "sinologue" would refer to both a
researcher in Sinology and a reporter of Pekingology.
