Christian democracy Christian democracy is a political ideology that seeks to
apply Christian principles to public policy. It emerged in nineteenth-century
Europe under the influence of conservatism and Catholic social teaching. It
continues to be influential in Europe and Latin America, though in a number of
countries its Christian ethos has been diluted by secularisation. In practice,
Christian democracy is often considered conservative on cultural, social and
moral issues (social conservatism) and advocates a social market economy in the
economic field (crossing over with social democratic economics but based on the
family). In Europe, where their opponents have traditionally been secularist
socialists, Christian democratic parties are moderately conservative overall,
whereas in the very different cultural and political environment of South
America they tend to lean to the left. Examples of Christian democratic parties
include the German Christian Democratic Union (CDU), the Christian Democratic
Party of Chile, the Christian Democratic People's Party of Switzerland, the
Christian Democratic Appeal (CDA) in the Netherlands, and the historical
Christian Democracy in Italy. Political viewpoints. As with any political
ideology, Christian democracy has had different manifestations over time and
between countries; there are some broad ideologies that are called Christian
Democracy. Geoffrey K. Roberts and Patricia Hogwood have noted that "Christian
democracy has incorporated many of the views held by liberals, conservatives
and socialists within a wider framework of moral and Christian principles."
Christian democrats are usually socially conservative, and, as such, generally
have a relatively skeptical stance towards abortion and same-sex marriage,
though some Christian democratic parties have accepted the limited legalization
of both. Christian democratic parties are often likely to assert the Christian
heritage of their country, and to affirm explicitly Christian ethics, rather
than adopting a more liberal or secular stance. On economic issues, Christian
democrats normally do not completely oppose capitalism as an economic system,
unlike their repudiation of atheistic communism and similar ideologies, though
they do see the economy as being at the service of humanity. The duty of the
state towards society is of real importance for Christian democrats, though
some would see this duty as being mostly to create the conditions for civil
society to flourish, while others would see it as a more direct duty of the
state towards citizens. In recent decades, some right-leaning Christian
democratic parties in Europe have adopted policies consistent with an
economically liberal point of view, while by contrast other Christian democrats
at times seem to hold views not dissimilar from Christian socialism. History.
Christian democracy as a political movement was born at the end of the 19th
century, largely as a result of the papal encyclical "Rerum Novarum" of Pope
Leo XIII, in which the Vatican recognized workers' misery and agreed that
something should be done about it, in reaction to the rise of the socialist and
trade union movements. The position of the Roman Catholic Church on this matter
was further clarified in subsequent encyclicals, such as Quadragesimo Anno, by
Pope Pius XI in 1931, Populorum Progressio by Pope Paul VI in 1967, Centesimus
Annus, by Pope John Paul II in 1991, and Caritas in Veritate by Pope Benedict
XVI in 2009. Christian democracy has evolved considerably since then, and it is
no longer the Catholic ideology of Distributism, although it is based on
Catholic social teaching, as outlined in the 2006 official "Catechism of the
Social Doctrine of the Catholic Church". (In Germany, for example, the
Christian Democratic Party emerged as a grouping dominated by Rhenish and
Westphalian Catholics, but also encompassed the more conservative elements of
the Protestant population.) Following World War II, Christian democracy was
seen as a neutral and unifying voice of compassionate conservatism, and
distinguished itself from the far right. It gave a voice to 'conservatives of
the heart', particularly in Germany, who had detested Adolf Hitler's regime yet
agreed with the right on many issues. In Protestant countries, Christian
democratic parties were founded by more conservative Protestants in reaction to
the political power of liberal tendencies within the Protestant churches. In
the Netherlands, for instance, the Anti Revolutionary Party was founded in 1879
by conservative Protestants. It institutionalized early 19th century opposition
against the ideas from the French Revolution on popular sovereignty. It held
the position that government derived its authority from God and not from the
people. This Burkean position is sometimes also called Christian Historian. It
was a response to the liberal ideas that predominated in political life. The
Christian Democrats of Sweden, rooted in the Pentecostal religious tradition,
has a similar history. While Christian democracy is of Roman Catholic origin,
it has been adopted by many Protestant and Eastern Orthodox Christians as well.
Some Christian democratic parties, particularly in Europe, no longer emphasize
religion and have become much more secular in recent years. Also within Europe,
two essentially Islamic parties, the Democratic League of Kosovo and Turkey's
ruling Justice and Development Party (usually known by the Turkish acronym AKP,
for "Adalet ve Kalkınma Partisi") have moved towards the tradition. The
Democratic League of Kosovo is now a full member of the Centrist Democrat
International "(see below)". Christian democracy can trace its philosophical
roots back to Thomas Aquinas and his thoughts about Aristotelian ontology and
the Christian tradition. According to him, human rights are based on natural
law and defined as the things that humans need to function properly. For
example, food is a human right because without food humans cannot function
properly. Modern authors important to the formation of Christian democratic
ideology include Emmanuel Mounier, Étienne Gilson, and Jacques Maritain.
Christian democracy around the world. The international organization of
Christian democratic parties, the Centrist Democrat International (CDI),
formerly known as the Christian Democratic International, is the second largest
international political organization in the world (second only to the Socialist
International). European Christian democratic parties have their own regional
organization called the European People's Party, which form the largest group
in the European Parliament, the EPP Group. Christian democracy in Europe.
Christian democracy has been especially important in the politics of Italy
(inspired by Luigi Sturzo; "see Christian Democracy (Italy)"), Norway "(see
Christian Democratic Party of Norway)", and Germany "(see Christian Democratic
Union (Germany) and Christian Social Union in Bavaria)". Major Christian
democratic influence can also be seen in the politics of Austria "(see Austrian
People's Party)", Belgium "(see Christene Volkspartij, Christian Democratic and
Flemish and Humanist Democratic Centre)", Finland (see "Christian Democrats
(Finland)"), France, Ireland "(see Fine Gael)", Luxembourg, Malta, the
Netherlands "(see Christian Democratic Appeal)", Portugal "(see Democratic and
Social Centre – People's Party)", Poland "(see Civic Platform and Polish
Peasants' Party)", Ukraine "(see Christian Democratic Union (Ukraine))", Spain
"(see, Partido Popular, Democratic Union of Catalonia)", and Sweden "(see
Christian Democrats (Sweden))". Christian democracy is not very strong in the
United Kingdom where the Conservative Party dominates conservative politics and
does not advocate Christian democratic platforms but Christian democratic
parties do exist.The Christian Peoples Alliance (CPA), The Common Good
(political party), the Christian Party (UK) and the Christian Democratic Party
(UK) are the four Christian democratic parties currently in the UK. Christian
Democratic Parties in the UK such as The Christian Peoples Alliance, seek new
candidates and members, in order to represent people considerately through a
Christian democratic process. The Nationalist Party of Malta is a Christian
democratic party and has won seven out of ten general elections since Malta's
independence in 1964. Currently governing, it has won its third consecutive
general election in 2008. It advocates staunch Christian values including bans
on abortion and, until recently, divorce. Christian democracy in Latin America.
Christian democracy has been especially important in Chile "(see Christian
Democrat Party of Chile)" and Venezuela (see COPEI - Christian Democratic Party
of Venezuela), among others, and partly also in Mexico, starting with the
ascendancy of President Vicente Fox in 2000, followed by Felipe Calderón "(see
National Action Party (Mexico))". Cuba counts with several Christian Democratic
political associations, both on the island and in exile. The most significant
is perhaps the Movimiento Cristiano de Liberación (MCL) (www.oswaldopaya.org),
led by well-known Cuban dissident Oswaldo Payá, who was killed in a tragic
automobile accident in the summer of 2012 and has been nominated for the Nobel
Peace Prize. Christian democracy in Australia and the United States. Christian
democratic parties in Australia are said to include not only the party called
'The Christian Democratic Party", but also the Democratic Labor Party (which is
a social democratic party) and Family First Party (which is regarded by some as
a liberal democratic party). In Victoria, and NSW Australian Labor Party (ALP)
state executive members, parliamentarians and branch members associated
(rightly or wrongly) with the Industrial Groups or B. A. Santamaria and The
Movement, were expelled from the party (against that party's rules). They
formed a new party, soon to be known as the Democratic Labor Party (DLP). Later
in 1957, a similar split occurred in Queensland, with the resulting group
subsequently joining the DLP. The party also had sitting members from Tasmania
and New South Wales at various times, though it was much stronger in the former
mentioned states. The party was in agreement with the ruling conservative
Liberal and Country parties on many issues, which resulted in their
preferencing of these parties over the ALP. However, it was more morally
conservative, militantly anti-communist and socially compassionate than the
Liberals. The DLP was defeated by the federal election of 1974 that saw its
primary vote cut by nearly two thirds, and the entry of an ALP government. The
DLP never regained its previous support in subsequent elections and formally
disbanded in 1978, but a small group within the party refused to accept this
decision and created a small, reformed successor party. Though his party was
effectively gone, Santamaria and his National Civic Council took a strong
diametrically opposed stance to dominant neoliberal/New Right tendencies within
both the ALP and Liberal parties throughout the eighties and early nineties. A
new Christian party that found its first strength in 1981 was the Christian
Democratic Party (initially known as the "Call to Australia" party). It gained
9.1% of the vote in the New South Wales (NSW) state election of 1981, but its
vote rapidly declined thereafter. This Protestant party had some very similar
social policies to the DLP. Its support base has generally been restricted to
NSW and Western Australia, where it usually gains between 2–4% of votes, with
its support being minuscule in other states. It has had two members of the NSW
state parliament for most of its existence. Another Australian Christian
democratic party of note is the Family First Party. It has had one or two
members in the SA parliament since 2002, and in 2004 also managed to elect a
Victorian senator. Its electoral support is small, with the largest
constituencies being South Australia (4–6%), and Victoria (around 4%). Family
First generally receives lower support in national elections than in state
elections. In 2006, the new DLP experienced a resurgence. The successor party
struggled through decades of Victorian elections before finally gaining a
parliamentary seat when the Victorian upper house was redesigned. Nevertheless,
its electoral support is still very small in Victoria (around 2%). It has
recently reformed state parties in Queensland and New South Wales. In the
Australian federal election, 2010, the DLP won the sixth senate seat in
Victoria, giving it representation in the Australian Senate. In the United
States there have been various attempts to create Christian Democratic parties,
similar to their European and Latin American counterparts, but efforts have
generally run against the formidable strength of the existing bipartisan
Republican/Democratic party system. The Christian Democratic Union of the
United States of America (www.cdu-usa.org), formed in 2007, claims to be
growing in membership and support, attracting persons disaffected with the two
established parties. CDU-USA defines itself as conservative on moral and
cultural issues, while progressive on economic and social ones. Among its
positions, The Christian Democratic Union is supportive of a universal health
care system for the United States, through publicly funded health care and
single-payer health care, as proposed, for example, by the American Physicians
for a National Health Program (www.PNHP.org). CDU-USA is also supportive of
national energy self-sufficiency and of more equitable and progressive tax
rates so as to achieve the goal of a balanced budget without decreasing social
expenditures or raising taxes on the middle class.
