Christian Institute The Christian Institute (CI) is a British evangelical
Christian pressure group. The CI promotes a Conservative Christian viewpoint,
founded on belief in Biblical inerrancy. The CI is a registered charity. While
the CI has campaigned on issues including gambling, abortion and euthanasia, it
is most notable for its campaigns against gay rights. The CI sought to retain
Section 28 and a higher age of consent for homosexuals, and opposed the Civil
Partnership Act and legislation giving gay couples the right to adopt. It has
opposed measures to prevent gay people being discriminated against in the
provision of services and goods. Both the Civil Partnership Act 2004 and the
Equality Act 2010 were ultimately enacted by Parliament. The Christian
Institute's activities resulted in censure by The Charity Commission in 2001,
for breaching rules limiting overt political campaigning by charities, by
"publishing a 100-page report, "Homosexuality and Young People" (1998), which
argued against reforming anti-homosexual law with no reference at all to a
Christian view." In 2004 the CI funded a full-page newspaper advertisement in
The Times in support of a controversial amendment to the Civil Partnership
Bill. The amendment attempted to include within the scope of the Bill siblings
who had lived together for longer than 12 years. The amendment was ultimately
rejected in both Houses of Parliament. In response to the advertisement,
Members of Parliament questioned the CI's overt political campaigning in light
of its charitable status. Legal actions. In 2000, the CI became the only group
to initiate a court case for an alleged breach of the now defunct Section 28.
The case failed.Glasgow forced not to promote homosexuality Christian Institute
website; retrieved 2012-08-16Gay groups 'delighted' as Section 28 case dropped
The Scotsman July 7, 2000 on website Highbeam Research; retrieved on 2012-08-16
In 2007, the CI and others unsuccessfully sought a judicial review of the
Sexual Orientation Regulations in Northern Ireland. In May 2008, the CI funded
the legal costs of Lillian Ladele, a registrar from Islington, London, who took
her employer, Islington London Borough Council, to the London Central
Employment Tribunal. Ladele had refused to process the paperwork associated
with civil partnerships on religious grounds, and following complaints from
other staff she was disciplined under the Council's "Fairness for All" policy.
Ladele claimed she had been subject to direct and indirect discrimination, and
harassment in the workplace, on grounds of her religion. In July 2008, the
tribunal found in Ladele's favour, however this ruling was overturned by the
Employment Appeal Tribunal in December, 2008. The CI later launched an
unsuccessful appeal against this ruling in the High Court, and has been refused
permission to appeal to the Supreme Court. In 2010, the CI funded the defence
of two Christian hotel owners accused of acting unlawfully under the Equality
Act (Sexual Orientation) Regulations, by refusing to let a gay couple in a
civil partnership stay in a double room reserved for married couples. The
owners lost both the case and the subsequent appeal.
