Christian existentialism Christian existentialism is a theo-philosophical
movement which takes an existentialist approach to Christian theology. The
school of thought is often traced back to the work of the Danish philosopher
and theologian Søren Kierkegaard (1813–1855), who is considered the father
of existentialism. Kierkegaardian themes. Christian existentialism relies on
Kierkegaard's understanding of Christianity. Kierkegaard argued that the
universe is fundamentally paradoxical, and that its greatest paradox is the
transcendent union of God and man in the person of Jesus Christ. He also
posited having a personal relationship with God that supersedes all prescribed
moralities, social structures and communal norms, since he asserted that
following social conventions is essentially a personal aesthetic choice made by
individuals. Kierkegaard proposed that each person must make independent
choices, which then constitute his or her existence. Each person suffers from
the anguish of indecision (whether knowingly or unknowingly) until he or she
commits to a particular choice about the way to live. Kierkegaard also proposed
three rubrics with which to understand the conditions that issue from distinct
life choices: the aesthetic, the ethical, and the religious. Major premises.
One of the major premises of Christian existentialism entails calling the
masses back to a more genuine form of Christianity. This form is often
identified with some notion of Early Christianity, which mostly existed during
the first three centuries after the Christ's crucifixion. Beginning with the
Edict of Milan, which was issued by Roman Emperor Constantine I in AD 313,
Christianity enjoyed a level of popularity among Romans and later among other
Europeans. And yet Kierkegaard asserted that by the 19th century, the ultimate
meaning of New Testament Christianity (love, cf. agape, mercy and loving-
kindness) had become perverted, and Christianity had deviated considerably from
its original threefold message of grace, humility, and love. Another major
premise of Christian existentialism involves Kierkegaard's conception of God
and Love. For the most part, Kierkegaard equates God with Love. Thus, when a
person engages in the act of loving, he is in effect achieving an aspect of the
divine. Kierkegaard also viewed the individual as a necessary synthesis of both
and infinite elements. Therefore, when an individual does not come to a full
realization of his infinite side, he is said to be in . For many contemporary
Christian theologians, the notion of despair can be viewed as sin. However, to
Kierkegaard, a man sinned when he was exposed to this idea of despair and chose
a path other than one in accordance with God's will. A final major premise of
Christian existentialism entails the systematic undoing of evil acts.
Kierkegaard asserted that once an action had been completed, it should be
evaluated in the face of God, for holding oneself up to divine scrutiny was the
only way to judge one's actions. Because actions constitute the manner in which
something is deemed good or bad, one must be constantly conscious of the
potential consequences of his actions. Kierkegaard believed that the choice for
goodness ultimately came down to each individual. Yet Kierkegaard also foresaw
the potential limiting of choices for individuals who fell into despair. The
Bible. Christian Existentialism often refers to what it calls the indirect
style of Christ's teachings, which it considers to be a distinctive and
important aspect of his ministry. Christ's point, it says, is often left unsaid
in any particular parable or saying, to permit each individual to confront the
truth on their own. This is particularly evident in (but is certainly not
limited to) his parables. For example, in the Gospel of Matthew (), Jesus tells
a story about a man who is heavily in debt (the parable of the unforgiving
servant). The debtor and his family are about to be sold into slavery, but he
pleads for their lives. His master accordingly cancels the debt and sets them
free. Later the man who was in debt abuses some people who owe him money, and
he has them thrown in jail. Upon being informed of what this man has done, the
master brings him in and says, "Why are you doing this? Weren't your debts
canceled?" Then the debtor is thrown into jail until the debt is paid. Jesus
ends his story by saying, "This is how it will be for you if you do not forgive
your brother from your heart." Often Christ's parables are a response to a
question he is asked. After he tells the parable, he returns the question to
the individual who originally asked it. Often we see a person asking a
speculative question involving one's duty before God, and Christ's response is
more or less the same question—but as God would ask that individual. For
example, in the Gospel of Luke (), a teacher of the law asks Jesus what it
means to love one's neighbor as oneself. Jesus replies by telling the story of
the Good Samaritan. In the story a man is beaten by thieves. A priest and a
Levite pass him by, but a Samaritan takes pity on him and generously sets him
up at an inn—paying his tab in advance. Then Jesus returns the question,
"Which of these three do you think was a neighbor to the man who fell into the
hands of robbers?". Jesus does not answer the question because he requires the
individual to answer it, and thus to understand existence in the Bible, one
must recognize who that passage is speaking to in particular. To Kierkegaard,
it is the individual hearing the passage. A good example of indirect
communication in the Old Testament is the story of David and Nathan in . David
had committed adultery with a woman, Bathsheba, which resulted in her
pregnancy. He then ordered her husband, Uriah, to come home from a war front so
that he might sleep with his wife, thus making it appear as if Uriah had in
fact conceived with Bathsheba. Instead, Uriah would not break faith with his
fellow soldiers still on the battlefield and refused to sleep with her. David
then ordered him back out to the battlefront where he would surely die, thus
making Bathsheba a widow and available for marriage, which David soon arranged.
David initially thought he had gotten away with murder, until Nathan arrived to
tell him a story about two men, one rich and the other poor. The poor man was a
shepherd with only one lamb, which he raised with his family. The lamb ate at
his table and slept in his arms. One day a traveler came to visit the rich man;
instead of taking one of his own sheep, the rich man seized the ewe lamb that
belonged to the poor man and prepared it for his guest. When Nathan finished
his story, David burned with anger and said (among other things): "As surely as
the Lord lives, the man who did this deserves to die!". Nathan responded by
saying ""You" are the man!". Realizing his guilt, David becomes filled with
terror and remorse, tearfully repenting of his evil deed. An existential
reading of the Bible demands that the reader recognize that he is an existing
subject, studying the words that God communicates to him personally. This is in
contrast to looking at a collection of "truths" which are outside and unrelated
to the reader. Such a reader is not obligated to follow the commandments as if
an external agent is forcing them upon him, but as though they are inside him
and guiding him internally. This is the task Kierkegaard takes up when he asks:
"Who has the more difficult task: the teacher who lectures on earnest things a
meteor's distance from everyday life, or the learner who should put it to use?"
Existentially speaking, the Bible doesn't become an authority in a person's
life until they "authorize" the Bible to be their personal authority. Notable
Christian existentialists. Christian existentialists include German Protestant
theologians Paul Tillich and Rudolph Bultmann, British Anglican theologian John
Macquarrie, American theologians Craig J. N. de Paulo and Lincoln Swain,
American philosopher Clifford Williams, European philosophers Karl Jaspers,
Gabriel Marcel, Emmanuel Mounier, Miguel de Unamuno and Pierre Boutang, and
Russian philosophers Nikolai Berdyaev and Lev Shestov. Karl Barth added to
Kierkegaard's ideas the notion that existential despair leads an individual to
an awareness of God's infinite nature. Some ideas in the works of Russian
author Fyodor Dostoevsky could arguably be placed within the tradition of
Christian existentialism. The roots of existentialism have been traced back as
far as St Augustine. Some of the most striking passages in Pascal's "Pensées",
including the famous section on the Wager, deal with existentialist themes.
Jacques Maritain, in "Existence and the Existent: An Essay on Christian
Existentialism", finds the core of true existentialism in the thought of Thomas
Aquinas.
