Christian socialism Christian socialism is a form of religious socialism based
on the teachings of Jesus. Many Christian socialists believe capitalism to be
idolatrous and rooted in greed, which some Christians denominations consider a
mortal sin. Christian socialists identify the cause of inequality to be
associated with the greed that they associate with capitalism. Christian
socialism became a major movement in the United Kingdom beginning in the 1960s
through the Christian Socialist Movement. The term also pertains to such
earlier figures as the nineteenth century writers Frederick Denison Maurice
("The Kingdom of Christ", 1838), Charles Kingsley ("The Water-Babies", 1863),
Thomas Hughes ("Tom Brown's Schooldays", 1857), Frederick James Furnivall (co-
creator of the "Oxford English Dictionary"), Adin Ballou ("Practical Christian
Socialism", 1854), and Francis Bellamy (a Baptist minister and the author of
the United States' Pledge of Allegiance). History. Biblical age. Elements that
would form the basis of Christian socialism are found in the Old and New
Testaments. Old Testament. The Old Testament had divided perspectives on the
issue of poverty. One part of the Jewish tradition held that poverty was
judgement of God upon the wicked while viewing prosperity as a reward for the
good, stating that "The righteous has enough to satisfy his appetite, but the
belly of the wicked suffers want" (Prov. 13:25). However this does not imply
that the poor are always right, as Moses warns "You shall not be partial to the
poor or defer to the great but in righteousness shall you judge your neighbour"
(Lev. 19:15). New Testament. In the New Testament, Jesus in Matthew 25:31-46
identifies himself with the hungry, the poor, the sick, and the prisoners. In
the passage, Jesus states that "to feed the hungry" is not simple but requires
planning and says that the planning will have to be just as complex,
sophisticated, and as long-range as the demand and provision for food,
clothing, and shelter requires. Matthew 25:31-46 is a major component of
Christianity and is considered the cornerstone of Christian socialism. Another
key statement in the New Testament that is an important component of Christian
socialism is Luke 10:25-37 that follows up on the statement "You shall love
your neighbour as yourself" with the follow-up question "And who is my
neighbour?" With the revolutionary response that the neighbour includes the
Samaritans of this world, all those who are most despised and rejected. The
Samaritans were considered a heretical sect and were the objects of hostility
and contempt by ancient Jews. In the Sermon on the Plain, Jesus says, "Blessed
are you poor, for yours is the kingdom of God. Blessed are you that hunger now,
for you shall be satisfied" (Luke 6:20, 21). Eastern Orthodox Church. Basil
held sympathy for those who were unemployed for no fault of their own, but he
held no sympathy for deadbeats and able-bodied beggars. 19th century. In
Victorian Britain, the art critic John Ruskin in his later life expounded
theories about social justice in "Unto This Last" (1860). The painters of the
Pre-Raphaelite Brotherhood were influenced and sponsored by Ruskin. The artist
William Morris was a leader of the Socialist League founded in December 1884.
The Fabian Society was founded in the same year; Sydney and Beatrice Webb were
its leading members. George Bernard Shaw and the members of the Bloomsbury
Group were also influenced by the Fabians. Such Christian socialist thinkers
were important in the early history of the British Labour party. "The Christian
Church exists for the sole purpose of saving the human race. So far she has
failed, but I think that Socialism shows her how she may succeed. It insists
that men cannot be made right until the material conditions be made right.
Although man cannot live by bread alone, he must have bread. Therefore the
Church must destroy a system of society which inevitably creates and
perpetuates unequal and unfair conditions of life. These unequal and unfair
conditions have been created by competition. Therefore competition must cease
and cooperation take its place." Despite the explicit rejection of Socialism,
in the more Catholic countries of Europe the encyclical's teaching was the
inspiration that led to the formation of new Christian democratic parties. A
number of Christian socialist movements and political parties throughout the
world group themselves into the International League of Religious Socialists.
It has member organizations in 21 countries representing 200,000 members.
Christian socialists draw parallels between what some have characterized as the
egalitarian and anti-establishment message of Jesus, who–according to the
Gospel–spoke against the religious authorities of his time, and the
egalitarian, anti-establishment, and sometimes anti-clerical message of most
contemporary socialisms. Some Christian Socialists have become active
Communists. This phenomenon was most common among missionaries in China, the
most notable being James Gareth Endicott, who became supportive of the struggle
of the Communist Party of China in the 1930s and 1940s. Christian socialism is
not to be confused with certain parties with "Christian Social" in their names
which are found in the German-speaking world, such as the contemporary
Christian Social Union in Bavaria or the Christian Social Party in Austria-
Hungary c. 1900. Such parties do not claim to be socialist, nor are they
considered socialist by others. The term Christian Democrat is more
appropriately applied to the contemporary parties. Catholic criticisms. In
Roman Catholicism, Socialism was strongly criticized in the 1878 papal
encyclical "Quod Apostolici Muneris" by Pope Leo XIII. It was again denounced
in the 1931 letter "Quadragesimo Anno". Socialists were accused of attempting
to overthrow all existing civil society, and Christian socialism was deemed to
be an oxymoron because of this. Pius XI famously wrote at the time that "no one
can be at the same time a good Catholic and a true socialist". Prominent
Christian socialists. The British Labour Party, Australian Labor Party and New
Democratic Party of Canada have both been influenced by Christian socialism,
and some figures from both parties could be considered to be Christian
socialists, depending on the definition of "socialism" used. Former British
Labour leader Tony Blair is a member of the Christian Socialist Movement
although his adherence to Christian Socialist ideals is highly disputed, as he
is much further to the right than most "socialists". Former Australian Prime
Minister Kevin Rudd identified himself as an "old-fashioned Christian
socialist" in a 2003 interview with "The Australian Financial Review", later
writing in 2006: "A Christian perspective, informed by a social gospel or
Christian socialist tradition, should not be rejected contemptuously by secular
politicians as if these views are an unwelcome intrusion into the political
sphere." However he also described socialism as an "arcane, 19th century"
doctrine and stated that "I am not a socialist. I have never been a socialist
and I never will be a socialist." Quotes. John Richard Green, "History of the
English People". Accessed 2007-07-22. Socialism which means love, cooperation
and brotherhood in every department of human affairs, is the only outward
expression of a Christian's faith. I am firmly convinced that whether they know
it or not, all who approve and accept competition and struggle against each
other as the means whereby we gain our daily bread, do indeed betray and make
of no effect the "will of God." George Lansbury Tim Padgett: Chavez: "Bush Has
Called Me Worse Things" "Time" magazine, September 22, 2006. Accessed 2007-07-
22. References. Further reading. Primary sources Secondary sources
