Christian A Christian () is a person who adheres to Christianity, an Abrahamic,
monotheistic religion based on the life and teachings of Jesus of Nazareth as
recorded in the Canonical gospels and the letters of the New Testament.
"Christian" derives from the Koine Greek word Christ, a translation of the
Biblical Hebrew term Messiah. Central to the Christian faith is the "gospel",
the teaching that humans have hope for salvation through the message and work
of Jesus, and particularly, his atoning death on the cross and resurrection .
Christians also believe Jesus is the Messiah prophesied in the Hebrew Bible.
Most Christians believe in the doctrine of the Trinity ("tri-unity"), a
description of God as Father, Son and Holy Spirit. This includes the vast
majority of churches in Christianity, although a minority are Non-trinitarians.
The term "Christian" is also used adjectivally to describe anything associated
with Christianity, or in a proverbial sense "all that is noble, and good, and
Christ-like." It is also used as a label to identify people who associate with
the cultural aspects of Christianity, irrespective of personal religious
beliefs or practices. Etymology. The Greek word ("Christianos")—meaning
"follower of Christ"—comes from ("Christos")—meaning "anointed one"—with
an adjectival ending borrowed from Latin to denote adhering to, or even
belonging to, as in slave ownership. In the Greek Septuagint, "christos" was
used to translate the Hebrew מָשִׁיחַ ("," messiah), meaning "who is
anointed." In other European languages, equivalent words to 'Christian' are
likewise derived from the Greek, such as 'Chrétien' in French and 'Cristiano'
in Spanish. Early usage. The first recorded use of the term (or its cognates in
other languages) is in the New Testament, in , which states "...in Antioch the
disciples were first called Christians." The second mention of the term follows
in , where Herod Agrippa II replies to Paul the Apostle, "Do you think that in
such a short time you can persuade me to be a Christian?" The third and final
New Testament reference to the term is in , which exhorts believers, "...if you
suffer as a Christian, do not be ashamed, but praise God that you bear that
name." Another term for Christians which appears in the New Testament is
"Nazarenes" which is used by the Jewish lawyer Tertullus in Acts 24. Tertullian
("Against Marcion" 4:8) records that "the Jews call us Nazarenes," while around
331 AD Eusebius records that Christ was called a Nazoraean from the name
Nazareth, and that in earlier centuries "Christians," were once called
"Nazarenes." The Hebrew equivalent of "Nazarenes", "Notzrim", occurs in the
Babylonian Talmud, and is still the modern Israeli Hebrew term for Christian.
All three original New Testament verses' usages reflect a derisive element in
the term "Christian" to refer to followers of Christ who did not acknowledge
the emperor of Rome. The town Antioch, which is said to have given them the
name "Christian", had a reputation for coming up with such nicknames. However
Peter's apparent endorsement of the term led to its being preferred over
"Nazarenes" and the term "Christianoi" from 1 Peter becomes the standard term
in the Early Church Fathers from Ignatius and Polycarp onwards. The earliest
occurrences of the term in non-Christian literature include Josephus, referring
to "the tribe of Christians, so named from him;" Pliny the Younger in
correspondence with Trajan; and Tacitus, writing near the end of the 1st
century. In the "Annals" he relates that "by vulgar appellation were commonly
called Christians" and identifies Christians as Nero's scapegoats for the Great
Fire of Rome. Modern usage. A wide range of beliefs and practices is found
across the world among those who call themselves Christian. There is usually a
consensus among many denominations about what defines a Christian, but
disagreement does exist among some sects and denominations on a common
definition of "Christianity." Philosopher Michael Martin, in his book "The Case
Against Christianity", evaluated three historical Christian creeds (the
Apostles' Creed, the Nicene Creed and the Athanasian Creed) to establish a set
of basic assumptions which include belief in theism, the historicity of Jesus,
the Incarnation, salvation through faith in Jesus, and Jesus as an ethical role
model. Hebrew terms. As the identification of the Messiah with Jesus is not
accepted within Judaism, the Talmudic term for Christians in Hebrew is
"Notzrim" ("Nazarenes"), originally derived from the fact that Jesus came from
the village of Nazareth in Israel. However, Messianic Jews are referred to in
modern Hebrew as יהודים משיחיים ("Yehudim Meshihi'im"). Arabic
terms. In Arabic-speaking cultures, two words are commonly used for Christians:
"Nasrani" (نصراني), plural "Nasara" (نصارى) is generally understood
to be derived from "Nazareth" through the Syriac (Aramaic); "Masihi"
(مسيحي) means followers of the Messiah. Where there is a distinction,
"Nasrani" refers to people from a Christian culture and "Masihi" means those
with a religious faith in Jesus. In some countries "Nasrani" tends to be used
generically for non-Muslim white people. Another Arabic word sometimes used for
Christians, particularly in a political context, is "Salibi" (صليبي
"Crusader") from "salib" (صليب "crucifix") which refers to Crusaders and
has negative connotations. Asian terms. The Syriac term "Nasrani" (Nazarene)
has also been attached to the Saint Thomas Christians of Kerala, India. In the
Indian subcontinent, Christians call themselves "Isaai" (, ), and are also
known by this term to adherents of other religions. This is related to the name
they call Jesus, "Isa Masih". In the past, the Malays used to call the
Portuguese "Serani" from the Arabic "Nasrani". Today the term "Serani" is used
for the creole Christian community of Malaysia today. The Chinese word is
(pinyin: jīdū tú), literally "Christ follower." The two characters now
pronounced "Jīdū" in Mandarin Chinese, were originally pronounced "Ki-To" in
Cantonese as representation of Latin "Cristo." Likewise in Vietnam the same two
characters read "Cơ đốc", and a "follower of Christianity" is a "tín đồ
Cơ đốc giáo". In Japan, the term "kirishitan" (written in Edo period
documents 吉利支丹, 切支丹, and in modern Japanese histories as
キリシタン), from Portuguese cristão, referred to Roman Catholic
Christians in the 16th and 17th centuries before the religion was banned by the
Tokugawa shogunate. Today Christians are referred to in standard Japanese as
"Kuristo-kyo-to" キリスト教徒, or the English-derived term "kurisuchan"
クリスチャン. Korean still uses "Kidok-kyo-do" (written in hangul as
기독교도) for "Christian," though the Greek form "Kurisudo" 그리스도
has now replaced the old Sino-Korean "Kidok" for Christ himself. Demographics.
As of the early 21st century, Christianity has around 2.1 billion adherents.
The faith represents about a quarter to a third of the world's population and
is the largest religion in the world, with approximately 38,000 Christian
denominations. Christians have composed about 33 percent of the world's
population for around 100 years. The largest Christian denomination is the
Roman Catholic Church, with 1.17 billion adherents, representing half of all
Christians.
