Juche The Juche Idea, sometimes spelled "Chuch'e" (), is a political thesis of
Kim Il-sung which says that the Korean masses are the masters of the country's
development. From the 1950s to the 1970s, Kim and other party theorists such as
Hwang Jang-yop elaborated the Juche Idea into a set of principles that the
government uses to justify its policy decisions. Among these are a strong
military posture and reliance on Korean national resources. The name comes from
"juche", the Korean translation for the philosophical and Marxist term
‚Äúsubject‚Äù, also meaning ‚Äúmain body‚Äù or ‚Äúmainstream‚Äù, and is
sometimes translated in North Korean sources as ‚Äúindependent stand‚Äù or
‚Äúspirit of self-reliance‚Äù. It has also been interpreted as ‚Äúalways
putting Korean things first‚Äù. According to Kim Il-sung, the Juche Idea is
based on the belief that ‚Äúman is the master of everything and decides
everything‚Äù. Origin. North Korean sources trace the origins of Juche to the
1930s. According to these sources the earliest mention of Juche was in a June
30, 1930 speech by Kim Il-sung, who was then 18 years old. The authenticity of
these early speeches, however, is disputed. Kim focuses on the importance of
education and learning Korean history. Through the education of Korean people's
own history will it "stimulate their national pride and rouse the broad masses
to revolutionary struggle". Kim talks throughout his speech bulleting
monumental events of the past and how certain outcomes could have been
prevented. He stresses the importance of remembering their struggle, and that
not learning their past, or denying it would "mean that our people did
nothing." Hwang Jang-yeop, Kim's top adviser on ideology, discovered this
speech later in the 1950s when Kim sought to develop his own version of
Marxism‚ÄìLeninism, which Juche was originally seen as a progression of, and
began to craft the idea birthing it into the society-defining credo it became.
By 1958, Kim Il-sung had established himself as "the unrivaled ruler in North
Korea" and thus started the language used to reference the people's devotion to
Kim. This resulted in building a personality cult around him to glorify Kim Il-
sung and his family's history and legitimacy as leaders. Even following Kim Il-
sung's death he remains the eternal president and even those who were critical
of his son Kim Jung-il still passionately revered him. The rewritten history of
Korea goes as far back as 1866 when the "heroic" Kim family and his great-
grandfather had fought against American imperialism. This is an example of the
way in which the North Korean political machine began to mythologize Kim's
history and abilities. The cult of personality surrounding the Kim family has
both legitimated and helped garner support for the Juche ideology. Kim Il-sung
was revered as the "supreme leader and the sun" of all people. Former North
Korean leader Kim Jong-il officially authored the definitive statement on Juche
in a 1982 document titled "On the Juche Idea". He had final authority over the
interpretation of the state ideology and incorporated the Songun (army-first)
policy into it in 1996. The idea of Juche was developed by Kim Il-sung as the
guide and foundation of all conduct in North Korea. The meaning of Juche is
"self-reliance" and "independence" in politics, economics, defense, and
ideology. Juche emphasized independence in political work, self-sustenance in
economic endeavors, and self-defense in national defense. "Chajusong" (self-
reliance), "minjok tongnip" (national or ethnic independence), "charip kyongje"
(independent economy), the common factors that all the colonized peoples wanted
at mid-century, are the synonyms of Juche and can be the antonyms of
"sadaejuui", which means serving and relying upon foreign power. The second
character of Juche, "che", is found in the late-nineteenth century self-
strengthening movement of Li Hung-chang‚Äôs term. Che of Juche is same as ti of
ti-yung in Chinese learning and tai of kokutai in Japanese learning. The
Koreans use Juche in their case with the goal of creating a self-reliant state
of mind, the correct thought that must precede and that will then determine
correct action but also as a means of defining what is simultaneously modern
and Korean. Amidst the 4th Party Conference held in April 2012, Kim Jong-un
furtherly defined Juche as the comprehensive thought of Kim Il-sung, developed
and deepened by Kim Jong-il, therefore terming it as "Kimilsungism-
Kimjongilism". He said: ""Kimilsungism-Kimjongilism is an integral system of
the idea, theory and method of Juche, and a great revolutionary ideology
representative of the Juche era. Guided by Kimilsungism-Kimjongilism, we should
conduct Party building and Party activities, so as to sustain the revolutionary
character of our Party and advance the revolution and construction in line with
the ideas and intentions of the President and the General."" Ideology and
practical application. The Juche outlook requires absolute loyalty to the
revolutionary party and leader. In North Korea, these are the Workers' Party of
Korea and the supreme commander, formerly Kim Jong-il. In official North Korean
histories, one of the first purported applications of Juche was the Five-Year
Plan of 1956-1961, also known as the Chollima Movement, which led to the
Chongsan-ri Method and the Taean Work System. The Five-Year Plan involved rapid
economic development of North Korea, with a focus on heavy industry, to ensure
political independence from both the Soviet Union and China. The Chollima
Movement, however, applied the same method of centralized state planning that
began with the Soviet First Five-Year Plan in 1928. The campaign also coincided
with and was partially based on Mao's First Five-Year Plan and the Great Leap
Forward. North Korea was apparently able to avoid the catastrophes of the Great
Leap Forward. Despite its aspirations to self-sufficiency, North Korea has
continually relied on economic assistance from other countries. Historically,
North Korea received most of its assistance from the USSR until its collapse in
1991. In the period after the Korean War, North Korea relied on economic
assistance and loans from "fraternal" countries from 1953‚Äì1963 and also
depended considerably on Soviet industrial aid from 1953 to 1976. Following the
fall of the USSR, the North Korean economy went into a crisis, with consequent
infrastructural failures contributing to the mass famine of the mid-1990s.
After several years of starvation, the People's Republic of China agreed to be
a substitute for the Soviet Union as a major aid provider, supplying over
US$400 million per year in humanitarian assistance. Since 2007, North Korea
also received large supplies of heavy fuel oil and technical assistance as
scheduled in the six-party talks framework. North Korea was the second largest
recipient of international food aid in 2005, and continues to suffer chronic
food shortages. Relation to Marxism, Stalinism, and Maoism. In 1972, Juche
replaced Marxism-Leninism in the revised North Korean constitution as the
official state ideology, this being a response to the Sino-Soviet split. Juche
was nonetheless defined as a "creative application of Marxism-Leninism." Kim
Il-sung also explained that Juche was not original to North Korea and that in
formulating it he only laid stress on a programmatic orientation that is
inherent to all Stalinist states. After the 1991 collapse of the Soviet Union,
North Korea‚Äôs greatest economic benefactor, all reference to Marxism-Leninism
was dropped in the revised 1998 constitution. Some Marxist-Leninist phraseology
remained in occasional use, but in 2009, the word Í≥µÏÇ∞Ï£ºÏùò ("communism")
itself was dropped from the constitution altogether. The establishment of the
Songun doctrine in the mid-1990s, however, has formally designated the
military, not the proletariat or working class, as the main revolutionary force
in North Korea. Many commentators, journalists, and scholars outside North
Korea equate Juche with Stalinism and call North Korea a Stalinist country.
Some specialists have argued otherwise and have attempted to characterize the
North Korean state as corporatist (Bruce Cumings), race-based nationalist
(Brian Myers), guerrillaist (Wada Haruki), monarchist (Dae Sook-suh), and
theocratic (Han S. Park, Christopher Hitchens). Those who have made conditional
arguments that North Korea is a Stalinist regime include Charles Armstrong,
Adrian Buzo, Chong-Sik Lee, and Robert Scalapino. Despite this, statements by
Kim Il-sung concerning learning from Stalin and the Soviet experience were
later removed from public record. After Stalin's death, Stalin's cult of
personality was denounced at the 1956 Twentieth Party Congress of the Communist
Party of the Soviet Union, North Korean state authorities ended overt adulation
of the Soviet leader. But the regime refused to follow the example of Soviet
political reform, which it decried as modern revisionism, or join the Council
for Mutual Economic Assistance (COMECON), the major international trade
organization of Marxist-Leninist states subordinated to the economic
development of the Soviet Union. At present, the North Korean government admits
no connection between Juche and the ideas of Stalin, though occasional mention
is made of his political merits. Political thinking from Maoist China has
greatly influenced North Korea, such as the North's Chollima mass mobilization
movements, which were based on China's Great Leap Forward. However, the ruling
party in Pyongyang strongly denounces any Maoist influences on Juche in an
attempt to appear independent. So even though the influence of Mao Zedong is
also not formally acknowledged in North Korea, WPK ideologists and speech
writers began to openly use Maoist ideas, such as the concept of self-
regeneration, in the 1950s and 1960s. Maoist theories of art also began to
influence North Korean musical theater during this time. These developments
occurred as a result of the influence of the Chinese Army's involvement during
the Korean War, as well as during the Sino-Soviet split when Kim Il-sung sided
with Mao against Soviet de-Stalinization. Kim attended middle school in China,
he was conversant in Chinese, and he had been a guerrilla partisan in the
Communist Party of China from about 1931-1941. The postwar Kim Il-sung regime
had also emulated Mao‚Äôs Great Leap Forward, his theory of the Mass line
("qunzhong luxian"), and the guerrilla tradition. Juche, however, does not
exactly share the Maoist faith in the peasantry over the working class and the
village over the city, as it exalts the military. Effects on the economy. While
Juche was not the sole cause of North Korea's famine and unstable economy, the
idea drastically impacted the country's economic system. In 1957-1961, the Five
Year Plan prioritized the reconstruction of major industries destroyed by the
war, and placed consumer goods at the bottom of the priority list. This bias
toward rebuilding major industries, "combined with unprecedentedly large
amounts of aid from the Soviet bloc, pushed the economy forward at world-
beating growth rates in the 1950s and 1960s". Where everyday consumer items
such as pens and watches had been rare in post-war North Korea in 1949, by the
mid-1960s North Korea's economy was growing faster than that of South Korea.
Under Juche, North Korea's economic goal became to ‚Äúbuild a rich and strong
state that can guarantee our nation's "chajusong" (freedom)." Kim Il-sung
proposed to protect the "chajusong" of the national economy by relying on
domestic resources and seeking independence from foreign resources. In
adherence to the Juche principles of "chaju" (independence in politics) and
"charip" (self-sustenance in the economy) as outlined by Kim Il-sung in 1965,
the country isolated itself from rest of the world. North Korea had only
minimal diplomatic relationships with other nations until the collapse of the
Soviet bloc forced it to create new alliances. It may be noted that the
"charip" idea of a self-contained economy was unlike other countries that
withdrew from the world economy such as Albania under Enver Hoxha and Myanmar
(Burma), two countries that "withdrew" to no apparent purpose as their
economies idled along or got worse; North Korea didn't idle but grew until the
1980s. In theory, North Korea's withdrawal from the world economy was designed
to create self-reliance and independence from other countries. In practice,
however, the nation was forced to rely on the USSR, and later China, to sustain
its livelihood. One example of the need for foreign aid occurred in 1986, when
Kim Il-sung set a production goal of ten million tons of grain. When the plan
failed and the country produced only four million tons of grain, it turned to
foreign aid to provide an additional two million tons of grain. The six million
tons of grain it managed to obtain was the bare minimum needed to feed its
population. North Korea's economic crisis continued through the 1990s. "Most of
the blame was attributed not to North Korea's ponderous socialist system but to
'the collapse of socialist countries and the socialist market of the world,'
which 'shattered' many of P'yongyang's trade partners and agreements.‚Äù The
fall of the socialist market and trade partners led North Korea into a crisis
that was unmanageable within their economic system. As a result, in
contradiction to the Juche philosophy of autarky, North Korea established the
Najin-Sonbong free economic and trade zone during the mid-1990s. Investors from
firms in Hong Kong, the United Kingdom, Japan, France, South Korea, the United
States, and other countries opened manufacturing facilities in the DPRK. The
Shell Oil Corporation (in 1995) is one of the large, multinational corporations
that invested in the open trade area. Near the parallel, North Korea also
opened the city of Kaesong for exports until 2010, when South Korea imposed
economic sanctions after the sinking of a South Korean warship. The Juche
principle of "chawi" (self-defense in national defense) has caused North Korea
to spend much of its capital for military purposes, reducing the amount
available for economic development. It is estimated that 25 percent of North
Korea's annual budget goes to the military. Kim Jong Il explicitly expressed an
"army first" policy in the mid-1990s. Social class. Unlike the Choson dynasty
where there was a huge gap between the upper and lower classes, North Korea had
adopted a unified social mass, also known as the gathered-together "people".
Instead of a strict social hierarchy or a class divided society, North Korea
had, in theory, divided the union into three classes-peasant, worker, and the
samuwon (intellectuals and professionals) where each sect is just as important
as the other. The samuwon class consisted of clerks, small traders,
bureaucrats, professors and writers. This was a unique class that was created
in order to increase the education and literature of North Korea. Normally
Communist nations would value only the farmers or laborers, thus in the USSR
"intelligentsia" was not an independent class of its own, but an insertion
between the classes proletariat and bourgeoisie. Language reforms followed
revolutions more than once, such as the simplification of Chinese characters
under Mao (a consequence of the divergent orthographic choices of Taiwan and
the People's Republic of China), or the simplification of the Russian alphabet
after the 1917 revolution in Russia and consequent struggle against illiteracy,
known in Soviet Russia as "Likbez" ("Likvidaciya Bezgramotnosti", liquidation
of illiteracy). The emphasis on literacy and education stems from the
understanding, explained by Lenin, that illiterate workers or peasants can't
become subjects of political struggle. It was necessary, as well, to create a
class of highly skilled workers, which was impossible without a pool of
literate workers to draw from. North Korea, too, believed that promoting the
education of the populace was as important as economic growth. These three
ideas are cherished, and are symbolized through the symbol or statue of a
writing brush across the hammer and sickle. North Korea also adopted a Soviet-
style socialism approach. They believed in the rapid industrialization through
labor and believed in subjecting nature to human will. By restructuring the
social class into a mass of people who are theoretically all equal, the North
Korean government claimed it would be able to attain self-reliance or Juche in
the upcoming years. This is questionable, as the country suffers massive food
shortages annually and is heavily dependent on foreign aid. Criticism. Human
rights monitoring organizations and political analysts such as Brian Reynolds
Myers continually report that the actual situation in North Korea bears no
resemblance to Juche theory, citing the fact that North Korea's economy has
depended heavily on imports and foreign aid, both before and after the collapse
of the Communist trading bloc. Critics also claim that the opinions of the
people have no actual weight in decision-making. Leading Juche theorist Hwang
Jang-yop added his voice to these criticisms after defecting to South Korea,
although he maintained faith in the Juche Idea as he understood it. Political
scientist Han S. Park in his book "Juche: The Politics of Unconventional
Wisdom" (2002) and theologian Thomas J. Belke in "Juche: A Christian Study of
North Korea's State Religion" (1999) have both likened Juche to a religious
movement. Myers goes so far as to propose that Juche is merely a sham developed
to extol Kim Il-sung as a political thinker alongside Mao Zedong. Juche become
the subject of satire by influential Chinese novelty film director Hu Ge.
Outside North Korea. During the Cold War, North Korea promoted Juche and the
principle of "self-reliance" as a guide for other countries, particularly third
world countries, to develop their economies. Indonesian president Sukarno
visited North Korea in 1964 and attempted to implement the North Korean
economic program in his country, but it resulted in a military coup. Romanian
president Nicolae Ceau≈üescu was impressed by ideological mobilization in North
Korea during his Asia visit in 1971, and began his systematization campaign
shortly afterward with those features. The North Korean government hosted its
first international seminar on the Juche Idea in September 1977. The Korean
Central News Agency and the Voice of Korea sometimes refer to statements by
Juche study groups in other countries. Two of the most prominent of these
groups are International Institute of the Juche Idea in Japan and the Korean
Friendship Association, an international organisation presided over by Spanish
national Alejandro Cao de Benos de Les y P√©rez. Other Juche study groups are
not publicized outside of North Korean media and the extent of their activity
is therefore unclear. Kim Jong-il emphasized that other countries should not
apply Juche formulaically, but should use methods suitable to the situation.
Calendar. The North Korean government and associated organizations use a
variation of the Gregorian calendar with a Juche year based on April 15, 1912
CE (AD), the date of birth of Kim Il-sung, as year 1. The calendar was
introduced in 1997. Months are unchanged from those in the standard Gregorian
calendar. In many instances, the Juche year is given after the CE year, for
example, "27¬ June 2007 Juche 96". But in North Korean publications, the Juche
year is usually placed before the corresponding CE year, as in "Juche 96
(2007)". Calendar schemes based on political era are also found in the Japanese
era name ("Nengo") system and in the Minguo calendar used in the Republic of
China (Taiwan), though these are not based on the birth of an individual as in
the Gregorian and Juche calendars. Incidentally, the year numbers of the Juche
calendar, Minguo calendar, and Japan's Taish≈ç period correspond to each other
even though they were not meant to be related. In August 1997 the Central
People's Committee of the Democratic People's Republic of Korea promulgated
regulations regarding use of the Juche Era calendar, according to which for
dates occurring before 1912 the Gregorian calendar year is used exclusively, so
that there is no "negative" Juche year, or "Before Juche" concept. For example,
1682 is rendered as "1682", while 2012 is rendered as "Juche 101, 2012" or as
"Juche 101 (2012)." Critics of Juche charge that the "Juche dating system", as
it is based on a person's birth date rather than a political era, reflects a
dynastic tradition where era names are specified for ruling Emperors of Japan
and China, as well as the Korean Emperors, who also used this system.
