Cicero Marcus Tullius Cicero (; ; January 3, 106 BC ‚Äì December 7, 43 BC;
sometimes anglicized as Tully) was a Roman philosopher, statesman, lawyer,
orator, political theorist, consul and constitutionalist. He came from a
wealthy municipal family of the equestrian order, and is widely considered one
of Rome's greatest orators and prose stylists. His influence on the Latin
language was so immense that the subsequent history of prose in not only Latin
but European languages up to the 19th century was said to be either a reaction
against or a return to his style. According to Michael Grant, "the influence of
Cicero upon the history of European literature and ideas greatly exceeds that
of any other prose writer in any language." Cicero introduced the Romans to the
chief schools of Greek philosophy and created a Latin philosophical vocabulary
(with neologisms such as "humanitas", "qualitas", "quantitas", and "essentia")
distinguishing himself as a linguist, translator, and philosopher. Petrarch's
rediscovery of Cicero's letters is often credited for initiating the 14th-
century Renaissance. According to Polish historian Tadeusz Zieli≈Ñski,
"Renaissance was above all things a revival of Cicero, and only after him and
through him of the rest of Classical antiquity." The peak of Cicero's authority
and prestige came during the eighteenth-century Enlightenment, and his impact
on leading Enlightenment thinkers such as John Locke, David Hume, and
Montesquieu was substantial. His works rank among the most influential in
European culture, and today still constitute one of the most important bodies
of primary material for the writing and revision of Roman history, especially
the last days of the Roman Republic. Though he was an accomplished orator and
successful lawyer, Cicero believed his political career was his most important
achievement. It was during his consulship that the Catiline conspiracy
attempted the government overthrow through an attack on the city from outside
forces, and Cicero suppressed the revolt by executing five conspirators without
due process. During the chaotic latter half of the 1st century BC marked by
civil wars and the dictatorship of Gaius Julius Caesar, Cicero championed a
return to the traditional republican government. Following Julius Caesar's
death Cicero became an enemy of Mark Antony in the ensuing power struggle,
attacking him in a series of speeches. He was proscribed as an enemy of the
state by the Second Triumvirate and subsequently murdered in 43 BC. Personal
life. Early life. Cicero was born in 106 BC in Arpinum, a hill town southeast
of Rome. His father was a well-to-do member of the equestrian order with good
connections in Rome, though as a semi-invalid, he could not enter public life.
He compensated for this by studying extensively. Although little is known about
Cicero's mother, Helvia, it was common for the wives of important Roman
citizens to be responsible for the management of the household. Cicero's
brother Quintus wrote in a letter that she was a thrifty housewife. Cicero's
cognomen, or personal surname, comes from the Latin for chickpea, "cicer".
Plutarch explains that the name was originally given to one of Cicero's
ancestors who had a cleft in the tip of his nose resembling a chickpea.
However, it is more likely that Cicero's ancestors prospered through the
cultivation and sale of chickpeas. Romans often chose down-to-earth personal
surnames: the famous family names of Fabius, Lentulus, and Piso come from the
Latin names of beans, lentils, and peas. Plutarch writes that Cicero was urged
to change this deprecatory name when he entered politics, but refused, saying
that he would make "Cicero" more glorious than "Scaurus" ("Swollen-ankled") and
"Catulus" ("Puppy"). During this period in Roman history, to be considered
"cultured" meant being able to speak both Latin and Greek. Cicero, like most of
his contemporaries, was therefore educated in the teachings of the ancient
Greek philosophers, poets and historians. The most prominent teachers of
oratory of that time were themselves Greek. Cicero used his knowledge of Greek
to translate many of the theoretical concepts of Greek philosophy into Latin,
thus translating Greek philosophical works for a larger audience. It was
precisely his broad education that tied him to the traditional Roman elite.
According to Plutarch, Cicero was an extremely talented student, whose learning
attracted attention from all over Rome, affording him the opportunity to study
Roman law under Quintus Mucius Scaevola. Cicero's fellow students were Gaius
Marius Minor, Servius Sulpicius Rufus (who became a famous lawyer, one of the
few whom Cicero considered superior to himself in legal matters), and Titus
Pomponius. The latter two became Cicero's friends for life, and Pomponius (who
later received the nickname "Atticus") would become Cicero's longtime chief
emotional support and adviser. Cicero wanted to pursue a public career in
politics along the steps of the Cursus honorum. In 90 BC‚Äì88 BC, he served
both Gnaeus Pompeius Strabo and Lucius Cornelius Sulla as they campaigned in
the Social War, though he had no taste for military life, being an intellectual
first and foremost. Cicero started his career as a lawyer around 83‚Äì81 BC.
His first major case, of which a written record is still extant, was his 80 BC
defense of Sextus Roscius on the charge of patricide. Taking this case was a
courageous move for Cicero; patricide was considered an appalling crime, and
the people whom Cicero accused of the murder, the most notorious being
Chrysogonus, were favorites of Sulla. At this time it would have been easy for
Sulla to have the unknown Cicero murdered. Cicero's defense was an indirect
challenge to the dictator Sulla, and on the strength of his case, Roscius was
acquitted. In 79 BC, Cicero left for Greece, Asia Minor and Rhodes, perhaps
because of the potential wrath of Sulla. Cicero traveled to Athens, where he
again met Atticus, who had become an honorary citizen of Athens and introduced
Cicero to some significant Athenians. In Athens, Cicero visited the sacred
sites of the philosophers, but not before he consulted different rhetoricians
in order to learn a less physically exhausting style of speech. His chief
instructor was the rhetorician Apollonius Molon of Rhodes. He instructed Cicero
in a more expansive and less intense form of oratory that would define Cicero's
individual style in years to come. Cicero's interest in philosophy figured
heavily in his later career and led to him introducing Greek philosophy to
Roman culture, creating a philosophical vocabulary in Latin. In 87 BC, Philo of
Larissa, the head of the Academy that was founded by Plato in Athens about 300
years earlier, arrived in Rome. Cicero, "inspired by an extraordinary zeal for
philosophy", sat enthusiastically at his feet and absorbed Plato's philosophy.
He admired especially Plato's moral and political seriousness, but he also
respected his breadth of imagination. Cicero nonetheless rejected Plato's
theory of Ideas. Public career. Quaestor. His first office was as one of the
twenty annual Quaestors, a training post for serious public administration in a
diversity of areas, but with a traditional emphasis on administration and
rigorous accounting of public monies under the guidance of a senior magistrate
or provincial commander. Cicero served as quaestor in western Sicily in 75 BC
and demonstrated honesty and integrity in his dealings with the inhabitants. As
a result, the grateful Sicilians asked Cicero to prosecute Gaius Verres, a
governor of Sicily, who had badly plundered Sicily. His prosecution of Gaius
Verres was a great forensic success for Cicero. Governor Gaius Verres hired the
prominent lawyer of a noble family Quintus Hortensius Hortalus. After a lengthy
period on Sicily collecting testimonials, evidence and persuading witnesses to
come forth, Cicero returned to Rome and won the case in a series of dramatic
court battles. His unique style of oratory setting him apart from the
flamboyant Hortalus. Upon the conclusion of this case, Cicero came to be
considered the greatest orator in Rome. The view that Cicero may have taken the
case for reasons of his own is viable. Quintus Hortensius Hortalus was, at this
point, known as the best lawyer in Rome; to beat him would guarantee much
success and prestige that Cicero needed to start his career. Cicero's
oratorical skill is shown in his character assassination of Verres and various
other persuasive techniques used towards the jury. One such example is found in
the speech "Against Verres I", where he states "with you on this bench,
gentlemen, with Marcus Acilius Glabrio as your president, I do not understand
what Verres can hope to achieve". Oratory was considered a great art in ancient
Rome and an important tool for disseminating knowledge and promoting oneself in
elections, in part because there were no regular newspapers or mass media at
the time. Cicero was neither a patrician nor a plebeian noble; his rise to
political office despite his relatively humble origins has traditionally been
attributed to his brilliance as an orator. Cicero grew up in a time of civil
unrest and war. Sulla‚Äôs victory in the first of a series of civil wars led to
a new constitutional framework that undermined "libertas" (liberty), the
fundamental value of the Roman Republic. Nonetheless, Sulla‚Äôs reforms
strengthened the position of the equestrian class, contributing to that
class‚Äôs growing political power. Cicero was both an Italian "eques" and a
"novus homo", but more importantly he was a Roman constitutionalist. His social
class and loyalty to the Republic ensured that he would "command the support
and confidence of the people as well as the Italian middle classes." The fact
that the "optimates" faction never truly accepted Cicero undermined his efforts
to reform the Republic while preserving the constitution. Nevertheless, he was
able to successfully ascend the Roman "cursus honorum", holding each magistracy
at or near the youngest possible age: quaestor in 75 BC (age 31), aedile in 69
BC (age 37), and praetor in 66 BC (age 40), where he served as president of the
"Reclamation" (or extortion) Court. He was then elected consul at age 43.
Consul. Cicero was elected Consul for the year 63 BC. His co-consul for the
year, Gaius Antonius Hybrida, played a minor role. During his year in office,
he thwarted a conspiracy centered on assassinating him and overthrowing the
Roman Republic with the help of foreign armed forces, led by Lucius Sergius
Catilina. Cicero procured a "Senatus Consultum de Re Publica Defendenda"
(a¬ declaration of martial law) and drove Catiline from the city with four
vehement speeches (the Catiline Orations), which to this day remain outstanding
examples of his rhetorical style. The Orations listed Catiline and his
followers' debaucheries, and denounced Catiline's senatorial sympathizers as
roguish and dissolute debtors clinging to Catiline as a final and desperate
hope. Cicero demanded that Catiline and his followers leave the city. At the
conclusion of his first speech, Catiline hurriedly left the senate, (which was
being held in the Temple of Jupiter Stator). In his following speeches, Cicero
did not directly address Catiline. He delivered the second and third orations
before the people, and the last one again before the Senate. By these speeches,
Cicero wanted to prepare the Senate for the worst possible case; he also
delivered more evidence against Catiline. Catiline fled and left behind his
followers to start the revolution from within while Catiline assaulted the city
with an army of "moral bankrupts and honest fanatics". Catiline had attempted
to involve the Allobroges, a tribe of Transalpine Gaul, in their plot, but
Cicero, working with the Gauls, was able to seize letters which incriminated
the five conspirators and forced them to confess their crimes in front of the
Senate. The Senate then deliberated upon the conspirators' punishment. As it
was the dominant advisory body to the various legislative assemblies rather
than a judicial body, there were limits to its power; however, martial law was
in effect, and it was feared that simple house arrest or exile¬ ‚Äì the
standard options¬ ‚Äì would not remove the threat to the state. At first
Decimus Silanus spoke for the "extreme penalty"; many were then swayed by
Julius Caesar, who decried the precedent it would set and argued in favor of
life imprisonment in various Italian towns. Cato then rose in defence of the
death penalty and all the Senate finally agreed on the matter. Cicero had the
conspirators taken to the Tullianum, the notorious Roman prison, where they
were strangled. Cicero himself accompanied the former consul Publius Cornelius
Lentulus Sura, one of the conspirators, to the Tullianum. Cicero received the
honorific ""Pater Patriae"" for his efforts to suppress the conspiracy, but
lived thereafter in fear of trial or exile for having put Roman citizens to
death without trial. Exile and return. In 60 BC Julius Caesar invited Cicero to
be the fourth member of his existing partnership with Pompey and Marcus
Licinius Crassus, an assembly that would eventually be called the First
Triumvirate. Cicero refused the invitation because he suspected it would
undermine the Republic. In 58 BC, Publius Clodius Pulcher, the tribune of the
plebs, introduced a law (the "Leges Clodiae") threatening exile to anyone who
executed a Roman citizen without a trial. Cicero, having executed members of
the Catiline conspiracy four years previously without formal trial, and having
had a public falling out with Clodius, was clearly the intended target of the
law. Cicero argued that the "senatus consultum ultimum" indemnified him from
punishment, and he attempted to gain the support of the senators and consuls,
especially of Pompey. When help was not forthcoming, he went into exile. He
arrived at Thessalonica, Greece, on May¬ 23, 58¬ BC. Cicero's exile caused him
to fall into depression. He wrote to Atticus: "Your pleas have prevented me
from committing suicide. But what is there to live for? Don't blame me for
complaining. My afflictions surpass any you ever heard of earlier". After the
intervention of recently elected tribune Titus Annius Milo, the senate voted in
favor of recalling Cicero from exile. Clodius cast a single vote against the
decree. Cicero returned to Italy on August¬ 5, 57¬ BC, landing at Brundisium.
He was greeted by a cheering crowd, and, to his delight, his beloved daughter
Tullia. Cicero tried to reintegrate himself into politics, but his attack on a
bill of Caesar's proved unsuccessful. The conference at Luca in 56¬ BC forced
Cicero to make a recantation and pledge his support to the triumvirate. With
this, a cowed Cicero retreated to his literary works. It is uncertain whether
he had any direct involvement in politics for the following few years. He only
reluctantly accepted a promagistracy in Cilicia for 51¬ BC, after a shortage of
eligible governors was created by legislation requiring an interval of five
years between a consulship or praetorship and a provincial command. He was
absent from Italy as proconsul of Cilicia from May 51 to November 50¬ BC.
Accompanied by his brother Quintus as a legate, he was mostly spared from
warfare due to internal conflict among the Parthians, yet for storming a
mountain fortress he acquired the title of imperator. Julius Caesar's civil
war. The struggle between Pompey and Julius Caesar grew more intense in 50 BC.
Cicero chose to favour Pompey as he was in defence of the senate and Republican
tradition, but at the same time he prudently avoided openly alienating Caesar.
When Caesar invaded Italy in 49 BC, Cicero fled Rome. Caesar, seeking the
legitimacy an endorsement by a senior senator would provide, courted Cicero's
favour, but even so Cicero slipped out of Italy and traveled to Dyrrachium
(Epidamnos), Illyria, where Pompey's staff was situated. Cicero traveled with
the Pompeian forces to Pharsalus in 48 BC, though he was quickly losing faith
in the competence and righteousness of the Pompeian lot. Eventually, he
provoked the hostility of his fellow senator Cato, who told him that he would
have been of more use to the cause of the "optimates" if he had stayed in Rome.
After Caesar's victory at Pharsalus, Cicero returned to Rome only very
cautiously. Caesar pardoned him and Cicero tried to adjust to the situation and
maintain his political work, hoping that Caesar might revive the Republic and
its institutions. In a letter to Varro on c. April 20, 46 BC, Cicero outlined
his strategy under Caesar's dictatorship. Cicero, however, was taken completely
by surprise when the "Liberatores" assassinated Caesar on the ides of March, 44
BC. Cicero was not included in the conspiracy, even though the conspirators
were sure of his sympathy. Marcus Junius Brutus called out Cicero's name,
asking him to restore the republic when he lifted the bloodstained dagger after
the assassination. A letter Cicero wrote in February 43 BC to Trebonius, one of
the conspirators, began, "How I could wish that you had invited me to that most
glorious banquet on the Ides of March"! Cicero became a popular leader during
the period of instability following the assassination. He had no respect for
Mark Antony, who was scheming to take revenge upon Caesar's murderers. In
exchange for amnesty for the assassins, he arranged for the Senate to agree not
to declare Caesar to have been a tyrant, which allowed the Caesarians to have
lawful support and kept Caesar's reforms and policies intact. Opposition to
Mark Antony and death. Cicero and Antony then became the two leading men in
Rome; Cicero as spokesman for the Senate and Antony as consul, leader of the
Caesarian faction, and unofficial executor of Caesar's public will. The two men
had never been on friendly terms and their relationship worsened after Cicero
made it clear that he felt Antony to be taking unfair liberties in interpreting
Caesar's wishes and intentions. When Octavian, Caesar's heir and adopted son,
arrived in Italy in April, Cicero formed a plan to play him against Antony. In
September he began attacking Antony in a series of speeches he called the
Philippics, after Demosthenes's denunciations of Philip¬ II of Macedon.
Praising Octavian, he said that the young man only desired honor and would not
make the same mistake as his adoptive father. During this time, Cicero's
popularity as a public figure was unrivalled. Cicero supported Decimus Junius
Brutus Albinus as governor of Cisalpine Gaul ("Gallia Cisalpina") and urged the
Senate to name Antony an enemy of the state. The speech of Lucius Piso,
Caesar's father-in-law, delayed proceedings against Antony. Antony was later
declared an enemy of the state when he refused to lift the siege of Mutina,
which was in the hands of Decimus Brutus. Cicero‚Äôs plan to drive out Antony
failed. Antony and Octavian reconciled and allied with Lepidus to form the
Second Triumvirate after the successive battles of Forum Gallorum and Mutina.
The Triumvirate began proscribing their enemies and potential rivals
immediately after legislating the alliance into official existence for a term
of five years with consular "imperium". Cicero and all of his contacts and
supporters were numbered among the enemies of the state, and reportedly,
Octavian argued for two days against Cicero being added to the list. Cicero was
one of the most viciously and doggedly hunted among the proscribed. He was
viewed with sympathy by a large segment of the public and many people refused
to report that they had seen him. He was caught December¬ 7, 43¬ BC leaving his
villa in Formiae in a litter going to the seaside where he hoped to embark on a
ship destined for Macedonia. When his killers ‚Äì Herennius (a centurion) and
Popilius (a tribune) ‚Äì arrived, Cicero's own slaves said they had not seen
him, but he was given away by Philologus, a freed slave of his brother Quintus
Cicero. Cicero's last words are said to have been, "There is nothing proper
about what you are doing, soldier, but do try to kill me properly." He bowed to
his captors, leaning his head out of the litter in a gladiatorial gesture to
ease the task. By baring his neck and throat to the soldiers, he was indicating
that he wouldn't resist. According to Plutarch, Herennius first slew him, then
cut off his head. On Antony's instructions his hands, which had penned the
Philippics against Antony, were cut off as well; these were nailed along with
his head on the Rostra in the Forum Romanum according to the tradition of
Marius and Sulla, both of whom had displayed the heads of their enemies in the
Forum. Cicero was the only victim of the proscriptions to be displayed in that
manner. According to Cassius Dio (in a story often mistakenly attributed to
Plutarch), Antony's wife Fulvia took Cicero's head, pulled out his tongue, and
jabbed it repeatedly with her hairpin in final revenge against Cicero's power
of speech. Cicero's son, Marcus Tullius Cicero Minor, during his year as a
consul in 30¬ BC, avenged his father's death, to a certain extent, when he
announced to the Senate Mark Antony's naval defeat at Actium in 31¬ BC by
Octavian and his capable commander-in-chief, Agrippa. Octavian (or Augustus, as
he was later called) is reported to have praised Cicero as a patriot and a
scholar of meaning in later times, within the circle of his family. However, it
was the acquiescence of Augustus that allowed Cicero's assassination, as Cicero
was proscribed by the new Triumvirate. However, his career as a statesman was
marked by inconsistencies and a tendency to shift his position in response to
changes in the political climate. His indecision may be attributed to his
sensitive and impressionable personality; he was prone to overreaction in the
face of political and private change. "Would that he had been able to endure
prosperity with greater self control, and adversity with more fortitude!" wrote
C. Asinius Pollio, a contemporary Roman statesman and historian. Family. Cicero
married Terentia probably at the age of 27, in 79 BC. According to the upper
class of the day it was a marriage of convenience, but endured harmoniously for
some 30 years. Terentia's family was wealthy, probably the plebeian noble house
of Terenti Varrones, thus meeting the needs of Cicero's political ambitions in
both economic and social terms. She had a half sister (or perhaps first cousin)
named Fabia, who as a child had become a Vestal Virgin, a very great honour.
Terentia was a strong willed woman and (citing Plutarch) "she took more
interest in her husband's political career than she allowed him to take in
household affairs." In the 50s BC, Cicero's letters to Terentia became shorter
and colder. He complained to his friends that Terentia had betrayed him but did
not specify in which sense. Perhaps the marriage simply could not outlast the
strain of the political upheaval in Rome, Cicero's involvement in it, and
various other disputes between the two. The divorce appears to have taken place
in 51 BC or shortly before. In 46 or 45 BC, Cicero married a young girl,
Publilia, who had been his ward. It is thought that Cicero needed her money,
particularly after having to repay the dowry of Terentia, who came from a
wealthy family. This marriage did not last long. Although his marriage to
Terentia was one of convenience, it is commonly known that Cicero held great
love for his daughter Tullia. When she suddenly became ill in February 45 BC
and died after having seemingly recovered from giving birth to a son in
January, Cicero was stunned. "I have lost the one thing that bound me to life"
he wrote to Atticus. Atticus told him to come for a visit during the first
weeks of his bereavement, so that he could comfort him when his pain was at its
greatest. In Atticus's large library, Cicero read everything that the Greek
philosophers had written about overcoming grief, "but my sorrow defeats all
consolation." Caesar and Brutus as well as Servius Sulpicius Rufus sent him
letters of condolence. Cicero hoped that his son Marcus would become a
philosopher like him, but Marcus himself wished for a military career. He
joined the army of Pompey in 49 BC and after Pompey's defeat at Pharsalus 48
BC, he was pardoned by Caesar. Cicero sent him to Athens to study as a disciple
of the peripatetic philosopher Kratippos in 48 BC, but he used this absence
from "his father's vigilant eye" to "eat, drink and be merry." After Cicero's
murder he joined the army of the "Liberatores" but was later pardoned by
Augustus. Augustus' bad conscience for not having objected to Cicero's being
put on the proscription list during the Second Triumvirate led him to aid
considerably Marcus Minor's career. He became an augur, and was nominated
consul in 30 BC together with Augustus. As such, he was responsible for
revoking the honors of Mark Antony, who was responsible for the proscription,
and could in this way take revenge. Later he was appointed proconsul of Syria
and the province of Asia. Legacy. Cicero has been traditionally considered the
master of Latin prose, with Quintilian declaring Cicero was "not the name of a
man, but of eloquence itself. " He is credited with transforming Latin from a
modest utilitarian language into a versatile literary medium capable of
expressing abstract and complicated thoughts with clarity. Julius Caesar
praised Cicero's achievement by saying ‚Äúit is more important to have greatly
extended the frontiers of the Roman spirit than the frontiers of the Roman
empire‚Äù According to John William Mackail, "Cicero‚Äôs unique and
imperishable glory is that he created the language of the civilized world, and
used that language to create a style which nineteen centuries have not
replaced, and in some respects have hardly altered." Cicero was also an
energetic writer with an interest in a wide variety of subjects in keeping with
the Hellenistic philosophical and rhetorical traditions in which he was
trained. The quality and ready accessibility of Ciceronian texts favored very
wide distribution and inclusion in teaching curricula as suggested by an
amusing graffiti at Pompeii admonishing "you will like Cicero, or you will be
whipped" Cicero was greatly admired by influential Latin Church Fathers such as
Augustine of Hippo, who credited Cicero's lost "Hortensius" for his eventual
conversion to Christianity and St.Jerome, who had a feverish vision in which he
was accused of being "follower of Cicero and not of Christ" before the judgment
seat. This influence further increased after the Dark Ages in Europe, from
which more of his writings survived than any other Latin author. Medieval
philosophers were influenced by Cicero's writings on natural law and innate
rights. Petrarch's rediscovery of Cicero's letters provided impetus for
searches for ancient Greek and Latin writings scattered throughout European
monasteries, and the subsequent rediscovery of Classical Antiquity led to the
Renaissance. Subsequently, Cicero came to be regarded synonymous with classical
Latin that many humanist scholars held that no Latin word or phrase was to be
used unless it could be found in Cicero's works to the extent that Erasmus felt
compelled to criticize such extremism in his treatise Ciceronianus. His
voluminous correspondence, much of it addressed to his friend Atticus, has been
especially influential, introducing the art of refined letter writing to
European culture. Cornelius Nepos, the 1st century BC biographer of Atticus,
remarked that Cicero's letters contained such a wealth of detail "concerning
the inclinations of leading men, the faults of the generals, and the
revolutions in the government" that their reader had little need for a history
of the period. Among Cicero's admirers were Desiderius Erasmus, Martin Luther,
and John Locke. Following the invention of the printing press, "De Officiis"
was the second book to be printed¬ ‚Äì second only to the Gutenberg Bible.
Scholars note Cicero's influence on the rebirth of religious toleration in the
17th century. While Cicero the humanist deeply influenced the culture of the
Renaissance, Cicero the republican inspired the Founding Fathers of the United
States and the revolutionaries of the French Revolution. John Adams said of him
"As all the ages of the world have not produced a greater statesman and
philosopher united than Cicero, his authority should have great weight."
Jefferson names Cicero as one of a handful of major figures who contributed to
a tradition ‚Äúof public right‚Äù that informed his draft of the Declaration of
Independence and shaped American understandings of "the common sense" basis for
the right of revolution. Camille Desmoulins said of the French republicans in
1789 that they were "mostly young people who, nourished by the reading of
Cicero at school, had become passionate enthusiasts for liberty". Jim Powell
starts his book on the history of liberty with the sentence: "Marcus Tullius
Cicero expressed principles that became the bedrock of liberty in the modern
world." Legitimate government protects liberty and justice according to
"natural law." "Murray N. Rothbard praised Cicero as 'the great transmitter of
Stoic ideas from Greece to Rome.¬ ... Stoic natural law doctrines ... helped
shape the great structures of Roman law which became pervasive in Western
Civilization." Government's purpose was the protection of private property.
Likewise, no other antique personality has inspired venomous dislike as Cicero
especially in more modern times. Friedrich Engels referred to him as "the most
contemptible scoundrel in history" for upholding republican "democracy", while
at the same time denouncing land and class reforms. Cicero has faced criticism
for exaggerating the democratic qualities of republican Rome, and for defending
the Roman oligarchy against the popular reforms of Caesar. Michael Parenti
admits Cicero's abilities as an orator, but finds him a vain, pompous and
hypocritical personality who, when it suited him, could show public support for
popular causes that he privately despised. Parenti presents Cicero's
prosecution of the Catiline conspiracy as legally flawed at least, and possibly
unlawful. Cicero also had an influence on modern astronomy. Nicolaus
Copernicus, searching for ancient views on earth motion, say that he
"first¬ ... found in Cicero that Hicetas supposed the earth to move." Works.
Cicero was declared a "righteous pagan" by the early Catholic Church, and
therefore many of his works were deemed worthy of preservation. Subsequent
Roman writers quoted liberally from his works "De Re Publica" ("On The
Republic") and "De Legibus" ("On The Laws"), and much of his work has been
recreated from these surviving fragments. Cicero also articulated an early,
abstract conceptualization of rights, based on ancient law and custom. Of
Cicero's books, six on rhetoric have survived, as well as parts of eight on
philosophy. Of his speeches, 88 were recorded, but only 58 survive. More than
900 letters by Cicero to others have survived, and over 100 letters from others
to him. Notable fictional portrayals. Ben Jonson dramatised the Catiline
conspiracy in his play "Catiline His Conspiracy", featuring Cicero as a
character. Cicero also appears as a minor character in William Shakespeare's
play "Julius Caesar". Cicero was portrayed on the motion picture screen by
British actor Alan Napier in the 1953 film "Julius Caesar", based on
Shakespeare's play. He has also been played by such noted actors as Michael
Hordern (in "Cleopatra"), and Andre Morell (in the 1970 "Julius Caesar"). Most
recently, Cicero was portrayed by David Bamber in the HBO series "Rome"
(2005‚Äì2007) and appeared in both seasons. In her series of historical novels
"Masters of Rome" Colleen McCullough presents an unflattering depiction of
Cicero's career, showing him struggling with an inferiority complex and vanity,
morally flexible and fatally indiscreet, while his rival Julius Caesar is shown
in a more approving light. Cicero is portrayed as a hero in the novel "A Pillar
of Iron" by Taylor Caldwell (1965). Robert Harris' novels "Imperium" and
"Lustrum" ("Conspirata" in the U.S.) are the first two parts of a planned
trilogy of novels based upon the life of Cicero. In these novels Cicero's
character is depicted in a more balanced way than in those of McCullough, with
his positive traits equaling or outweighing his weaknesses (while conversely
Caesar is depicted as more sinister than in McCullough). Cicero is a major
recurring character in the "Roma Sub Rosa" series of mystery novels by Steven
Saylor. He also appears several times as a peripheral character in John Maddox
Roberts's "SPQR" series. Roberts's protagonist, Decius Metellus, admires Cicero
for his erudition, but is disappointed by his lack of real opposition to
Caesar, as well as puzzled by his relentless fawning on the "Optimates", who
secretly despise Cicero as a parvenu. In "Spartacus: Swords and Ashes" (2012)
by Jonathan Clements, a young Cicero clashes with Verres shortly before the
latter becomes the governor of Sicily, establishing another motive for their
later antagonism.
