Citizenship Citizenship denotes the link between a person and a state or an
association of states. It is normally synonymous with the term nationality
although the latter term is sometimes understood to have ethnic connotations.
Possession of citizenship is normally associated with the right to work and
live in a country and to participate in political life. A person who does not
have citizenship in any state is said to be stateless. Nationality is often
used as a synonym for citizenship – notably in international law – although
the term is sometimes understood as denoting a person's membership of a nation.
History. Polis citizenship. Many thinkers point to the concept of citizenship
beginning in the early city-states of ancient Greece, although others see it as
primarily a modern phenomenon dating back only a few hundred years and, for
mankind, that the concept of citizenship arose with the first laws. "Polis"
meant both the political assembly of the city-state as well as the entire
society. Citizenship has generally been identified as a western phenomenon.
There is a general view that citizenship in ancient times was a simpler
relation than modern forms of citizenship, although this view has come under
scrutiny. The relation of citizenship has not been a fixed or static relation,
but constantly changed within each society, and that according to one view,
citizenship might "really have worked" only at select periods during certain
times, such as when the Athenian politician Solon made reforms in the early
Athenian state. Slavery permitted slaveowners to have substantial free time,
and enabled participation in public life. Polis citizenship was marked by
exclusivity. Inequality of status was widespread; citizens had a higher status
than non-citizens, such as women, slaves or barbarians. The first form of
citizenship was based on the way people lived in the ancient Greek times, in
small-scale organic communities of the polis. Citizenship was not seen as a
separate activity from the private life of the individual person, in the sense
that there was not a distinction between public and private life. The
obligations of citizenship were deeply connected into one’s everyday life in
the polis. These small-scale organic communities were generally seen as a new
development in world history, in contrast to the established ancient
civilizations of Egypt or Persia, or the hunter-gatherer bands elsewhere. From
the viewpoint of the ancient Greeks, a person's public life was not separated
from their private life, and Greeks did not distinguish between the two worlds
according to the modern western conception. The obligations of citizenship were
deeply connected with everyday life. To be truly human, one had to be an active
citizen to the community, which Aristotle famously expressed: “To take no
part in the running of the community's affairs is to be either a beast or a
god!” This form of citizenship was based on obligations of citizens towards
the community, rather than rights given to the citizens of the community. This
was not a problem because they all had a strong affinity with the polis; their
own destiny and the destiny of the community were strongly linked. Also,
citizens of the polis saw obligations to the community as an opportunity to be
virtuous, it was a source of honour and respect. In Athens, citizens were both
ruler and ruled, important political and judicial offices were rotated and all
citizens had the right to speak and vote in the political assembly. Roman ideas
of citizenship. Roman citizenship reflected a struggle between the upper-class
patrician interests against the lower-order working groups known as the
plebeian class. A citizen came to be understood as a person "free to act by
law, free to ask and expect the law's protection, a citizen of such and such a
legal community, of such and such a legal standing in that community."
Citizenship meant having rights to have possessions, immunities, expectations,
which were "available in many kinds and degrees, available or unavailable to
many kinds of person for many kinds of reason." And the law, itself, was a kind
of bond uniting people. Roman citizenship was more impersonal, universal,
multiform, having different degrees and applications. Middle Ages. During
European Middle Ages, citizenship was usually associated with cities, see
burgher, Grand Burgher (German "Großbürger") and Bourgeoisie. Nobility used
to have privileges above commoners (see aristocracy), but the French Revolution
and other revolutions revoked these privileges and made citizens. Renaissance.
During the Renaissance, people transitioned from being subjects of a king or
queen to being citizens of a city and later to a nation. Each city had its own
law, courts, and independent administration. And being a citizen often meant
being subject to the city's law in addition to having power in some instances
to help choose officials. City dwellers who had fought alongside nobles in
battles to defend their cities were no longer content with having a subordinate
social status, but demanded a greater role in the form of citizenship.
Membership in guilds was an indirect form of citizenship in that it helped
their members succeed financially. The rise of citizenship was linked to the
rise of republicanism, according to one account, since independent citizens
meant that kings had less power. Citizenship became an idealized, almost
abstract, concept, and did not signify a submissive relation with a lord or
count, but rather indicated the bond between a person and the state in the
rather abstract sense of having rights and duties. Modern times. The modern
idea of citizenship still respects the idea of political participation, but it
is usually done through "elaborate systems of political representation at a
distance" such as representative democracy. Modern citizenship is much more
passive; action is delegated to others; citizenship is often a constraint on
acting, not an impetus to act. Nevertheless, citizens are usually aware of
their obligations to authorities, and are aware that these bonds often limit
what they can do. Different senses of citizenship. Citizenship status, under
social contract theory, carries with it both rights and responsibilities. In
this sense, citizenship was described as "a bundle of rights -- primarily,
political participation in the life of the community, the right to vote, and
the right to receive certain protection from the community, as well as
obligations." Citizenship is seen by most scholars as culture-specific, in the
sense that the meaning of the term varies considerably from culture to culture,
and over time. How citizenship is understood depends on the person making the
determination. The relation of citizenship has never been fixed or static, but
constantly changes within each society. While citizenship has varied
considerably throughout history, and within societies over time, there are some
common elements but they vary considerably as well. As a bond, citizenship
extends beyond basic kinship ties to unite people of different genetic
backgrounds. It usually signifies membership in a political body. It is often
based on, or was a result of, some form of military service or expectation of
future service. It usually involves some form of political participation, but
this can vary from token acts to active service in government. Citizenship is a
status in society. It is an ideal state as well. It generally describes a
person with legal rights within a given political order. It almost always has
an element of exclusion, meaning that some people are not citizens, and that
this distinction can sometimes be very important, or not important, depending
on a particular society. Citizenship as a concept is generally hard to isolate
intellectually and compare with related political notions, since it relates to
many other aspects of society such as the family, military service, the
individual, freedom, religion, ideas of right and wrong, ethnicity, and
patterns for how a person should behave in society. When there are many
different groups within a nation, citizenship may be the only real bond which
unites everybody as equals without discrimination—it is a "broad bond"
linking "a person with the state" and gives people a universal identity as a
legal member of a specific nation. Modern citizenship has often been looked at
as two competing underlying ideas: Scholars suggest that the concept of
citizenship contains many unresolved issues, sometimes called tensions,
existing within the relation, that continue to reflect uncertainty about what
citizenship is supposed to mean. Some unresolved issues regarding citizenship
include questions about what is the proper balance between duties and rights.
Some see these two aspects of citizenship as incompatible, such that social
rights have gone too far with not enough emphasis on "duties" citizens owe to
the state. Another is a question about what is the proper balance between
"political citizenship" versus "social citizenship". Some thinkers see benefits
with people being absent from public affairs, since too much participation such
as revolution can be destructive, yet too little participation such as total
apathy can be problematic as well. Citizenship can be seen as a special elite
status, and it can also be seen as a democratizing force and something that
everybody has; the concept can include both senses. According to political
scientist Arthur Stinchcombe, citizenship is based on the extent that a person
can control one's own destiny within the group in the sense of being able to
influence the government of the group. One last distinction within citizenship
is the so-called "consent descent" distinction, and this issue addresses
whether citizenship is a fundamental matter determined by a person "choosing"
to belong to a particular nation––by his or her "consent"––or is
citizenship a matter of where a person was born––that is, by his or her
"descent". International citizenship. In recent years, some intergovernmental
organizations have extended the concept and terminology associated with
citizenship to the international level, where it is applied to the totality of
the citizens of their constituent countries combined. Citizenship at this level
is a secondary concept, with rights deriving from national citizenship.
Commonwealth citizenship. Although Ireland left the Commonwealth in 1949, it is
often treated as if it were a member, with references being made in legal
documents to 'the Commonwealth and the Republic of Ireland', and its citizens
are not classified as foreign nationals, particularly in the United Kingdom.
Canada departed from the principle of nationality being defined in terms of
allegiance in 1921. In 1935 the Irish Free State was the first to introduce its
own citizenship. However, Irish citizens were still treated as subjects of the
Crown, and they are still not regarded as foreign, even though Ireland is not a
member of the Commonwealth. The Canadian Citizenship Act of 1947 provided for a
distinct Canadian Citizenship, automatically conferred upon most individuals
born in Canada, with some exceptions, and defined the conditions under which
one could become a naturalized citizen. The concept of Commonwealth citizenship
was introduced in 1948 in the British Nationality Act 1948. Other dominions
adopted this principle such as New Zealand, by way of the British Nationality
and New Zealand Citizenship Act of 1948. European Union citizenship. The
Maastricht Treaty introduced the concept of citizenship of the European Union.
Article 17 (1) of the Treaty on European Union stated that: Consolidated
versions of the Treaty on European Union An agreement known as the amended EC
Treaty established certain minimal rights for European Union citizens. Article
12 of the amended EC Treaty guaranteed a general right of non-discrimination
within the scope of the Treaty. Article 18 provided a limited right to free
movement and residence in Member States other than that of which the European
Union citizen is a national. Articles 18-21 and 225 provide certain political
rights. Union citizens have also extensive rights to move in order to exercise
economic activity in any of the Member States which predate the introduction of
Union citizenship. Subnational citizenship. Citizenship most usually relates to
membership of the nation state, but the term can also apply at the subnational
level. Subnational entities may impose requirements, of residency or otherwise,
which permit citizens to participate in the political life of that entity, or
to enjoy benefits provided by the government of that entity. But in such cases,
those eligible are also sometimes seen as "citizens" of the relevant state,
province, or region. An example of this is how the fundamental basis of Swiss
citizenship is citizenship of an individual commune, from which follows
citizenship of a canton and of the Confederation. Another example is Åland
where the residents enjoy a special provincial citizenship within Finland,
"hembygdsrätt". The United States has a federal system in which a person is a
citizen of their specific state of residence, such as New Jersey or California,
as well as a citizen of the United States. State constitutions may grant
certain rights above and beyond what are granted under the United States
Constitution and may impose their own obligations including the sovereign right
of taxation and military service; each state maintains at least one military
force subject to national militia transfer service, the state's national guard,
and some states maintain a second military force not subject to
nationalization. Citizenship education. "Active citizenship" is the philosophy
that citizens should work towards the betterment of their community through
economic participation, public, volunteer work, and other such efforts to
improve life for all citizens. In this vein, schools in some countries provide
citizenship education. United Kingdom. Citizenship is offered as a General
Certificate of Secondary Education (GCSE) course in many schools in the United
Kingdom. As well as teaching knowledge about democracy, parliament, government,
the justice system, human rights and the UK's relations with the wider world,
students participate in active citizenship, often involving a social action or
social enterprise in their local community. Ireland. It is taught in Ireland as
an exam subject for the Junior Certificate. It is known as Civic, Social and
Political Education (CSPE). A new Leaving Certificate exam subject with the
working title 'Politics & Society' is being developed by the National Council
for Curriculum and Assessment (NCCA) and is expected to be introduced to the
curriculum sometime after 2012.
