City-state A city-state is an independent or autonomous entity whose territory
consists of a city which is not administered as a part of another local
government. A city-state can also be defined as a central city and its
surrounding villages, which together follow the same law, have one form of
government, and share languages, religious beliefs, and ways of life. Today,
only three independent, sovereign city-states exist: Monaco, Singapore, and
Vatican City. Historical examples of city-states. Historical examples include
the oldest known Sumerian cities of Uruk and Ur, the Phoenician cities of
Canaan (such as Tyre and Sidon), the Berber city-states of the Garamantes, the
city-states of ancient Greece (the poleis such as Athens, Sparta, Thebes, and
Corinth), the Roman Republic which grew from a city-state into a great power,
the Maya, Aztecs, and other cultures of pre-Columbian Mesoamerica (including
cities such as Chichen Itza, Tikal, Monte Albán and Tenochtitlan), the central
Asian cities along the Silk Road, Venice, Croatian city-state of Ragusa
(Dubrovnik) and many others. The Viking colonial cities in medieval Ireland,
most importantly Dublin, have recently been classed as genuine city-states.
Within the transalpine part of the Holy Roman Empire the Free Imperial Cities
enjoyed a considerable autonomy, buttressed legally by the Lübeck law which
was emulated by many other cities. Some cities — though also members of
different confederacies at that time — officially became sovereign city-
states in the 19th century — such as the Canton of Basel City (1833–48),
the Free Hanseatic City of Bremen (1806–11 and again 1813–71), the Free
City of Frankfurt upon Main (1815–66), the Canton of Geneva (1813–48), the
Free and Hanseatic City of Hamburg (1806–11 and again 1814–71) and the Free
and Hanseatic City of Lübeck (1806–11 and again 1813–71). Another city-
state, though lacking sovereignty, was West Berlin (1948–90), being a state
legally not belonging to any other state, but ruled by the Western Allies. They
allowed — notwithstanding their overlordship as occupant powers — its
internal organisation as one state simultaneously being a city, officially
called Berlin (West). Though West Berlin held close ties to the West German
Federal Republic of Germany, it was legally never part of it. A number of the
aforementioned city-states — though partly with altered borders — continue
to exist as city-states within today's Federal Republic of Germany and today's
Swiss Confederation (see below: 'Cities that are component states of
federations'). Among the most well-known periods of city-state culture in human
history include ancient Greek city-states, and the merchant city-states of
Renaissance Italy, who organised themselves in small independent centres. The
success of small regional units coexisting as autonomous actors in loose
geographical and cultural unity, as in Italy or Greece, often prevented their
amalgamation into larger national units. However, such small political entities
often survived only for short periods because they lacked the resources to
defend themselves against incursions by larger states. Thus they inevitably
gave way to larger organisations of society, including the empire and the
nation state. In Mainland Southeast Asian history, settlements were organised
into autonomous or semi-autonomous city-states which were referred to as
"mueang" and usually related in a tributary relationship now described as
mandala. The system existed until the 19th century when colonisation by
European powers resulted in the adoption of the modern concept of statehood.
Contemporary city-states. Today there are only a handful of cities that
exercise authority akin to a sub-regional state, and even fewer that are
sovereign states in their own right. Sovereign city-states. Monaco. The
Principality of Monaco is an independent city-state. Monaco-Ville (the ancient
fortified city) and Monaco's well-known area Monte Carlo are districts of a
continuous urban zone, not distinct cities, though they were three separate
municipalities ("communes") until 1917. The Principality of Monaco and the city
of Monaco (each having specific powers) govern the same territory. On 28 June
1919, a treaty was signed providing for limited French protection over Monaco.
The treaty, part of the Treaty of Versailles, established that Monégasque
policy would be aligned with French political, military, and economic
interests. Only in 1993 did Monaco become a member of the United Nations, with
full voting rights. In 2002, a new treaty between France and Monaco clarifies
that if there are no heirs to carry on the dynasty, the principality will
remain an independent nation rather than revert to France (which were the terms
of the previous arrangement). Monaco's military defence, however, is still the
responsibility of France. Monaco did not receive its first foreign ambassador,
the French ambassador, until 16 February 2006. Singapore. Singapore is an
island city-state in Southeast Asia. About 5.2 million people live and work
within , making Singapore the 3rd-most-densely populated country in the world
after Monaco, another city-state. The entire island functions as a single
metropolitan area. The city centre near the south of the island is surrounded
by satellite towns, parks, reservoirs and industrial estates, which are
connected to the centre and each other by a dense network of roads, expressways
and metro railway lines dubbed MRT by locals. Singapore has a highly
centralised, unitary government with a unicameral legislature (the City Council
and the Rural Board were abolished in the 1960s). While there are town councils
and mayors in Singapore, these are essentially property managers in charge of
the maintenance of public housing within their constituency boundaries. They do
not represent local authorities with any legislative or executive autonomy from
the national government. Prior to the 19th century, Singapore was a minor part
of various regional empires, including Srivijaya, Majapahit, Malacca and Johor.
From 1826 to the Battle of Singapore in 1942, Singapore was the capital of the
Straits Settlements, a British colony that included the Settlements of Malacca
and Penang along the Straits of Malacca. After the Second World War, Singapore
was hived off as a separate colony while the other two Settlements joined the
Malay States to form the Federation of Malaya. In 1963, Singapore merged with
Malaya, Sabah and Sarawak to form Malaysia. However, because of a number of
problems, Singapore was expelled from the federation in 1965, becoming an
independent republic. Since 1965, Singapore rapidly industrialised and
modernised, becoming one of the four "Asian Tigers". In addition to the
substantial absolute and per-capita size of its economy, Singapore maintains a
significant armed forces. It ranks highly in terms of defence spending and
troop size. Despite its small land area, Singapore has a population, economy
and armed forces that place it in a similar league to small, but full-fledged
nations like New Zealand, Ireland, Israel and the Nordic countries (i.e.,
Denmark, Finland, Iceland, Norway and Sweden), rather than semi-dependent
microstates. Singapore also maintains a diplomatic corps and has memberships in
international organizations such as the United Nations, the Commonwealth of
Nations and the Association of Southeast Asian Nations. Singapore places
emphasis on self-sufficiency in basic needs, like water. The government also
stockpiles other key resources, such as sand and oil. In this way, Singapore
tries to avoid overdependence economically, politically or militarily on larger
entities. Accordingly, Singapore may represent the most-complete contemporary
example of a city-state, meeting the full definitions of both a city and a
fully sovereign state. Vatican City. Until 1870, the city of Rome had been
controlled by the pope as part of his Papal States. When King Victor Emmanuel
II seized the city in 1870, Pope Pius IX refused to recognize the newly formed
Kingdom of Italy. Because he could not travel without effectively acknowledging
the authority of the king, Pius IX and his successors each claimed to be a
"Prisoner in the Vatican", unable to leave the papal enclave once they had
ascended the papal thrones. The impasse was resolved in 1929 by the Lateran
Treaties negotiated by the Italian dictator Benito Mussolini between King
Victor Emmanuel III and Pope Pius XI. Under this treaty, the Vatican was
recognized as an independent state, with the Pope as its head. The Vatican City
State has its own citizenship, diplomatic corps, flag, and postage stamps. With
a population of less than 1,000 (mostly clergymen) it is by far the smallest
sovereign country in the world. Malta. The Maltese coat-of-arms bears a mural
crown described as "representing the fortifications of Malta and denoting a
City State". However, it has been noted that the mural crown was also included
in the coats-of-arms of the Republic of Austria and the First Spanish Republic.
In addition, one has to keep in mind that Malta is divided into 68 divisions
for statistical and demographic purposes. According to Eurostat, Malta is
composed of two Larger Urban Zones nominally referred to as "Valletta" (Malta
Island) and "Gozo" (Gozo Island). According to Demographia, state is identified
as urban area. According to European Spatial Planning Observation Network,
Malta is identified as Functional Urban Area (FUA). According to United
Nations, about 95% area of Malta is urban area and the number grows every year.
Occasionally, in the media, Malta is shown as a city-state. Also, some
government authorities of Malta, uses the term of city-state. Malta, with area
of and population of 0.4 million, it is one of the most densely populated
countries worldwide. Non-sovereign city-states. Some cities or urban areas,
while not sovereign states, may nevertheless enjoy such a high degree of
autonomy that they function as "city-states" within the context of the
sovereign state that they belong to. Cities under international supervision.
Trieste. After the Second World War, the UN attempted to make the Free
Territory of Trieste into a city state, but it never gained real independence
and in 1954 its territory was divided between Italy and Yugoslavia. Federally
administered cities. Washington, D.C.. Not being part of any U.S. state,
Washington, D.C.'s government operates under authority derived from the U.S.
federal government. The city (generally referred to as the District of
Columbia) is run by an elected mayor and a city council. The council is
composed of 13 members: one elected from each of the eight wards and five
members, including the chairman, elected at-large. The council conducts its
work through standing committees and special committees established as needed.
District schools are administered by a chancellor, who is appointed by the
mayor; in addition, a superintendent of education and a board of education are
responsible for setting some educational policies. There are 37 elected
Advisory Neighborhood Commissioners that provide the most direct access for
residents to their local government. The commissioners are elected by small
neighborhood districts, and their suggestions are given "great weight" by the
city council and city agencies. However, the U.S. Congress has the ultimate
plenary power over the District. It has the right to review and overrule laws
created locally and has often done so. The Tenth Amendment to the U.S.
Constitution, which reserves to states all rights not belonging to the federal
government, does not apply to the District. Residents of the District have one
non-voting representative in the U.S. Congress. Autonomous cities of unitary
states. Hong Kong and Macau. Because of Hong Kong's and Macau's long histories
as colonies of the British and Portuguese empires, respectively, and the unique
"one-country, two-systems" policy, the two city-states continue to enjoy a high
degree of autonomy even after their return to China. Having legal systems,
police forces, monetary systems, customs policies, immigration policies,
national sports teams, official languages, postal systems, academic and
educational systems, and certain degrees of international representation that
are different or independent from the People's Republic of China, makes their
status almost equivalent to independent nations in many respects.
