Civil registry Civil registration is the system by which a government records
the vital events of its citizens and residents. The resulting repository or
database is called civil register or registry, or population registry. The
primary purpose of civil registration is to create legal documents that are
used to establish and protect the civil rights of individuals. A secondary
purpose is to create a data source for the compilation of vital statistics. In
most countries, there is a legal requirement to notify the relevant authority
of any life event which affects the registry. The United Nations defines civil
registration as "the continuous, permanent, compulsory and universal recording
of the occurrence and characteristics of vital events pertaining to the
population as provided through decree or regulation in accordance with the
legal requirements of a country. Civil registration is carried out primarily
for the purpose of establishing the legal documents provided by the law. These
records are also a main source of vital statistics. Complete coverage, accuracy
and timeliness of civil registration are essential for quality vital
statistics. Vital events that are typically recorded include live birth, death,
foetal death, marriage, divorce, annulment of marriage, judicial separation of
marriage, adoption, legitimization and recognition. Additionally, in some
countries, immigration, emigration, and any change of residence may require
notification. Among the legal documents that are derived from civil
registration are birth certificates, death certificates, and marriage
certificates. A family register is a type of civil register which is more
concerned with events within the family unit and is common in Continental
European and Asian countries, such as Germany (""), France, Spain, Russia
("Propiska"), China ("Hukou"), Japan ("Koseki"), and North and South Korea
("Hoju"). A register of residents is a type of civil register primarily
concerned with the current residence. Countries. Australia. In Australia civil
registrations are carried out and held by individual states. Tasmania began
theirs in 1838, South Australia and Western Australia both in 1842, Victoria in
1854, Queensland and New South Wales in 1856, Northern Territory in 1870 and
Australian Capital Territory in 1911. Because early civil registration often
involved the churches, it is sometimes difficult to distinguish whether early
records are civil or church records. From 1856 civil registration was carried
out by government employees and was independent of the church. Information
recorded in records varies from state to state. Most states call the
appropriate central registry for the state the Office of the Registrar General
of Births, Deaths and Marriages. In South Australia it is the Principal
Registrar of Births, Deaths and Marriages and in Victoria it is the Government
Statist Registry of Births, Deaths and Marriages. Mexico. In Mexico, vital
records (birth, death and marriage certificates) are registered in offices
named Registro Civil (Civil Registry of Mexico). Each state has its own
registration format, but is often standardized if copies are asked at Central
Office in Mexico City. In the past decades (until the 1960s), birth
certificates were written by hand, on a styled-curive calligraphy (almost
incomprehensible by the new generations)and typically issued on green-security
paper. After the 1960s, the format in Mexico City didn't change at all, except
for instead hand calligraphy, they were issued on typewriter. But later after,
persons who were born in the 1960s or before, if they asked for copies in an
office, they had the same hand copy they registered at first, just in the final
part, the judge established the new date of issue and the place of. In the
1980s and 1990s, copies were written by typewriter, but only with capital
letters and in the same green-security paper. Now, all the copies (from people
born before and after 1960s) are standardized in brown-security paper and are
typed automatically by a computer, they have already issued the CURP, (national
identification number in Mexico) and specific dates of issuing. Netherlands. In
the Netherlands, maintaining the civil registry ("Gemeentelijke
basisadministratie") is the duty of the municipalities. Before the French Rule,
the Netherlands did not have a central registration of its population, which
was introduced in some part of the country in 1796 by the French. In 1811, this
registration was introduced throughout the country. The Dutch differentiate
between the "Gemeentelijke basisadministratie", an ongoing database of
citizens' information, and the "Burgerlijke Stand", which is a collection (at
the municipal level) of documents evidencing certain events taking place in a
given municipality, such as birth, marriage, civil union, and death. Beginning
on 1 January 1850, municipalities were obliged to keep citizen's records in
bookform. Early in the twentieth century this system was replaced by a card
system that registered families. The move toward individual registration took
place in 1939 with the introduction of the "persoonskaart", a single card
registering a single individual, kept in the municipality. Information gathered
on this card included family name, first names, gender, position within the
family, date and place of birth, marital status, address, and church
affiliation, besides information on when a person entered and left a
municipality. In 1940, the Dutch government did not want to mandate citizen's
identification, but during World War II the German occupying government
mandated it so they could assess who was to be sent to Germany as forced labor
and to select Jewish citizens from the general population. When the war was
over, mandatory identification was done away with. In the 1990s all local
registries were automated, and starting on 1 October 1994 the individual
registration card was replaced with a digital list containing a person's
information as collected by the "Gemeentelijke basisadministratie van
persoonsgegevens", kept and maintained at the municipal level. Municipalities
exchange information through a closed network at the end of each day to a
nationwide database, which can be consulted by officials online. Though it was
generally considered "un-Dutch," in 1 January 2005 mandatory identification was
reintroduced for everyone over 14; official identification is to be presented
for all important transactions between citizens and government. South Africa.
In South Africa, vital records are contained in the National Population
Register, which is maintained by the national Department of Home Affairs. Any
Home Affairs office can record a vital event or issue a certified copy of a
vital record. Sweden. In Sweden, the civil registry is maintained by the
Swedish Tax Agency ("Skatteverket"); up into the 1990s the Church of Sweden was
responsible. Recording of births and deaths was stipulated in the early 17th
century, formal national censuses have been made since the mid-18th century,
and Sweden has one of the longest and most comprehensive suites of civil
records of any country. United Kingdom. In the United Kingdom, maintaining the
"civil registry" is the duty of the General Register Office. The mandatory
civil registration of births, marriages, and deaths in England and Wales was
introduced on 1 July 1837. Initially the onus lay on registrars to discover and
record events. Subsequent legislation introduced similar systems in Ireland
(all of which was then part of the United Kingdom), and Scotland. The
administration of individual registration districts is the responsibility of
"registrars" in the relevant local authority. There is also a national body for
each jurisdiction. The local offices are generally responsible both for
maintaining the original registers and for providing copies to the national
body for central retention. A "superintendent registrar" facilitates the legal
preliminaries to marriage, conducts civil marriage ceremonies and retains in
his/her custody all completed birth, death and marriage registers for the
district. The office of the superintendent registrar is the district Register
office, often referred to (informally) in the media as the "Registry office".
Today, both officers may also conduct statutory civil partnership preliminaries
and ceremonies, citizenship ceremonies and other non statutory ceremonies such
as naming or renewal of vows. Certified copies of the entries made by the
registrars over the years are issued on a daily basis either for genealogical
research or for modern legal purposes such as supporting passport applications
or ensuring eligibility for the appropriate junior sports leagues. On 1
December 2007 Registrars and Superintendent Registrars became employees of
their local authority for the first time following the enactment of the
Statistics and Registration Service Act 2007. England and Wales. Births in
England and Wales must be registered within 42 days, whilst deaths must be
registered within 5 days unless an inquest is called or a post mortem is held.
Marriages are registered at the time of the ceremony by either (1) the
officiating minister of the Church of England or the Church in Wales, (2) an
Authorised Person at a Registered Building, religious, or (3) a registrar at a
Register Office, Registered Building or Approved Premise. The official
registers are not directly accessible by the general public. Instead, indexes
are made available which can be used to find the relevant register entry and
then request a certified copy of the details. Increasingly local indexes are
being published on the internet, for example: [http://www.nebmd.co.uk] The
General Register Office—now merged into the Office for National Statistics—
has overall responsibility for registration administration. Scotland. Civil
registration came into force in Scotland on January 1, 1855. A significant
difference from the English system is the greater detail required for a
registration. This means that if a certified copy of an entry is requested, it
will contain much more information. The General Register Office for Scotland
has overall responsibility for registration administration and drafting
legislative changes in this area (as well as census data). They are governed by
the Registration of Births, Deaths and Marriages (Scotland) Act 1965 and
subsequent legislation (responsibility for which has now been devolved to the
Scottish Parliament). United States. In the United States, vital records such
as birth certificates, death certificates, and frequently marriage certificates
are maintained by the Office of Vital Statistics or Office of Vital Records in
each individual state. Other documents such as deeds, mortgage documents, name
change documents, and divorce records, as well as marriage certificates for
those states not centralizing these records, are maintained by the Clerk of
Court of each individual county. However, the term 'civil registry' is not
used.
