Civil service A civil servant or public servant is a person in the public
sector employed for a government department or agency. The term explicitly
excludes the armed services, although civilian officials can work at "Defence
Ministry" headquarters. The extent of civil servants of a state as part of the
"Civil Service" varies from country to country. In the United Kingdom, for
instance, only Crown employees are referred to as civil servants, county or
city employees are not. Many consider the study of civil service to be a part
of the field of public administration. Workers in "non-departmental public
bodies" (sometimes called "QUANGOs") may also be classed as civil servants for
the purpose of statistics and possibly for their terms and conditions.
Collectively a state's civil servants form its Civil Service or Public Service.
An international civil servant or international staff member is a civilian
employee that is employed by an international organisation. These international
civil servants do not resort under any national legislation (from which they
have immunity of jurisdiction) but are governed by an internal staff
regulation. All disputes related to international civil service are brought
before special tribunals created by these international organisations such as,
for instance, the Administrative Tribunal of the ILO. Specific referral can be
made to the International Civil Service Commission (ICSC) of the United
Nations, an independent expert body established by the United Nations General
Assembly. Its mandate is to regulate and coordinate the conditions of service
of staff in the United Nations common system, while promoting and maintaining
high standards in the international civil service. History. Early history.
Administrative institutions usually grow out of the personal servants of high
officials, as in the Roman Empire. This developed a complex administrative
structure, which is outlined in the Notitia Dignitatum and the work of John
Lydus, but as far as we know appointments to it were made entirely by
inheritance or patronage and not on merit, and it was also possible for
officers to employ other people to carry out their official tasks but continue
to draw their salary themselves. There are obvious parallels here with the
early bureaucratic structures in modern states, such as the Office of Works or
the Navy in 18th century England, where again appointments depended on
patronage and were often bought and sold. Modern meritocratic civil service.
The origin of the modern meritocratic civil service can be traced back to
Imperial examination founded in Imperial China. The Imperial exam based on
merit was designed to select the best administrative officials for the state's
bureaucracy. This system had a huge influence on both society and culture in
Imperial C hina and was directly responsible for the creation of a class of
scholar-bureaucrats irrespective of their family pedigree. From the time of the
Han Dynasty (206 BC to AD 220) until the implementation of the imperial
examination system, most appointments in the imperial bureaucracy were based on
recommendations from prominent aristocrats and local officials whilst
recommended individuals were predominantly of aristocratic rank. Emperor Wu of
Han started an early form of the imperial examinations, transitioning from
inheritance and patronage to merit, in which local officials would select
candidates to take part in an examination of the Confucian classics. The system
reached its apogee during the Song dynasty. The Chinese civil-service system
gave the Chinese empire stability for more than 2,000 years and provided one of
the major outlets for social mobility in Chinese society. The modern
examination system for selecting civil service staff also indirectly evolved
from the imperial one. This system was admired and then borrowed by European
countries from the 16th century onward, and is now the model for most countries
around the world. The first European power to successfully implement the
meritocratic civil service was the British Empire, in their administration of
India: "company managers hired and promoted employees based on competitive
examinations in order to prevent corruption and favoritism." British colonial
administrators in China advocated the spread of the system to the rest of the
Commonwealth, the most prominent of which was Thomas Taylor Meadows, Britain's
consul in Guangzhou, China. Meadows successfully argued in his "Desultory Notes
on the Government and People of China", published in 1847, that "the long
duration of the Chinese empire is solely and altogether owing to the good
government which consists in the advancement of men of talent and merit only,"
and that the British must reform their civil service by making the institution
meritocratic. The report was influential. The British adopted a meritocratic
civil service following the Northcote-Trevelyan Report in 1853, and the
Americans did likewise in 1883, with the Pendleton Civil Service Reform Act. By
countries. Brazil. Civil servants in Brazil, "Servidores públicos" in
Portuguese, are those working in the executive, legislative and judicial
branches of the federal government, state government, municipal government and
the Government of Brasilia, including congressmen, senators, mayors, ministers,
the president of the republic, and workers in Government-owned corporation.
Career civil servants (not temporary workers or politicians) are hired only
externally on the basis of entrance examinations known as "Concurso Público"
in Portuguese, usually consisting of a written test, also some posts may
require physical tests (like policemen) or oral tests (like judges, prosecutors
and attorneys). The position according to the examination score is used for
filling the vacancies. The entrance examination are conducted by several
companies with a government mandade; the best known are CESPE (which belongs to
the University of Brasilia), the FGV (Getulio Vargas Foundation), ESAF, and the
Cesgranrio Foundation (which is part of the Federal University of Rio de
Janeiro). The labour laws and social insurance for civil servants are different
from private workers, even between government branches (like different states
or cities) the law and insurance differ between them. The posts usually are
ranked by titles, the most common are "technician" for high school literates
and "analyst" for graduate literates. There's also high post ranks like
auditor, fiscal, chief of police, prosecutor, judge, attorney, etc. Those
titles may require master's degree or doctorate. The law doesn't allow servants
to upgrade or downgrade posts internally, if they wanto to do that they need to
pass in another external entrance examination. Canada. Canada's federal public
service comprises approximately 200 departments, agencies, commissions, boards,
councils, and crown corporations. There are 423,781 active contributors to the
federal public service, Royal Canadian Mounted Police, and Canadian Forces
pension plans. This represents about 2.3 percent of the Canadian workforce of
18.7 million. Each provincial government also has its own public service. In
2010, all provincial governments' public service were employing a total of more
than 350 000 persons. China. One of the oldest examples of a civil service
based on meritocracy is the Imperial bureaucracy of China, which can be traced
as far back as the Qin Dynasty (221–207 BC). During the Han Dynasty (202
BC–220 AD) the "xiaolian" system of recommendation by superiors for
appointments to office was established. In the areas of administration,
especially the military, appointments were based solely on merit. After the
fall of the Han Dynasty, the Chinese bureaucracy regressed into a semi-merit
system known as the Nine-rank system; in this system noble birthright became
the most significant prerequisite for gaining access to more authoritative
posts. This system was reversed during the short-lived Sui Dynasty (581–618),
which initiated a civil service bureaucracy recruited through written
examinations and recommendation. The following Tang Dynasty (618–907) adopted
the same measures for drafting officials, and decreasingly relied on
aristocratic recommendations and more and more on promotion based on the
results of written examinations. However, the civil service examinations were
practiced on a much smaller scale in comparison to the stronger, centralized
bureaucracy of the Song Dynasty (960–1279). In response to the regional
military rule of jiedushi and the loss of civil authority during the late Tang
period and Five Dynasties (907–960), the Song emperors were eager to
implement a system where civil officials would owe their social prestige to the
central court and gain their salaries strictly from the central government.
This ideal was not fully achieved since many scholar officials were affluent
landowners and were engaged in many anonymous business affairs in an age of
economic revolution in China. Nonetheless, gaining a degree through three
levels of examination — prefectural exams, provincial exams, and the
prestigious palace exams — was a far more desirable goal in society than
becoming a merchant. This was because the mercantile class was traditionally
regarded with some disdain by the scholar official class. This class of state
bureaucrats in the Song period were far less aristocratic than their Tang
predecessors. The examinations were carefully structured in order to ensure
that people of lesser means than what was available to candidates born into
wealthy, landowning families were given a greater chance to pass the exams and
obtain an official degree. This included the employment of a bureau of copyists
who would rewrite all of the candidates' exams in order to mask their
handwriting and thus prevent favoritism by graders of the exams who might
otherwise recognize a candidate's handwriting. The advent of widespread
printing in the Song period allowed many more examination candidates access to
the Confucian texts whose mastery was required for passing the exams. France.
The civil service in France ("fonction publique") is often considered to
include government employees, as well as employees of public corporations.
Germany. The Public service in Germany ("Öffentlicher Dienst") is run by 4.6
million employees as of 2011. Public servants are distinguished into three
groups of occupational statuses: "Arbeiter" ("blue-collar workers"),
"Angestellte" ("salaried employees") and servants called "Beamte". All three
groups are employed by "Körperschaften des öffentlichen Rechts" (communes,
states, federal government and many more). While Arbeiter and Angestelle work
with individual contracts, Beamte are appointed, employed and removed by law
("öffentlich-rechtliches Dienst- und Treueverhältnis"). Arbeiter. "Arbeiter"
in public service serve mostly in low-skilled labor such as construction, waste
collection or manual office work. In some cases, training is not obligatory.
Angestellte. "Angestellte" work in technical, vocational and office work in a
very large range of occupational fields. In most cases, they have received a
training aside from the government prior to employment. Beamte. "Beamte" are
known for several centuries in German states, but became a standarized group in
1794. Soldiers other than conscriptive soldiers are not Beamte but have
according rights. Judges and public attorneys are troughoutly Beamte,
professors are mostly Beamte. The group of Beamte have the most secure
employment and are paid by a scheme of "Besoldungsordnungen". It is prohibited
for Beamte to take strike action. Beamte are normally employed for life-time
but with several exceptions for special positions or course of training.
Greece. Controversies about the institution of civil service in Greece are
widespread. Typically, they concern the large numbers of public employees, the
lack of adequate meritocracy in their employment, the strong ties that
significant portions of public employees maintain with political parties and
the clientist phenomena that this relationship incubates, internal inequalities
of wages among public employees, and inequalities of the high income of public
employees relevant to that of private sector workers. The amount of pay that
they get is also under controversy given the conditions before the financial
crisis that made being one of these servants a job to dream of. India. In
India, the Civil Service is defined as "appointive positions by the Government
in connection with the affairs of the Union and includes a civilian in a
Defence Service, except positions in the Indian Armed Forces." The members of
civil service serve at the pleasure of the President of India and Article 311
of the constitution protects them from politically motivated or vindictive
action. The Civil Services of India can be classified into two types - the All
India Services and the Central Civil Services (Group A and B). The recruits are
university graduates (or above) selected through a rigorous system of
examinations, called the Civil Services Examination (CSE) conducted by the
Union Public Service Commission. The entry into the State Civil Services is
through a competitive examination conducted by every state public service
commission. Close to 3.5 lakhs of candidates apply every year for the 400 to
500 vacancies that may arise. Ireland. The civil service of Ireland includes
the employees of the Department of State (excluded are government ministers and
a small number of paid political advisors) as well as a small number of core
state agencies such as the Office of the Revenue Commissioners, the Office of
Public Works, and the Public Appointments Service. The organisation of the
Irish Civil Service is very similar to the traditional organization of the
British Home Civil Service, and indeed the grading system in the Irish Civil
Service is nearly identical to the traditional grading system of its British
counterpart. In Ireland, public sector employees such as teachers or members of
the country's police force, "An Garda Síochána" are not considered to be
civil servants, but are rather described as "public servants" (and form the
Public service of the Republic of Ireland). Spain. The civil service in Spain
("función pública") is usually considered to include all the employees at the
different levels of the Spanish Public Administration: central government,
autonomous communities, as well as municipalities. There are three main
categories of Spanish public positions: temporary political posts ("personal
funcionario eventual"), which require a simple procedure for hire and dismiss
and is associated to top level executives and advisors, statutory permanent
posts ("funcionarios de carrera"), which require a formal procedure for access
that usually involves a competition among candidates and whose tenants are
subject to a special statutory relationship of work with their employers, and
non statutory permanent posts ("personal laboral"), which also require a formal
procedure for entry similar to the procedure required for the "funcionarios de
carrera", but whose tenants are subject to normal working conditions and laws.
Competitions differ notably among the State, the 17 Autonomous Communities and
the City Councils, and the "funcionarios de carrera" and "personal laboral"
examinations vary in difficulty from one location to another. As of 2011, there
were 2.6 Million civil servants in Spain (22% work for the central state, 50%
for the Autonomous communities, 4% for the Universities and 22% for local
organization such as municipalities and provinces). In December 2011, the
government of Rajoy announced that civil servants have to serve a minimum 37.5
working hours per week regardless of their place or kind of service. United
Kingdom. The civil service in the United Kingdom only includes Crown employees;
not those who are parliamentary employees. Public sector employees such as
those in education and the NHS are not considered to be civil servants. Note
that civil servants in the devolved government in Northern Ireland are not part
of the Home Civil Service, but constitute the separate Northern Ireland Civil
Service nor are employees of the Foreign and Commonwealth Office. United
States. In the United States, the civil service was established in 1871. The
Federal Civil Service is defined as "all appointive positions in the executive,
judicial, and legislative branches of the Government of the United States,
except positions in the uniformed services." (). In the early 19th century,
government jobs were held at the pleasure of the president — a person could
be fired at any time. The spoils system meant that jobs were used to support
the political parties. This was changed in slow stages by the Pendleton Civil
Service Reform Act of 1883 and subsequent laws. By 1909, almost 2/3 of the U.S.
federal work force was appointed based on merit, that is, qualifications
measured by tests. Certain senior civil service positions, including some heads
of diplomatic missions and executive agencies are filled by political
appointees. Under the Hatch Act of 1939, civil servants are not allowed to
engage in political activities while performing their duties. The U.S. civil
service includes the Competitive service and the Excepted service. The majority
of civil service appointments in the U.S. are made under the Competitive
Service, but certain categories in the Diplomatic Service, the FBI, and other
National Security positions are made under the Excepted Service. (U.S. Code
Title V) U.S. state and local government entities often have competitive civil
service systems that are modeled on the national system, in varying degrees. As
of January 2007, the Federal Government, excluding the Postal Service, employed
about 1.8 million civilian workers. The Federal Government is the Nation's
single largest employer. Although most federal agencies are based in the
Washington D.C. region, only about 16% (or about 288,000) of the federal
government workforce is employed in this region. There are currently 15 federal
executive branch agencies and hundreds of subagencies. European Union. The
European Civil Service is the civil service serving the institutions of the
European Union, of which the largest employer is the European Commission, the
executive branch of the European Union. It is the permanent bureaucracy that
implements the decisions of the Union's government. Civil servants are
recruited directly into the institutions after being selected by competitions
set by EPSO, the official selection office. They are allocated to departments,
known as Directorates-General (DGs), each covering one or more related policy
areas. Other meanings. Civil service also means a form of legal conscientious
objection, for example the Swiss Civilian Service. More accurately, in this
scope civil service is work performed in the public interest as a replacement
for a military obligation to which one objects. The Finnish "siviilipalvelus",
French "service civil", German "Zivildienst", Italian "servizio civile" and
Swedish "civiltjänst" all can be translated as "civil service" in this sense.
