Civil liberties Civil liberties are civil rights and freedoms that provide an
individual specific rights. Though the scope of the term differs amongst
various countries, some examples of civil liberties include the freedom from
slavery and forced labor, freedom from torture and death, the right to liberty
and security, freedom of conscience, freedom of religion, freedom of
expression, freedom of the press, freedom of assembly and association, freedom
of speech, the right to privacy, the right to due process, the right to a fair
trial, the right to own property, the right to defend one's self, the right to
bodily integrity, and the right to keep and bear arms. Within the distinctions
between civil liberties and other types of liberty, there are distinctions
between positive liberty/positive rights and negative liberty/negative rights.
Overview. Many contemporary states have a constitution, a bill of rights, or
similar constitutional documents that enumerate and seek to guarantee civil
liberties. Other states have enacted similar laws through a variety of legal
means, including signing and ratifying or otherwise giving effect to key
conventions such as the European Convention on Human Rights and the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights. The existence of some
claimed civil liberties is a matter of dispute, as are the extent of most civil
rights. Controversial examples include property rights, reproductive rights,
civil marriage, and the right to keep and bear arms. Whether the existence of
victimless crimes infringes upon civil liberties is a matter of dispute.
Another matter of debate is the suspension or alteration of certain civil
liberties in times of war or state of emergency, including whether and to what
extent this should occur. The formal concept of civil liberties dates back to
the English legal charter the Magna Carta 1215, which in turn was based on pre-
existing documents namely the English Charter of Liberties, a landmark document
in English legal history. North America. United States. The United States
Constitution, especially its Bill of Rights, protects civil liberties. The
passage of the Fourteenth Amendment further protected civil liberties by
introducing the Privileges or Immunities Clause, Due Process Clause, and Equal
Protection Clause. Human rights within the United States are often called civil
rights, which are those rights, privileges and immunities held by all people,
in distinction to "political" rights, which are the rights that inhere to those
who are entitled to participate in elections, as candidates or voters. Before
universal suffrage, this distinction was important, since many people were
ineligible to vote but still were considered to have the fundamental freedoms
derived from the rights to life, liberty and the pursuit of happiness. This
distinction is less important now that Americans enjoy near universal suffrage,
and civil liberties are now taken to include the political rights to vote and
participate in elections. Because Indian tribal governments retain sovereignty
over tribal members, the U.S. Congress in 1968 enacted a law that essentially
applies most of the protections of the Bill of Rights to tribal members, to be
enforced mainly by tribal courts. Canada. The Constitution of Canada includes
the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms which guarantees many of the same
rights as the U.S. constitution, with the notable exceptions of protection
against establishment of religion. However, the Charter does protect freedom of
religion. The Charter also omits any mention of, or protection for, property.
Europe. European Convention on Human Rights. The European Convention on Human
Rights, to which most European countries, including all of the European Union,
belong, enumerates a number of civil liberties and is of varying constitutional
force in different European states. United Kingdom. While the United Kingdom
has no codified constitution, relying on a number of legal conventions and
pieces of legislation, it is a signatory to the European Convention on Human
Rights which covers both human rights and civil liberties. The Human Rights Act
1998 incorporates the great majority of Convention rights directly into UK law.
Britain has what is called an unwritten constitution: centuries of legislation
and legal precedent dating back to before the Magna Carta guarantee the rights
of its subjects. In June 2008 the then Shadow Home Secretary David Davis
resigned his parliamentary seat over what he described as the "erosion of civil
liberties" by the then Labour government, and successfully won re-election on a
civil liberties platform (although he was not opposed by candidates of other
major parties). This was in reference to anti-terrorism laws and in particular
the extension to pre-trial detention, that is perceived by many to be an
infringement of Habeas Corpus established in the Magna Carta in 1215. France.
France's 1789 Declaration of the Rights of Man and of the Citizen listed many
civil liberties and is of constitutional force. Asia. China. The Constitution
of People's Republic of China (which applies only to mainland China, not to
Hong Kong, Macau and Taiwan), especially its Fundamental Rights and Duties of
Citizens, claims to protect many civil liberties, although in practice
dissidents may find themselves without the protection of the rule of law. See
Civil liberties in the People's Republic of China. India. The Fundamental
Rights — embodied in Part III of the constitution — guarantee civil
liberties such that all Indians can lead their lives in peace as citizens of
India. The six fundamental rights are right to equality, right to freedom,
right against exploitation, right to freedom of religion, cultural and
educational rights and right to constitutional remedies. These include
individual rights common to most liberal democracies, incorporated in the
fundamental law of the land and are enforceable in a court of law. Violations
of these rights result in punishments as prescribed in the Indian Penal Code,
subject to discretion of the judiciary. These rights are neither absolute nor
immune from constitutional amendments. They have been aimed at overturning the
inequalities of pre-independence social practises. Specifically, they resulted
in abolishment of untouchability and prohibit discrimination on the grounds of
religion, race, caste, sex, or place of birth. They forbid human trafficking
and unfree labour. They protect cultural and educational rights of ethnic and
religious minorities by allowing them to preserve their languages and
administer their own educational institutions. All people, irrespective of
race, religion, caste or sex, have the right to approach the High Courts or the
Supreme Court for the enforcement of their fundamental rights. It is not
necessary that the aggrieved party has to be the one to do so. In public
interest, anyone can initiate litigation in the court on their behalf. This is
known as "Public interest litigation". High Court and Supreme Court judges can
also act on their own on the basis of media reports. The Fundamental Rights
emphasise equality by guaranteeing to all citizens the access and use of public
institutions and protections, irrespective of their background. The rights to
life and personal liberty apply for persons of any nationality, while others,
such as the freedom of speech and expression are applicable only to the
citizens of India (including non-resident Indian citizens). The right to
equality in matters of public employment cannot be conferred to overseas
citizens of India. Fundamental Rights primarily protect individuals from any
arbitrary State actions, but some rights are enforceable against private
individuals too. For instance, the constitution abolishes untouchability and
prohibits "begar". These provisions act as a check both on State action and
actions of private individuals. Fundamental Rights are not absolute and are
subject to reasonable restrictions as necessary for the protection of national
interest. In the "Kesavananda Bharati vs. state of Kerala" case, the Supreme
Court ruled that all provisions of the constitution, including Fundamental
Rights can be amended. However, the Parliament cannot alter the basic structure
of the constitution like secularism, democracy, federalism, separation of
powers. Often called the "Basic structure doctrine", this decision is widely
regarded as an important part of Indian history. In the 1978 "Maneka Gandhi v.
Union of India" case, the Supreme Court extended the doctrine's importance as
superior to any parliamentary legislation.According to the verdict, no act of
parliament can be considered a law if it violated the basic structure of the
constitution. This landmark guarantee of Fundamental Rights was regarded as a
unique example of judicial independence in preserving the sanctity of
Fundamental Rights. The Fundamental Rights can only be altered by a
constitutional amendment, hence their inclusion is a check not only on the
executive branch, but also on the Parliament and state legislatures. The
imposition of a state of emergency may lead to a temporary suspension of the
rights conferred by Article 19 (including freedoms of speech, assembly and
movement, etc.) to preserve national security and public order. The President
can, by order, suspend the right to constitutional remedies as well. Russia.
The Constitution of Russian Federation guarantees in theory many of the same
rights and civil liberties as the U.S. except to bear arms, i.e.: freedom of
speech, freedom of religion, freedom of association and assembly, freedom to
choose language, to due process, to a fair trial, privacy, freedom to vote,
right for education, etc. However, human rights groups like Amnesty
International have warned that Putin has seriously curtailed freedom of
expression, freedom of assembly and freedom of association amidst growing
authoritarianism.
