Clandestine Insurgent Rebel Clown Army The Clandestine Insurgent Rebel Clown
Army (or CIRCA) is a United Kingdom-based anti-authoritarian left-wing activist
group that uses clowning and non-violent tactics to act against corporate
globalisation, war, and on other issues. CIRCA emerged out of the direct action
movement and has participated in protests against George W. Bush's visit to the
UK in 2003 and demonstrations against the 2003 invasion of Iraq. The group was
particularly prominent in many of the actions organised around the 31st G8
summit held in Gleneagles during July 2005. Those participating in CIRCA
actions typically dress in military-style camouflage clothing supplemented with
brightly coloured trimmings and political logos. The costumes both create a
comical atmosphere and serve to maintain anonymity during protests. 'Armaments'
are usually limited to feather dusters, although some carry water pistols. The
complete ensemble of the costume and traditional clown make-up (usually
consisting of a white face and red nose) creates a sense of ridiculousness
which seeks to challenge preconceptions of radical activists. CIRCA claims that
there is more to the Army than simply dressing up and messing around. There is
also a psychology which informs its actions: the clown persona can be used to
defuse tense situations and engage with police in public order situations. In
order to learn this 'recruits' must participate in a training workshop before
deployment. In an article about the G8 protests, the "Edinburgh Evening News"
described CIRCA as ""an anarchist splinter group,"" but a member of the
organization denied this, saying that while some members would describe
themselves as anarchists ""...most would consider themselves 'horizontalists'
where we engage people without the need for leaders."" The Clown Army now has
active groups in the United Kingdom, Ireland, the Netherlands, Belgium, France,
Denmark, Germany, and Israel, and many other groups have appeared that have
been inspired by the work of the original group.
