Clare Boothe Luce Clare Boothe Luce (March 10, 1903 – October 9, 1987) was
the first American woman appointed to a major ambassadorial post abroad. A
versatile author, she is best known for her 1936 hit play "The Women", which
had an all-female cast. Her writings extended from drama and screen scenarios
to fiction, journalism, and war reportage. She was the wife of Henry Luce,
publisher of "Time", "Life" and "Fortune". Politically, Luce was a Republican
who became steadily more conservative in later life. In her youth however, she
flirted briefly with the Democratic liberalism of Franklin D. Roosevelt, as a
protege of Bernard Baruch. During her two terms as a Congresswoman from
Connecticut in the early 1940s, her moderate views, especially toward blacks,
immigrants, and women denied professional careers, contrasted with those of
most of men in her party. Although she was a strong supporter of the Anglo-
American alliance in World War II, she remained outspokenly critical of the
British presence in India. A charismatic and forceful public speaker,
especially after her conversion to Roman Catholicism in 1946, she campaigned
for every Republican presidential candidate from Wendell Willkie to Ronald
Reagan. Early life. Luce was born Ann Clare Boothe in New York City on March
10, 1903, the second child of Anna Clara Schneider (aka Ann Snyder Murphy; aka
Ann Boothe, aka Ann Clare Austin) and William Franklin Boothe (aka "John J.
Murphy"; aka "Jord Murfe"). Her parents were not married and would separate in
1912. Her father, a sophisticated man and a brilliant violinist, instilled in
his daughter a love of literature, if not of music. But William Boothe had
trouble holding down any job, and spent years as a travelling salesman. Parts
of young Clare's childhood were spent in Memphis and Nashville, Tennessee,
Chicago, Illinois, and Union City, New Jersey as well as New York City. Clare
Boothe had an elder brother, David Franklin Boothe. As adults, they were both
plagued by suspicions that they had been born illegitimate, a fact that Clare
had difficulty admitting to all her life. She attended schools in Garden City
and Tarrytown, New York, graduating in 1919. Her ambitious mother's initial
plan for her was to become an actress. Clare understudied Mary Pickford on
Broadway at age 10, and had a small part in Thomas Edison's 1915 movie, "The
Heart of a Waif." After a tour of Europe with her mother and stepfather, Dr.
Albert E. Austin, whom Ann Boothe married in 1919, she became interested in the
women's suffrage movement, and was hired by Alva Belmont to work for the
National Woman's Party in Washington, D.C. and Seneca Falls, N.Y. Highly
intelligent, ambitious, and blessed with a deceptively fragile blonde beauty,
the young Clare Boothe soon abandoned ideological feminism for the safer
advancement offered by marrying money. She wed George Tuttle Brokaw,
millionaire heir to a New York clothing fortune, on August 10, 1923, at the age
of 20. They had one daughter, Ann Clare Brokaw (August 22, 1924 – January 11,
1944). According to Boothe, Brokaw was a hopeless alcoholic, and the marriage
ended in divorce in 1929. On November 23, 1935, Clare Boothe married Henry
Robinson Luce, the publisher of "Time", "Life" and "Fortune". She thereafter
called herself Clare Boothe Luce, a frequently-misspelled name that was often
confused with that of her exact contemporary Claire Luce, a stage and film
actress. As a professional writer, Luce continued to use her maiden name. On
January 11, 1944, her daughter and only child Ann Clare Brokaw, a senior at
Stanford University, was killed in an automobile accident. As a result of this
tragedy, Luce explored psychotherapy and religion, joining the Roman Catholic
Church in 1946. She became an ardent essayist and lecturer in celebration of
her faith, and was ultimately honored by being named a Dame of Malta. Marriage
to Henry Luce. The early months of the Luces' marriage—a second for
both—was happy. Soon, however, temperamental and sexual incompatibilities
inflicted painful strains upon the couple. Henry Luce was by any standards an
extremely successful man, but his physical awkwardness, lack of humor, and
newsman's discomfort with any conversation that was not strictly factual put
him in awe of his beautiful wife's social poise, wit, and fertile imagination.
Only at work, where he reigned supreme as publisher and editor-in-chief of Time
Inc., was he able to escape nagging feelings of inferiority to her. His
exclusively male coterie of editors resented what they believed to be Clare
Luce's desire to gain a niche for herself in the boss's empire. Their dread was
not unfounded, because her years as managing editor of "Vanity Fair" had left
her with an avid interest in journalism (she claimed, with some reason, to have
suggested the idea of "Life" magazine to her husband before it was developed
internally. Henry Luce himself was generous in encouraging her to write for
"Life," but the question of how much coverage she should be accorded in "Time,"
as she grew more famous, was a perennial problem to him, since he did not want
to be accused of nepotism. For her part, Clare Boothe Luce was touched by, but
slightly contemptuous of her husband's tendency to put her on a pedestal. It
affected his virility, and when, after ten years of marriage, she found out
that he was seeing another woman, her reaction was to threaten suicide.
Ironically, she herself had several affairs during World War II—notably with
General Charles Willoughby, Douglas Macarthur's intelligence chief. (Roald
Dahl, an air attaché at the British Embassy in Washington, boasted to
Creekmore Fath that Luce "had screwed from one end of the room to the other for
three straight nights." ) Sexually, she had always been adventurous, but the
art of seduction, which she learned from her equally promiscuous mother,
interested her more than the physical act itself. She retained into extreme old
age the power to bewitch men in any company, while paying less attention to
women. The Luces regularly, but half-heartedly, talked of divorce, yet an
exhausted sort of love held them together until Henry's death from a heart
attack in 1967. As one of the great "power couples" in American history, they
were more or less welded by their mutual interests and complementary, if
contrasting characters. They treated each other with unfailing respect in
public, never more so than when Henry Luce willingly acted as his wife's
consort during her years as Ambassador to Italy. She was never able to convert
him to Catholicism—he was the son of a Presbyterian missionary—but he did
not question the sincerity of her faith, often attended Mass with her, and
defended her whenever she was criticized by his fellow Protestants. In the
early years of her widowhood, Clare Boothe Luce retired to the luxurious beach
house she and her husband had planned in Honolulu. But boredom with life in
what she called "this fur-lined rut" brought her back to Washington D.C. for
increasingly long periods, and she made her final home there in 1983. Writing
career. A writer with considerable powers of invention and wit, Luce published
"Stuffed Shirts", a promising volume of short stories, in 1931. "Scribner's"
magazine compared the latter work to Evelyn Waugh's "Vile Bodies" for its
bitter humor. The "New York Times" found it socially superficial, but praised
its "lovely festoons of epigrams" and beguiling stylishness: "What malice there
may be in these pages has a felinity that is the purest Angoran." The book's
device of characters interlinked from story to story was borrowed from Sherwood
Anderson's "Winesburg, Ohio" (1919), but it impressed Andre Maurois, who asked
Luce's permission to imitate it. Luce also published many magazine articles.
Her real talent, however, was as a playwright. After the failure of her initial
stage effort, the marital melodrama "Abide With Me" (1935), she rapidly
followed up with a satirical comedy, "The Women". Deploying a cast of no fewer
than forty actresses who discussed men in often scorching language, it became a
Broadway smash in 1936 and, three years later, a successful Hollywood movie.
Toward the end of her life, Luce claimed that for half a century she had
steadily received royalties from productions of "The Women" all around the
world. Later in the 1930s, she wrote two more successful, but less durable
plays, also both made into movies: "Kiss the Boys Goodbye" and "Margin for
Error." The latter work courageously, but ineffectively, tried to make fun of
Nazism. Its opening night in Princeton, N.J., on October 14, 1939, was attended
by Albert Einstein and Thomas Mann. Otto Preminger directed and starred in both
the Broadway production and screen adaptation. Much of Luce's famously acid wit
("No good deed goes unpunished" "Widowhood is a fringe benefit of marriage" "A
hospital is no place to be sick") can be traced back to the days when, as a
wealthy young divorcee in the early 1930s, she became a caption writer at
"Vogue" and then, associate editor and managing editor of Vanity Fair. She not
only edited the works of such great humorists as P. G. Wodehouse and Corey
Ford, but contributed many comic pieces of her own, signed and unsigned. Her
humor, which she retained into old age, was a saving grace that ameliorated the
ruthlessness with which she pursued publicity and power. The obsessiveness of
Luce's "rage for fame" (a phrase by John Wolcot that she applied to herself as
a schoolgirl) did not allow her the time and solitude she needed to mature as a
writer, and her literary precocity soon lost its bloom. When she published her
second book, "Europe in the Spring" (1940), an acutely observed report on the
"phony war" preceding the conquest of France, her first-person style caused
Dorothy Parker to dub it "All Clare on the Western Front." After the war,
Luce's conversion to Catholicism made her for some years a religious
proselytizer, and she later mourned that theological writing had killed her
creative originality. It could be argued that her increasing tendency to orate
on political platforms, where rhetoric was cheap, was a contributing factor.
Nevertheless, she had some success in 1949 with her scenario for "Come to the
Stable," a popular 20th Century Fox movie about Benedictine nuns establishing a
monastery in Connecticut. Luce's plot was nominated for an Academy Award that
year in the Best Story category. Several other ambitious Hollywood scripts,
including a big-budget project for Howard Hughes at RKO entitled "Pilate's
Wife", came to nothing. Luce's play "Child of the Morning", about the murder of
a saintly girl (1951), received mixed reviews in its Massachusetts tryouts and
never made it to Broadway. In 1952 she edited a volume of divine lives, "Saints
for Now," recruiting as contributors such distinguished authors as Evelyn
Waugh, Thomas Merton, Whittaker Chambers, and Rebecca West. She wrote her final
play, "Slam the Door Softly", in 1970. Another branch of Luce's literary career
was that of war journalism. From her first teenage encounter with the
battlefields of World War I, she had always been drawn to matters
military—not to mention military officers, with whom she had many affairs.
"Europe in the Spring" was the result of a four-month tour of Britain, Belgium,
Holland, Italy, and France in 1939-1940 as a correspondent for her husband's
"Life" magazine. She described the widening battleground of World War II as "a
world where men have decided to die together because they are unable to find a
way to live together."" "In 1941, Luce and her husband toured China and
reported on the status of the country and its war with Japan. Her profile of
General Douglas Macarthur appeared on the cover of "Life" on the day the
Japanese attacked Pearl Harbor. After the United States entered the war, Luce
toured military installations in Africa, India, China, and Burma, compiling a
further series of reports for "Life". She published interviews with General
Harold Alexander, commander of British troops in the Middle East, Chiang Kai-
Shek, Jawaharlal Nehru, and General Stilwell, commander of American troops in
the China-Burma-India theater. Her lifelong instinct for being in the right
place at the right time, and easy access to key commanders made Clare Boothe
Luce an influential figure on both sides of the Atlantic. Courageous by nature,
she endured bombing raids and other dangers in Europe and the Far East. She did
not hesitate to criticize the unwarlike lifestyle of General Sir Claude
Auchinleck's Middle East Command in language that recalled the barbs of her
best playwriting. One draft article for "Life", noting that the general lived
far from the Egyptian front in a houseboat, and mocking RAF pilots as "flying
fairies", was discovered by British Customs when she passed through Trinidad in
April, 1942. It caused such Allied consternation that she briefly faced house
arrest. Coincidentally or not, Auchinleck was fired a few months later by
Winston Churchill. Her varied experiences in all the major war theaters
qualified her for a seat the following year on the House Military Affairs
Committee." Luce never wrote her autobiography despite a contract to do so. She
did, however, select a posthumous biographer, and willed her enormous archive
of personal papers to the Library of Congress. Political career. House of
Representatives. In 1942, Luce won a Republican seat in the United States House
of Representatives representing Fairfield County, Connecticut, the 4th
Congressional District. She based her platform on three goals: “One, to win
the war. Two, to prosecute that war as loyally and effectively as we can as
Republicans. Three, to bring about a better world and a durable peace, with
special attention to post-war security and employment here at home.” She
filled the seat formerly held by her late stepfather, Dr. Albert Austin. An
outspoken critic of President Franklin Delano Roosevelt's foreign policy, Luce
was supported by isolationists and conservatives in Congress, and was appointed
early to the prestigious House Military Affairs Committee. Although she was by
no means the only female representative on the floor, her beauty, wealth, and
penchant for slashing witticisms caused her to be treated patronizingly by
colleagues of both sexes. She made a sensational debut in her maiden speech,
coining the phrase "globaloney" to disparage Vice President Henry Wallace's
recommendation that airlines of the world be given free access to U.S.
airports. Her voting record was generally more moderate than was expected by
her GOP backers. To help the nation meet its rising war costs, she advocated
"taxing the rich almost to the point of constitutional confiscation." She
called for repeal of the Chinese Exclusion Act, comparing its "doctrine of race
theology" to Adolf Hitler's, advocated aid for war victims abroad, and sided
with the administration on issues such as infant-care and maternity
appropriations for the wives of enlisted men. Nevertheless, President Roosevelt
took a dislike to Representative Luce, and campaigned in 1944 to prevent her
reelection, publicly calling her "a sharp-tongued glamor girl of forty." She
gave as good as she got, accusing Roosevelt of being "the only American
president who ever lied us into a war because he did not have the political
courage to lead us into it." During her second term, Luce was instrumental in
the creation of the Atomic Energy Commission and, during the course of two
tours of Allied battlefronts in Europe, a campaigner for more support of what
she considered to be America's forgotten army in Italy. She was present at the
liberation of several Nazi concentration camps in April, 1945, and after V-
E Day began warning against the rise of international Communism as another form
of totalitarianism, likely to lead to World War III. In 1946 she was the co-
author of the Luce-Celler Act of 1946, which increased the numbers of Indians
and Filipinos permitted to immigrate to the US (previously limited to only 100
per year), and allowed them ultimately to become naturalized citizens. Wearied
by four years of failure to be treated more seriously by her colleagues,
Representative Luce chose not to run for re-election that fall. She retired
from Congress in January 1947. Republican National Conventions. Clare Boothe
Luce's emergence as a formidable political orator in Congress made her a
candidate to deliver the keynote speech at the 1944 Republican National
Convention. She did not, however, win that honor, as many reports erroneously
state. (Nor was she the first woman to address a national political convention:
Corinne Roosevelt Robinson did so in 1920.) Governor Earl Warren of California
was ultimately selected as keynote speaker, and Representative Luce was asked
to introduce former President Herbert Hoover. After seeing a draft of her
proposed remarks, Hoover suggested that he introduce her. Luce's subsequent
address invoked an allegorical figure, “G.I. Jim,” as "G.I. Joe's" less
celebrated comrade-in-arms, a victim of the Roosevelt Administration's tardy
preparation for World War II. She reproved President Roosevelt for practicing
one-man diplomacy, and claimed that American democracy was “becoming a
dictatorial bumbledom". Although her rhetoric was overblown and some
accusations unfair to the point of offensiveness, she was rewarded with a vast
ovation. The convention nominated Governor Thomas E. Dewey of New York for the
presidency. At the Republican National Convention in 1948, Luce delivered a
similarly abusive speech, castigating President Harry S. Truman and his
administration in language just short of slander. Evening Bulletin, June 22,
1948 E Again the applause was great, but most press comments afterwards were
negative. As a passionate convert to Roman Catholicism and dedicated Cold
Warrior, Luce was by now moving toward the extreme right of the GOP. Ignoring
her clear preference for Senator Arthur Vandenburg as a candidate, the
convention renominated Thomas E. Dewey to run against Truman. Ambassador to
Italy. Luce returned to politics during the 1952 presidential election, when
she campaigned on behalf of Republican candidate Dwight Eisenhower. Her anti-
Communist speeches on the hustings, radio, and television were effective in
persuading a large number of Catholic Democrats to switch parties and vote for
Ike. For this, and for a large contribution by her husband to the GOP campaign,
Luce was rewarded with an appointment as Ambassador to Italy. She was confirmed
by the Senate in March 1953, the first woman ever to hold such an important
diplomatic post. Italians reacted doubtfully at first to the arrival of a
female ambassador in Rome, but Luce soon convinced those of moderate and
conservative temper that she favored their civilization and religion. The
country's large Communist minority, however, regarded her as a foreign meddler
in Italian affairs. She was no stranger to Pope Pius XII, who welcomed her as a
friend and faithful acolyte. Over the course of several audiences since 1940,
Luce had impressed Pius XII as one of the most effective secular preachers of
Catholicism in America. Her principal achievement as ambassador was to play a
vital role in negotiating a peaceful solution to the Trieste Crisis of 1953-
1954, a border dispute between Italy and Yugoslavia that she saw as potentially
escalating into a war between East and West. Her sympathies throughout were
with the Christian Democratic government of Giuseppe Pella, and influential on
the Mediterranean policy of Secretary of State John Foster Dulles, another
religiously driven anticommunist. Although Luce regarded the abatement of the
acute phase of the crisis in December, 1953 as a triumph for herself, the main
work of settlement, finalized in October 1954, was undertaken by professional
representatives of the five concerned powers (Britain, France, the United
States, Italy, and Yugoslavia) meeting in London. As ambassador, Luce
consistently overestimated the possibility that the Italian left would mount a
governmental coup and restore totalitarian rule, unless the democratic center
was buttressed with generous American aid. Nurturing an image of her own
country as a haven of social peace and prosperity, she threatened to boycott
the 1955 Venice Film Festival if the juvenile delinquent film "Blackboard
Jungle" was shown. Around the same time she fell seriously ill with arsenic
poisoning. Sensational rumors circulated that the ambassador was the target of
extermination by agents of the Soviet Union. Medical analysis eventually
determined that the poisoning was caused by arsenate of lead in paint dust
falling from the stucco that decorated her bedroom ceiling. The episode
debilitated Luce physically and mentally, and she resigned her post in
December, 1956. Ambassador to Brazil. In 1959 President Eisenhower nominated a
recovered Luce to be the US Ambassador to Brazil. She began to learn Portuguese
in preparation for the job, but she was by now so conservative that her
appointment met with strong opposition from a small number of Democratic
Senators. Leading the charge was Oregon Senator Wayne Morse. Despite his
opposition Luce was confirmed by a 79 to 11 vote. However, one of her typically
abrasive wisecracks—that Senator Morse's behavior dated back to the time he
had been "kicked in the head by a horse"—sparked a public outcry. The
controversy caused her husband to urge her to resign from her new
ambassadorship. He pointed out that it would be difficult for her in future to
work with Morse, who chaired the Senate Subcommitte on Latin American Affairs.
She had served only four days, from April 28 to May 1, 1959, and never left
American soil. Political life after office. After Fidel Castro led a revolution
in Cuba in 1959, Luce and her husband began to sponsor anti-Castro groups. This
support included funding exiles in commando speedboat raids against Cuba in the
early 1960s. Luce 's continuing anti-Communist views, as well as her advocacy
of fiscal conservatism, led her to support Senator Barry Goldwater of Arizona
as the Republican candidate for president in 1964. She also considered, but
rejected, a candidacy for the United States Senate from New York on the
Conservative party ticket. That same year, which also saw the political
emergence of her future friend Ronald Reagan, marked the voluntary end of Henry
Luce's tenure as editor-in-chief of "Time." The Luces retired together,
establishing a winter home in Arizona and planning a final move to Hawaii.
Henry Luce died in 1967 before that dream could be realized. But his widow went
ahead with construction of a luxurious beach house in Honolulu, and for some
years led an active life in Hawaiian society. In 1973, Richard Nixon named
Clare Boothe Luce to the President's Foreign Intelligence Advisory Board
(PFIAB). She remained on the board until President Jimmy Carter succeeded
President Gerald Ford in 1977. By then she had put down roots in Washington,
D.C. that would become permanent in her last years. In 1979 she was the first
female to be awarded the Sylvanus Thayer Award by the United States Military
Academy at West Point. In 1981, the newly-inaugurated President Ronald Reagan
reappointed Luce to PFIAB. She served on the board until 1983. Presidential
Medal of Freedom. President Reagan awarded her the Presidential Medal of
Freedom in 1983. She was the first woman member of Congress to receive this
award. Death. Luce died of brain cancer on October 9, 1987, aged 84, at her
Watergate apartment in Washington D.C. She is buried at Mepkin Abbey, South
Carolina, a plantation that she and Henry Luce had once owned and given to a
community of Trappist monks. She lies in a grave adjoining those of her mother,
her daughter, and her husband. Legacy. Feminism. Revered in her later years as
a heroine of the feminist movement, Luce had mixed feelings about the role of
women in society. This ambivalence showed early in her willingness, as a
teenager, to abandon a job with the National Women's Party and obey her
mother's urgings to find a rich husband. As a Congresswoman in 1943 she was
invited to co-sponsor a submission of the Equal Rights Amendment, offered by
Representative Louis Ludlow of Indiana, but claimed that the invitation got
lost in her mail. Both her marriages were strained, but she never ceased to
advise women to marry and provide supportive homes for their husbands. (During
her ambassadorial years, at a dinner in Luxembourg attended by many European
dignitaries, Luce was heard declaiming that all women wanted from men was
"babies and security.".) Yet her own professional career as a successful
editor, writer, playwright, reporter, legislator, and diplomat remarkably
showed how a woman of humble origins and no college education could, by the
exercise of brains and beauty, raise herself to an escalating series of public
heights. Luce bequeathed a large part of her personal fortune of some $50
million to an academic program designed to encourage the entry of women into
technological fields traditionally dominated by men (see below). Clare Boothe
Luce Program. Since 1989 the Clare Boothe Luce Program (CBL) has become a
significant source of private funding support for women in science, mathematics
and engineering. All awards must be used exclusively in the United States (not
applicable for travel or study abroad). Student recipients must be U.S.
citizens and faculty recipients must be citizens or permanent residents. Thus
far, the program has supported more than 1500 women. The terms of the bequest
require the following criteria: 1) at least fifty percent of the awards go to
Roman Catholic colleges or universities, 2) grants are made only to four-year
degree-granting institutions, not directly to individuals. The program is
divided into three distinct categories: 1) undergraduate scholarships and
research awards, 2) graduate and post-doctoral fellowships, and 3) term support
for tenure-track appointments at the assistant or associate professorship
level. Clare Boothe Luce Policy Institute. The Clare Boothe Luce Policy
Institute was founded in 1993 by Michelle Easton. The non-profit think tank
seeks to advance American women through conservative ideas and espouses much
the same philosophy as Clare Boothe Luce, both in terms of foreign policy and
domestic policy. Clare Boothe Luce Heritage Foundation Award. The Clare Boothe
Luce Award, established in 1991 in memory of Luce, is the Heritage Foundation's
highest award for distinguished contributions to the conservative movement.
Prominent recipients include Ronald Reagan, Margaret Thatcher and William F.
Buckley Jr.
