Class conflict Class conflict, frequently referred to as class warfare or class
struggle, is the tension or antagonism which exists in society due to competing
socioeconomic interests and desires between people of different classes. Class
conflict can take many different forms: direct violence, such as wars fought
for resources and cheap labor; indirect violence, such as deaths from poverty,
starvation, illness or unsafe working conditions; coercion, such as the threat
of losing a job or pulling an important investment; or ideology, either
intentionally (as with books and articles promoting capitalism) or
unintentionally (as with the promotion of consumerism through advertising).
Additionally, political forms of class conflict exist; legally or illegally
lobbying or bribing government leaders for passage of partisan desirable
legislation including labor laws, tax codes, consumer laws, acts of congress or
other sanction, injunction or tariff. The conflict can be open, as with a
lockout aimed at destroying a labor union, or hidden, as with an informal
slowdown in production protesting low wages or unfair labor practices. Usage.
In the past the term "Class conflict" was a term used mostly by socialists, who
define a class by its relationship to the means of production — such as
factories, land and machinery. From this point of view, the social control of
production and labor is a contest between classes, and the division of these
resources necessarily involves conflict and inflicts harm. (Marx, 1848)
However, in more contemporary times this term is striking chords and finding
new definition amongst capitalistic societies in the United States and other
Westernized countries. Marxists argue that class conflict plays a pivotal role
in the history of class-based hierarchical systems such as capitalism and
feudalism. Marxists refer to its overt manifestations as class war, a struggle
whose resolution in favor of the working class is viewed by them as inevitable
under plutocratic capitalism. Pre-capitalist societies. Where societies are
socially divided based on status, wealth, or control of social production and
distribution, conflict arises. This conflict is both everyday, such as the
common medieval insistence on the right of lords to control access to grain
mills and baking ovens, or it can be exceptional such as the Roman Conflict of
the Orders, the uprising of Spartacus, or the various popular uprisings in late
medieval Europe. One of the earliest analysis of these conflicts is Friedrich
Engels' German Peasants War. One of the earliest analyses of the development of
class as the development of conflicts between emergent classes is available in
Peter Kropotkin's "". In this work, Kropotkin analyzes the disposal of goods
after death in pre-class societies, and how inheritance produces early class
divisions and conflict. 21st Century USA. Predicated on the proposed tax
legislation aimed at the wealthy in the USA, conservative news hosts and talk-
show commentators are bringing pejorative application to the term class
warfare. Perhaps an "ad hominem" attack on the man who reintroduced the term to
main-stream America, Warren Buffett, the term in its classic sense, is now
being used to describe President Obama's efforts to create the Buffett Rule.
The rule would set a minimum effective tax rate of 30% for those individuals
making over $1 million USD annually. FOX News Business Network anchor and
investor Eric Bolling, Fox News commentator Steve Moore, political and legal
analyst for Fox News Channel Andrew Napolitano, and former speech writer for
President George W. Bush, Marc Thiessen have all used the words class warfare
to describe the tax initiative. In response fellow billionaire and friend to
Warren Buffett, George Soros addresses the pejorative use of the term by the
conservative-right by stating, ""Speaking as a person who would be most hurt by
this, I think my fellow hedge fund managers call this class warfare because
they don't like to pay more taxes."" The USA and similar societies. The typical
example of class conflict described is class conflict within capitalism. This
class conflict is seen to occur primarily between the bourgeoisie and the
proletariat, and takes the form of conflict over hours of work, value of wages,
cost of consumer goods, the culture at work, control over parliament or
bureaucracy, and economic inequality. The particular implementation of
government programs which may seem purely humanitarian, such as disaster
relief, can actually be a form of class conflict. In the USA class conflict is
often noted in labor/management disputes. As far back as 1933 representative
Edward Hamilton of ALPA, the Airline Pilot's Association, used the term "class
warfare" to describe airline management's opposition at the National Labor
Board hearings in October of that year. Apart from these day-to-day forms of
class conflict, during periods of crisis or revolution class conflict takes on
a violent nature and involves repression, assault, restriction of civil
liberties, and murderous violence such as assassinations or death squads.
(Zinn, "People's History") Thomas Jefferson, USA. Although Thomas Jefferson
(1744–1826) led the United States as president from 1801–1809 and is
considered one of the founding fathers, he died with immense amounts of debt.
About class warfare, Thomas Jefferson is quoted as saying, ""Experience demands
that man is the only animal which devours his own kind, for I can apply no
milder term to the general prey of the rich on the poor."" Warren Buffett, USA.
In 2012, and the years leading up to it, renowned investor and philanthropist
Warren Buffett has often found himself on the list of the top 10 wealthiest men
in the world. In November 2006 Buffett commented in an interview with The New
York Times, ""There’s class warfare all right, but it’s my class, the rich
class, that’s making war, and we’re winning."" Shortly after issuing the
quote Warren gave away more than half of his fortune to charitable causes
through a program developed by himself and computer software tycoon Bill Gates.
Later in 2011 Buffett called on government legislators to, ""...stop coddling
the super rich."" Max Weber, Germany. Max Weber (1864–1920) agrees with the
fundamental ideas of Karl Marx about the economy causing class conflict, but
claims that class conflict can also stem from prestige and power. Weber argues
that classes come from the different property locations. Different locations
can largely affect one's class by their education and the people they associate
with. He also states that prestige results in different status groupings. This
prestige is based upon the social status of one's parents. Prestige is an
attributed value and many times cannot be changed. Weber states that power
differences led to the formation of political parties. Weber disagrees with
Marx about the formation of classes. While Marx believes that groups are
similar due to their economic status, Weber argues that classes are largely
formed by social status. Weber does not believe that communities are formed by
economic standing, but by similar social prestige. Weber does recognize that
there is a relationship between social status, social prestige and classes.
Muslim societies (Arab Spring). Numerous factors have culminated in what's
known as the Arab Spring. Agenda behind the civil unrest, and the ultimate
overthrow of totalitarian governments throughout the Middle-East included
issues such as dictatorship or absolute monarchy, human rights violations,
government corruption (demonstrated by Wikileaks diplomatic cables), economic
decline, unemployment, extreme poverty, and a number of demographic structural
factors, such as a large percentage of educated but dissatisfied youth within
the population. Also, some, like Slovenian philosopher Slavoj Žižek attribute
the 2009 Iranian protests as one of the reasons behind the Arab Spring. The
catalysts for the revolts in all Northern African and Persian Gulf countries
have been the concentration of wealth in the hands of autocrats in power for
decades, insufficient transparency of its redistribution, corruption, and
especially the refusal of the youth to accept the status quo. as they involve
threats to food security worldwide and prices that approach levels of the
2007–2008 world food price crisis. Amnesty International singled out
Wikileaks' release of US diplomatic cables as a catalyst for the revolts. The
Soviet Union and similar societies. A variety of predominantly Marxist and
anarchist thinkers argue that class conflict exists in Soviet-style societies.
These arguments describe as a class the bureaucratic stratum formed by the
ruling political party (known as the Nomenklatura in the Soviet Union) —
sometimes termed a "new class". --that controls the means of production. This
ruling class is viewed to be in opposition to the remainder of society,
generally considered the proletariat. This type of system is referred to by its
detractors as state capitalism, state socialism, bureaucratic collectivism or
new class societies. (Cliff; Ðilas 1957) Marxism was such a predominate
ideological power in what became the Soviet Union since a Marxist group known
as the Russian Social Democratic Labour Party was formed in the country, prior
to 1917. This party soon divided into two main factions; the Bolsheviks, who
were led by Vladimir Lenin, and the Mensheviks, who were led by Julius Martov.
Marxist perspectives. Karl Marx (1818–1883) was a German born philosopher who
lived the majority of his adult life in England. In "The Communist Manifesto",
Karl Marx argued that a class is formed when its members achieve class
consciousness and solidarity. This largely happens when the members of a class
become aware of their exploitation and the conflict with another class. A class
will then realize their shared interests and a common identity. According to
Marx, a class will then take action against those that are exploiting the lower
classes. What Marx points out is that members of each of the two main classes
have interests in common. These class or collective interests are in conflict
with those of the other class as a whole. This in turn leads to conflict
between individual members of different classes. Marxist analysis of society
identifies two main social groups: Not all class struggle is violent or
necessarily radical, as with strikes and lockouts. Class antagonism may instead
be expressed as low worker morale, minor sabotage and pilferage, and individual
workers' abuse of petty authority and hoarding of information. It may also be
expressed on a larger scale by support for socialist or populist parties. On
the employers' side, the use of union busting legal firms and the lobbying for
anti-union laws are forms of class struggle. Not all class struggle is a threat
to capitalism, or even to the authority of an individual capitalist. A narrow
struggle for higher wages by a small sector of the working-class, what is often
called "economism", hardly threatens the status quo. In fact, by applying the
craft-union tactics of excluding other workers from skilled trades, an
economistic struggle may even weaken the working class as a whole by dividing
it. Class struggle becomes more important in the historical process as it
becomes more general, as industries are organized rather than crafts, as
workers' class consciousness rises, and as they self-organize away from
political parties. Marx referred to this as the progress of the proletariat
from being a class "in itself", a position in the social structure, to being
one "for itself",an active and conscious force that could change the world.
Marx largely focuses on the capital industrialist society as the source of
social stratification, which ultimately results in class conflict. He states
that capitalism creates a division between classes which can largely be seen in
manufacturing factories. The proletariat, is separated from the bourgeoisie
because production becomes a social enterprise. Contributing to their
separation is the technology that is in factories. Technology de-skills and
alienates workers as they are no longer viewed as having a specialized skill.
Another effect of technology is a homogenous workforce that can be easily
replaceable. Marx believed that this class conflict would result in the
overthrow of the bourgeoisie and that the private property would be communally
owned. The mode of production would remain, but communal ownership would
eliminate class conflict. Even after a revolution, the two classes would
struggle, but eventually the struggle would recede and the classes dissolve. As
class boundaries broke down, the state apparatus would wither away. According
to Marx, the main task of any state apparatus is to uphold the power of the
ruling class; but without any classes there would be no need for a state. That
would lead to the classless, stateless communist society. Non-Marxist
perspectives. Social commentators, historians and socialist theorists had
commented on class struggle for some time before Marx, as well as the
connection between class struggle, property, and law: Augustin Thierry,
François Guizot, François-Auguste Mignet and Adolphe Thiers. The Physiocrats,
David Ricardo, and after Marx, Henry George noted the inelastic supply of land
and argued that this created certain privileges (economic rent) for landowners.
According to the historian Arnold Toynbee, stratification along lines of class
appears only within civilizations, and furthermore only appears during the
process of a civilization's decline while not characterizing the growth phase
of a civilization. Proudhon, in "What is Property?" (1840) states that "certain
classes do not relish investigation into the pretended titles to property, and
its fabulous and perhaps scandalous history." Fascists have often opposed class
struggle and instead have attempted to appeal to the working class while
promising to preserve the existing social classes and have proposed an
alternative concept known as class collaboration. Class vs. race struggle.
According to Michel Foucault, in the 19th century the essentialist notion of
the "race" was incorporated by racists, biologists, and eugenicists, who gave
it the modern sense of "biological race" which was then integrated to "state
racism". On the other hand, Foucault claims that when Marxists developed their
concept of "class struggle", they were partly inspired by the older, non-
biological notions of the "race" and the "race struggle". In a letter to
Friedrich Engels in 1882 Karl Marx wrote: "You know very well where we found
our idea of class struggle; we found it in the work of the French historians
who talked about the race struggle." For Foucault, the theme of social war
provides the overriding principle that connects class and race struggle. Moses
Hess, an important theoretician of the early socialist movement, in his
"Epilogue" to "Rome and Jerusalem" argued that "the race struggle is primary,
the class struggle secondary... With the cessation of race antagonism, the
class struggle will also come to a standstill. The equalization of all classes
of society will necessarily follow the emancipation of all the races, for it
will ultimately become a scientific question of social economics." In modern
times, emerging schools of thought in the U.S. and other countries hold the
opposite to be true. They argue that the race struggle is less important,
because the primary struggle is that of class since labor of all races face the
same problems and injustices. The main example given is the United States,
which has the most politically weak working class of any developed nation,
where race is held as a distraction that has kept labor divided and
unorganized. Chronology. Riots with a basically nationalist background are not
included.
