Classical economics Classical economics is widely regarded as the first modern
school of economic thought. Its major developers include Adam Smith, Jean-
Baptiste Say, David Ricardo, Thomas Malthus and John Stuart Mill. Adam Smith's
"The Wealth of Nations" in 1776 is usually considered to mark the beginning of
classical economics. The school was active into the mid 19th century and was
followed by neoclassical economics in Britain beginning around 1870, or, in
Marx's definition by "vulgar political economy" from the 1830s. The definition
of classical economics is debated, particularly the period 1830–70 and the
connection to neoclassical economics. The term "classical economics" was coined
by Karl Marx to refer to Ricardian economics – the economics of David Ricardo
and James Mill and their "predecessors" – but usage was subsequently extended
to include the "followers" of Ricardo. Classical economists claimed that free
markets regulate themselves, when free of any intervention. Adam Smith referred
to a so called invisible hand, which will move markets towards their natural
equilibrium, without requiring any outside intervention. As opposed to
Keynesian economics, classical economics assumes flexible prices both in the
case of goods and wages. Another main assumption is based on Say's Law: supply
creates its own demand - that is, aggregate production will generate an income
enough to purchase all the output produced; this implicitly assumes, in
contrast to Keynes, that there will be net saving or spending of cash or
financial instruments. Another postulate of classical economics is the equality
of savings and investment, assuming that flexible interest rates will always
maintain equilibrium. History. The classical economists produced their
"magnificent dynamics" during a period in which capitalism was emerging from
feudalism and in which the industrial revolution was leading to vast changes in
society. These changes raised the question of how a society could be organized
around a system in which every individual sought his or her own (monetary)
gain. Classical political economy is popularly associated with the idea that
free markets can regulate themselves. Classical economists and their immediate
predecessors reoriented economics away from an analysis of the ruler's personal
interests to broader national interests. Adam Smith, and also physiocrat
Francois Quesnay, for example, identified the wealth of a nation with the
yearly national income, instead of the king's treasury. Smith saw this income
as produced by labour, land, and capital. With property rights to land and
capital held by individuals, the national income is divided up between
labourers, landlords, and capitalists in the form of wages, rent, and interest
or profits. Modern legacy. Classical economics is generally agreed (but see
section Debates on the definition of classical economics below) to have
developed into neoclassical economics – as the name suggests – or to at
least be most closely represented in the modern age by neoclassical economics,
and many of its ideas remain fundamental in economics. Other ideas, however,
have either disappeared from neoclassical discourse or been replaced by
Keynesian economics in the Keynesian revolution and neoclassical synthesis.
Some classical ideas are represented in various schools of heterodox economics,
notably Marxian economics – Marx being a contemporary of the classical
economists and their immediate successors – and Austrian economics, which
split from neoclassical economics in the late 19th century. Classical theories
of growth and development. Analyzing the growth in the wealth of nations and
advocating policies to promote such growth was a major focus of classical
economists. John Hicks & Samuel Hollander, Nicholas Kaldor, Luigi L. Pasinetti,
and Paul A. Samuelson have presented formal models as part of their respective
interpretations of classical political economy. Value theory. Classical
economists developed a theory of value, or price, to investigate economic
dynamics. William Petty introduced a fundamental distinction between market
price and natural price to facilitate the portrayal of regularities in prices.
Market prices are jostled by many transient influences that are difficult to
theorize about at any abstract level. Natural prices, according to Petty,
Smith, and Ricardo, for example, capture systematic and persistent forces
operating at a point in time. Market prices always tend toward natural prices
in a process that Smith described as somewhat similar to gravitational
attraction. The theory of what determined natural prices varied within the
Classical school. Petty tried to develop a par between land and labour and had
what might be called a land-and-labour theory of value. Smith confined the
labour theory of value to a mythical pre-capitalist past. Others may interpret
Smith believed in value as derived from labour. He stated that natural prices
were the sum of natural rates of wages, profits (including interest on capital
and wages of superintendence) and rent. Ricardo also had what might be
described as a cost of production theory of value. He criticized Smith for
describing rent as price-determining, instead of price-determined, and saw the
labour theory of value as a good approximation. are seen as exogenous to
neoclassical economics. Classical economics tended to stress the benefits of
trade. Its theory of value was largely displaced by marginalist schools of
thought which sees "use value" as deriving from the marginal utility that
consumers finds in a good, and "exchange value" (i.e. natural price) as
determined by the marginal opportunity- or disutility-cost of the inputs that
make up the product. Ironically, considering the attachment of many classical
economists to the free market, the largest school of economic thought that
still adheres to classical form is the Marxian school. Monetary theory. British
classical economists in the 19th century had a well-developed controversy
between the Banking and the Currency school. This parallels recent debates
between proponents of the theory of endogeneous money, such as Nicholas Kaldor,
and monetarists, such as Milton Friedman. Monetarists and members of the
currency school argued that banks can and should control the supply of money.
According to their theories, inflation is caused by banks issuing an excessive
supply of money. According to proponents of the theory of endogenous money, the
supply of money automatically adjusts to the demand, and banks can only control
the terms (e.g., the rate of interest) on which loans are made . Debates on the
definition of classical economics. The theory of value is currently a contested
subject. One issue is whether classical economics is a forerunner of
neoclassical economics or a school of thought that had a distinct theory of
value, distribution, and growth. Sraffians, who emphasize the discontinuity
thesis, see classical economics as extending from Petty's work in the 17th
century to the break-up of the Ricardian system around 1830. The period between
1830 and the 1870s would then be dominated by "vulgar political economy", as
Karl Marx characterized it. Sraffians argue that: the wages fund theory;
Senior's abstinence theory of interest, which puts the return to capital on the
same level as returns to land and labour; the explanation of equilibrium prices
by well-behaved supply and demand functions; and Say's law, are not necessary
or essential elements of the classical theory of value and distribution.
Perhaps Schumpeter's view that John Stuart Mill put forth a half-way house
between classical and neoclassical economics is consistent with this view.
Sraffians generally see Marx as having rediscovered and restated the logic of
classical economics, albeit for his own purposes. Others, such as Schumpeter,
think of Marx as a follower of Ricardo. Even Samuel Hollander has recently
explained that there is a textual basis in the classical economists for Marx's
reading, although he does argue that it is an extremely narrow set of texts.
Another position is that neoclassical economics is essentially continuous with
classical economics. To scholars promoting this view, there is no hard and fast
line between classical and neoclassical economics. There may be shifts of
emphasis, such as between the long run and the short run and between supply and
demand, but the neoclassical concepts are to be found confused or in embryo in
classical economics. To these economists, there is only one theory of value and
distribution. Alfred Marshall is a well-known promoter of this view. Samuel
Hollander is probably its best current proponent. Still another position sees
two threads simultaneously being developed in classical economics. In this
view, neoclassical economics is a development of certain exoteric (popular)
views in Adam Smith. Ricardo was a sport, developing certain esoteric (known by
only the select) views in Adam Smith. This view can be found in W. Stanley
Jevons, who referred to Ricardo as something like "that able, but wrong-headed
man" who put economics on the "wrong track". One can also find this view in
Maurice Dobb's "Theories of Value and Distribution Since Adam Smith: Ideology
and Economic Theory" (1973), as well as in Karl Marx's "Theories of Surplus
Value". The above does not exhaust the possibilities. John Maynard Keynes
thought of classical economics as starting with Ricardo and being ended by the
publication of Keynes' own "General Theory of Employment Interest and Money".
The defining criterion of classical economics, on this view, is Say's law which
is disputed by Keynesian economics. One difficulty in these debates is that the
participants are frequently arguing about whether there is a non-neoclassical
theory that should be reconstructed and applied today to describe capitalist
economies. Some, such as Terry Peach, see classical economics as of antiquarian
interest. Sometimes the definition of classical economics is expanded to
include the earlier 17th century English economist William Petty and the
contemporary early 19th century German economist Johann Heinrich von Thünen.
