Clean Clothes Campaign The Clean Clothes Campaign (CCC) is the garment
industry's largest alliance of labour unions and non-governmental
organizations. The civil society campaign focuses on the improvement of working
conditions in the garment and sportswear industries. Formed in the Netherlands
in 1989, the CCC has campaigns in 15 European countries: Austria, Belgium
(North and South), Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Italy, Ireland,
Netherlands, Norway, Poland, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland and the United Kingdom.
The CCC works with a partner network of more than 250 organizations around the
world. Structure. The national branches of the CCC are autonomous organizations
of consumer groups, trade unions, human and women's rights organizations,
researchers and activists. Representatives from each national campaign meet
three times a year to coordinate international activities. Activities. The
Clean Clothes Campaign educates and mobilises consumers, lobbies companies and
governments, and offers direct solidarity support to workers as they fight for
their rights and demand better working conditions. Retailers and distributors.
The Clean Clothes Campaign insists that companies bear a responsibility and
have the power to ensure that workers throughout their supply chains are
treated fairly. The CCC has developed a "Code of Labour Practices for the
Apparel Industry Including Sportswear" based upon the conventions of the United
Nations' International Labour Organization. The principles set forth in this
code include, among others, a minimum employment age, safe working
requirements, set working hours and right to a living wage. The CCC pressures
retailers and manufacturers to adopt the Code of Labour Practices and ensure
that the principles are upheld. Successful campaigning by the CCC has led many
businesses to adopt “codes of conduct,” a list of standards for suppliers.
The CCC pushes companies to give these codes real meaning by reinforcing them
with a commitment to monitoring conditions and resolving problems. The CCC also
presses companies to ensure that their buying practices, such as pricing and
delivery schedules, do no make it unfeasible for factories to provide decent
work. Support to workers. The Clean Clothes Campaign provides solidarity
support in urgent cases of labor and human rights violations. The CCC
communicates with companies and public authorities, requesting positive
intervention and resolution. If companies fail to take adequate steps to
resolve problems, the CCC mobilizes consumers and activists around the world to
take action. The CCC has taken up more than 250 cases involving discrimination
against union members and officials, unsafe working conditions, withholding of
wages and social premiums, violence against workers, and violations of worker's
human rights. Consumer education. The CCC publicizes through educational
programmes, demonstrations, advertisement, debates, books, rallies and news
outlets information related to the production of clothes and the misuse of
garment workers. Legal advocacy. The Clean Clothes Campaign calls on the
European Union and national governments to promote respect for international
labour standards. It lobbies governments to be responsible consumers themselves
by committing to the ethical procurement of government uniforms and work wear.
