Independence of clones criterion In voting systems theory, the independence of
clones criterion measures an election method's robustness to strategic
nomination. Nicolaus Tideman was the first to formulate this criterion, which
states that the winner must not change due to the addition of a non-winning
candidate that's similar to a candidate already present. To be more precise, a
subset of the candidates, called a set of clones, exists if no voter ranks any
candidate outside the set between (or equal to) any candidates that are in the
set. If a set of clones contains at least two candidates, the criterion
requires that deleting one of the clones must not increase or decrease the
winning chance of any candidate not in the set of clones. In some systems (such
as the plurality vote), the addition of a similar candidate divides support
between similar candidates, which can cause them both to lose. In some other
systems (such as the Borda count), the addition of a similar alternative
increases the apparent support for one of the similar candidates, which can
cause it to win. In yet other systems (such as Ranked pairs), the introduction
of similar alternatives does not affect the chances of the dissimilar
candidates, as required by the criterion. There are further systems where the
effect of the additional similar alternatives depends on the distribution of
other votes. Clone negative and clone positive. Elections methods that fail
independence of clones can either be clone negative (the addition of a similar
candidate decreases another candidate's chance of winning) or clone positive
(the addition of a similar candidate increases another candidate's chance of
winning). The Borda count is an example of a clone positive method. Plurality
voting is an example of a clone negative method because of vote-splitting.
Compliant methods. Instant-runoff voting, Approval voting and some election
methods that comply with the Condorcet criterion such as Ranked Pairs and
Schulze also meet independence of clones. The interpretation of the term "set
of clones" for scored voting systems is controversial. If clones are candidates
that are considered nearly identical by the voters, range voting and Majority
Judgment satisfy the criterion. If clones also include candidates that are
still similar but clearly superior to an existing candidate, that superior
clone can win in range voting, even if no inferior clone of that candidate
would have won. However, since range voting and Majority Judgment satisfy the
Independence of irrelevant alternatives criterion, the addition of clones never
helps or harms candidates who are already present. Some of the other methods
that fail the criterion are the Borda count, Minimax, the Kemeny–Young
method, Copeland's method, the Bucklinvote, the plurality vote, and the two-
round system. Examples. Borda count. Candidate A would receive 66% Borda points
(66%×1 + 34%×0) and B would receive 34% (66%×0 + 34%×1). Thus candidate A
would win by a 66% landslide. Candidate A now has 132% Borda points (66%×2 +
34%×0). B has 134% (66%×1 + 34%×2). B2 has 34% (66%×0 + 34%×1). The
nomination of B2 changes the winner from A to B, overturning the landslide,
even though the additional information about voters' preferences is redundant
due to the similarity of B2 to B. Similar examples can be constructed to show
that given the Borda count, any arbitrarily large landslide can be overturned
by adding enough candidates (assuming at least one voter prefers the landslide
loser). For example, to overturn a 90% landslide preference for A over B, add 9
alternatives similar/inferior to B. Then A's score would be 900% (90%×10 +
10%×0) and B's score would be 910% (90%×9 + 10%×10). No knowledge of the
voters' preferences is needed to exploit this strategy. Factions could simply
nominate as many alternatives as possible that are similar to their preferred
alternative. In typical elections, game theory suggests this manipulability of
Borda can be expected to be a serious problem, particularly when a significant
number of voters can be expected to vote their sincere order of preference (as
in public elections, where many voters are not strategically sophisticated;
cite Michael R. Alvarez of Caltech). Small minorities typically have the power
to nominate additional candidates, and typically it is easy to find additional
candidates that are similar. In the context of people running for office,
people can take similar positions on the issues, and in the context of voting
on proposals, it is easy to construct similar proposals. Game theory suggests
that all factions would seek to nominate as many similar candidates as possible
since the winner would depend on the number of similar candidates, regardless
of the voters' preferences. Copeland. This examples show that Copeland's method
violates the Independence of clones criterion. Crowding. Note, that B, B2 and
B3 form a clone set. Clones not nominated. Result: C has one win and no
defeats, A has one win and one defeat. Thus, C is elected Copeland winner.
Clones nominated. Result: Still, C has one win and no defeat, but now A has
three wins and one defeat. Thus, A is elected Copeland winner. Conclusion. A
benefits from the clones of the candidate he defeats, while C cannot benefit
from the clones because C ties with all of them. Thus, by adding two clones of
the non-winning candidate B, the winner has changed. Thus, Copeland's method is
vulnerable against crowding and fails the independence of clones criterion.
Teaming. Note, that B, B2 and B3 form a clone set. Clones not nominated.
Result: A has one win and no defeats, B has no wins or defeats so A is elected
Copeland winner. Clones nominated. Result: A has one win and no defeat, but now
B has two wins and no defeat. Thus, B is elected Copeland winner. Conclusion. B
benefits from adding inferior clones, while A cannot benefit from the clones
because he ties with all of them. So, by adding two clones of B, B changed from
loser to winner. Thus, Copeland's method is vulnerable against Teaming and
fails the Independence of clones criterion. Plurality voting. Suppose there are
two candidates, A and B, and 55% of the voters prefer A over B. A would win the
election, 55% to 45%. But suppose the supporters of B also nominate an
alternative similar to A, named A2. Assume a significant number of the voters
who prefer A over B also prefer A2 over A. When they vote for A2, this can
reduces A's total below 45%, causing B to win. Range Voting. Range voting
satisfies the Independence of clones criterion. Voters changing their opinion.
In range voting, to raise the influence of the ballot, the voter can give the
maximum possible score to their most preferred alternative and the minimum
possible score to their least preferred alternative. In fact, giving the
maximum possible score to all candidates that are over some threshold and
giving the minimum possible score to the other candidates, will maximize the
influence of a ballot on the outcome. However, for this example it is
necessary, that the voter uses the first simple rule, but not the second. Begin
by supposing there are 3 alternatives: A, B and B2, where B2 is similar to B
but considered inferior by the supporters of A and B. The voters supporting A
would have the order of preference "A>B>B2" so that they give A the maximum
possible score, they give B2 the minimum possible score, and they give B a
score that's somewhere in between (greater than the minimum). The supporters of
B would have the order of preference "B>B2>A", so they give B the maximum
possible score, A the minimum score and B2 a score somewhere in between. Assume
B narrowly wins the election. Now suppose B2 isn't nominated. The voters
supporting A who would have given B a score somewhere in between would now give
B the minimum score while the supporters of B will still give B the maximum
score, changing the winner to A. This violates the criterion. Note, that if the
voters that support B would prefer B2 to B, this result would not hold, since
removing B2 would raise the score B receives from his supporters in an
analogous way as the score he receives from the supporters of A would decrease.
The conclusion that can be drawn is that considering all voters voting in a
certain special way, range voting creates an incentive to nominate additional
alternatives that are similar to one you prefer, but considered clearly
inferior by his voters and by the voters of his opponent, since this can be
expected to cause the voters supporting the opponent to raise their score of
the one you prefer (because it looks better by comparison to the inferior
ones), but not his own voters to lower their score. Strictly-interpreted
definition of ranked-clones. The set {A, B} is a set of clones, since there is
no voter that gives C a score between the scores of A and B. Also, the set {B,
C} is a set of clones, since there is not voter that gives A a score between
the scores of B and C. The set {A, C} is not a set of clones, since both voters
gives B a score between the scores of A and C. So, A is a clone of B, and B is
a clone of C, but A is not a clone C. Now, if the election is held between A
and C (without B), then A will win. If B is added, B will win. B is a clone of
A, the winner in the first place. But B is also a clone of C, the loser in the
first place. Thus, using the definition in its strict form, B must not win,
because the inferior C cannot win. However, even in this strict version of the
definition of clones, adding a non-winning clone does not change the chances of
all candidates to win. Note, that Condorcet methods would lead to a tie between
all candidates in this example. Whether Independence of clones is satisfied
depends on the tie-breaker. Using the Schulze method or ranked pairs, simply
choosing one of the tied candidates at random would raise the chance of the
clone-set {A, B} from 50% if B don't compete to 67%, if B compete and thus,
violate the criterion. How the definition of clones have to be adapted for
scored voting methods is controversial. Kemeny–Young method. Note, that B1,
B2 and B3 form a clone set. Clones not nominated. Result: The ranking B1 > C >
A has the highest ranking score. Thus, B1 wins ahead of C and A. Clones
nominated. Result: The ranking A > B1 > B2 > B3 > C has the highest ranking
score. Thus, A wins ahead of the clones Bi and C. Conclusion. A benefits from
the two clones of B1 because A's win is multiplied by the two. So, by adding
two clones of B, B changed from winner to loser. Thus, the Kemeny–Young
method is vulnerable against spoilers and fails the independence of clones
criterion. Minimax. Note, that B1, B2 and B3 form a clone set. Since all
preferences are strict rankings (no equals are present), all three Minimax
methods (winning votes, margins and pairwise opposite) elect the same winners.
Clones not nominated. Result: B is the Condorcet winner. Thus, B is elected
Minimax winner. Clones nominated. Result: A has the closest biggest defeat.
Thus, A is elected Minimax winner. Conclusion. By adding clones, the Condorcet
winner B1 becomes defeated. All three clones beat each other in clear defeats.
A benefits from that. So, by adding two clones of B, B changed from winner to
loser. Thus, the Minimax method is vulnerable against spoilers and fails the
independence of clones criterion.
