Coase theorem In law and economics, the Coase theorem (pronounced /ˈkoʊs/),
attributed to Nobel Prize laureate Ronald Coase, describes the economic
efficiency of an economic allocation or outcome in the presence of
externalities. The theorem states that if trade in an externality is possible
and there are no transaction costs, bargaining will lead to an efficient
outcome regardless of the initial allocation of property rights. In practice,
obstacles to bargaining or poorly defined property rights can prevent Coasian
bargaining. This economic theorem, along with his 1937 paper on the nature of
the firm (which also emphasizes the role of transaction costs), earned Ronald
Coase the 1991 Nobel Prize in Economics. In this paper, Coase argued that real-
world transaction costs are rarely low enough to allow for efficient bargaining
and hence the theorem is almost always inapplicable to economic reality. Since
then, others have demonstrated the importance of the perfect information
assumption and shown using game theory that inefficient outcomes are to be
expected when this assumption is not met. Nevertheless, the Coase theorem is
considered an important basis for most modern economic analyses of government
regulation, especially in the case of externalities, and it has been used by
jurists and legal scholars to analyse and resolve legal disputes. George
Stigler summarized the resolution of the externality problem in the absence of
transaction costs in a 1966 economics textbook in terms of private and social
cost, and for the first time called it a "theorem". Since the 1960s, a
voluminous literature on the Coase theorem and its various interpretations,
proofs, and criticism has developed and continues to grow. The theorem. Coase
developed his theorem when considering the regulation of radio frequencies.
Competing radio stations could use the same frequencies and would therefore
interfere with each other's broadcasts. The problem faced by regulators was how
to eliminate interference and allocate frequencies to radio stations
efficiently. What Coase proposed in 1959 was that as long as property rights in
these frequencies were well defined, it ultimately did not matter if adjacent
radio stations interfered with each other by broadcasting in the same frequency
band. Furthermore, it did not matter to whom the property rights were granted.
His reasoning was that the station able to reap the higher economic gain from
broadcasting would have an incentive to pay the other station not to interfere.
In the absence of transaction costs, both stations would strike a mutually
advantageous deal. It would not matter which station had the initial right to
broadcast; eventually, the right to broadcast would end up with the party that
was able to put it to the most highly valued use. Of course, the parties
themselves would care who was granted the rights initially because this
allocation would impact their wealth, but the end result of who broadcasts
would not change because the parties would trade to the outcome that was
overall most efficient. This counterintuitive insight—that the initial
imposition of legal entitlement is irrelevant because the parties will
eventually reach the same result—is Coase’s invariance thesis. Coase's main
point, clarified in his article 'The Problem of Social Cost', published in 1960
and cited when he was awarded the Nobel Prize in 1991, was that transaction
costs, however, could not be neglected, and therefore, the initial allocation
of property rights often mattered. As a result, one normative conclusion
sometimes drawn from the Coase theorem is that property rights should initially
be assigned to the actors gaining the most utility from them. The problem in
real life is that nobody knows ex ante the most valued use of a resource, and
also that there exist costs involving the reallocation of resources by
government. Another, more refined, normative conclusion also often discussed in
law and economics is that government should create institutions that minimize
transaction costs, so as to allow misallocations of resources to be corrected
as cheaply as possible. Efficiency and invariance. Because Ronald Coase himself
did not originally intend to set forth any one particular theorem, it has
largely been the effort of others who have developed the loose formulation of
the Coase theorem. What Coase initially provided was fuel in the form of
“counterintuitive insight” that externalities necessarily involved more
than a single party engaged in conflicting activities and must be treated as a
reciprocal problem. His work explored the relationship between the parties and
their conflicting activities and the role of assigned rights/liabilities. While
the exact definition of the Coase theorem remains unsettled, there are two
issues or claims within the theorem: the results will be efficient and the
results in terms of resource allocation will be the same regardless of initial
assignments of rights/liabilities. Efficiency version: aside from transaction
costs, the prevailing outcome will be efficient. The zero transaction cost
condition is taken to mean that there are no impediments to bargaining. Since
any inefficient allocation leaves unexploited contractual opportunities, the
allocation cannot be a contractual equilibrium. This is a tautology, but an
illuminating one. It reveals that corrective taxation is not the only way to
internalize negative externalities. Invariance version: aside from transaction
costs, the same efficient outcome will prevail. This version fits the legal
cases cited by Coase. If it is more efficient to prevent cattle trampling a
farmer's fields by fencing in the farm, rather than fencing in the cattle, the
outcome of bargaining will be the fence, regardless of whether victim rights or
unrestricted grazing-rights prevail. Subsequent authors have shown that this
version of the theorem is not generally true, however. Changing liability
placement changes wealth distribution, which in turn affects demand and prices.
These wealth effects may be small, however. Equivalence version. In his UCLA
dissertation and in subsequent work, Steven N. S. Cheung (1969) coined an
equivalence version of the Coase theorem: aside from transaction costs, all
institutional forms are capable of achieving the same efficient allocation.
Contracts, extended markets, and corrective taxation are equally capable of
internalizing an externality. To be logically correct, some restrictive
assumptions are needed. First, spillover effects must be bilateral. This
applies to the cases that Coase investigated. Cattle trample a farmer's fields;
a building blocks sunlight to a neighbor's swimming pool; a confectioner
disturbs a dentist's patients etc. In each case the source of the externality
is matched with a particular victim. It does not apply to pollution generally,
since there are typically multiple victims. Equivalence also requires that each
institution has equivalent property rights. Victim rights in contract law
correspond to victim entitlements in extended markets and to the polluter pays
principle in taxation. Notwithstanding these restrictive assumptions, the
equivalence version helps to underscore the Pigouvian fallacies the work of
Arthur C. Pigou that motivated Coase. Pigouvian taxation is revealed as not the
only way to internalize an externality. Market and contractual institutions
should also be considered, as well as corrective subsidies. The equivalence
theorem also is a springboard for Coase's primary achievement—providing the
pillars for the New Institutional Economics. First, the Coasean maximum-value
solution becomes a benchmark by which institutions can be compared. And the
institutional equivalence result establishes the motive for comparative
institutional analysis and suggests the means by which institutions can be
compared (according to their respective abilities to economize on transaction
costs). The equivalency result also underlies Coase's (1937) proposition that
the boundaries of the firm are chosen to minimize transaction costs. Aside from
the "marketing costs" of using outside suppliers and the agency costs of
central direction inside the firm, whether to put Fisher Body inside or outside
of General Motors would have been a matter of indifference. Application in
United States contract and tort law. The Coase Theorem has been used by jurists
and legal scholars in the analysis and resolution of disputes involving both
contract law and tort law. In contract law, Coase is often used as a method to
evaluate the relative power of the parties during the negotiation and
acceptance of a traditional or classical bargained-for contract. In modern tort
law, application of economic analysis to assign liability for damages was
popularized by Judge Learned Hand of Second Circuit Court of Appeals in his
decision, "United States v. Carroll Towing Co." 159 F.2d 169 (2d. Cir. 1947).
Judge Hand's holding resolved simply that liability could be determined by
applying the formula of B < PL, where B = the burden (economic or otherwise) of
adequate protection against foreseeable damages, P = the probability of damage
(or loss) occurring and L = the gravity of the resulting injury (loss). This
decision flung open the doors of economic analysis in tort cases, thanks in no
small part to Judge Hand's popularity among legal scholars. In resultant
scholarship using economic models of analysis, prominently including the Coase
theorem, theoretical models demonstrated that, when transaction costs are
minimized or nonexistent, the legal appropriation of liability diminishes in
importance or disappears completely. In other words, parties will arrive at an
economically efficient solution that may ignore the legal framework in place.
The Coase theorem considers all four of these outcomes logical because the
economic incentives will be stronger than legal incentives. Pure or traditional
legal analysis will expect that the wall will exist in both scenarios where #2
has a cause of action and that the wall will never exist if #2 has no cause of
action. Example of application. The Jones family plants pear trees on their
property which is adjacent to the Smith family. The Smith family gets an
external benefit from the Jones family’s pear trees because they pick up
whatever pears fall to the ground on their side of the property line. This is
an externality because the Smith family does not pay the Jones family for
utility received from gathering the fallen pears and, therefore, does not
participate in the market transaction of pear production. It results in the
pears being underproduced, which means too few pear trees are planted. By
applying the Coase Theorem two possible solutions arise for internalizing this
externality. These solutions can occur because the positive external benefits
are clearly identified and we assume that 1)transaction costs are low;
2)property rights are clearly defined. After realizing that the Smith family
gets utility from the Jones family’s pear trees, the Jones family thinks it
is unfair that the Smiths get utility from picking up the pears that fall from
their pear trees. The first option to eliminate the externality could be to put
up a net fence that will prevent pears from falling to the ground of the
Smith’s side property line, which will automatically decrease the Smith
family’s marginal benefit to 0. The second option for the Jones could be to
impose a cost on the Smith family if they want to continue to get utility from
their pear trees. Say, if the Jones family has a MC of $25 for each pear tree
produced, it allows them to plant 3 pear trees a year (Jones’ MB = MC).
However, if the cost is imposed on the Smiths, the optimal quantity of pear
trees produced a year will increase to 4 (Jones’ MB + Smiths’ MB = MC). By
internalizing the externality, both the Smith family and the Jones family
increase their overall utility by increasing production from 3 pear trees a
year to 4. It should be noted that $5 is the maximum price the Smiths are
willing to pay for an additional, fourth, pear tree, which implies their
marginal benefit to plant a fifth pear tree is 0. Criticism. Ronald Coase's
work emphasised a problem in applying the Coase theorem: transactions are
"often extremely costly, sufficiently costly at any rate to prevent many
transactions that would be carried out in a world in which the pricing system
worked without cost." (Coase, 1960—first paragraph of section VI.) This isn't
a criticism of the theorem itself, since the theorem considers only those
situations in which there are no transaction costs. Instead, it is an objection
to applications of the theorem that neglect this crucial assumption. So, a key
criticism is that the theorem is almost always inapplicable in economic
reality, because real-world transaction costs are rarely low enough to allow
for efficient bargaining. (That was the conclusion of Coase's original paper,
making him the first 'critic' of using the theorem as a practical solution.)
Economist James Meade argued that even in a simple case of a beekeeper's bees
pollinating a nearby farmer's crops, Coasean bargaining is inefficient. (Though
bee-keepers and farmers do make contracts and have for some time.) David
Friedman has argued that the fact that an "economist as distinguished as Meade
assumed an externality problem was insoluble save for government intervention
suggests...the range of problems to which the Coasian solution is relevant may
be greater than many would at first guess." Friedman is scathing of most
critical attacks on the Coase theorem. In many cases of externalities, the
parties might be a single large factory versus a thousand landowners nearby. In
such situations, say the critics, not only do transaction costs rise
extraordinarily high, but bargaining is hindered by the basic incentive to
free-ride and poorly defined property rights—classic public good problems.
(Though these problems do not preclude a free market Coasian solution.) A third
critique can be found in the work of the critical legal scholar Duncan Kennedy,
who argues that the initial allocation always matters in reality. Steven N. S.
Cheung thinks that private property rights are institutions that arise to
reduce transaction costs. The existence of private property rights implies that
transaction costs are non-zero. If transaction costs are really zero, any
property rights system will result in identical and efficient resource
allocation, and the assumption of private property rights is not necessary.
Therefore, zero transaction costs and private property rights cannot logically
coexist In 2009, in their seminal JEI article, Hahnel and Sheeran highlight
several major misinterpretations and common assumption, which when accounted
for substantially reduce the applicability of Coase's theorem to real world
policy and economic problems. First, they recognize that the solution between a
single polluter and single victim is a negotiation—not a market. As such, it
is subject to the extensive work on bargaining games, negotiation, and game
theory (specifically a "divide the pie" game under incomplete information).
This typically yields a broad range of potential negotiated solutions, making
it unlikely that the efficient outcome will be the one selected. Rather it is
more likely to be determined by a host of factors including the structure of
the negotiations, discount rates and other factors of relative bargaining
strength (cf. Ariel Rubenstein). If the negotiation is not a single shot game,
then reputation effects may also occur, which can dramatically distort outcomes
and may even lead to failed negotiation (cf. David M. Kreps, also the
Chainstore paradox). Second, the information assumptions required to apply
Coase's theorem correctly to yield an efficient result are complete
information—in other words that both sides lack private information, that
their true costs are completely known not only to themselves but to each other,
and that this knowledge state is also common knowledge. When this is not the
case, Coasian solutions predictably yield highly inefficient results due to
perverse incentives—not "mere" transaction costs. If the polluter has the
ownership rights, it is incentivized to overstate its benefits from polluting,
if the victim has the ownership rights, (s)he has the incentive to also
misrepresent her/his damages. As a result, under incomplete information
(probably the only state of knowledge for most real world negotiations),
Coaseian yield predictably inefficient results. Third, if there are multiple
victims, victims who would be required to pay have incentive to pretend that
they are not harmed (freeriding) or understate their harm. If the polluter is
required to pay, victims overpresent, overestimate their damage, and/or hold
out. Hahnel and Sheeran emphasize that these failures are not due to behavioral
issues or irrationality (although these are also quite prevalent (Ultimatum
Game, Cognitive biases)), are not due to transaction costs (although these are
also quite prevalent), and are not due to absorbing states and inability to
pay, rather it is due to fundamental theoretical requirements of Coase's
theorem (necessary conditions) that are typically grossly misunderstood, and
that when not present systematically eliminate the ability of Coaseian
approaches to obtain efficient outcomes—locking in inefficient ones. Hahnel
and Sheeran conclude that it is highly unlikely that conditions required for an
efficient Coaseian solution will exist in any real-world economic situations.
