Coase conjecture The Coase conjecture, developed first by Ronald Coase, is an
argument in monopoly theory. The conjecture sets up a situation in which a
monopolist sells a durable good to a market where resale is impossible and
faces consumers who all have different valuations. The conjecture proposes that
a monopolist that does not know individuals' valuations will have to sell its
product at a low price if the monopolist tries to separate consumers by
offering different prices in different periods. This is because the monopoly
is, in effect, in price competition with itself over several periods and the
consumer with the highest valuation, if he is patient enough, can simply wait
for the lowest price. Thus the monopolist will have to offer a competitive
price in the first period which will be low. The monopolist could avoid this
problem by committing to a stable linear pricing strategy or adopting other
business strategies. Simple two-consumer model. Imagine there are consumers,
called formula_1 and formula_2 with valuations of good with formula_3 and
formula_4 respectively. The valuations are such as formula_5. The monopoly
cannot directly identify individual consumers but it knows that there are 2
different valuations of a good. The good being sold is durable so that once a
consumer buys it, he or she will still have it in all subsequent periods. This
means that after the monopolist has sold to all consumers, there can be no
further sales. Also assume that production is such that average cost and
marginal cost are both equal to zero. The monopolist could try to charge at a
formula_6 in the first period and then in the second period formula_7, hence
price discriminating. This will not result in consumer formula_2 buying in the
first period because, by waiting, she could get price equal to formula_3. To
make consumer formula_2 indifferent between buying in the first period or the
second period, the monopolist will have to charge a price of formula_11 where
formula_12 is a discount factor between 0 and 1. This price is such as
formula_13. Hence by waiting, formula_2 forces the monopolist to compete on
price with its future self. "n" consumers. Imagine there are formula_15
consumers with valuations ranging from formula_4 to a valuation just above
zero. The monopolist will want to sell to the consumer with the lowest
valuation. This is because production is costless and by charging a price just
above zero it still makes a profit. Hence to separate the consumers, the
monopoly will charge first consumer formula_17 where formula_15 is the number
of consumers. If the discount factor is high enough this price will be close to
zero. Hence the conjecture is proved.
