Cobweb model The cobweb model or cobweb theory is an economic model that
explains why prices might be subject to periodic fluctuations in certain types
of markets. It describes cyclical supply and demand in a market where the
amount produced must be chosen before prices are observed. Producers'
expectations about prices are assumed to be based on observations of previous
prices. Nicholas Kaldor analyzed the model in 1934, coining the term 'cobweb
theorem' (see Kaldor, 1938 and Pashigian, 2008), citing previous analyses in
German by Henry Schultz and U. Ricci. The model. The cobweb model is based on a
time lag between supply and demand decisions. Agricultural markets are a
context where the cobweb model might apply, since there is a lag between
planting and harvesting (Kaldor, 1934, p.Â 133-134 gives two agricultural
examples: rubber and corn). Suppose for example that as a result of
unexpectedly bad weather, farmers go to market with an unusually small crop of
strawberries. This shortage, equivalent to a leftward shift in the market's
supply curve, results in high prices. If farmers expect these high price
conditions to continue, then in the following year, they will raise their
production of strawberries relative to other crops. Therefore when they go to
market the supply will be high, resulting in low prices. If they then expect
low prices to continue, they will decrease their production of strawberries for
the next year, resulting in high prices again. This process is illustrated by
the diagrams on the right. The equilibrium price is at the intersection of the
supply and demand curves. A poor harvest in period 1 means supply falls to Q1,
so that prices rise to P1. If producers plan their period 2 production under
the expectation that this high price will continue, then the period 2 supply
will be higher, at Q2. Prices therefore fall to P2 when they try to sell all
their output. As this process repeats itself, oscillating between periods of
low supply with high prices and then high supply with low prices, the price and
quantity trace out a spiral. They may spiral inwards, as in the top figure, in
which case the economy converges to the equilibrium where supply and demand
cross; or they may spiral outwards, with the fluctuations increasing in
magnitude. Simplifying, the cobweb model can have two main types of outcomes:
In either of the first two scenarios, the combination of the spiral and the
supply and demand curves often looks like a cobweb, hence the name of the
theory. Elasticities versus slopes. The outcomes of the cobweb model are stated
above in terms of slopes, but they are more commonly described in terms of
elasticities. In terms of slopes, the "convergent case" requires that the slope
of the supply curve be greater than the absolute value of the slope of the
demand curve: In standard terminology from microeconomics, define the
"elasticity of supply" as formula_2, and the "elasticity of demand" as
formula_3. If we evaluate these two elasticities at the equilibrium point, that
is formula_4 and formula_5, then we see that the "convergent case" requires
whereas the "divergent case" requires In words, the "convergent case" occurs
when the demand curve is more elastic than the supply curve, at the equilibrium
point. The "divergent case" occurs when the supply curve is more elastic than
the demand curve, at the equilibrium point (see Kaldor, 1934, page 135,
propositions (i) and (ii).) Role of expectations. One reason to be skeptical
about this model's predictions is that it assumes producers are extremely
shortsighted. Assuming that farmers look back at the most recent prices in
order to forecast future prices might seem very reasonable, but this backward-
looking forecasting (which is called adaptive expectations) turns out to be
crucial for the model's fluctuations. When farmers expect high prices to
continue, they produce too much and therefore end up with low prices, and vice
versa. In the stable case, this may not be an unbelievable outcome, since the
farmers' prediction errors (the difference between the price they expect and
the price that actually occurs) become smaller every period. In this case,
after several periods prices and quantities will come close to the point where
supply and demand cross, and predicted prices will be very close to actual
prices. But in the unstable case, the farmers' errors get "larger" every
period. This seems to indicate that adaptive expectations is a misleading
assumption: how could farmers fail to notice that last period's price is "not"
a good predictor of this period's price? The fact that agents with adaptive
expectations may make ever-increasing errors over time has led many economists
to conclude that it is better to assume rational expectations, that is,
expectations consistent with the actual structure of the economy. However, the
rational expectations assumption is controversial since it may exaggerate
agents' understanding of the economy. The cobweb model serves as one of the
best examples to illustrate why understanding expectation formation is so
important for understanding economic dynamics, and also why expectations are so
controversial in recent economic theory. Evidence. Livestock herds. The cobweb
model has been interpreted as an explanation of fluctuations in various
livestock markets, like those documented by Arthur Hanau in German hog markets;
see Pork cycle. However, Rosen et al. (1994) proposed an alternative model
which showed that because of the three-year life cycle of beef cattle, cattle
populations would fluctuate over time even if ranchers had perfectly rational
expectations. Human experimental data. In 1989, Wellford conducted twelve
experimental sessions each conducted with five participants over thirty periods
simulating the stable and unstable cases. Her results show that the unstable
case did not result in the divergent behavior we see with cobweb expectations
but rather the participants converged toward the rational expectations
equilibrium. However, the price path variance in the unstable case was greater
than that in the stable case (and the difference was shown to be statistically
significant). One way of interpreting these results is to say that in the long
run, the participants behaved as if they had rational expectations, but that in
the short run they made mistakes. These mistakes caused larger fluctuations in
the unstable case than in the stable case.
