Coercion Coercion () is the practice of forcing another party to act in an
involuntary manner (whether through action or inaction) by use of threats or
intimidation or some other form of pressure or force. In law, coercion is
codified as the duress crime. Such actions are used as leverage, to force the
victim to act in the desired way. Coercion may involve the actual infliction of
physical pain/injury or psychological harm in order to enhance the credibility
of a threat. The threat of further harm may lead to the cooperation or
obedience of the person being coerced. Torture is one of the most extreme
examples of coercion i.e. severe pain is inflicted until the victim provides
the desired response. Overview. The purpose of coercion is to substitute
one‚Äôs aims to those of the victim. For this reason, many social philosophers
have considered coercion as the polar opposite to freedom. Various forms of
coercion are distinguished: first on the basis of the "kind of injury"
threatened, second according to its "aims" and "scope", and finally according
to its "effects", from which its legal, social, and ethical implications mostly
depend. Physical. Physical coercion is the most commonly considered form of
coercion, where the content of the conditional threat is the use of force
against a victim, their dear ones or property. An often used example is
"putting a gun to someone's head" (at gunpoint) or putting a "knife under the
throat" (at knifepoint or cut-throat) to compel action. These are so common
that they are also used as metaphors for other forms of coercion. Armed forces
in many countries use firing squads to maintain discipline and intimidate the
masses, or opposition, into submission or silent compliance. However, there
also are nonphysical forms of coercion, where the threatened injury does not
immediately imply the use of force. Byman and Waxman (2000) define coercion as
"the use of threatened force, including the limited use of actual force to back
up the threat, to induce an adversary to behave differently than it otherwise
would." However, coercion does not necessarily amount to destruction.
Psychological. In psychological coercion, the threatened injury regards the
victim‚Äôs relationships with other people. The most obvious example is
"blackmail", where the threat consists of the dissemination of damaging
information. However, many other types are possible e.g. so-called "emotional
blackmail", which typically involves threats of rejection from or disapproval
by a peer-group, or creating feelings of guilt/obligation via a display of
anger or hurt by someone whom the victim loves or respects. Another example is
coercive persuasion. Psychological coercion ‚Äì along with the other varieties
- was extensively and systematically used by the government of the People‚Äôs
Republic of China during the ‚ÄúThought Reform‚Äù campaign of 1951-1952. The
process ‚Äì carried out partly at ‚Äúrevolutionary universities‚Äù and partly
within prisons ‚Äì was investigated and reported upon by Robert Jay Lifton,
then Research Professor of Psychiatry at Yale University: see Lifton (1961).
The techniques used by the Chinese authorities included a technique derived
from standard group psychotherapy, which was aimed at forcing the victims (who
were generally intellectuals) to produce detailed and sincere ideological
‚Äúconfessions‚Äù. For instance, a professor of formal logic called Chin Yueh-
lin ‚Äì who was then regarded as China‚Äôs leading authority on his subject ‚Äì
was induced to write: ‚ÄúThe new philosophy Marxism-Leninism, being scientific,
is the supreme truth‚Äù. (1961) p.¬ 545. Legal. Government agencies may use
highly intimidating methods during investigations e.g. the threat of harsh
legal penalties; such coercion is typically legal. The usual incentive to
cooperate is some form of plea bargain i.e. an offer to drop or reduce criminal
charges against a suspect in return for full cooperation. Social. Some people
speak of cultural coercion when the fear of falling out with the group may
force people into wearing a certain style of dress, publicly reciting a creed
or a pledge of allegiance which they find ethically reprehensible or starting
to smoke when they would have preferred not to etc. Within the definitional
framework adopted here, all such things amount to (psychological) coercion if
and only if the fear of falling out with the group is the result of
"purposeful" threats by someone. See Peer pressure, Sociology of religion,
Pledge of Allegiance. Aims. Predatory. The purely selfish kinds of coercion are
a form of predatory behaviour by the coercing party, whose aim is to narrow
down the scope of other people‚Äôs actions so as to make them instrumental to
its own personal interests. According to many social philosophers, this sort of
predatory behaviour will become the prevailing one. According to others it has
been the prevailing one for millennia. Pedagogic and thought. At the other
extreme of the spectrum one finds attempts to use coercion altruistically, as a
pedagogical device to improve ‚Äì in some supposedly objective sense ‚Äì the
way other people "think", with particular regard to their basic attitudes and
values. Pedagogic coercion may be applied within a strictly educational
context, and it is then mostly directed towards children. In this article,
however, attention will focus on "thought coercion", i.e. the attempt to use
coercion to affect the basic values of grown-up people in general. In all forms
of "thought coercion" the immediate objective is to force other people to act
"as if" their basic choice rules were identical to those of the coercing party.
However, this mere conformity of ‚Äúoutward‚Äù behaviour is but a first step.
The true and final aim of thought coercion is to induce a change in the
victim‚Äôs objective function itself, i.e. the basic set of values and rules by
which the victim determines his or her own choice among the alternatives of
"any" feasible set. Thought coercion is thus generally meant to be only
"temporary". Once the desired change in values has been brought about, the
victim is expected to conform spontaneously, without any need for further
coercion. Whether and under what conditions this final aim can in fact be
stably achieved is a difficult question, and it will be considered in the
section devoted to the effects of coercion. Here it is necessary to point out
that, whatever its effectiveness, thought coercion has in fact been used very
extensively throughout history. Ideological. "Ideological coercion" is the use
of thought coercion in the attempt to modify people‚Äôs social and political
philosophy. This is of course quite different from plain propaganda, or even
the simple persecution of political opponents, because its objective is to
force individual ideological conversions. Unlike religious coercion, it is a
quite recent phenomenon, confined to some of the totalitarian regimes of the
twentieth century. The most notable example of ideological coercion was the
already mentioned Chinese ‚ÄúThought Reform‚Äù campaign of 1951-52, which was
unique due to both thoroughness and number of people involved. Yet, Chinese
authorities found it necessary to follow that up with a new, albeit slightly
milder, campaign as part of the Maoist ‚ÄúCultural Revolution‚Äù of 1966-1968.
Starting from the political purges in the Soviet Union during the Thirties,
similar ‚Äúbrainwashing‚Äù techniques were intermittently and less
systematically used by most Stalinist regimes of the twentieth century. By
contrast, the Fascist and Nazi regimes of Italy and Germany tended to confine
their coercive activities to purely political aims, without any serious attempt
to force the ideological conversion of their opponents. The use of (physical)
ideological coercion was however theorised by some Fascist philosophers, like
Giovanni Gentile and Jared Harfield. Disciplinary. Somewhere in the middle
between predatory and pedagogic coercion one finds the forms of coercion that
are used as the main coordination tools of command systems. These are
organisations that use coercion to enforce on their members patterns of
division of labour aimed at reaching the organisation‚Äôs goals, which for a
variety of reasons may not always be consistent with each member‚Äôs personal
aims. The most typical example of a command system is a military organisation,
which is typically called a government, but any large production team may
easily fall into this category. Through the punishment system of disciplinary
coercion, each individual member is typically forced into altruistic behaviour
in the interest of the whole group. This kind of coercion is predatory, is
thought coercion, but may often be accepted in advance by the members of the
group. Scope. The scope of coercion has to do with who uses a conditional
threat against whom. It is closely linked with some of the other aspects
already surveyed above, and may be of paramount importance in determining
coercion‚Äôs effects and implications. Specific. Specific or "personal"
coercion is the most commonly considered kind. It takes place when the
conditional threat is decided upon by one particular individual or small group,
and/or directed against some other individual or small group. All forms of
predatory and thought coercion fall into this category. Unspecific. Under
unspecific or "impersonal" coercion the conditional threats come from well-
known and socially accepted general rules and ‚Äì rather than any individual or
sub-group ‚Äì and are directed against anybody in the stated conditions,
according to clearly stated principles of due process. In practice, the
narrowing down of individual choice may be here principally aimed at reducing
the incidence of specific coercion, rather than forcing on everybody some
special sub-set of positive goals. More generally, unspecific coercion may be
the form taken by disciplinary coercion, and this appears to be in fact the
case within the most effective command systems of the modern world. Unspecific
coercion is thus the same thing as the rule of law in its widest sense. This
must not however be confused with the "monopoly of coercion by the State".
First, State coercion may very easily be arbitrary ‚Äì indeed technically very
"specific", according to the above definition. Second, there are well-
documented historical examples of (small) societies that have practiced
unspecific coercion "without" the help of State institutions ‚Äî like Iceland
in the early Middle Ages. The identification between State and law is but a
special "normative" principle introduced by (public) Roman law, which according
to some, like Maitland, was for this very reason to be treated as the
quintessential ‚Äúlaw of tyranny‚Äù. Inspired by the ‚Äúgeneral will‚Äù, it
should be entitled to enforcement by revolutionary coercion on the will of all.
Later on, during the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, this French
revolutionary principle ‚Äì though not of course its specific way to identify
the ‚Äúgeneral will‚Äù ‚Äì percolated into first Socialist and then Fascist
political thinking. Ethical effects regarding freedom. To most people , the
ethical implications of individual predatory coercion are straightforward. In
recent times, some have attempted to extend a similar ethical judgment to non-
predatory forms of coercion by individuals. Thus, for instance, the Taking
Children Seriously movement has criticised pedagogic coercion by adults,
including parents, on children, holding that it is possible and desirable to
act with a child in such a way that all activities are consensual. The ethical
standing of wider forms of supposedly ‚Äúaltruistic‚Äù specific coercion ‚Äì
like political and thought coercion ‚Äì is however much more controversial,
along lines relating to the assumed relationship between coercion and freedom,
which is often regarded as an ethical value in itself. Negation of freedom. The
Whig-liberal tradition has led to the well-known notion of (negative) freedom
as lack of specific coercion. According to this view, any form of specific
coercion is then unethical in itself as an injury to freedom, quite apart from
its damaging effects on social progress. Indeed, the ethical value of
(negative) freedom is grounded on the idea that conscience cannot be coerced,
and is thus the ultimate standard of morality.
