Colby College Colby College is a private liberal arts college located on
Mayflower Hill in Waterville, Maine. Founded in 1813, it is the 12th-oldest
independent liberal arts college in the United States. Colby was the first all-
male college in New England to accept female students, the first of whom was
Mary Caffrey Low-- valedictorian of the Class of 1875. Approximately 1,800
students from more than 60 countries are enrolled annually. The college offers
54 major fields of study and 30 minors. More than two thirds of Colby students
participate in study abroad programs. Colby College competes in the NESCAC
conference and is one of the "Little Ivies". History. Origins. On February 27,
1813, the Commonwealth of Massachusetts adopted a petition to establish the
Maine Literary and Theological Institution, the 33rd chartered college in the
United States. The petition was led by Baptists who had come to the region for
missionary work, and who wanted to train their own ministers, to end the
reliance on England for providing men of learning. From 1816-1818, the new
institution found a home in Waterville on 179 acres of land donated by
citizens. In 1818, trustees assigned the institution to Rev. Jeremiah Chaplin,
a Baptist theologian. Chaplin arrived in Waterville in the summer of 1818 with
his family and seven students, including George Dana Boardman, the
institution's first graduate. They were put up in a vacant Waterville home, and
in that home the first classes were held. After Maine separated from
Massachusetts in 1820, the first Maine legislature affirmed the Massachusetts
charter for the institution, but made significant changes. Students could no
longer be denied admission based on religion, the institution was prohibited
from applying a religious test when selecting board members, and the trustees
now had the authority to grant degrees. A turning point, the Maine Literary and
Theological Institution was renamed Waterville College on February 5, 1821. In
1822, Elijah Parish Lovejoy, who would become a celebrated martyr to
emancipation and to freedom of the press, graduates as valedictorian. In 1825,
the theological department was discontinued. In 1833, Rev. Rufus Babcock became
Colby's second president, and students form the nation’s first college-based
anti-slavery society. During the Civil War, many young men were called away
from school to join the fight; from Waterville College, Richard C. Shannon,
Henry C. Merriam, and Benjamin Butler. Twenty-seven Waterville College students
perished in the war, and more than 100 men from the town. In the years
following the war, as was the case at many American colleges, Waterville
College was left with few students remaining to pay the bills and a depleted
endowment. Waterville College was on the verge of closing. Colby University. On
August 9th, 1865, a Boston merchant, prominent Baptist philanthropist, and
Maine native Gardner Colby, attended Waterville College's commencement dinner,
and unbeknownst to anyone in attendance except college president James Tift
Champlin, announced a matching $50,000 donation that would allow the college to
remain open. On January 23, 1867, the college was renamed Colby University in
gratitude. Now on solid financial footing and just 16 months after The Battle
of Appomattox Court House, trustees of the college voted to construct a library
and chapel to honor the Colby men who died in the war, making Memorial Hall the
first Civil War memorial erected on a college campus. The building began
construction in the summer of 1867, and dedicated at commencement in 1869. At
commencement in 1871, The Lion of Lucerne, a sculpture by Martin Milmore, was
added as the centerpiece of the building. The lion was brought to Miller
Library from Memorial Hall in January 1962. In the fall of, 1871 Colby
University was the first all-male college in New England to accept female
students. The national Sigma Kappa sorority was founded at Colby in 1874 by the
college's first five female students. One of the buildings is named after the
first woman to attend, Mary Caffrey Low, who was the valedictorian of the Class
of 1875. Colby College. On January 25th, 1889, Colby president Nathaniel
Butler, Jr. '73, having come from the University of Chicago, renamed the
"university" Colby College. In 1920, Colby celebrated its centennial, marking
not the date of the original charter, but the date of its charter from the new
State of Maine in 1820. Mayflower Hill. Franklin W. Johnson was appointed
president of the college in June 1929. Citing a recently released Maine Higher
Education Survey Report, a cramped location between the river and the railroad
tracks, an aging physical plant, and lack of dining facilities for men, amongst
others, Johnson began a campaign to move the college to a more adequate
location. Franklin's campaign to raise funds for the move were complicated by
the Great Depression, but ended up including a gift from the City of Waterville
- in an effort to keep Colby from relocating to Augusta, Waterville deeded on
Mayflower Hill, near the outskirts of the city, to the college. In 1937,
construction broke ground on Lorimer Chapel, the first building on the new
campus Mayflower Hill campus. In 1951, the last class took place on the old
campus in Coburn Hall. In 1984, following an investigation of campus life
commissioned by the Board of Trustees, a decision was made to withdraw
recognition from Colby’s Greek system as it was seen to be "exclusionary by
nature". The day that fraternity and sorority decision was announced happened
to fall on a Sunday and was known as "Bloody Sunday" by many on the campus at
the time. In 2000, William D. Adams, a demonstrated advocate of liberal arts
education, became the President of Colby. Adams initiated strategic plan that
detailed aspirations and directions for the institution, a fundraising effort
for which raised $376 million. Academics. Students choose from courses in 54
major fields and have wide flexibility in designing independent study programs,
electing special majors, and participating in internships and study-abroad
programs. Colby's most popular majors are Government, Economics, and Biology.
Consequently, the three majors are also some of Colby's strongest. The
Economics Department is the 6th most published of any liberal arts school. The
Government Department's faculty are cited in media outlets including the New
York Times and Washington Post, and are called to testify on Capitol Hill on a
regular basis. Colby emphasizes project-based learning, while volunteer
programs and service learning take many students into the surrounding
community. 4–1–4 Calendar. The academic year follows a 4–1–4 with two
four-course semesters plus a Winter Term session in January. The Winter Term,
often called "Jan-plan", allows students to enroll in one intensive course,
pursue independent research, or complete an off-campus internship. The Goldfarb
Center. The Goldfarb Center for Public Affairs and Civic Engagement organizes
Colby's engagement in the local community, the national stage, and throughout
the world. The Goldfarb Center organizes and awards the Elijah Parish Lovejoy
Award annually; it also organizes the The Morton A. Brody Distinguished
Judicial Service Award, the William R. and Linda K. Cotter Debate Series, the
Senator George J. Mitchell Distinguished International Lecture Series, and
Colby's Visiting Fellows Program. The Oak Institute for International Human
Rights at Colby is a Goldfarb Center program. The center also organizes Colby's
civic engagement programs: the Colby Volunteer Center and Colby Cares about
Kids. First Year Experience. In 1975 Colby instituted its first outdoor
orientation trip. The program, which has been expanded to include on-campus
orientation and is called COOT2, now offers 52 trips in the fall semester and
an ICED COOT program for those students who spend the first semester of their
freshman year abroad. Destinations for fall trips include hiking trips at
Acadia National Park, Mount Katahdin, and other locations around Maine; canoe
trips on the Kennebec and Moose Rivers, along with other trips around the
state. The various trips are designed to appeal to incoming students with a
variety of interests and fitness levels and more "front country" trips have
been added in recent years including service- and arts-oriented options. The
primary goals of COOT are to ease new students' transition into college and to
introduce them to the Maine's cultural and natural resources. COOT leaders are
chosen from upperclass students who apply for these positions and are expected
to help the students both during and after the trip with the adjustment to
campus life. Ranking. Together with Bates College and Bowdoin College, Colby is
one of three highly selective liberal arts colleges in Maine. In 2009, Colby
was ranked the 9th best liberal arts college by Kiplinger, ahead of Maine
rivals Bowdoin and Bates, 20th best college/university by Forbes, ranking it
3rd in the NESCAC, and 21st best liberal arts college in the U.S. News & World
Report rankings. Colby was named one of the "25 New Elite Ivies" by the Kaplan
College Guide. Colby was also named one of "25 New Ivies" by Newsweek. Colby
was named to the list of the top ten environmental programs by the 2010 Fiske
Guide and ranked 13th by the Sierra Club rankings of America's coolest schools.
Graduate School Placement. Colby is very successful in its graduate placement
of alumni. In 2005, the Wall Street Journal ranked Colby among the top 50
"feeder schools" of elite graduate institutions. Campus. Colby's 714-acre
campus is situated on Mayflower Hill overlooking the small city of Waterville,
Maine, located along the Kennebec River Valley in Central Maine. Colby's campus
buildings vary in age from the original Mayflower Hill construction in the
1930s, to newest Diamond Building completed in 2007. Most of Colby's buildings
are designed in the Georgian Revival style of the original Mayflower Hill
construction, but recent architectural additions have largely branched out.
Libraries. Colby’s three libraries—Miller Library, the Bixler Art and Music
Library, and the Olin Science Library—have a collection of more than 900,000
books, journals, microfilms, music scores, sound recordings, videos/DVDs, and
manuscripts. They provide access to more than 100 electronic databases and more
than 47,500 electronic journals. Computer labs, wireless networks, laptops,
study areas, and a listening center are available for student use. Colby
College Museum of Art. The Colby College Museum of Art, founded in 1959 with
the building of the Mayflower Hill Campus, is one of the largest art museums in
Maine. Admission is free to the museum, which serves both as a teaching
resource for Colby College and as an active cultural institution for the
residents of Maine and visitors to the state. It is notable for an entire wing
dedicated to works by American painter Alex Katz, a particularly strong
collection of American art, and its major outdoor sculptures by Richard Serra
and Sol LeWitt. The museum is part of the Bixler Art and Music Center, a
building named in honor of President J. Seelye Bixler (1942–1960) in
recognition of his visionary support for the arts at Colby. Housing and Student
Life Facilities. Colby is a residential college and almost all students live on
campus. The dormitories vary in design and age; some are from the original
Mayflower Hill construction, with the newest addition being the Alfond Senior
Apartments. Room arrangements range from singles to quads and apartment suites.
All meals on campus including catered events are served by Colby Dining
Services, which operates 4 dining establishments on Campus plus the Marchese
Blue Light Pub. Cotter Union is the center of student life and programming,
which houses the Pulver Pavilion, Pugh Center for Multicultural Affairs, Page
Commons audtiorium, and the Student Post Office. Mary Low contains the Colby
Outing Club and the Mary Low Coffee House for student performances, Roberts
houses student offices for the Colby Echo and the radio station WMHB. Student
Life. Student Government. Students established the Student Government
Association (SGA) to "enhance the student community." Leadership is by an
elected student SGA President, and includes class presidents, dorm
representatives, a finance chair, and a publicity chair, amongst others. The
SGA has representation on the Colby College Board of Trustees and every all-
college committee; additionally, the SGA represents the official student body
to the Faculty operated College Affairs Council and President's Council. The
SGA distributes funding to all student operated clubs and organizations on
campus. The Pugh Community Board (PCB) and the Student Planning Board (SPB) are
the largest organizations that plan lectures, concerts, and other major student
events. Athletics. The Colby Mules compete in the National Collegiate Athletic
Association (NCAA) Division III New England Small College Athletic Conference,
and the Colby-Bates-Bowdoin Consortium. There are 16 varsity teams for women,
15 for men, and one co-ed team. The official school colors are blue and gray.
Approximately 1/3 of the student population participates in one or more of 32
intercollegiate varsity sports. Colby also offers club sports, and an
intramural sports program called I-Play. Student Programming. In 2003 the
college created a Student Programming Board (SPB) to produce social events on
campus. This student-run organization sponsors multiple programs every week
ranging from dances to special lectures to bingo nights to large-scale live
performances. In the past, SPB has brought such acts as Wiz Khalifa, Jurassic
5, Citizen Cope, Blackalicious, Ben Folds, Ben Kweller, OK Go, Dane Cook, Talib
Kweli, Matisyahu, State Radio, Lupe Fiasco, Blue Scholars, Guster, Common,
Mates of State, CAKE, Bob Marley (comedian) and Naughty By Nature. In addition
to SPBs programming, clubs on campus often put on all-school events.
Publications. Colby's student newspaper, The Colby "Echo", has been published
since 1877. "The Colby Echo" staff currently consists of 20 editors, who are
responsible for assigning and writing articles, overseeing the production
process and maintaining the "Echo’s" online presence. "The Colby Echo"
editors also assign weekly articles to a team of 15 news staff writers. "The
Colby Echo" is published every Wednesday that the College is in session, with
1,300 copies printed each week. Inside Colby is a student publication that
highlights student life by blogs, essays, photos, and videos. WMHB 89.7 FM, is
Colby's non-commercial College radio station, directed, managed, and staffed
entirely by students. It has been on air since March 1949, and broadcasts new
and diverse programming to Waterville, Winslow, Oakland, Fairfield and
surrounding communities, and around the world on the Internet via its webcast.
People. Students. Colby’s 1,800-plus students, evenly divided between men and
women, come from virtually every state and more than 60 countries. Colby
students are listed as 62-percent white, 18-percent unknown race, 14.5-percent
ALANA (Asian American, Latino/a, African American, Native American), and 5.3-
percent international (2009–10). Colby's class of 2014 is the most diverse in
its history, with 24% of its students being ALANA and 7% being international.
Colby's was one of the five original schools to partner with the Shelby Davis
Scholarship program for graduated from the United World Colleges, dramatically
increasing the international student population. Colby also participates in the
Posse Foundation for multicultural scholars. In 2005, Colby was presented the
Senator Paul Simon Award for Campus Internationalization. Notable alumni.
Alumni, now numbering more than 25,000, are represented in all 50 states and 75
foreign countries. Alumni remain engaged with the College through alumni
programs, affinity groups, and a directory and related services online, all
offered by the Office of Alumni Relations. Environmental practices. In the Fall
of 2009, Colby launched "Green Colby" to highlight Colby's environmental
policies (carbon footprint, conservation, student involvement etc.). In this
vein, the school has signed a number of official agreements to reduce its
environmental impact, including the Governor’s Carbon Challenge and the
American College and University Presidents Climate Commitment. All of the
school's electricity comes from renewable sources —hydro and biomass—with
10 percent of campus electricity provided by an on-campus cogeneration turbine.
The college has stated that all new buildings will comply with a minimum LEED
silver standard, and renovated buildings will also include green features. The
dining halls make an effort to purchase local and organic foods, and the
elimination of trays has saved 79,000 gallons of water and 50 tons of food
waste annually. Colby also has an ambitious composting program, which processes
more than 100 tons of food and yard waste annually. On the College
Sustainability Report Card 2009 Colby earned a B; Colby's grade was brought
down by its lack of endowment transparency and shareholder engagement. Alma
mater. Colby's alma mater is "Hail, Colby, Hail". The lyrics to the song were
written by Karl R. Kennison from the class of 1906 and it is sung to the tune
of "O Canada". In 1979, the second line was changed from "thy sons from far and
near" to "thy people far and near."
