Collective responsibility Collective responsibility is a concept or doctrine,
according to which individuals are to be held responsible for other people's
actions by tolerating, ignoring, or harboring them, without actively
collaborating in these actions. In religion. This concept is found in the Old
Testament (or Tanakh), some examples include the account of the Flood, the
Tower of Babel, Sodom and Gomorrah and in some interpretations, the Book of
Joshua's Achan. In those records entire communities were punished on the act of
the vast majority of their members, however it is impossible to state that
there were no innocent people, or children too young to be responsible for
their deeds. The practice of blaming the Jews for Jesus' death is the longest
example of collective responsibility. In this case, the blame was cast not only
on the Jews of the time but upon successive generations. This comes from
Matthew 27:25-66 New International Version (NIV) 25 All the people answered,
“His blood is on us and on our children!” Collective punishment. Collective
responsibility in the form of collective punishment is often used as a
disciplinary measure in closed institutions, e.g. boarding schools (punishing a
whole class for the actions of a single unknown pupil), military units, prisons
(juvenile and adult), psychiatric facilities, etc. The effectiveness and
severeity of this measure may vary greatly, but it often breeds distrust and
isolation among their members, and is almost always a sign of authoritarian
tendencies in the institution or its home society. For example, in the Soviet
Gulags, all members of a "brigada" (work unit) were punished for bad
performance of any of its members. Collective punishment is also practiced in
situation of war, economic sanctions, etc., presupposing the existence of
collective guilt. Collective guilt, or guilt by association, is the
controversial collectivist idea that groups of humans can bear guilt above and
beyond the guilt of individual members, and hence an individual holds
responsibility for what other members of their group have done, even if they
themselves didn't do this. Contemporary systems of criminal law accept the
principle that guilt shall only be personal. Others view groups as being
entities in themselves (an entitative group), capable of holding guilt or
responsibility independent of any of the group's members. The mass shootings of
Nicholas II's family in 1918 may be regarded as an example of such an approach.
Another example is when ethnic Germans in Central and Eastern Europe were held
collectively responsible for Nazi crimes, resulting in numerous atrocities
against the German population, including killings (see Expulsion of Germans
after World War II and Beneš decrees). In business. As the business practices
known as Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR) and sustainability mature and
converge with the responsibilities of governments and citizens, the term
"collective responsibility" is beginning to be more widely used. Collective
responsibility is widely applied in corporations, where the entire workforce is
held responsible for failure to achieve corporate targets (for example, profit
targets), irrespective of the performance of individuals or teams which may
have achieved or overachieved within their area. Collective punishment, even
including measures that actually further harm the prospect of achieving
targets, is applied as a measure to 'teach' the workforce. Where corporate
targets are achieved, however, rewards are carefully targeted to those
perceived by management to have contributed, often disproportionately
concentrated at senior management levels. The impact on morale of this practice
is commonly ignored as it is not measurable on balance sheets. In culture. The
concept of collective responsibility is present in literature, most notably in
Samuel Taylor Coleridge's "The Rime of the Ancient Mariner", a poem telling the
tale of a ship's crew who died of thirst because they approved of one crew
member's killing of an albatross. 1959's "Ben-Hur" and 1983's prison drama "Bad
Boys" depict collective responsibility and punishment.
