Collective action Collective action is traditionally defined as any action
aiming to improve the group’s conditions (such as status or power), which is
enacted by a representative of the group. It is a term that has formulations
and theories in many areas of the social sciences including psychology,
sociology, political science and economics. In social psychology. Social
Identity Model of Collection Action. Researchers Martijn van Zomeren, Tom
Postmes, and Russell Spears conducted a meta-analysis of over 180 studies of
collective action, in an attempt to integrate three dominant socio-
psychological perspectives explaining antecedent conditions to this phenomenon
– injustice, efficacy, and identity. In their resultant 2008 review article,
an integrative Social Identity Model of Collective Action (SIMCA) was proposed
which accounts for interrelationships among the three predictors as well as
their predictive capacities for collective action. An important assumption of
this approach is that people tend to respond to subjective states of
disadvantage, which may or may not flow from objective physical and social
reality. Perceived injustice. Examining collective action through perceived
injustice was initially guided by relative deprivation theory (RDT). RDT
focuses on a subjective state of unjust disadvantage, proposing that engaging
in fraternal (group-based) social comparisons with others may result in
feelings of relative deprivation that foster collective action. Group-based
emotions resulting from perceived injustice, such as anger, are thought to
motivate collective action in an attempt to rectify the state of unfair
deprivation. Meta-analysis results confirm that effects of injustice causally
predict collective action, highlighting the theoretical importance of this
variable. Perceived efficacy. Moving beyond RDT, scholars suggested that in
addition to a sense of injustice, people must also have the objective,
structural resources necessary to mobilize change through social protest. An
important psychological development saw this research instead directed towards
subjective expectations and beliefs that unified effort (collective action) is
a viable option for achieving group-based goals – this is referred to as
perceived collective efficacy. Empirically, collective efficacy is shown to
causally affect collective action among a number of populations across varied
contexts. Social identity. Social Identity Theory (SIT) suggests that people
strive to achieve and maintain positive social identities associated with their
group memberships. Where a group membership is disadvantaged (for example, low
status), SIT implicates three variables in the evocation of collective action
to improve conditions for the group – permeability of group boundaries,
legitimacy of the intergroup structures, and the stability of these
relationships. For example, when disadvantaged groups perceive intergroup
status relationships as illegitimate and unstable, collective action is
predicted to occur, in an attempt to change status structures for the
betterment of the disadvantaged group. Meta-analysis results also confirm that
social identity causally predicts collective action across a number of diverse
contexts. Additionally, the integrated SIMCA affords another important role to
social identity – that of a psychological bridge forming the collective base
from which both collective efficacy and group injustice may be conceived. Model
refinement. While there is sound empirical support for the causal importance of
SIMCA’s key theoretical variables on collective action, more recent
literature has addressed the issue of reverse causation, finding support for a
related, yet distinct, encapsulation model of social identity in collective
action (EMSICA). This model suggests that perceived group efficacy and
perceived injustice provide the basis from which social identity emerges,
highlighting an alternative causal pathway to collective action. Recent
research has sought to integrate SIMCA with intergroup contact theory (see
Cakal, Hewstone, Schwär, & Heath) and others have extended SIMCA through
bridging morality research with the collective action literature (see van
Zomeren, Postmes, & Spears for a review). In sociology. As an explanation of
social movements, an inquiry into collective action involves examining those
factors that cause the setting of standards of social integration, as well as
those factors which lead to standards of deviance and conflict. An explanation
of a collective action in sociology will involve the explanation of those
things which are similar or dissimilar to collective actions at different times
and in different places. Theories of collective action emphasise how group
behavior can, in some sense, be linked to social institutions. In political
science and economics. The economic theory of collective action is concerned
with the provision of public goods (and other collective consumption) through
the collaboration of two or more individuals, and the impact of externalities
on group behavior. It is more commonly referred to as Public Choice. Mancur
Olson's 1965 book "The Logic of Collective Action: Public Goods and the Theory
of Groups," is an important early analysis of the problems of public good cost.
Besides economics, the theory has found many applications in political science,
sociology, communication, anthropology and environmentalism. Collective action
problem. The term "collective action problem" describes the situation in which
multiple individuals would all benefit from a certain action, but has an
associated cost making it implausible that any one individual can or will
undertake and solve it alone. The rational choice is then to undertake this as
a collective action the cost of which is shared. Exploitation of the great by
the small. Mancur Olson made the highly controversial claim that individual
rational choice leads to situations where individuals with more resources will
carry a higher burden in the provision of the public good than poorer ones.
Poorer individuals will usually have little choice but to opt for the free
rider strategy, i.e. they will attempt to benefit from the public good without
contributing to its provision. This may also encourage the under-production
(inefficient production) of the public good. Institutional design. Joint
products. A joint-product model analyzes the collaborative effect of joining a
private good to a public good. For example, a tax deduction (private good) can
be tied to a donation to a charity (public good). It can be shown that the
provision of the public good increases when tied to the private good, as long
as the private good is provided by a monopoly (otherwise the private good would
be provided by competitors without the link to the public good). Clubs. Some
institutional design, e.g. intellectual property rights, can introduce an
exclusion mechanism and turn a pure public good into an impure public good
artificially. If the costs of the exclusion mechanism are not higher than the
gain from the collaboration, clubs can emerge. James M. Buchanan showed in his
seminal paper that clubs can be an efficient alternative to government
interventions. A nation can be seen as a club whose members are its citizens.
Government would then be the manager of this club. Federated structure. In some
cases, theory shows that collaboration emerges spontaneously in smaller groups
rather than in large ones (see e.g. Dunbar's number). This explains why labor
unions or charities often have a federated structure. In philosophy. Over the
past twenty years or so analytic philosophers have been exploring the nature of
collective action in the sense of acting together, as when people paint a house
together, go for a walk together, or together execute a pass play. These
particular examples have been central for three of the philosophers who have
made well known contributions to this literature: Michael Bratman, Margaret
Gilbert, and John Searle, respectively. In and subsequent articles and book
chapters including Gilbert (2006, chapter 7) Gilbert argues for an account of
collective action according to which this rests on a special kind of
interpersonal commitment, what Gilbert calls a "joint commitment". A joint
commitment in Gilbert's sense is not a matter of a set of personal commitments
independently created by each of the participants, as when each makes a
personal decision to do something. Rather, it is a single commitment to whose
creation each participant makes a contribution. Thus suppose that one person
says "Shall we go for a walk?" and the other says "Yes, let's". Gilbert
proposes that as a result of this exchange the parties are jointly committed to
go for a walk, and thereby obligated to one another to act as if they were
parts of a single person taking a walk. Joint commitments can be created less
explicitly and through processes that are more extended in time. One merit of a
joint commitment account of collective action, in Gilbert's view, is that it
explains the fact that those who are out on a walk together, for instance,
understand that each of them is in a position to demand corrective action of
the other if he or she acts in ways that affect negatively the completion of
their walk. In she discusses the pertinence of joint commitment to collective
actions in the sense of the theory of rational choice. In Searle (1990) Searle
argues that what lies at the heart of a collective action is the presence in
the mind of each participant of a "we-intention". Searle does not give an
account of we-intentions or, as he also puts it, "collective intentionality",
but insists that they are distinct from the "I-intentions" that animate the
actions of persons acting alone. In Bratman (1993) Bratman proposed that,
roughly, two people "share an intention" to paint a house together when each
intends that the house is painted by virtue of the activity of each, and also
intends that it is so painted by virtue of the intention of each that it is so
painted. That these conditions obtain must also be "common knowledge" between
the participants. Discussion in this area continues to expand, and has
influenced discussions in other disciplines including anthropology,
developmental psychology, and economics. One general question is whether it is
necessary to think in terms that go beyond the personal intentions of
individual human beings properly to characterize what it is to act together.
Bratman's account does not go beyond such personal intentions. Gilbert's
account, with its invocation of joint commitment, does go beyond them. Searle's
account does also, with its invocation of collective intentionality. The
question of whether and how one must account for the existence of mutual
obligations when there is a collective intention is another of the issues in
this area of inquiry. Collective action as a response to climate change.
Climate change has been described by the Stern Review as a problem to be solved
by international cooperation. It stated that 'no two countries will face
exactly the same situation in terms of impacts or the costs and benefits of
action, and no country can take effective action to control the risks that they
face alone. International collective action to tackle the problem is required
because climate... is a global public good — and because co-operative action
will greatly reduce the costs of both mitigation and adaption. The
international collective response to the climate change problem required is
therefore unique, both in terms of its complexity and depth'. International
collective action has been shown to be more likely to succeed where there is
mutual self-interest, when it is in response to a shared threat, and where
there is leadership by a dominant country. FLOSS development as collective
action including private actors. The development of Free and Libre Open Source
Software FLOSS is an example of collective action where individuals create a
public good: the source code freely available to everyone. The uniqueness is
that not only individuals contribute to the common good but also private firms
invest into the production of the freely available knowledge. Therefore this
phenomenon is called private-collective innovation.
