Collusion Collusion is an agreement between two or more persons, sometimes
illegal and therefore secretive, to limit open competition by deceiving,
misleading, or defrauding others of their legal rights, or to obtain an
objective forbidden by law typically by defrauding or gaining an unfair
advantage. It is an agreement among firms to divide the market, set prices, or
limit production. It can involve "wage fixing, kickbacks, or misrepresenting
the independence of the relationship between the colluding parties". In legal
terms, all acts affected by collusion are considered void. Definition. In the
study of economics and market competition, collusion takes place within an
industry when rival companies cooperate for their mutual benefit. Collusion
most often takes place within the market structure of oligopoly, where the
decision of a few firms to collude can significantly impact the market as a
whole. Cartels are a special case of explicit collusion. Collusion which is not
overt, on the other hand, is known as tacit collusion. Variations. According to
neoclassical price-determination theory and game theory, the independence of
suppliers forces prices to their minimum, increasing efficiency and decreasing
the price determining ability of each individual firm. However, if firms
collude to all increase prices, loss of sales is minimized, as consumers lack
alternative choices at lower prices. This benefits the colluding firms at the
cost of efficiency to society. One variation of this traditional theory is the
theory of kinked demand. Firms face a kinked demand curve if, when one firm
decreases its price, other firms will follow suit in order to maintain sales,
and when one firm increases its price, its rivals are unlikely to follow, as
they would lose the sales' gains that they would otherwise get by holding
prices at the previous level. Kinked demand potentially fosters supra-
competitive prices because any one firm would receive a reduced benefit from
cutting price, as opposed to the benefits accruing under neoclassical theory
and certain game theoretic models such as Bertrand competition.
