Collectivism Collectivism is any philosophic, political, religious, economic,
or social outlook that emphasizes the interdependence of every human being.
Collectivism is a basic cultural element that exists as the reverse of
individualism in human nature (in the same way high context culture exists as
the reverse of low context culture), and stresses the priority of group goals
over individual goals and the importance of cohesion within social groups (such
as an "in-group", in what specific context it is defined). Collectivists
usually focus on community, society, or nation. It is used and has been used as
an element in many different and diverse types of government and political,
economic and educational philosophies throughout history and most human
societies, in practice, contain elements of both individualism and
collectivism. Some examples of Collectivist Democracies are Portugal, India,
and Japan. Collectivism can be divided into horizontal collectivism and
vertical collectivism. Horizontal collectivism stresses collective decision-
making among relatively-equal individuals, and is thus usually based on
decentralization. Vertical collectivism is based on hierarchical structures of
power and on moral and cultural conformity, and is therefore based on
centralization. A cooperative enterprise would be an example of horizontal
collectivism, whereas monarchy would be an example of vertical collectivism. In
political economy, horizontal-collectivism is often associated with the
economic theories of socialism, which call for some form of co-operative or
collective ownership of the means of production and collective decision-making
or worker's self-management within economic enterprises. Corporatism refers to
a form of collectivism that views the whole as being greater than the sum of
its individual parts, and gives priority to group rights over individual
rights. Typology. Collectivism has been used to refer to a diverse range of
political and economic positions, including democracy, totalitarian
nationalism, monarchy and communism. In modern times, collectivism is sometimes
thought to be synonymous with socialism or specifically Leninism for its
emphasis on a hierarchical Vanguard party organization, though collectivism
more accurately simply means "group oriented" or "group orientation". Politics.
According to Moyra Grant, in political philosophy "collectivism" refers to any
philosophy or system that puts any kind of group (such as a class, nation,
race, society, state, etc.) before the individual. According to Encyclopædia
Britannica, "collectivism has found varying degrees of expression in the 20th
century in such movements as socialism, communism, and fascism. The least
collectivist of these is social democracy, which seeks to reduce the perceived
injustices of unrestrained capitalism by government regulation, redistribution
of income, and varying degrees of planning and public ownership. Historically,
in Socialist systems collectivist economics were carried to their furthest
extreme, with a minimum of private ownership and a maximum of planned economy."
However, political collectivism is not necessarily associated with support for
states, governments, or other hierarchical institutions. There are variants of
anarchism, such as collectivist anarchism and anarcho-communism, which are
collectivist. Collectivist anarchists, particularly Mikhail Bakunin, were among
the earliest critics of authoritarian communism. They agree with communists
that the means of production should be expropriated from private owners and
converted to common property, but they advocate the ownership of this property
to be vested by a loose group of decentralized communes rather than to be held
in common by all of society. Nevertheless, unlike anarcho-communists,
collectivist anarchists supported a wage system and markets in non-capital
goods. Thus, Bakunin's "Collectivist Anarchism", notwithstanding the title, is
seen as a blend of individualism and collectivism. Anarcho-communism is a more
comprehensive form of collectivism which advocates not only the
collectivization of the means of production but of the products of labor as
well. According to anarcho-communist Peter Kropotkin, "And as long as dwelling-
houses, fields, and factories belong to isolated owners, men will have to pay
them, in one way or another, for being allowed to work in the fields or
factories, or for living in the houses. The owners will accept to be paid by
the workers in gold, in paper-money, or in cheques exchangeable for all sorts
of commodities. But how can we defend labour-notes, this new form of wagedom,
when we admit that houses, fields, and factories will no longer be private
property, and that they will belong to the commune or the nation?" Economics.
Leroy-Beaulieu says that Albert Schäffle gave the first definition to the
phrase "collectivisim". Collectivism, for them both, is a kind of communism in
which quotas are set on quality in addition to those set on quantity. (())
Generally speaking, economic collectivism can refer to two distinct concepts:
that property (usually in reference to productive property) be owned by all of
society in common, or that possessions be owned by collective groups that use
the property. The first concept is related to Communism, communalism and some
forms of socialism, while the latter concept is related to forms of socialism
based on independent cooperative organizations such as Syndicalism, Guild
socialism, libertarian socialism and market socialism. Additionally, capitalist
systems that largely consist of either cooperative or corporate ownership
structures, with ownership being vested in collective entities of legal owners
rather than the producers/users of the property, can be characterized as being
collectivist to some degree. Collectivism in the field of economics holds that
some things should be owned by all of society and used for the benefit of all
rather than being owned by just individuals or private parties. Central to this
view is the concept of the commons, as opposed to private property. Early
economic systems such as communalism and tribal societies practiced this form
of collectivism. Collectivism can also apply to public ownership over the means
of production, while others argue that all valued commodities, like
environmental or consumer goods, should be regarded as public goods and placed
under public ownership. In health care, collective action by trade unions and
other professional bodies throughout Europe in the early twentieth century
established mutual sickness funds and contracts with doctors and hospitals
enabling workers to be assured of access to health care and sometimes sick pay
collectively funded by all the members of the trade union or profession. The
Italian Federation considers the collective property of the products of labour
as the necessary complement to the collectivist programme, the aid of all for
the satisfaction of the needs of each being the only rule of production and
consumption which corresponds to the principle of solidarity. Anarcho-communist
Peter Kropotkin believed that a lack of collectivization of goods would be a
dis-service to individuals. Typology. Collectivism can be typified as
"horizontal collectivism", wherein equality is emphasized and people engage in
sharing and cooperation, or "vertical collectivism", wherein hierarchy is
emphasized and people submit to authorities to the point of self-sacrifice.
Horizontal collectivism is based on the assumption that each individual is more
or less equal, while vertical collectivism assumes that individuals are
fundamentally different from each other. Social anarchist Alexander Berkman,
who was a horizontal collectivist, argued that equality does not imply a lack
of unique individuality, but an equal amount of freedom and equal opportunity
to develop one's own skills and talents, Indeed, horizontal collectivists argue
that the idea of individuals sacrificing themselves for the "group" or "greater
good" is nonsensical, arguing that groups are made up of individuals (including
oneself) and are not a cohesive, monolithic entity separate from the self. But
most social anarchists do not see themselves as collectivists or
individualists, viewing both as illusory ideologies based on fiction .
Horizontal collectivists tend to favour democratic decision-making, while
vertical collectivists believe in a strict chain of command. Horizontal
collectivism stresses common goals, interdependence and sociability. Vertical
collectivism stresses the integrity of the in-group (e.g. the family or the
nation), expects individuals to sacrifice themselves for the in-group if
necessary, and promotes competition between different in-groups. Collectivist
societies. There are few examples of societies around the world which have
characterized themselves or have been characterized by outsiders as
"collectivist". On the one hand, at the country scale, there are the Communist
states, which have often collectivized work activities. If these states
practice agricultural collectivism, they are often called Communist states. On
the other hand, at the community scale, there are Israeli kibbutzim (voluntary
communes where people live and farm together without private ownership), the
Federation of Egalitarian Communities (non-hierarchical income-sharing
intentional communities), and communities such as the Freetown Christiania in
Denmark (a small anarchist political experiment centered on an abandoned
military installation in Copenhagen; Christiania has laws abolishing private
property). Another type is fascism which emphasizes certain ideologies such as
nationalism and patriotism which can be considered reactionary forms of
collectivism, as they emphasize the role of the nation or the state over
individuals. Fascists and Nazis also supported class collaboration which was a
reactionary form of collectivism related to nationalism but opposed to
socialist forms of collectivism such as workplace democracy. However, Fascism
and Nazism also ascribe to Social Darwinism, which is an anti-collectivist
reactionary form of individualism. Harry Triandis and Michele Gelfand argue
that horizontal collectivist societies are those based on communal living, such
as Israeli kibbutzim, while vertical collectivist societies are for example
Stalinist and fascist countries or traditional communities with strong
patriarchal leaders; vertical collectivism also correlates with Right-wing
Authoritarianism. Democracy, with its emphasis on notions of social contract
and the collective agreement and self-determination of the people can be seen
as a form of collectivism. Democracy is defined as a form of government in
which all adult citizens have a say in the decisions that affect their lives.
But if democracy is characterized by individuals having a say in decisions that
affect their lives, then democracy is also a form of individualism. If one's
'say in a decision that affect's one's life' is to have any ruling weight at
all, then democracies require the protection of individual freedoms and rights.
To consent or participate in a democracy, one must have certain individual
liberties and rights including, e.g., freedom of speech and information,
freedom to assemble and form groups, freedom to petition against others and
against legislation--and along with these, freedom from persecution,
presumption of guilt, unwarranted arrest, and the right to equal and fair
treatment under democratically determined law. Since democracy, as rule of the
people ("demos"), derives the authority of governance and determination of law
from the people (from the bottom-up as opposed to top-down authoritarian rule)
by every person having an equal say in the ruling of the whole, this requires
free and fair elections and that the power to legislate and repeal laws remain
ultimately in the hands of the people and not with the central power or
particularly powerful individuals. Criticisms. Classical liberal criticisms.
There are two main objections to collectivism from the ideas of liberal
individualism. One is that collectivism stifles individuality and diversity by
insisting upon a common social identity, such as nationalism, racialism, or
some other group focus. The other is that collectivism is linked to statism and
the diminution of freedom when political authority is used to advance
collectivist goals. Criticism of collectivism comes from liberal
individualists, such as classical liberals, libertarians and individualist
anarchists. Perhaps the most notable modern criticism of economic collectivism
is the one put forward by Friedrich Hayek in his book "The Road to Serfdom",
published in 1944. The Fallacy of Collectivism Socialist criticisms. Many
socialists, particularly Libertarian socialists, democratic socialists,
individualist anarchists, and Marxists criticise the concept of collectivism.
Some anti-collectivists often argue that all authoritarian and totalitarian
societies are (vertically) collectivist in nature. Socialists argue that modern
capitalism and private property, which is based on socialized production and
joint-stock or corporate ownership structures, is a form of organic
collectivism that sharply contrasts with the utopian picture of capitalism
painted by its proponents as a system of free individuals exchanging
commodities. Socialists argue that true individualism can only exist when
individuals are free from coercive social structures to pursue their own
interests, which can only be accomplished by common ownership of socialized,
productive assets and free access to the means of life so that no individual
has coercive power over other individuals. George Orwell, a dedicated
democratic socialist, believed that collectivism resulted in the empowerment of
a minority of individuals that led to further oppression of the majority of the
population in the name of some ideal such as freedom. George Orwell, review of
"The Road to Serfdom" (1944) ... that a return to 'free' competition means for
the great mass of people a tyranny probably worse, because more irresponsible,
than that of the state. Red Emma Speaks, p. 112 and 443 In response to
criticism made by various pro-capitalist groups that claim that public
ownership or common ownership of the means of production is a form of
collectivism, socialists maintain that common ownership over productive assets
does not infringe upon the individual, but is instead a liberating force that
transcends the false dichotomy of individualism and collectivism. Socialists
maintain that these critiques conflate the concept of private property in the
means of production with personal possessions and individual production. Other
criticisms. Ayn Rand, creator of the philosophy of Objectivism and a
particularly vocal opponent of collectivism, argued that it led to
totalitarianism. She argued that "collectivism means the subjugation of the
individual to a group," and that "throughout history, no tyrant ever rose to
power except on the claim of representing "the common good"." She further
claimed that "horrors which no man would dare consider for his own selfish sake
are perpetrated with a clear conscience by "altruists" who justify themselves
by the common good." (The "altruists" Rand refers to are not those who practice
simple benevolence or charity, but rather those who believe in Auguste Comte's
ethical doctrine of altruism which holds that there is "a moral and political
obligation of the individual to sacrifice his own interests for the sake of a
greater social good.").
