College of William & Mary The College of William & Mary in Virginia (also known
as The College, William & Mary, or W&M) is a public research university located
in Williamsburg, Virginia, United States. Privately founded in 1693 by letters
patent issued by King William III and Queen Mary II, it is the second-oldest
institution of higher education in the United States after Harvard University.
William & Mary educated U.S. Presidents Thomas Jefferson, James Monroe, and
John Tyler as well as other key figures important to the development of the
nation, including U.S. Supreme Court Chief Justice John Marshall, Speaker of
the House Henry Clay, and 16 signers of the Declaration of Independence. W&M
founded the Phi Beta Kappa academic honor society in 1776 and was the first
school of higher education in the United States to install an honor code of
conduct for students. The establishment of graduate programs in law and
medicine in 1779 make it one of the first universities in the United States. In
addition to its undergraduate program (which includes a joint degree program
with the University of St. Andrews and a joint engineering program with
Columbia University), W&M is home to several graduate and professional schools,
including law, business, public policy, education, marine science and colonial
history. History. Colonial era: 1693‚Äì1776. A school of higher education for
both Native American young men and the sons of the colonists was one of the
earliest goals of the leaders of the Virginia Colony. The College was founded
on February 8, 1693, under a royal charter (legally, letters patent) to ""make,
found and establish a certain Place of Universal Study, a perpetual College of
Divinity, Philosophy, Languages, and other good arts and sciences...to be
supported and maintained, in all time coming."" Named in honor of the reigning
monarchs King William III and Queen Mary II, the College is the second oldest
college in America. The original plans for the College date back to 1618,
decades before Harvard. In 1695 before the town of Williamsburg existed,
construction began on the Sir Christopher Wren Building, then known only as the
College Building, and is the oldest college building in America. The College is
one of the country's nine Colonial Colleges founded before the American
Revolution. The Charter named James Blair as the College's first president (a
lifetime appointment which he held until his death in 1743). William & Mary was
founded as an Anglican institution; were required to be members of the Church
of England, and professors were required to declare adherence to the Thirty-
Nine Articles. The school's charter called for a center of higher education
consisting of three schools. The Philosophy School instructed students in the
advanced study of moral philosophy (logic, rhetoric, ethics) as well as natural
philosophy (physics, metaphysics, and mathematics); upon completion of this
coursework, the Divinity School prepared these young men for ordination in the
Church of England. This curriculum made William & Mary the first American
college with a full faculty. In 1693, the College was given a seat in the House
of Burgesses and it was determined that the College would be supported by
tobacco taxes and export duties on furs and animal skins. The College acquired
a parcel for the new school, from Jamestown. In 1694, the new school opened in
temporary buildings. Williamsburg was granted a royal charter as a city in 1722
and served as the capital of Colonial Virginia from 1699 to 1780. During this
time, the College served as a law center and lawmakers frequently used its
buildings. It educated future U.S. Presidents Thomas Jefferson, James Monroe,
and John Tyler. The College has been called ‚Äúthe Alma Mater of a Nation‚Äù
because of its close ties to America‚Äôs founding fathers. A 17-year-old George
Washington received his surveyor's license through the College and would return
as its first American chancellor. William & Mary is famous for its firsts: the
first U.S. institution with a Royal Charter, the first Greek-letter society
(Phi Beta Kappa, founded in 1776), the first student honor code and the first
law school in America. The College became a state-supported school in 1906 and
went coed in 1918. In 1928, John D. Rockefeller, Jr. chose the Wren as the
first building to be returned to its 18th-century appearance as part of the
iconic Colonial Williamsburg restoration. Revolution and transition. During the
period of the American Revolution, freedom of religion was established in
Virginia and the separation of church and state achieved, notably with the 1786
passage of the Virginia Statute for Religious Freedom. Future U.S. President
James Madison was a key figure in the transition to religious freedom in
Virginia, and Right Reverend James Madison, his cousin and Thomas Jefferson,
who was on the Board of Visitors, helped The College of William & Mary to make
the transition as well. The college became the first American university with
the establishment of the graduate schools in law and medicine. As its
President, Reverend Madison worked with the new leaders of Virginia, most
notably Jefferson, on a reorganization and changes for the College which
included the abolition of the Divinity School and the Indian School and the
establishment of the first elective system of study and honor system. The
College of William and Mary is home to the nation's first collegiate secret
society, the F.H.C. Society, founded November 11, 1750. On December 5, 1776,
students John Heath and William Short (Class of 1779) founded Phi Beta Kappa as
a secret literary and philosophical society. Other secret societies known to
currently exist at the College include: The 7 Society, 13 Club, Alpha Club,
Bishop James Madison Society, Flat Hat Club, The Society, The Spades, W
Society, and Wren Society. In 1842, alumni of the College formed the Society of
the Alumni which is now the sixth oldest alumni organization in the United
States. In 1859, a great fire caused destruction to the College. The Alumni
House is one of the few original antebellum structures remaining on campus;
notable others include the Wren Building, the President's House, and the
Brafferton. Civil War, Reconstruction, and the early 20th century. At the
outset of the American Civil War (1861‚Äì1865), enlistments in the Confederate
Army depleted the student body and on May 10, 1861, the faculty voted to close
the College for the duration of the conflict. The College Building was used as
a Confederate barracks and later as a hospital, first by Confederate, and later
Union forces. The Battle of Williamsburg was fought nearby during the Peninsula
Campaign on May 5, 1862, and the city fell to the Union the next day. The
Brafferton building of the College was used for a time as quarters for the
commanding officer of the Union garrison occupying the town. On September 9,
1862, drunken soldiers of the 5th Pennsylvania Cavalry set fire to the College
Building, purportedly in an attempt to prevent Confederate snipers from using
it for cover. Much damage was done to the community during the Union
occupation, which lasted until September 1865. Following restoration of the
Union, Virginia was destitute from the War. The College's 16th president,
Benjamin Stoddert Ewell, finally reopened the school in 1869 using his personal
funds but the College closed in 1882 due to lack of funds. In 1888, William &
Mary resumed operations under a substitute charter when the Commonwealth of
Virginia passed an act appropriating $10,000 to support the College as a state
teacher-training institution. Lyon Gardiner Tyler (son of US President and
alumnus John Tyler) became the 17th president of the College following
President Ewell's retirement. Tyler, along with 18th president J.A.C. Chandler,
expanded the College into a modern institution. In March 1906, the General
Assembly passed an act taking over the grounds of the colonial institution, and
it has remained publicly supported ever since. In 1918, William & Mary preceded
the University of Virginia to be one of the first universities in Virginia to
admit women and become coeducational. [http://www2.lib.virginia.edu/exhibits/
women/grad_prof1.html] During this time, enrollment increased from 104 students
in 1889 to 1269 students by 1932. Largely thanks to the vision of a William and
Mary instructor, Reverend Dr. W.A.R. Goodwin, the Sir Christopher Wren
Building, the President's House and the Brafferton (the President's office)
were restored to their 18th century appearance between 1928 and 1932 with
substantial financial support from John D. Rockefeller, Jr. and his wife, Abby
Aldrich Rockefeller. Together, they led the establishment and beginnings of
Colonial Williamsburg. 1930‚Äìpresent. In 1930, William & Mary expanded its
territorial range by establishing a branch in Norfolk, Virginia. This extension
would eventually become the independent state-supported institution known as
Old Dominion University. Significant campus construction continued under the
College's nineteenth president, John Stewart Bryan. President Franklin D.
Roosevelt received an honorary degree from the College on October 20, 1934.
[http://select.nytimes.com/gst/
abstract.html?res=F10917FF3B5D167A93C3AB178BD95F408385F9&scp=3&sq=william%20and%20mary&st=cse]
In 1935, the Sunken Garden was constructed, just west of the Wren Building. The
sunken design is taken from a similar landscape feature at Chelsea Hospital in
London, designed by Sir Christopher Wren. The College has a history of
supporting freedom of the press dating back at least to the 1940s. In 1945, for
example, the College administration sanctioned the student Marilyn Kaemmerle
for an article she had written in The Flat Hat supporting the end of racist
policies of segregation, anti-miscegenation and white supremacy. According to
Time Magazine, in response, over one-thousand William & Mary students held "a
spirited mass meeting protesting infringement of the sacred principles of
freedom of the press bequeathed by Alumnus Thomas Jefferson." She was pardoned
by the college Board of Visitors decades later. In 1960, the Colleges of
William & Mary, a short-lived five campus university system, was founded. It
included the College of William & Mary, the Richmond Professional Institute,
the Norfolk Division of the College of William & Mary, Christopher Newport
College, and Richard Bland College. It was dissolved in 1962. In 1974, Jay
Winston Johns willed Ash Lawn-Highland, the historic Albemarle County, Virginia
estate of alumnus and U.S. President James Monroe, to the College. The College
restored this historic presidential home near Charlottesville and opened it to
the public. Campus. The College is located on a campus in Williamsburg,
Virginia. The Sir Christopher Wren Building is both the oldest college building
in the United States and a National Historic Landmark. The building,
colloquially referred to as the "Wren Building", was so named upon its
renovation in 1931 to honor the English architect Sir Christopher Wren. The
basis for the 1930s name is a 1724 history in which Hugh Jones stated that the
1699 design was "first modelled by Sir Christopher Wren" and then was adapted
"by the Gentlemen there" in Virginia; little is known about how it looked,
since it burned within a few years of its completion. Today's Wren Building is
based on the design of its 1716 replacement. The College's Alumni Association
recently published an article suggesting that Wren's connection to the 1931
building is a viable subject of investigation. A follow-up letter clarified the
apocryphal nature of the Wren connection. Two other buildings around the Wren
Building complete a triangle known as "Ancient Campus": the Brafferton (built
in 1723 and originally housing the Indian School, now the President and
Provost's offices) and the President's House (built in 1732). In addition to
the "Ancient Campus," which dates to the 18th century, the College also
consists of "Old Campus" and "New Campus." "Old Campus" consists of academic
buildings and dormitories built in close proximity to the Wren Building and
match the Georgian and Anglo-Dutch architecture of the colonial buildings of
"Ancient Campus" and Colonial Williamsburg. Located directly to the west of the
Wren Building, the majority of "Old Campus" was constructed during the 1920s
and 1930s and is dominated by the Sunken Gardens and the College's football
stadium, Zable Stadium. Also located within "Old Campus" are Sorority Court,
the majority of upperclassmen dormitories, and the offices and classrooms of
the History, Philosophy, Religion, Music, Modern Language, and English
Departments. Adjoining "Old Campus" to the north and west is "New Campus." It
was constructed primarily between 1950 and 1980, and it consists of academic
buildings and dormitories that, while of the same brick construction as "Old
Campus," fit into the vernacular of modern architecture. Beginning with the
College's tercentenary in 1993, the College has embarked on a building and
renovation program that favors the traditional architectural style of "Old
Campus," while incorporating energy-efficient technologies. Several buildings
constructed since the 1990s have been LEED certified. Additionally, as the
buildings of "New Campus" are renovated after decades of use, several have been
remodeled to incorporate more traditional architectural elements in an effort
to unify the appearance of the entire College campus. "New Campus" is dominated
by William and Mary Hall, Earl Gregg Swem Library, and Phi Beta Kappa Memorial
Hall. It also includes the offices and classrooms of the Mathematics, Physics,
Psychology, Biology, and Chemistry Departments, the majority of freshman
dormitories, the fraternity complex, and the majority of the College's athletic
fields. The newest addition to "New Campus" is Alan B. Miller Hall, the
headquarters of the College's Mason School of Business. The recent wave of
construction at William and Mary has resulted in a new building for the School
of Education, located not far from William and Mary Hall. Additionally, new
facilities have freed up space in existing structures. The offices and
classrooms of the Government, Economics, and Classical Language Departments,
which currently share a building on "New Campus," could potentially be
separated and some relocated to vacant buildings awaiting renovation within the
"Old Campus." The vast majority of William and Mary's consists of woodlands and
Lake Matoaka, an artificial lake. The College has shown a dedication to the
stewardship and preservation of these natural elements, which are accessible
via the trails running throughout the campus. The College also has property and
buildings not contiguous to campus, including the William and Mary School of
Law and the McCormack-Nagelsen Tennis Center, both located on a piece of
property approximately four blocks southeast of the Wren Building.
Additionally, approximately a mile northwest of "New Campus" is the Dillard
Complex (located across from the modern campus of Virginia's Eastern State
Hospital), which is home to several offices, two former dormitories, and
Plumeri Park, the College's baseball stadium. Organization and administration.
The Board of Visitors is a corporation established by the General Assembly of
Virginia to govern and supervise the operation of the College of William & Mary
and of Richard Bland College. The corporation is composed of 17 members
appointed by the Governor of Virginia, based upon on the recommendations made
by the Society of the Alumni, to a maximum of two-successive four-year terms.
The Board elects a Rector, Vice Rector, and Secretary and the Board meets four
times annually. The Board is responsible for appointing a president, related
administrative officers, and an honorary chancellor, approving degrees,
admission policies, departments, and schools, and executing the fiduciary
duties of supervising the College's property and finances. The Chancellor of
the College of William and Mary is largely a ceremonial role. Until 1776, the
position was held by an English subject, usually the Archbishop of Canterbury
or the Bishop of London, who served as the College‚Äôs advocate to the crown,
while a colonial President oversaw the day-to-day activities of the
Williamsburg campus. Following the Revolutionary War, General George Washington
was appointed as the first American chancellor; later United States President
John Tyler held the post. The College has recently had a number of
distinguished chancellors: former Chief Justice of the United States Warren E.
Burger (1986‚Äì1993), former British Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher
(1993‚Äì2000), and former U.S. Secretary of State Henry Kissinger
(2000‚Äì2005). Former U.S. Supreme Court Justice Sandra Day O'Connor was
installed as the College's 23rd Chancellor on April 7, 2006. When her term
expires in February 2012, Robert M. Gates '65 will succeed her. The Board of
Visitors delegates to a president the operating responsibility and
accountability for the administrative, fiscal, and academic performance of the
College as well as representing the College on public occasions such as
conferral of degrees. In September 2008, W. Taylor Reveley III became the 27th
President of the College, succeeding Gene Nichol. The president is assisted by
a provost, the senior academic officer of the university, and several vice
presidents. Faculty members are organized into separate faculties of the
Faculty of Arts and Science as well as those for the respective schools of
Business, Education, Law, and Virginia Institute of Marine Science. Each
faculty is presided over by a dean, who reports to the provost, and governs
itself through separate by-laws approved by the Board of Visitors. The faculty
are also represented by a faculty assembly that serves to advise the president
and provost. The Royal Hospital School, an independent boarding school in the
United Kingdom, is a sister institution. Academics. The College of William &
Mary is a medium-sized, highly residential, public research university. The
focal point of the university is its four-year, full-time undergraduate program
which comprises most of the institution's enrollment. The College has a strong
undergraduate arts & sciences focus, with a select number of graduate programs
in diverse fields ranging from American colonial history to marine science. The
College offers an undergraduate joint degree program in engineering with
Columbia University as well as a liberal arts joint degree program with the
venerable University of St. Andrews in Scotland. [http://www.wm.edu/sites/
standrews/index.php] The graduate programs are dominant in STEM fields and the
university has a high level of research activity. For the 2007‚Äì08 school
year, 1,454 undergraduate, 440 masters, 60 doctoral, and 209 professional
degrees were conferred. William & Mary is accredited by the Southern
Association of Colleges and Schools. William & Mary offers exchange programs
with 15 foreign schools, drawing more than 12% of its undergraduates into these
programs, and receives U.S. State Department grants to further expand its
foreign exchange programs. Learning environment. William & Mary is committed to
ensuring the quality of its undergraduate teaching experience. To advance this
mission, W&M provides a "small college environment" and maintains a low
student-to-faculty ratio of 12-to-1 (the second lowest among U.S. public
universities), thereby fostering student-professor interaction. A notable 99%
of all undergraduate classes, excluding labs, are taught by professors (not
teaching assistants) and 86% of all classes contain 40 or fewer students. The
2011 U.S. News college rankings placed W&M 5th in the nation for "Best
Undergraduate Teaching" thereby supporting the efficacy of the College's
mission. [http://colleges.usnews.rankingsandreviews.com/best-colleges/national-
ut-rank] Student body and admissions. William & Mary enrolled 5,850
undergraduate, 1,414 graduate, and 628 professional students in 2008. Women
make up 54.7% of the undergraduate, 53.5% of the graduate, and 49% of the
professional student bodies, respectively. Admission to W&M is considered "most
selective" according to U.S. News and World Report. There were 11,636
applications for admission to the class of 2012: 3,966 were admitted (33.7%)
and 1,387 enrolled for an admissions yield of 35%. Over three-quarters of
enrolling students (79%) graduated in the top tenth of their high school class,
77.6% had a high school GPA above 3.75, and the interquartile range on SAT
scores was 630‚Äì730 for reading, 620‚Äì710 for math, and 610‚Äì720 for
writing. The top five overlap schools for William & Mary applicants are Cornell
University, Duke University, Georgetown University, the University of Virginia,
and Vanderbilt University. 95% of freshmen enrolled the subsequent year, the
four year graduation rate was 84%, and the six year rate was 91%. Undergraduate
tuition for 2007‚Äì2008 was $6,090 for Virginia residents and $24,960 for out-
of-state students. One-third (32%) of the student body received loans, W&M
granted over $8 million in need-based scholarships in 2007‚Äì2008 to 1,280
students (22.6% of the student body), and average student indebtedness was
$15,602. Law and medical school acceptance rates. Sixty percent of W&M students
go on to graduate school within five years of graduation. From 1999 to 2003
(the latest available figures), W&M's law and medical school acceptance rates
hovered between 72% and 84%, respectively. These figures are notably above the
national acceptance rate averages of 50% and 64% for medical and law school,
respectively. Rankings. In the most recent ranking by Forbes, William & Mary is
the 2nd highest ranked public university, and is ranked 40th overall. The
College of William & Mary's undergraduate program is ranked as the 6th best
public university program in America, according to the 2011 U.S. News & World
Report rankings. In overall rankings of American institutions (public and
private), W&M ranked #8 by "The Washington Monthly" in 2009 and moved up two
places to #31 in the "National University" category of the 2011 U.S. News
rankings. Undergraduate teaching. William & Mary's undergraduate teaching ranks
among the Top 5 in the nation according to the 2011 U.S. News college rankings.
The College ranked #5 in "Best Undergraduate Teaching. "This supports the
College's stated commitment to the high quality of its undergraduate learning
environment. Best value. William & Mary ranked as the #3 "best value" among
America's public universities in the 2007 issue of "Kiplinger's Personal
Finance Magazine". William & Mary's Swem Library was ranked in 2008 the
Princeton Review as the #8 "Best College Library". Business program. The
undergraduate business program is steadily climbing national rankings due in
part to improved faculty quality and a new building. It was ranked #8 among
public undergraduate programs (#25 overall) by the 2010 Business Week survey
and #43 by the 2009 "U.S. News" survey. [http://bwnt.businessweek.com/bschools/
undergraduate/10rankings/?chan=magazine+channel_special+report Graduate school
rankings. U.S. colonial history. William & Mary's graduate program in U.S.
colonial history has consistently ranked among the Top 5 programs in the nation
by U.S. News‚Äîit ranked #4 in the 2009 U.S. News (the most recent report for
this category), behind only the programs at Harvard, Yale and Penn. [http://
grad-schools.usnews.rankingsandreviews.com/best-graduate-schools/top-history-
schools/us-colonial-history] Law. William & Mary Law School currently ranks #35
in the latest 2013 edition of the U.S. News law school rankings (#14 among
public universities). Business. William & Mary's graduate business program
(Mason School of Business) ranked #47 by "Business Week" in 2010, #41 by
"Forbes" in 2011, #40 nationally by the "Financial Times" in 2008 and #17
nationally by the "Wall Street Journal". It is also ranked #70 in 2012 by US
News and World Report. Education. William and Mary's School of Education ranked
#39 in the 2011 U.S. News and World Report rankings. Publications. The College,
vis-√ -vis the Omohundro Institute of Early American History and Culture
publishes the William and Mary Quarterly, a scholarly journal focusing on
colonial history, particularly in North America and the Atlantic World from the
Age of Discovery onward. In addition to the Quarterly, W&M, in accordance with
its mission to provide undergraduates with a thorough grounding in research
also hosts several student journals. The Monitor is the undergraduate journal
of International Studies which publishes on a bi-annual basis. The Lyon
Gardiner Tyler Department of History also supports an undergraduate history
journal, The James Blair Historical Review, which publishes on an annual basis.
Non-academic publications include Winged Nation- the literary arts magazine,
Acropolis- the Art and Art History magazine, The Flat Hat- the student
newspaper, The DoG Street Journal- a daily online newspaper, and The Botetourt
Squat- a satirical freshman newspaper Endowment. As of 2011, W&M's fiscal year
endowment totaled US $625¬ million. With a total enrollment of just under 8,000
(undergraduate and graduate), this equates to an $80,000 per student endowment
- a common metric of an institution's financial strength. This places W&M on
par with flagship public universities in several neighboring states including
the University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill ($77,000) and Georgia Tech
($78,000). Faculty. Since the 17th century, many prominent academics have
chosen to teach at William & Mary. Distinguished faculty include the first
professor of law in the United States, George Wythe (who taught Henry Clay,
John Marshall, and Thomas Jefferson, among others); William Small (Thomas
Jefferson's cherished mentor); William and Thomas Dawson, who were also
presidents of William & Mary. In addition, the founder and first president of
the Massachusetts Institute of Technology - William Barton Rogers - taught
chemistry at William & Mary (which was also Professor Barton's "alma mater").
Several members of the socially elite and politically influential Tucker
family, including Nathaniel Beverly, St. George, and Henry St. George Tucker,
Sr. (who penned the original honor code pledge for the University of Virginia
that remains in use there today), taught at William & Mary. The constitutional
scholar William Van Alstyne was recruited to William & Mary from Duke Law
School. Professor Benjamin Bolger - the second-most credentialed person in
modern history behind Michael Nicholson - teaches at W&M. Lawrence Wilkerson,
current Harriman Visiting Professor of Government and Public Policy, was chief
of staff for Colin Powell. Susan Wise Bauer is an author and founder of Peace
Hill Press who teaches writing and American literature at the College. James
Axtell, who teaches history, was inducted into the American Academy of Arts and
Sciences as a Fellow in 2004. Student life. Campus activities. The College
enjoys a temperate climate. In addition to renovations on the student
recreation center (including a new gym, rock climbing wall, and larger exercise
rooms), the largely wooded campus has its own lake and outdoor amphitheatre.
The Virginia Beach oceanfront is away, and Washington D.C. is a drive to the
north. Also, the beaches of the Delmarva Peninsula are just a few hours away
via the Chesapeake Bay Bridge-Tunnel. The College's Alma Mater Productions
(AMP) hosts concerts, comedians, and speakers on campus and in the 8,600-person
capacity Kaplan Arena. Students produce numerous publications on campus,
including the official student newspaper "The Flat Hat", the conservative-
leaning newspaper "The Virginia Informer", and the monthly magazine "The DoG
Street Journal". The school's television station, WMTV, produces informational
content in the categories of cuisine, comedy, travel, and sports. "Everyday
Gourmet", the flagship production of the station, was recently featured in "USA
Today". The College has a large number of student run dance organizations
including Swing and Ballroom Dance. The Ballroom Dance club competes at various
universities along the East Coast. In 2010, the College sent senior members to
the US National Dancesport Competition. The College also hosts a number of
prominent student-run cultural organizations, such as the Chinese Student
Organization, African Cultural Society, Japanese Cultural Association,
Vietnamese Student Association, and Tribe Bhangra Team. These organizations
hold events to promote the spread and awareness of different cultures from
around the world. Honor system. The basis of W&M's Honor Pledge was written
over 150 years ago by alumnus and law professor Henry St. George Tucker, Sr.
While teaching law at the University of Virginia, Tucker proposed that students
attach a pledge to all exams confirming that on their honor they did not
receive any assistance. Tucker's honor pledge was the early basis of the Honor
System at the University of Virginia. At W&M, the Honor System stands as one of
the College's most important traditions; it remains student-administered
through the Honor Council with the advice of the faculty and administration of
the College. The College's Honor System is codified such that students found
guilty of cheating, stealing or lying are subject to sanctions ranging anywhere
from a verbal warning up to expulsion. Traditions. William & Mary has a number
of traditions, including the Yule Log Ceremony, at which the president dresses
as Santa Claus and reads a rendition of "How the Grinch Stole Christmas", the
Vice-President of Student Affairs reads "Twas the Night Before Finals," and The
Gentlemen of the College sing the song "The Twelve Days of Christmas".
Christmas is a grand celebration at the College; decorated Christmas trees
abound on campus. This popular tradition in fact started when German immigrant
Charles Minnegerode, a humanities professor at the College in 1842 who taught
Latin and Greek, brought one of the first Christmas trees to America. Entering
into the social life of post-colonial Virginia, Minnigerode introduced the
German custom of decorating an evergreen tree at Christmas at the home of law
professor St. George Tucker, thereby becoming another of many influences that
prompted Americans to adopt the practice at about that time. [http://
www.encyclopediavirginia.org/Minnigerode_Charles_1814-1894] Incoming freshmen
participate in Opening Convocation, at which they pass through the entrance of
the Wren Building and are officially welcomed as the newest members of the
College. Freshmen also have the opportunity, during orientation week, to
serenade the President of the College at his home with the Alma Mater song. The
Senior Walk is similar, in that graduating seniors walk through the Wren
Building in their "departure" from the College. On the last day of classes,
Seniors are invited to ring the bell in the cupola of the Wren Building. One
unofficial tradition is the Triathlon, a set of three tasks to be completed by
each student prior to graduation. These include jumping the wall of the
Governor's Palace in Colonial Williamsburg after hours (and if so inclined,
running through the Boxwood Maze to the Palace itself), streaking through the
Sunken Garden, and swimming in the Crim Dell pond. William and Mary also takes
pride in their connections to their colonial past during Charter Day
festivities. Charter Day is technically February 8, based on the date (from the
Julian Calendar) that the Reverend James Blair, first President of The College
received the charter from the Court of William and Mary at Kensington Palace in
1693. (http://scdb.swem.wm.edu/wiki/index.php/
Charter#Transcription_of_the_Royal_Charter) Past Charter Day speakers have
included former US President John Tyler, Henry Kissinger, Margaret Thatcher,
and Robert Gates. A unique tradition at William and Mary is the annual Raft
Debate. Described by The College as "...a 'delicate balance of comedy and
lecture,' the annual Raft Debate features four W&M faculty members from diverse
disciplines, stranded on a desolate island with only a one-person life raft for
escape to civilization. Based on the volume of applause, the audience chooses
the sole survivor as the professors cajole, plead, pontificate, and resort
shamelessly to props and costumes. The quirky event originated in the mid-1900s
and was revived during the 2000s by the Graduate Center, the A&S Office of
Graduate Studies and Research, and the A&S Graduate Student Association.
Faculty participants represent the Humanities, the Social Sciences, or the
Natural and Computational Sciences. The Devil‚Äôs Advocate, who argues
sarcastically that none of the academic disciplines are worth saving, has on
rare occasion emerged victoriously." Commencement exercises each year begin
with the senior class walking through the Wren Building and across the campus,
crossing the Crim Dell bridge, and arriving at William & Mary Hall for the
commencement ceremony. The graduating class processes into the arena as the
Choir of the College of William & Mary sings the William & Mary Hymn. Unlike
many universities, the students of William and Mary have taken the formality
out of the Alma Mater as it has become the theme song for anything and
everything William and Mary. Fraternities and sororities. William & Mary has a
long history of fraternities and sororities dating back to Phi Beta Kappa, the
first "Greek-letter" organization, which was founded there in 1776 . Today,
Greek organizations play an important role in the College community, along with
other social organizations (e.g. theatre and club sports organizations).
Overall, about one-third of its undergraduates are active members of 18
national fraternities and 12 sororities. William & Mary is also home to several
unique non-Greek social fraternities, notably the Nu Kappa Epsilon music
sorority and the Queens' Guard. Music. William and Mary has eleven collegiate a
cappella groups: The Christopher Wren Singers (1987, co-ed); The Gentlemen of
the College (1990, all-male); The Stairwells (1990, all-male); Intonations
(1991, all-female); The Accidentals (1992, all-female); Reveille (1992, all-
female); DoubleTake (1993, co-ed); Common Ground (1995, all-female); One Accord
(1998, all-male); The Cleftomaniacs (1999, co-ed); Passing Notes (2002, all-
female). The Sinfonicron, founded in 1965, is William and Mary's light opera
company. Music societies at the college include local chapters of the music
honor societies Delta Omicron (co-ed) and Phi Mu Alpha (all-male) as well as Nu
Kappa Epsilon (all-female). Nu Kappa Epsilon, founded in 1994 at William and
Mary, is "dedicated to promoting the growth and development of musical
activities at the College as well as in the Williamsburg community". Its
members are professional performing musicians. Musical ensembles at The College
include an Early Music Ensemble, featuring medieval, renaissance and baroque
music, a Jazz combo ensemble, a Jazz ensemble, the Wham Bam Big Band, a Mixed
Ensemble which features chamber music, an Opera workshop, a percussion
ensemble, saxophone ensemble, string ensemble, viol ensemble and wind ensemble.
(http://www.wm.edu/as/music/ensembles/classicalandjazz/index.php) In addition
to these traditional groups W&M offers a number of non-traditional and world
music ensembles such as The Appalachian Music Ensemble, Indonesian Gamelan,
Middle Eastern Music Ensemble, and performance art ensemble. (http://
www.wm.edu/as/music/ensembles/nontraditional/index.php) Prior to 1996 the
College also had a formal Marching Band, however from 1996 to present The
College has joined the likes of Columbia University in having a scramble band
on campus, known as the William and Mary Pep Band. (http://web.wm.edu/so/
pepband/?svr=www#) Additionally, though not formally affiliated with The
College, the William and Mary Bookstore hosts an Irish seisi√∫n once a week.
Comedy groups. William and Mary has two campus comedy groups. I.T. (short for
Improvisational Theatre) has been around since 1986, and has become a feeder
into the professional improv scene in Chicago and Los Angeles, boasting
performers with The Second City, I.O., ComedySportz, and Mission IMPROVable. In
addition to performing shows across campus and Virginia, I.T. annually travels
to Chicago as part of its Fall Tour, where new and returning members develop
and practice their improvisational skills. Every year culminates with
Improvathon, a 12-hour show at the Lake Matoaka Amphitheatre to benefit Avalon,
a local battered women's shelter. The sketch comedy ensemble 7th Grade has been
in existence since 1997. Athletics. Formerly known as the "Indians," William &
Mary's athletic teams are now known as the "Tribe". The College fields NCAA
Division I teams for men and women in basketball, cross country, golf,
gymnastics, soccer, swimming and diving, tennis, and indoor and outdoor track
and field. In addition, there are women's field hockey, lacrosse and volleyball
squads as well as men's baseball and football. In the 2004‚Äì05 season, the
Tribe garnered five Colonial Athletic Association titles, and it leads the
conference with over 80 titles. In that same year, several teams competed in
the NCAA Championships, with the football team appearing in the Division I-AA
national semifinals. The men's cross country team finished 8th and 5th at the
Division I NCAA Men's Cross Country Championship in 2006 and 2009,
respectively. The William & Mary men's basketball team is one of five original
Division I schools that has never been to the NCAA Division I Men's Basketball
Tournament. There have been many recent notable athletes who competed for the
Tribe. On the men's soccer team, goalkeeper Adin Brown was a back-to-back NCAA
First Team All-American in 1998 and 1999. The track program has produced
several All-Americans, including Brian Hyde, an Olympian and collegiate record
holder in the 1500-meter run, and Ed Moran, a gold medalist in the 5000-meter
run at the 2007 Pan American Games. The baseball program boasts a handful of
current MLB players, including relief pitcher Bill Bray with the Cleveland
Indians organization and Colorado Rockies utility infielder Brendan Harris. The
football program has also produced numerous NFL players and coaches: All-Pro
safety Darren Sharper, current Pittsburgh Steelers head coach Mike Tomlin,
cornerback Derek Cox, kicker Steve Christie, long snapper Mike Leach, Walter
Payton Award-winning quarterback Lang Campbell, wide receiver Dominique
Thompson, Pro Football Hall of Fame coaches Marv Levy and Lou Holtz, and
Jacksonville Jaguars linebackers coach Mark Duffner. In May 2006, the NCAA
ruled that the athletic logo, which includes two green and gold feathers, could
create an environment that is offensive to the American Indian community. The
College's appeal regarding the use of the institution‚Äôs athletic logo to the
NCAA Executive Committee was rejected. The "Tribe" nickname, by itself, was
found to be neither hostile nor abusive, but rather communicates ennobling
sentiments of commitment, shared idealism, community and common cause. The
College stated it would phase out the use of the two feathers by the fall of
2007, although they can still be seen prominently painted on streets throughout
the campus. Some students have vowed to display the prior logo on their own at
NCAA post-season games. A new design was unveiled in December 2007. For a short
time, the College's unofficial mascot was a green and gold frog (though it was
commonly referred to on campus simply as an 'amorphous green blob') called
"Colonel Ebirt" ("Tribe" backwards), which was discontinued in 2005. Prior to
that, two students, one male, one female, dressed in buckskins. The female was
referred to as Pocohontas, while the male was usually referred to as "tribe
guy." The practice ended around 1991. Subsequently, a selection process was
conducted to select the College's new mascot. In December 2009, five finalists
‚Äì including a Griffin, King and Queen, the Phoenix, a Pug and the Wren ‚Äì
were announced from more than 800 submissions. On April 6, 2010, President
Taylor Reveley announced that the College has selected the Griffin as its new
mascot. Alumni. William & Mary has produced a large number of distinguished
alumni including U.S. Presidents Thomas Jefferson, John Tyler, and James
Monroe; key figures in American history Peyton Randolph, Fulwar Skipwith, Henry
Clay and Chief Justice of the United States John Marshall; Massachusetts
Institute of Technology founder William Barton Rogers, Amherst College
president Carolyn Martin; U.S. Military General Winfield Scott; Pittsburgh
Steelers head coach Mike Tomlin, Miami Dolphins offensive coordinator Dan
Henning, football Hall-of-Famer Lou Creekmur, and New Orleans Saints safety
Darren Sharper; major league baseball players Will Rhymes, Chris Ray, Brendan
Harris, Bill Bray, Vic Raschi and Curtis Pride; entertainers Glenn Close, Scott
Glenn, Linda Lavin, Patton Oswalt and "The Daily Show" host Jon Stewart;
creator and writer of "Scrubs" and "Spin City", Bill Lawrence; fashion designer
Perry Ellis; founder and chairman of Legg Mason Raymond A. "Chip" Mason; Willis
Group Holdings CEO Joe Plumeri; sports management pioneer Mark McCormack; U.S.
Representative and Republican presidential candidate Michele Bachmann; Cabinet
officials Robert Gates (22nd U.S. Secretary of Defense) and Christina Romer
(former Chairwoman, Council of Economic Advisors); and General David McKiernan
(Commander, U.S. Forces Afghanistan); and NASA astronaut David M. Brown.
Commencement. Hymn. The "William & Mary Hymn" is sung at the commencement
exercises by the choir of the College of William & Mary as the graduating class
processes into William & Mary Hall. Speakers. Commencement speakers at the
College of William and Mary have included a variety of notables, including
alumni, presidents of the College, students, professors, politicians,
journalists, entertainers, and royalty, among others.
