Colonialism Colonialism is the establishment, exploitation, maintenance,
acquisition and expansion of colonies in one territory by people from another
territory. It is a process whereby the metropole claims sovereignty over the
colony, and the social structure, government, and economics of the colony are
changed by colonizers from the metropole. Colonialism is a set of unequal
relationships between the metropole and the colony and between the colonists
and the indigenous population. The "European colonial period" was the era from
the 1500s to, arguably, the 1900s when several European powers (particularly,
but not exclusively, Spain, Portugal, Britain, the Netherlands and France)
established colonies in Asia, Africa, and the Americas. At first the countries
followed mercantilist policies designed to strengthen the home economy at the
expense of rivals, so the colonies were usually allowed to trade only with the
mother country. By the mid-19th century, however, the powerful British Empire
gave up mercantilism and trade restrictions and introduced the principle of
free trade, with few restrictions or tariffs. Definitions. "Collins English
Dictionary" defines colonialism as "the policy and practice of a power in
extending control over weaker peoples or areas." The "Merriam-Webster
Dictionary" offers four definitions, including "something characteristic of a
colony" and "control by one power over a dependent area or people." The 2006
"Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy" "uses the term 'colonialism' to describe
the process of European settlement and political control over the rest of the
world, including Americas, Australia, and parts of Africa and Asia." It
discusses the distinction between colonialism and imperialism and states that
"given the difficulty of consistently distinguishing between the two terms,
this entry will use colonialism as a broad concept that refers to the project
of European political domination from the sixteenth to the twentieth centuries
that ended with the national liberation movements of the 1960s." Types of
colonialism. Plantation colonies would be considered exploitation colonialism;
but colonizing powers would utilize either type for different territories
depending on various social and economic factors as well as climate and
geographic conditions. Surrogate colonialism involves a settlement project
supported by colonial power, in which most of the settlers do not come from the
mainstream of the ruling power. Internal colonialism is a notion of uneven
structural power between areas of a nation state. The source of exploitation
comes from within the state. Sociocultural evolution. As colonialism often
played out in pre-populated areas sociocultural evolution included the creation
of various ethnically hybrid populations. Colonialism gave rise to culturally
and ethnically mixed populations such as the mestizos of the Americas, as well
as racially divided populations as found in French Algeria or Southern
Rhodesia. In fact everywhere where Colonial powers established a consistent and
continued presence hybrid communities existed. Notable examples in Asia include
the Anglo-Burmese people, Anglo-Indian, Burgher people, Eurasian Singaporean,
Filipino mestizo, Kristang people and Macanese people. In the Dutch East Indies
(now Indonesia) the vast majority of Dutch settlers were in fact Eurasians
known as Indo-Europeans, formally belonging to the European legal class in the
colony. History. Activity that could be called colonialism has a long history.
Starting with the pre colonial African empires which lead to the Egyptians,
Phoenicians, Greeks and Romans who all built colonies in antiquity. The word
"metropole" comes from the Greek "metropolis" "μητρόπολις"—"mother
city". The word "colony" comes from the Latin "colonia"—"a place for
agriculture". Between the 11th and 18th centuries, the Vietnamese established
military colonies south of their original territory and absorbed the territory,
in a process known as nam tiến. Modern colonialism started with the Age of
Discovery. Portugal and Spain discovered new lands across the oceans and built
trading posts or conquered large extensions of land. For some people, it is
this building of colonies across oceans that differentiates colonialism from
other types of expansionism. These new lands were divided between the
Portuguese Empire and Spanish Empire, first by the papal bull Inter caetera and
then by the Treaty of Tordesillas and the Treaty of Zaragoza (1529). This
period is also associated with the Commercial Revolution. The late Middle Ages
saw reforms in accountancy and banking in Italy and the eastern Mediterranean.
These ideas were adopted and adapted in western Europe to the high risks and
rewards associated with colonial ventures. The 17th century saw the creation of
the French colonial empire and the Dutch Empire, as well as the English
colonial empire, which later became the British Empire. It also saw the
establishment of a Danish colonial empire and some Swedish overseas colonies.
The spread of colonial empires was reduced in the late 18th and early 19th
centuries by the American Revolutionary War and the Latin American wars of
independence. However, many new colonies were established after this time,
including the German colonial empire and Belgian colonial empire. In the late
19th century, many European powers were involved in the Scramble for Africa.
The Russian Empire, Ottoman Empire and Austrian Empire existed at the same time
as the above empires, but did not expand over oceans. Rather, these empires
expanded through the more traditional route of conquest of neighbouring
territories. There was, though, some Russian colonization of the Americas
across the Bering Strait. The Empire of Japan modelled itself on European
colonial empires. The United States of America gained overseas territories
after the Spanish-American War for which the term "American Empire" was coined.
After the First World War, the victorious allies divided up the German colonial
empire and much of the Ottoman Empire between themselves as League of Nations
mandates. These territories were divided into three classes according to how
quickly it was deemed that they would be ready for independence. However,
decolonisation outside the Americas lagged until after the Second World War. In
1962 the United Nations set up a Special Committee on Decolonization, often
called the Committee of 24, to encourage this process. Further, dozens of
independence movements and global political solidarity projects such as the
Non-Aligned Movement were instrumental in the decolonization efforts of former
colonies. European colonies in 1914. Numbers of European settlers in the
colonies (1500-1914). By 1914, Europeans had migrated to the colonies in the
millions. Some intended to remain in the colonies as temporary settlers, mainly
as military personnel or on business. Others went to the colonies as
immigrants. British citizens were by far the most numerous population to
migrate to the colonies: 2.5 million settled in Canada; 1.5 million in
Australia; 750,000 in New Zealand; 450,000 in the Union of South Africa; and
200,000 in India. French citizens also migrated in large numbers, mainly to the
colonies in the north African Maghreb region: 1.3 million settled in Algeria;
200,000 in Morocco; 100,000 in Tunisia; while only 20,000 migrated to French
Indochina. Dutch and German colonies saw relatively scarce European migration,
since Dutch and German colonial expansion focused upon commercial goals rather
than settlement. Portugal sent 150,000 settlers to Angola, 80,000 to
Mozambique, and 20,000 to Goa. During the Spanish Empire, approximately 550,000
Spanish settlers migrated to Latin America. Neocolonialism. The term
neocolonialism has been used to refer to a variety of contexts since
decolonization that took place after World War II. Generally it does not refer
to a type of direct colonization, rather, colonialism by other means.
Specifically, neocolonialism refers to the theory that former or existing
economic relationships, such as the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade and
the Central American Free Trade Agreement, created by former colonial powers
were or are used to maintain control of their former colonies and dependencies
after the colonial independence movements of the post–World War II period.
Colonialism and the history of thought. Universalism. The conquest of vast
territories brings multitudes of diverse cultures under the central control of
the imperial authorities. From the time of Ancient Greece and Ancient Rome,
this fact has been addressed by empires adopting the concept of universalism,
and applying it to their imperial policies towards their subjects far from the
imperial capitol. The capitol, the metropole, was the source of ostensibly
enlightened policies imposed throughout the distant colonies. The empire that
grew from Athenian conquest spurred the spread of Greek language, religion,
science and philosophy throughout the colonies. The Athenians considered their
own culture superior to all others. They referred to people speaking foreign
languages as barbarians, dismissing foreign languages as inferior mutterings
that sounded to Greek ears like "bar-bar". Romans found efficiency in imposing
a universalist policy towards their colonies in many matters. Roman law was
imposed on Roman citizens, as well as colonial subjects, throughout the empire.
Latin spread as the common language of government and trade, the lingua franca,
throughout the Empire. Romans also imposed peace between their diverse foreign
subjects, which they described in beneficial terms as the Pax Romana. The use
of universal regulation by the Romans marks the emergence of a European concept
of universalism and internationalism. Tolerance of other cultures and beliefs
has always been secondary to the aims of empires, however. The Roman Empire was
tolerant of diverse cultures and religious practises, so long as these did not
threaten Roman authority. Napoleon's foreign minister, Charles Maurice de
Talleyrand, once remarked: "Empire is the art of putting men in their place".
Colonialism and geography. Settlers acted as the link between the natives and
the imperial hegemony, bridging the geographical, ideological and commercial
gap between the colonisers and colonised. Advanced technology made possible the
expansion of European states. With tools such as cartography, shipbuilding,
navigation, mining and agricultural productivity colonisers had an upper hand.
Their awareness of the Earth's surface and abundance of practical skills
provided colonisers with a knowledge that, in turn, created power. Painter and
Jeffrey argue that geography as a discipline was not and is not an objective
science, rather it is based on assumptions about the physical world. Whereas it
may have given “The West” an advantage when it came to exploration, it also
created zones of racial inferiority. Geographical beliefs such as environmental
determinism, the view that some parts of the world are underdeveloped,
legitimised colonialism and created notions of skewed evolution. These are now
seen as elementary concepts. Political geographers maintain that colonial
behavior was reinforced by the physical mapping of the world, visually
separating “them” and “us”. Geographers are primarily focused on the
spaces of colonialism and imperialism, more specifically, the material and
symbolic appropriation of space enabling colonialism. Colonialism and
imperialism. A colony is part of an empire and so colonialism is closely
related to imperialism. Assumptions are that colonialism and imperialism are
interchangeable, however Robert Young suggests that imperialism is the concept
while colonialism is the practice. Colonialism is based on an imperial outlook,
thereby creating a consequential relationship. Through an empire, colonialism
is established and capitalism is expanded, on the other hand a capitalist
economy naturally enforces an empire. In the next section Marxists make a case
for this mutually reinforcing relationship. Marxist view of colonialism.
Marxism views colonialism as a form of capitalism, enforcing exploitation and
social change. Marx thought that working within the global capitalist system,
colonialism is closely associated with uneven development. It is an
“instrument of wholesale destruction, dependency and systematic exploitation
producing distorted economies, socio-psychological disorientation, massive
poverty and neocolonial dependency.” According to some Marxist historians, in
all of the colonial countries ruled by Western European countries “the
natives were robbed of more than half their natural span of life by
undernourishment”. Colonies are constructed into modes of production. The
search for raw materials and the current search for new investment
opportunities is a result of inter-capitalist rivalry for capital accumulation.
Lenin regarded colonialism as the root cause of imperialism, as imperialism was
distinguished by monopoly capitalism via colonialism and as Lyal S. Sunga
explains: "Vladimir Lenin advocated forcefully the principle of self-
determination of peoples in his "Theses on the Socialist Revolution and the
Right of Nations to Self-Determination" as an integral plank in the programme
of socialist internationalism" and he quotes Lenin who contended that "The
right of nations to self-determination implies exclusively the right to
independence in the political sense, the right to free political separation
from the oppressor nation. Specifically, this demand for political democracy
implies complete freedom to agitate for secession and for a referendum on
secession by the seceding nation." “Colonial Africa fell within that part of
the international capitalist economy from which surplus was drawn to feed the
metropolitan sector. As seen earlier, exploitation of land and labour is
essential for human social advance, but only on the assumption that the product
is made available within the area where the exploitation takes place.
Liberalism, capitalism and colonialism. Classical liberals generally opposed
colonialism (as opposed to colonization) and imperialism, including Adam Smith,
Frédéric Bastiat, Richard Cobden, John Bright, Henry Richard, Herbert
Spencer, H. R. Fox Bourne, Edward Morel, Josephine Butler, W. J. Fox and
William Ewart Gladstone. Adam Smith wrote in "Wealth of Nations" that Britain
should liberate all of its colonies and also noted that it would be
economically beneficial for British people in the average, although the
merchants having mercantilist privileges would lose out. Post-colonialism.
Post-colonialism (or post-colonial theory) can refer to a set of theories in
philosophy and literature that grapple with the legacy of colonial rule. In
this sense, postcolonial literature may be considered a branch of postmodern
literature concerned with the political and cultural independence of peoples
formerly subjugated in colonial empires. Many practitioners take Edward Saïd's
book "Orientalism" (1978) as the theory's founding work (although French
theorists such as Aimé Césaire and Frantz Fanon made similar claims decades
before Said). Saïd analysed the works of Balzac, Baudelaire and Lautréamont,
exploring how they both absorbed and helped to shape a societal fantasy of
European racial superiority. Writers of post-colonial fiction interact with the
traditional colonial discourse, but modify or subvert it; for instance by
retelling a familiar story from the perspective of an oppressed minor character
in the story. Gayatri Chakravorty Spivak's "Can the Subaltern Speak?" (1998)
gave its name to Subaltern Studies. In "A Critique of Postcolonial Reason"
(1999), Spivak explored how major works of European metaphysics (such as those
of Kant and Hegel) not only tend to exclude the subaltern from their
discussions, but actively prevent non-Europeans from occupying positions as
fully human subjects. Hegel's "Phenomenology of Spirit" (1807), famous for its
explicit ethnocentrism, considers Western civilization as the most accomplished
of all, while Kant also allowed some traces of racialism to enter his work.
Impact of colonialism and colonization. The impacts of colonization are immense
and pervasive. Various effects, both immediate and protracted, include the
spread of virulent diseases, the establishment of unequal social relations,
exploitation, enslavement, medical advances, the creation of new institutions,
and technological progress. Colonial practices also spur the spread of
languages, literature and cultural institutions. The native cultures of the
colonized peoples can also have a powerful influence on the imperial country.
Trade and commerce. Economic expansion has accompanied imperial expansion since
ancient times. Greek trade-networks spread throughout the Mediterranean region,
while Roman trade expanded with the main goal of directing tribute from the
colonized areas towards the Roman metropole. According to Strabo, by the time
of emperor Augustus, up to 120 Roman ships would set sail every year from Myos
Hormos in Roman Egypt to India. With the development of trade routes under the
Ottoman Empire, Aztec civilization developed into a large empire that, much
like the Roman Empire, had the goal of exacting tribute from the conquered
colonial areas. For the Aztecs, the most important tribute was the acquisition
of sacrificial victims for their religious rituals. On the other hand, European
colonial empires sometimes attempted to channel, restrict and impede trade
involving their colonies, funnelling activity through the metropole and taxing
accordingly. Slaves and indentured servants. European nations entered their
imperial projects with the goal of enriching the European metropole.
Exploitation of non-Europeans and other Europeans to support imperial goals was
acceptable to the colonizers. Two outgrowths of this imperial agenda were
slavery and indentured servitude. In the 17th century, nearly two-thirds of
English settlers came to North America as indentured servants. African slavery
had existed long before Europeans discovered it as an exploitable means of
creating an inexpensive labour force for the colonies. Europeans brought
transportation technology to the practise, bringing large numbers of African
slaves to the Americas by sail. Spain and Portugal had brought African slaves
to work at African colonies such as Cape Verde and the Azores, and then Latin
America, by the 16th century. The British, French and Dutch joined in the slave
trade in subsequent centuries. Ultimately, around 11 million Africans were
taken to the Caribbean and North and South America as slaves by European
colonizers. Abolitionists in Europe and America protested the inhumane
treatment of African slaves, which led to the elimination of the slave trade by
the late 19th century. The labour shortage that resulted inspired European
colonizers to develop a new source of labour, using a system of indentured
servitude. Indentured servants consented to a contract with the European
colonizers. Under their contract, the servant would work for an employer for a
term of at least a year, while the employer agreed to pay for the servant's
voyage to the colony, possibly pay for the return to the country of origin, and
pay the employee a wage as well. The employee was "indentured" to the employer
because they owed a debt back to the employer for their travel expense to the
colony, which they were expected to pay through their wages. In practice,
indentured servants were exploited through terrible working conditions and
burdensome debts created by the employers, with whom the servants had no means
of negotiating the debt once they arrived in the colony. India and China were
the largest source of indentured servants during the colonial era. Indentured
servants from India travelled to British colonies in Asia, Africa and the
Caribbean, and also to French and Portuguese colonies, while Chinese servants
travelled to British and Dutch colonies. Between 1830 and 1930, around 30
million indentured servants migrated from India, and 24 million returned to
India. China sent more indentured servants to European colonies, and around the
same proportion returned to China. Military innovation. Imperial expansion
follows military conquest in most instances. Imperial armies therefore have a
long history of military innovation in order to gain an advantage over the
armies of the people they aim to conquer. Greeks developed the phalanx system,
which enabled their military units to present themselves to their enemies as a
wall, with foot soldiers using shields to cover one another during their
advance on the battlefield. Under Philip II of Macedon, they were able to
organize thousands of soldiers into a formidable battle force, bringing
together carefully trained infantry and cavalry regiments. Alexander the Great
exploited this military foundation further during his conquests. The Spanish
Empire held a major advantage over Mesoamerican warriors through the use of
weapons made of stronger metal, predominantly iron, which was able to shatter
the blades of axes used by the Aztec civilization and others. The European
development of firearms using gunpowder cemented their military advantage over
the peoples they sought to subjugate in the Americas and elsewhere. The end of
empire. The populations of some colonial territories, such as Canada, enjoyed
relative peace and prosperity as part of a European power, at least among the
majority; however, minority populations such as First Nations peoples and
French-Canadians experienced marginalization and resented colonial practises.
Francophone residents of Quebec, for example, were vocal in opposing
conscription into the armed services to fight on behalf of Britain during World
War I, resulting in the Conscription crisis of 1917. Other European colonies
had much more pronounced conflict between European settlers and the local
population. Rebellions broke out in the later decades of the imperial era, such
as India's Sepoy Rebellion. The territorial boundaries imposed by European
colonizers, notably in central Africa and south Asia, defied the existing
boundaries of native populations that had previously interacted little with one
another. European colonizers disregarded native political and cultural
animosities, imposing peace upon people under their military control. Native
populations were relocated at the will of the colonial administrators. Once
independence from European control was achieved, civil war erupted in some
former colonies, as native populations fought to capture territory for their
own ethnic, cultural or political group. The Partition of India, a 1947 civil
war that came in the aftermath of India's independence from Britain, became a
conflict with 500,000 killed. Fighting erupted between Hindu, Sikh and Muslim
communities as they fought for territorial dominance. Muslims fought for an
independent country to be partitioned where they would not be a religious
minority, resulting in the creation of Pakistan. Post-independence population
movement. In a reversal of the migration patterns experienced during the modern
colonial era, post-independence era migration followed a route back towards the
imperial country. In some cases, this was a movement of settlers of European
origin returning to the land of their birth, or to an ancestral birthplace.
900,000 French colonists (known as the "Pied-Noirs") resettled in France
following Algeria's independence in 1962. A significant number of these
migrants were also of Algerian descent. 800,000 people of Portuguese origin
migrated to Portugal after the independence of former colonies in Africa
between 1974 and 1979; 300,000 settlers of Dutch origin migrated to the
Netherlands from the Dutch West Indies after Dutch military control of the
colony ended. After WWII 300,000 Dutchmen from the Dutch East Indies, of which
the majority were people of Eurasian descent called Indo Europeans, repatriated
to the Netherlands. A significant number later migrated to the US, Canada,
Australia and New Zealand. Global travel and migration in general developed at
an increasingly brisk pace throughout the era of European colonial expansion.
Citizens of the former colonies of European countries may have a privileged
status in some respects with regard to immigration rights when settling in the
former European imperial nation. For example, rights to dual citizenship may be
generous, or larger immigrant quotas may be extended to former colonies. In
some cases, the former European imperial nations continue to foster close
political and economic ties with former colonies. The Commonwealth of Nations
is an organization that promotes cooperation between and among Britain and its
former colonies, the Commonwealth members. A similar organization exists for
former colonies of France, the Francophonie; the Community of Portuguese
Language Countries plays a similar role for former Portuguese colonies, and the
Dutch Language Union is the equivalent for former colonies of the Netherlands.
Migration from former colonies has proven to be problematic for European
countries, where the majority population may express hostility to ethnic
minorities who have immigrated from former colonies. Cultural and religious
conflict have often erupted in France in recent decades, between immigrants
from the Maghreb countries of north Africa and the majority population of
France. Nonetheless, immigration has changed the ethnic composition of France;
by the 1980s, 25% of the total population of "inner Paris" and 14% of the
metropolitan region were of foreign origin, mainly Algerian. Impact on health.
Encounters between explorers and populations in the rest of the world often
introduced new diseases, which sometimes caused local epidemics of
extraordinary virulence. For example, smallpox, measles, malaria, yellow fever,
and others were unknown in pre-Columbian America. Disease killed the entire
native (Guanches) population of the Canary Islands in the 16th century. Half
the native population of Hispaniola in 1518 was killed by smallpox. Smallpox
also ravaged Mexico in the 1520s, killing 150,000 in Tenochtitlan alone,
including the emperor, and Peru in the 1530s, aiding the European conquerors.
Measles killed a further two million Mexican natives in the 17th century. In
1618–1619, smallpox wiped out 90% of the Massachusetts Bay Native Americans.
Smallpox epidemics in 1780–1782 and 1837–1838 brought devastation and
drastic depopulation among the Plains Indians. Some believe that the death of
up to 95% of the Native American population of the New World was caused by Old
World diseases. Over the centuries, the Europeans had developed high degrees of
immunity to these diseases, while the indigenous peoples had no time to build
such immunity. Smallpox decimated the native population of Australia, killing
around 50% of indigenous Australians in the early years of British
colonisation. It also killed many New Zealand Māori. As late as 1848–49, as
many as 40,000 out of 150,000 Hawaiians are estimated to have died of measles,
whooping cough and influenza. Introduced diseases, notably smallpox, nearly
wiped out the native population of Easter Island. In 1875, measles killed over
40,000 Fijians, approximately one-third of the population. The Ainu population
decreased drastically in the 19th century, due in large part to infectious
diseases brought by Japanese settlers pouring into Hokkaido. Conversely,
researchers concluded that syphilis was carried from the New World to Europe
after Columbus's voyages. The findings suggested Europeans could have carried
the nonvenereal tropical bacteria home, where the organisms may have mutated
into a more deadly form in the different conditions of Europe. The disease was
more frequently fatal than it is today; syphilis was a major killer in Europe
during the Renaissance. The first cholera pandemic began in Bengal, then spread
across India by 1820. Ten thousand British troops and countless Indians died
during this pandemic. Between 1736 and 1834 only some 10% of East India
Company's officers survived to take the final voyage home. Waldemar Haffkine,
who mainly worked in India, who developed and used vaccines against cholera and
bubonic plague in the 1890s, is considered the first microbiologist. Countering
disease. As early as 1803, the Spanish Crown organised a mission (the Balmis
expedition) to transport the smallpox vaccine to the Spanish colonies, and
establish mass vaccination programs there. By 1832, the federal government of
the United States established a smallpox vaccination program for Native
Americans. Under the direction of Mountstuart Elphinstone a program was
launched to propagate smallpox vaccination in India. From the beginning of the
20th century onwards, the elimination or control of disease in tropical
countries became a driving force for all colonial powers. The sleeping sickness
epidemic in Africa was arrested due to mobile teams systematically screening
millions of people at risk. In the 20th century, the world saw the biggest
increase in its population in human history due to lessening of the mortality
rate in many countries due to medical advances. The world population has grown
from 1.6 billion in 1900 to over 7 billion today. External links. Bold text
