Committee Subcommittees. A committee that is a subset of a larger committee is
called a subcommittee. Where the larger group has a name other than "committee"
- for example, "Board" or "Commission", the smaller group(s) would usually be
called committee(s), not subcommittee(s), and might go by an entirely different
name, or substitute "Commission" for "Committee". For example in the sciences,
the "International Commission on Stratigraphy" (ICS) a "standing working
committee" is doing organizational work establishing uniform naming and
benchmarks in the geologic record and timeline since 1974, all under the
auspices of the International Union of Geological Sciences (IUGS). It is
technically the "International Stratigraphy Committee" (ISC), which has limited
executive committee powers to impanel other subcommittees (also called
commissions) to resolve certain matters involving the Geologic time scale—its
deliberations and those of its subcommittees must be adopted by the IUGS which
meets in a committee-of-the-whole or Congress, every four years or so to
deliberate on the subcommittee recommendations and officially adopt or not-
adopt such. Executive committees. A subcommittee which has well defined
executive powers usually spelled out in the charter or by-laws and which meets
frequently to manage the affairs and further the purposes of an organization or
entity. These are commonly empanelled as well when an organization has a large
Board of Directors such as an international labor union, large corporations
(with thousands of stock holders) or national and international organizations.
A Board of directors is itself a kind of Executive committee established by the
charter and by-laws of the entity and elected by the overall franchised
membership. For organizations where the Board of Directors is large - say 20
people or more - it is common to have an Executive Committee of the Board—an
executive subcommittee of Board members, which is authorized to make some
decisions on behalf of the entire Board. Standing committees. A committee
established by an official and providing for its scope and powers. Most
governmental legislative subcommittees are standing committees, which by
another name is a permanent committee. Standing committees meet on a regular or
irregular basis dependent upon their enabling act, and retain any power or
oversight claims originally given them until subsequent official actions of the
committee of the whole (changes to law or by-laws) disbands the committee.
Working committees. An ad hoc committee established to accomplish a particular
task or to oversee an ongoing area in need of control or oversight. Many are
research or co-ordination committees in type or purpose, and can be temporary.
Some are a sub-group of a larger society with a particular area of interest
which decides to meet and discuss matters pertaining to their interests. For
example a group of astronomers might get together "ad hoc" to discuss how to
get the larger society to address near earth objects; A subgroup of engineers
and scientists of a large project's development team could meet ad hoc to solve
some particular issue with offsetting considerations and trade-offs. The term
when used officially, generally means a group with specific duties and related
authority, so when encountered in official contexts subsumes all other official
types of committees. The International Commission on Stratigraphy and its
subcommittees (commissions in name) are working committees that meet both far
more regularly and more frequently both in deliberation and co-ordination
furthering the needs of the IUGS (which regularly schedules meetings only every
fourth year) and the larger scientific community. Need. Committees are a
necessary aspect of organizations of any significant size (say, more than 15 or
20 people). They keep the number of participants manageable; with larger
groups, either many people do not get to speak (and feel left out), or
discussions are quite lengthy (and many participants find them duplicative and
often boring). Cross-field reasons. Committees are a way to formally draw
together people of relevant expertise from different parts of an organization
who otherwise would not have a good way to share information and coordinate
actions. They may have the advantage of widening viewpoints and sharing out
responsibilities. They can also be empaneled with experts to recommend actions
by the committee of the whole in matters that require specialized knowledge or
technical judgment. A "Defense" or "Banking" subcommittee in legislative bodies
or the many International science commissions such as the ICS mentioned above,
or a local "board of health" are or may be such. Standing committees. A
standing committee is a subunit of a political or deliberative body established
in a permanent fashion to aid the parent assembly in accomplishing its duties.
A standing committee is usually jurisdiction over a particular area of
legislation by the parent body. Under the laws of the United States of America,
a standing committee is a Congressional committee permanently authorized by
United States House of Representatives and United States Senate rules. The
Legislative Reorganization Act of 1946 greatly reduced the number of
committees, and set up the legislative committee structure still in use today,
as modified by authorized changes via the orderly mechanism of rules changes.
Steering committees. A steering committee is a committee that provides
guidance, direction and control to a project within an organization. The term
is derived from the steering mechanism that changes the steering angle of a
vehicle's wheels. Project Steering Committees are frequently used for guiding
and monitoring the information technology projects in large organizations, as
part of project governance. The functions of the committee might including
building a business case for the project, planning, providing assistance and
guidance, monitoring the progress, controlling the project scope and resolving
conflicts.
