Common Purpose UK Common Purpose UK is a British charity that runs leadership
development programmes across the UK. Founded in 1989 by its current Chief
Executive, Julia Middleton, its aim is to improve the way organisations and
society work together by developing all kinds of leaders through a programme of
diverse challenges and approaches. As of 2009, Common Purpose employs 125 staff
and operates in 50 locations across the UK. Activities. Courses. Common Purpose
runs a range of leadership development courses that offer participants the
inspiration, knowledge and connections to help them become more active and
engaged in society. Its courses run in 11 countries worldwide and aim at
improving the way organisations work by increasing the number of informed
individuals who are actively involved in shaping the future of the area in
which they work. Participants. Common Purpose works with a wide range of
organisations and individuals across business, public, voluntary and political
sectors. By January 2010, 12,000 participants were involved in Common Purpose
programmes. Chatham House Rule. Its courses are conducted under the Chatham
House Rule to encourage free discussion amongst participants. This has caused
some people to raise suspicion about the organisation. Bursary placements.
Common Purpose offers bursary placements to help bosses of small and medium-
sized business get through the economic downturn by enabling firms to make new
contacts and secure more work. Education and young people. Your Turn is a
leadership programme for Year 9 students that is conducted in five regions
throughout the UK and challenges young people to think in new ways about their
area and their world. CHANGEit is a collaboration between Common Purpose and
Deutsche Bank. It has been designed to recognise the achievements and ambitions
of young people between the ages of 11 and 18 who want to speak out and create
positive change. Senior executives. What Next? is a course run by leadership
development organisation Common Purpose and the Said Business School that can
help executives identify opportunities to continue to use the experience they
have accumulated during their careers. Thought leadership and campaigns. In
January 2010, Common Purpose Chief Executive, Julia Middleton, interviewed 12
well-known leaders from the private, public and voluntary sector, including Sir
David Bell and Dame Suzi Leather about the qualities needed for good leadership
in challenging times. The interviews were broadcast on video-sharing website
YouTube. In July 2009, Common Purpose was commissioned by the Government
Equalities Office to conduct an online survey of individuals in leadership
positions and produce a report titled “Diversity of Representation in Public
Appointments”. Subsequently Common Purpose and the Government Equalities
Office set up The About Time Public Leaders Courses, designed to support the
government’s aim to increase the diversity of public body board members and
the pool of talented individuals ready to take up public appointments. The
schemes were formally launched in January 2010. Projects. In July 2008, Common
Purpose introduced a project in Bangalore, India, which took 50 people from
different sectors, e.g. IT and banking, and encouraged them to share local and
international knowledge in order to solve problems associated with trading in a
recession. It has also run similar projects in Germany, to highlight the
importance of having good facilities for the disabled. Related issues. In May
2008, the "Yorkshire Post" revealed that Common Purpose had been granted free
office space at the Department for Children, Schools and Families in Sheffield
in 1997. A DCSF spokeswoman said the free office accommodation had been given
in line with the policy of the then Education Secretary David Blunkett, a
Sheffield MP, who had wanted to build better links with the local community.
But Philip Davies, Conservative MP for Shipley, criticised the relationship
between Government and Common Purpose as well as the fact it did not put the
content of its training in the public domain. In August 2008, conspiracy
theories about Common Purpose were mentioned in a House of Commons Library
document entitled 'Eurosceptic Campaigns Alleging the Abolition of
Westminster'. In January 2009, "Third Sector" reported that Common Purpose was
to face no further action from the Information Commissioner's Office. The
announcement came following ICO’s ruling in October 2008 that the charity was
unlikely to have complied with the provisions in the Data Protection Act on
processing personal data when it compiled a list containing the personal
details of people who had made requests under the Freedom of Information Act
2000 relating to its dealings with public authorities.
