Communitarianism Communitarianism is an ideology that emphasizes the connection
between the individual and the community. That community may be the family
unit, but it can also be understood in a far wider sense of personal
interaction, of geographical location, or of shared history. Origins.
Communitarianism has been traced back to early monasticism, but in the
twentieth century began to be formulated as a philosophy by Dorothy Day and the
Catholic Worker movement. In an early article the "Catholic Worker" clarified
the dogma of the Mystical Body of Christ as the basis for the movement's
communitarianism. Communitarianism is also related to the personalist
philosophy of Emmanuel Mounier. Later secular communitarians began from
analysis of classical republicanism, focusing on ancient Greek and Classicist
writers. Since 1990 they became the apologists of the idea of civil society as
a result of work of communist propaganda in Poland using it as a tool of
neoliberal transformation, legitimizing development of the third sector as a
substitute for the welfare state. Soon, due to work of Robert Putnam, they
started to treat Tocqueville as a main theoretician of civil society and their
primary ancestor. Thus they got under influence of neoliberal ideologies since
Tocqueville was a liberal, not a republican theorist, giving new impetus to
their work. Philosophical communitarianism. Communitarianism in philosophy,
like other schools of thought in contemporary political philosophy, can be
defined by its response to John Rawls' "A Theory of Justice". Communitarians
criticize the image Rawls presents of humans as atomistic individuals.
Communitarians claim values and beliefs are formed in public space, in which
debate takes place. Both linguistic and non-linguistic traditions are
communicated to children and form the backdrop against which individuals
formulate and understand beliefs. The dependence of the individual upon
community members is typically meant as descriptive. It does not mean that
individuals should accept majority beliefs. Rather, if an individual rejects a
majority belief, such as the historic belief that slavery is acceptable, he or
she will do so for reasons that make sense within the community (for example,
the Judeo-Christian conception of the "imago Dei", or reasons deriving from
secular Enlightenment humanism) rather than simply any reason at all. In this
sense, the rejection of a single majority belief relies on other majority
beliefs. Ideological communitarianism. Communitarian political philosophy.
Social capital. Beginning in the late 20th century, many authors began to
observe a deterioration in the social networks of the United States. In the
book "Bowling Alone", Robert Putnam observed that nearly every form of civic
organization has undergone drops in membership exemplified by the fact that,
while more people are bowling than in the 1950s, there are fewer bowling
leagues. In recent years, Putnam has revised this argument. This results in a
decline in "social capital", described by Putnam as "the collective value of
all 'social networks' and the inclinations that arise from these networks to do
things for each other". According to Putnam and his followers, social capital
is a key component to building and maintaining democracy. Positive rights.
Central to the communitarian philosophy is the concept of positive rights,
which are rights or guarantees to certain things. These may include state
subsidized education, state subsidized housing, a safe and clean environment,
universal health care, and even the right to a job with the concomitant
obligation of the government or individuals to provide one. To this end,
communitarians generally support social security programs, public works
programs, and laws limiting such things as pollution. A common objection is
that by providing such rights, communitarians violate the negative rights of
the citizens; rights to "not" have something done for you. For example,
taxation to pay for such programs as described above dispossesses individuals
of property. Proponents of positive rights, by attributing the protection of
negative rights to the society rather than the government, respond that
individuals would not have any rights in the absence of societies—a central
tenet of communitarianism—and thus have a personal responsibility to give
something back to it. Some have viewed this as a negation of natural rights.
However, what is or is not a "natural right" is a source of contention in
modern politics, as well as historically; for example, whether or not universal
health care, private property or protection from polluters can be considered a
birthright. Alternatively, some agree that negative rights may be violated by a
government action, but argue that it is justifiable if the positive rights
protected outweigh the negative rights lost. In the same vein, supporters of
positive rights further argue that negative rights are irrelevant in their
absence. Moreover, some communitarians "experience this less as a case of being
used for others' ends and more as a way of contributing to the purposes of a
community I regard as my own". Comparison to other political philosophies.
Communitarianism cannot be classified as being wholly left or right, and many
theorists claim to represent a sort of radical center. Progressives in the
American sense or social democrats in the European sense generally share the
communitarian position on issues relating to the economy, such as the need for
environmental protection and public education, but not on cultural issues.
Communitarians and conservatives generally agree on cultural issues, such as
support for character education and faith-based programs, but communitarians do
not support capitalism generally embraced by American conservatives.
Authoritarianism. Some people have argued that communitarianism's focus on
social cohesion raises similarities with nationalistic communism, or various
forms of authoritarianism, although supporters contend that there are
substantial differences between communitarianism and authoritarianism, and that
communitarianism has very little in common with Communism, which they see as
not really valuing individual liberty at all. Authoritarian governments often
embrace extremist ideologies and rule with brute force, accompanied with severe
restrictions on personal freedom, political and civil rights. Authoritarian
governments are overt about the role of the government as director and
commander. Civil society and democracy are not generally characteristic of
authoritarian regimes. For the most part, communitarians emphasize the use of
non-governmental organizations, such as private businesses, churches, non-
profits, or labor unions, in furthering their goals. This places
communitarianism close to neoliberalism, while development of the third sector
is a part of the politics of dismantling of the institutions of welfare state.
Communitarian movement. The modern communitarian movement was first articulated
by the Responsive Communitarian Platform, written in the United States by a
group of ethicists, activists, and social scientists including Amitai Etzioni,
Mary Ann Glendon, and William Galston. The Communitarian Network, founded in
1993 by Amitai Etzioni, is the best-known group advocating communitarianism.
One of the network's many initiatives to reach out to a broader public is the
transnational project Diversity within Unity, which advocates a communitarian
approach towards immigration and minority rights in today's diversifying
societies. The project is endorsed by a diverse and international group of
supporters, including former Dutch prime-minister Jan-Peter Balkenende from the
Christian Democratic Appeal; Rita Süssmuth from the Christian Democratic
Union; the Hungarian dissident and philosopher György Bence; British political
scholar David Miller; and others. A think tank called the Institute for
Communitarian Policy Studies is also directed by Etzioni. Other voices of
communitarianism include Don Eberly, director of the Civil Society Project and
Robert Putnam. Influence in the United States. Reflecting the dominance of
liberal and conservative politics in the United States, no major party and few
elected officials advocate communitarianism. Thus there is no consensus on
individual policies, but some that most communitarians endorse have been
enacted. It is quite possible that the United States' right-libertarian
ideological underpinnings have suppressed major communitarian factions from
emerging. Communitarians are often easily villainized as those seeking big
governments and nanny states. President Bill Clinton was open about his support
for much of Amitai Etzioni's philosophy, though whether this reflected on his
actual policy program is debatable. It has also been suggested that the
"compassionate conservatism" espoused by President Bush during his 2000
presidential campaign was a form of conservative communitarian thinking, though
he too did not implement it in his policy program. Cited policies have included
economic and rhetorical support for education, volunteerism, and community
programs, as well as a social emphasis on promoting families, character
education, traditional values, and faith-based projects. President Barack
Obama's support for public works programs, such as Americorps could also be
interpreted as a communitarian possition. Dana Milbank, writing in the
"Washington Post", remarked of modern communitarians, "There is still no such
thing as a card-carrying communitarian, and therefore no consensus on policies.
Some, such as John DiIulio and outside Bush adviser Marvin Olasky, favor
religious solutions for communities, while others, like Etzioni and Galston,
prefer secular approaches." In August 2011, the libertarian "Reason Magazine"
worked with the Rupe organization to survey 1,200 Americans by telephone. The
Reason-Rupe poll found that "Americans cannot easily be bundled into either the
'liberal' or 'conservative' groups". Specifically, 28% expressed conservative
views, 24% expressed libertarian views, 20% expressed communitarian views, and
28% expressed liberal views. The margin of error was ±3. A similar Gallup
survey in 2011 included possible centrist/moderate responses. That poll
reported that 17% expressed conservative views, 22% expressed libertarian
views, 20% expressed communitarian views, 17% expressed centrist views, and 24%
expressed liberal views. The organization used the terminology "the bigger the
better" to describe communitarianism. Criticisms. Liberal theorists such as
Simon Caney disagree that philosophical communitarianism has any interesting
criticisms to make of liberalism. They reject the communitarian charges that
liberalism neglects the value of community, and holds an "atomized" or asocial
view of the self. If they are correct in this, then communitarian doctrine
reduces to little more than traditionalism and cultural moral relativism.
However, he goes on to show that such arguments cannot be leveled against the
particular communitarian theories of Michael Walzer and Mervyn Frost. Other
critics emphasize close relation of communitarianism to neoliberalism and new
policies of dismantling the welfare state institutions through development of
the third sector.
