Communities Organized for Public Service Communities Organized for Public
Service (COPS) is a coalition of non-partisan, grassroots community pressure
groups based in San Antonio, Texas. It is an affiliate of the Industrial Areas
Foundation (IAF), a group dedicated to grassroots community organizing that was
developed by Saul Alinsky in Chicago during the 1930s. Founded in 1974, COPS’
mission is to secure specific, concrete standard of living improvements for
neighborhoods traditionally neglected by city leaders through relational
organizing. Though advocating primarily for the interests of lower-middle class
and working class Mexican-Americans on the city’s west and south sides, COPS
avoids the label of civil rights organization, instead projecting itself as an
agent for fair and equitable distribution of city resources and services. COPS
success in this endeavor to date is remarkable, amounting to over one billion
dollars in group-sponsored projects and initiatives. Goals and Methods. One of
its stated aims is to create give and take relationships between diverse
interest groups in the greater community that can lead to the realization of
goals defined within discrete neighborhoods. On the other hand, relational
organizing leads to initiatives that benefit the larger community, such as
economic development, aquifer protection, infrastructure development, and
improvement of educational opportunities. Inherent in this process is the
development of local leaders, who work to express the values and interests of
the membership. The role of IAF and COPS organizers is to identify natural
community leaders and stimulate their growth. In this sense, COPS and the IAF
represent an impulse for the practice of genuine democratic participation in
the American political system. Membership and Tactics. C.O.P.S. members
typically present as social conservatives, professing deep beliefs in family,
community, and religion. However, their actions, especially in the early days
of the organization, were often confrontational. On numerous occasions, they
faced off with the city council, other politicians or functionaries, and
business leaders to demand that these mainly Anglo elites address the group’s
concerns. C.O.P.S. organizers carefully planned the actions for effect and
insured that media was present to witness the events. As C.O.P.S. achieved
success in its initiatives and gained access to political power, it modified
its tactics, preferring to approach city and business leaders in a less
dramatic fashion. However, one feature of C.O.P.S. methods that remains is the
accountability session, in which the group confronts local politicians and
holds them to account for their failure or success in keeping promises.
External links. The University of Texas at San Antonio houses a collection of
news clippings, project files, reports, budgets, programs and general office
files for C.O.P.S.
