Commodity market Commodity markets are markets where raw or primary products
are exchanged. These raw commodities are traded on regulated commodities
exchanges, in which they are bought and sold in standardized contracts. This
article focuses o markets. It covers physical product (food, metals,
electricity) markets but not the ways that services, including those of
governments, nor investment, nor debt, can be seen as a commodity. Articles on
reinsurance markets, stock markets, bond markets and currency markets cover
those concerns separately and in more depth. One focus of this article is the
relationship between simple commodity money and the more complex instruments
offered in the commodity markets. See List of traded commodities for some
commodities and their trading units and places. History. The modern commodity
markets have their roots in the trading of agricultural products. While wheat
and corn, cattle and pigs, were widely traded using standard instruments in the
19th century in the United States, other basic foodstuffs such as soybeans were
only added quite recently in most markets. For a commodity market to be
established, there must be very broad consensus on the variations in the
product that make it acceptable for one purpose or another. The economic impact
of the development of commodity markets is hard to overestimate. Through the
19th century "the exchanges became effective spokesmen for, and innovators of,
improvements in transportation, warehousing, and financing, which paved the way
to expanded interstate and international trade." Early history of commodity
markets. Historically, dating from ancient Sumerian use of sheep or goats,
other peoples using pigs, rare seashells, or other items as commodity money,
people have sought ways to standardize and trade contracts in the delivery of
such items, to render trade itself more smooth and predictable. Commodity money
and commodity markets in a crude early form are believed to have originated in
Sumer where small baked clay tokens in the shape of sheep or goats were used in
trade. Sealed in clay vessels with a certain number of such tokens, with that
number written on the outside, they represented a promise to deliver that
number. This made them a form of commodity money - more than an I.O.U. but less
than a guarantee by a nation-state or bank. However, they were also known to
contain promises of time and date of delivery - this made them like a modern
futures contract. Regardless of the details, it was only possible to verify the
number of tokens inside by shaking the vessel or by breaking it, at which point
the number or terms written on the outside became subject to doubt. Eventually
the tokens disappeared, but the contracts remained on flat tablets. This
represented the first system of commodity accounting. Classical civilizations
built complex global markets trading gold or silver for spices, cloth, wood and
weapons, most of which had standards of quality and timeliness. Considering the
many hazards of climate, piracy, theft and abuse of military fiat by rulers of
kingdoms along the trade routes, it was a major focus of these civilizations to
keep markets open and trading in these scarce commodities. Reputation and
clearing became central concerns, and the states which could handle them most
effectively became very powerful empires, trusted by many peoples to manage and
mediate trade and commerce. Size of the market. The trading of commodities
consists of direct physical trading and derivatives trading. Exchange traded
commodities have seen an upturn in the volume of trading since the start of the
decade. This was largely a result of the growing attraction of commodities as
an asset class and a proliferation of investment options which has made it
easier to access this market. The global volume of commodities contracts traded
on exchanges increased by a fifth in 2010, and a half since 2008, to around 2.5
billion million contracts. During the three years up to the end of 2010, global
physical exports of commodities fell by 2%, while the outstanding value of OTC
commodities derivatives declined by two-thirds as investors reduced risk
following a five-fold increase in value outstanding in the previous three
years. Trading on exchanges in China and India has gained in importance in
recent years due to their emergence as significant commodities consumers and
producers. China accounted for more than 60% of exchange-traded commodities in
2009, up on its 40% share in the previous year. Commodity assets under
management more than doubled between 2008 and 2010 to nearly $380bn. Inflows
into the sector totalled over $60bn in 2010, the second highest year on record,
down from the record $72bn allocated to commodities funds in the previous year.
The bulk of funds went into precious metals and energy products. The growth in
prices of many commodities in 2010 contributed to the increase in the value of
commodities funds under management. Commodity as a new asset class for pension
funds and SWFs. In order to further diversify their investments and mitigate
the risks associated with inflationary debasement of currencies, an increasing
number of pension funds and sovereign wealth funds are allocating more capital
to real assets such as a commodities and commodity-related infrastructure.
Think-tanks such as the World Pensions Council (WPC) have argued that, unlike
previous recessionary cycles, commodity prices could remain durably at
relatively high levels as Gulf Arab, Latin American and Asian governments are
less inclined to accommodate G7 nations on the supply front. Commodities
trading. Spot trading. Spot trading is any transaction where delivery either
takes place immediately, or with a minimum lag between the trade and delivery
due to technical constraints. Spot trading normally involves visual inspection
of the commodity or a sample of the commodity, and is carried out in markets
such as wholesale markets. Commodity markets, on the other hand, require the
existence of agreed standards so that trades can be made without visual
inspection. Forward contracts. A forward contract is an agreement between two
parties to exchange at some fixed future date a given quantity of a commodity
for a price defined today. The fixed price today is known as the forward price.
Early on these forward contracts were used as a way of getting products from
producer to the consumer. These typically were only for food and agricultural
products. Futures contracts. A futures contract has the same general features
as a forward contract but is standardized and transacted through a futures
exchange. Although more complex today, early forward contracts for example,
were used for rice in seventeenth century Japan. Modern forward, or futures
agreements, began in Chicago in the 1840s, with the appearance of the
railroads. Chicago, being centrally located, emerged as the hub between
Midwestern farmers and producers and the east coast consumer population
centers. In essence, a futures contract is a standardized forward contract in
which the buyer and the seller accept the terms in regards to product, grade,
quantity and location and are only free to negotiate the price. Hedging.
Hedging, a common practice of farming cooperatives, insures against a poor
harvest by purchasing futures contracts in the same commodity. If the
cooperative has significantly less of its product to sell due to weather or
insects, it makes up for that loss with a profit on the markets, since the
overall supply of the crop is short everywhere that suffered the same
conditions. Delivery and condition guarantees. In addition, delivery day,
method of settlement and delivery point must all be specified. Typically,
trading must end two (or more) business days prior to the delivery day, so that
the routing of the shipment can be finalized via ship or rail, and payment can
be settled when the contract arrives at any delivery point. Standardization.
U.S. soybean futures, for example, are of standard grade if they are "GMO or a
mixture of GMO and Non-GMO No. 2 yellow soybeans of Indiana, Ohio and Michigan
origin produced in the U.S.A. (Non-screened, stored in silo)," and of
deliverable grade if they are "GMO or a mixture of GMO and Non-GMO No. 2 yellow
soybeans of Iowa, Illinois and Wisconsin origin produced in the U.S.A. (Non-
screened, stored in silo)." Note the distinction between states, and the need
to clearly mention their status as GMO (Genetically Modified Organism) which
makes them unacceptable to most organic food buyers. Similar specifications
apply for cotton, orange juice, cocoa, sugar, wheat, corn, barley, pork
bellies, milk, feedstuffs, fruits, vegetables, other grains, other beans, hay,
other livestock, meats, poultry, eggs, or any other commodity which is so
traded. Standardization has also occurred technologically, as the use of the
FIX Protocol by commodities exchanges has allowed trade messages to be sent,
received and processed in the same format as stocks or equities. This process
began in 2001 when the CME launched a FIX-compliant interface and has now been
adopted by commodity exchanges around the world. Regulation of commodity
markets. In the United States, the principal regulator of commodity and futures
markets is the Commodity Futures Trading Commission but it is the National
Futures Association that enforces rules and regulations put forth by the CFTC.
Oil. Building on the infrastructure and credit and settlement networks
established for food and precious metals, many such markets have proliferated
drastically in the late 20th century. Oil was the first form of energy so
widely traded, and the fluctuations in the oil markets are of particular
political interest. Some commodity market speculation is directly related to
the stability of certain states, e.g., during the Persian Gulf War, speculation
on the survival of the regime of Saddam Hussein in Iraq. Similar political
stability concerns have from time to time driven the price of oil. The oil
market is an exception. Most markets are not so tied to the politics of
volatile regions - even natural gas tends to be more stable, as it is not
traded across oceans by tanker as extensively. Commodity markets and
protectionism. Developing countries (democratic or not) have been moved to
harden their currencies, accept International Monetary Fund rules, join the
World Trade Organization (WTO), and submit to a broad regime of reforms that
amount to a hedge against being isolated. China's entry into the WTO signalled
the end of truly isolated nations entirely managing their own currency and
affairs. The need for stable currency and predictable clearing and rules-based
handling of trade disputes, has led to a global trade hegemony - many nations
hedging on a global scale against each other's anticipated protectionism, were
they to fail to join the WTO.
