Commonwealth of World Citizens The Commonwealth of World Citizens (later named
'Mondcivitan Republic' after the Esperanto) was initiated by Hugh J.
Schonfield, an associate and disciple of H.G. Wells. It was founded in 1956 and
organized under its own democratic government as a nation to serve mankind - a
Servant-Nation. Birth and goals. Hugh Schonfield was a biblical scholar, one
time Hebrew Christian, who was later best known for his book "The Passover
Plot." Schonfield first felt the need for a Servant-Nation for the impartial
service of all nations as far back as 1938. The years from 1938 to 1950 were
devoted to the consideration of all aspects of the venture, including questions
of international law. What was created was a worldwide people, not an
organisation, a people with a valid and recognised citizenship and having a
relationship with the governments of every country. When the United Nations was
formed, notification was given to the Secretary-General and to all the states
concerned of the intention to proceed with the plan to bring into being a
Mondcivitan Republic. Initial action commenced in November 1950. In the summer
of 1951, a General Assembly of the first citizens was held in Paris, which
appointed a Secretariat as the acting administration with offices in London. By
1952 the Republic had citizens in 14 countries, by 1954 in 25 countries and by
1955 in 30 countries. The second General Assembly in 1953 set up a commission
to draft the text of the constitution of the new people. After amendment at the
third General Assembly of 1955, the Provisional Constitution was approved for
adoption. In the same year humanitarian activities were initiated by the
creation of the World Service Trust as a specialised agency of the Republic.
Caresse Crosby merged her group with the legally established Commonwealth of
World Citizens. Ideals. The birth of this nation arose from the need felt by
many people throughout the world to give organic expression to the idea of the
fundamental unity of the human race by developing a common way of life and
government, which experimentally would be a preparation by example for a co-
operative World community embracing all peoples. The Republic was to be the sum
total of persons holding its citizenship at any given time, without regard for
colour or ethnic origin. In its political expression it was a free and self-
governing people and world community denying to itself the possession of a
national homeland. The new nation expressed the concept of world unity based on
the Brotherhood of Man. The idea was that in the capacity of a Servant-Nation,
it should labour for international reconciliation and the resolving of
international problems and conflicts. The loyalty it demanded was higher than
that given to any state, requiring in the individual full dedication to the
principles and purposes of the new nation, yet at the initial stage without
forfeiting state citizenship. The Republic. With citizens in 33 countries it
was decided in 1956 that the Mondcivitan Republic should be proclaimed in being
"de facto" and that all governments should be advised accordingly and furnished
with a copy of the constitution. A Constituent Assembly of the citizens was
convened at the Temple of Peace, Cardiff, headquarters of the United Nations
Association in Wales. The constitution was adopted on August 29 and the flag of
the Commonwealth hoisted over the building. A council was elected to prepare
the way for parliamentary government. In 1958 a democratic general election was
held giving opportunity to citizens of the Republic in countries where they
resided to elect deputies to the first parliament which met in Vienna in May
1959. Up to this time the Nation had used the title, "Commonwealth of World
Citizens" which was abandoned in favour of "The Mondcivitan Republic". Dr. Hugh
Schonfield, the pioneer of the enterprise, was elected acting president and a
government was formed headed by a young citizen, Donald Hanby as prime
minister. During the life of the first parliament good relations were developed
with a number of countries and the new nation was responsible for various
initiatives to promote world peace and international understanding, both
directly and by preparing helpful resolutions for sponsorship by member states
in the United Nations General Assembly. All measures taken were in the spirit
of the objectives to which the Republic was uniquely committed on behalf of
Mankind as a Servant-Nation. In 1963, the Mondcivitan Republic held its second
parliament. The term of this parliament was to be for five years. In accordance
with the constitution, a presidium of five was elected under the name of the
Supreme Council, each member of which would hold the office of president for
one year in turn. Those elected, in the order of their presidency, were Mrs.
Frieda bacon, Dr. Justo Priesto, Nguyen-Huu, Anthony Brooke and Hugh J.
Schonfield, the last named to take office at the end of August 1967. The post
of Prime Minister was relinquished and replaced under the constitution with
that of Commissioner-General and Mr. Donald Hanby was re-elected to that
office. At this time, the International Arbitration League, founded at the
beginning of the 20th century by the Nobel Peace Prize winner, Sir William
Randal Cremer, decided that its work could best be continued by the Mondcivitan
Republic and was duly incorporated. The benevolent work of the World Service
Trust continued and a housing agency, the Cremer Housing Association, was
brought into being, which later provided new premises for use by the Republic.
In 1971, it was decided to suspend the Provisional Constitution to make way for
formulating a full constitution. To enable the Republic to ensure the best
means of government, an Executive Council was appointed to take full
responsibility for the nation's affairs in the interim period. It was hoped
that a full constitution and self-government could be achieved by 1975. This,
unfortunately did not happen. Projects. At this time Hugh Schonfield's book
about the fundamental ideas behind the Servant-Nation, The "Politics of God,"
was published and received much interest, particularly because it had been
preceded by the best-seller, The Passover Plot, which had created much
discussion and aroused interest in the concept of Messianism. It became
increasingly important for the vision and the mission of the Republic to be
clearly stated in its role as Servant-Nation as many had been confused by the
reference to world citizenship and the movement which carries that name and the
emphasis on service to mankind and the Messianic nation was re-instated as the
core principle. Many projects were started, some of which are described below:
- The Community school project was an exciting experiment which the Republic's
citizens commenced at that time. It provided a viable alternative to the
prevalent educational concepts. Its primary aim was to give each child freedom,
experience, resources and love to develop his, or her, whole self to the
fullest. It was believed that this should take place in, and directly concerned
with, the community as a whole, encouraging children to take an active,
positive interest in the community, serving and changing it for the betterment
of the whole of mankind. Various methods of achieving these aims were
implemented. The school was completely non fee-paying and was supported by
generous donations from citizens. Many of the children were "problem" children
from the neighbourhood of the school who have since been able to lead
productive lives. The World Service Trust. The World Service Trust was founded
in 1955 as a special agency of the Mondcivitan republic for the purpose of
giving impartial aid to people and countries in circumstances of poverty,
famine, disease and epidemics, as well as natural disasters. The Trust was also
designed to assist education and improve standards of living. The Hugh and
Helene Schonfield World Service Trust. In 1980 the Trust became a foundation
and was renamed "The Hugh and Helene Schonfield World Service Trust". With
funds contributed to it by the Schonfields, it took on the specific
responsibility of acting as the guarantor of the Servant-Nation vision and has
given grants to organisations which it is felt will promote the ideology and
spirit of Hugh Schonfield's visionary inspiration. The Republic fell into
decline after the 1980s, but its archives are being incrementally presented in
the Internet. The activities have become more centred in Germany as the
community initiated by Wilhelm Haller felt a more decentralised and less
bureaucratic approach was necessary. A new initiative was started in 2004 with
the founding of the 'International Leadership and Business Society' which hopes
to encourage the application of the original Mondcivitan principles in business
and everyday life. The Hugh & Helene Schonfield World Service Trust continues
its work particularly with its responsibility for the archiving and publicising
of the work of the late Hugh J. Schonfield and research into the concepts of
Messianism, Humanitism and Servant-Nationhood and methods to find their
practical realisation. A small museum and the archives of the Mondcivitan
Republic are kept in the Trust's center in Germany and can be accessed for
research on request.
