Commodity In economics, a commodity is the generic term for any marketable item
produced to satisfy wants or needs. Economic commodities comprise goods and
services. The more specific meaning of the term "commodity" is applied to goods
only. It is used to describe a class of goods for which there is demand, but
which is supplied without qualitative differentiation across a market. A
commodity has full or partial fungibility; that is, the market treats its
instances as equivalent or nearly so with no regard to who produced them. "From
the taste of wheat it is not possible to tell who produced it, a Russian serf,
a French peasant or an English capitalist." Petroleum and copper are examples
of such commodities. The price of copper is universal, and fluctuates daily
based on global supply and demand. Items such as stereo systems, on the other
hand, have many aspects of product differentiation, such as the brand, the user
interface, the perceived quality etc. And, the more valuable a stereo is
perceived to be, the more it will cost. In contrast, one of the characteristics
of a commodity good is that its price is determined as a function of its market
as a whole. Well-established physical commodities have actively traded spot and
derivative markets. Generally, these are basic resources and agricultural
products such as iron ore, crude oil, coal, salt, sugar, coffee beans,
soybeans, aluminum, copper, rice, wheat, gold, silver, palladium, and platinum.
Soft commodities are goods that are grown, while hard commodities are the ones
that are extracted through mining. There is another important class of energy
commodities which includes electricity, gas, coal and oil. Electricity has the
particular characteristic that it is usually uneconomical to store; hence,
electricity must be consumed as soon as it is produced. Commodification (also
called commoditization) occurs as a goods or services market loses
differentiation across its supply base, often by the diffusion of the
intellectual capital necessary to acquire or produce it efficiently. As such,
goods that formerly carried premium margins for market have become commodities,
such as generic pharmaceuticals and DRAM chips. Another example is the credit
card product, where all suppliers offer almost identical interest rates, fees,
rewards programs, and bait & hook incentive models for new customers. Since the
core credit card product is essentially identical, the only remaining market
differentiators are branding & customer service. There is a spectrum of
commodification, rather than a binary distinction of "commodity versus
differentiable product". Few products have complete undifferentiability and
hence fungibility; even electricity can be differentiated in the market based
on its method of generation (e.g., fossil fuel, wind, solar). Many products'
degree of commodification depends on the buyer's mentality and means. For
example, milk, eggs, and notebook paper are considered by many customers as
completely undifferentiable and fungible; lowest price is the only deciding
factor in the purchasing choice. Other customers take into consideration other
factors besides price, such as environmental sustainability and animal welfare.
To these customers, distinctions such as "organic versus not" or "cage free
versus not" count toward differentiating brands of milk or eggs, and percentage
of recycled content or forestry council certification count toward
differentiating brands of notebook paper. Etymology. The word "commodity" came
into use in English in the 15th century, from the French "commodité", to a
benefit or profit. Going further back, the French word derived from the Latin
"commoditatem" (nominative "commoditas") meaning "fitness, adaptation". The
Latin root "commod-" meant variously "appropriate", "proper measure, time or
condition" and "advantage, benefit". Recently, many industry individuals have
begun to identify workers' compensation insurance as a commodity. Global
commodities trading company. This is a list of giant commodities trading
companies who operate worldwide. Commodity trade. In the original and
simplified sense, commodities were things of value, of uniform quality, that
were produced in large quantities by many different producers; the items from
each different producer were considered equivalent. On a commodity exchange, it
is the underlying standard stated in the contract that defines the commodity,
not any quality inherent in a specific producer's product. Markets for trading
commodities can be very efficient, particularly if the division into pools
matches demand segments. These markets will quickly respond to changes in
supply and demand to find an equilibrium price and quantity. In addition,
investors can gain passive exposure to the commodity markets through a
commodity price index. Commodity as a new asset class for pension funds and
SWFs. In order to further diversify their investments and mitigate the risks
associated with inflationary debasement of currencies, an increasing number of
pension funds and sovereign wealth funds are allocating more capital to non-
listed assets such as a commodities and commodity-related infrastructure.
Think-tanks such as the World Pensions Council (WPC) have argued that, unlike
previous recessionary cycles, commodity prices could remain durably at
relatively high levels as Gulf Arab, Latin American and Asian governments are
less inclined to accommodate G7 nations on the supply front. Inventory data.
The inventory of commodities, with low inventories typically leading to more
volatile future prices and increasing the risk of a "stockout" (inventory
exhaustion). According to economist theorists, companies receive a convenience
yield by holding inventories of certain commodities. Data on inventories of
commodities are not available from one common source, although data is
available from various sources. Inventory data on 31 commodities was used in a
2006 study on the relationship between inventories and commodity futures risk
premiums. Commodities in Marxism. In classical political economy and especially
in Karl Marx's critique of political economy, a commodity is an object or a
good or service ("product" or "activity") produced by human labour. Objects are
external to man. However, some objects attain "use value" to persons in this
world, when they are found to be "necessary, useful or pleasant in life," "Use
value" makes an object "an object of human wants," or is "a means of
subsistence in the widest sense." As society developed people found that they
could exchange goods and services for other goods and services. At this stage,
these goods and services became "commodities." Commodities are defined as
objects which are offered for sale or are "exchanged in a market." In the
marketplace, where commodities are sold, "use value" is not helpful in
facilitating the sale of commodities. Accordingly, in addition to having use
value, commodities must have an "exchange value"--a value that could be
expressed in the market. Prior to Marx, many economists debated as to what
elements made up exchange value. Adam Smith maintained that exchange value was
made up of rent, profit, labour and the costs of wear and tear on the
instruments of husbandry. David Ricardo, a follower of Adam Smith, modified
Smith's approach on this point by alleging that labour alone is the content of
the exchange value of any good or service. While maintaining that all exchange
value in commodities was derived directly from the hands of the people that
made the commodity, Ricardo noted that only part of the exchange value of the
commodity was paid to the worker who made the commodity. The other part of the
value of this particular commodity was labour that was not paid to the
worker—unpaid labour. This unpaid labour was retained by the owner of the
means of production. In capitalist society, the capitalist owns the means of
production and therefore the unpaid labour is, therefore, retained by the
capitalist as rent or as profit. The means of production means the site where
the commodity is made, the raw products that are used in the production and the
instruments or machines that are used for the production of the commodity.
However, not all commodities are reproducible nor were all commodities
originally intended to be sold in the market. These priced goods are also
treated as commodities, e.g. human labor-power, works of art and natural
resources ("earth itself is an instrument of labour", even though they may not
be produced specifically for the market, or be non-reproducible goods. Marx's
analysis of the commodity is intended to help solve the problem of what
establishes the economic value of goods, using the labor theory of value. This
problem was extensively debated by Adam Smith, David Ricardo and Karl
Rodbertus-Jagetzow among others. All three of the above-mentioned economists,
rejected the theory that labour composed 100% of the exchange value of any
commodity. In varying degrees, these economists turned to supply and demand to
establish the price of commodities. Marx held that the "price" and the "value"
of a commodity were not synonymous. Price of any commodity would vary according
to the imbalance of supply to demand at any one period of time. The "value" of
the same commodity, would be consistent and would reflect the amount of labor
value used to produce that commodity. Prior to Marx, economists noted that the
problem with using the "quantity of labour" to establish the value of
commodities was that the time spent by an unskilled worker would be longer than
the time spent on the same commodity by a skilled worker. Thus, under this
analysis, the commodity produced by an unskilled worker would be more valuable
than the same commodity produced by the skilled worker. Marx pointed out,
however, that in society at large, an average amount of time that was necessary
to produce the commodity would arise. This average time necessary to produce
the commodity Marx called the "socially necessary labour time" Socially
necessary labour time was the proper basis on which to base the "exchange
value" of a given commodity. Value and price are not equivalent terms in
economics, and theorising the specific relationship of value to market price
has been a challenge for both liberal and Marxist economists. However, Marx
held that the value and price of any commodity would coincide only when demand
and supply were equivalent to each other.
