Compensating differential "Wage differential is a term used in labour economics
to analyze the relation between the wage rate and the unpleasantness, risk, or
other undesirable attributes of a particular job. A compensating differential,
which is also called a compensating wage differential or an equalizing
difference"', is defined as the additional amount of income that a given worker
must be offered in order to motivate them to accept a given undesirable job,
relative to other jobs that worker could perform. One can also speak of the
compensating differential for an especially desirable job, or one that provides
special benefits, but in this case the differential would be "negative": that
is, a given worker would be willing to accept a "lower" wage for an especially
desirable job, relative to other jobs. The idea of compensating differentials
has been used to analyze issues such as the risk of future unemployment, the
risk of injury, the risk of unsafe sex, the monetary value workers place on
their own lives, and in explaining geographical wage differentials.
=Geographical Wage Differentials= There is a wide literature dealing with
geographical wage differentials. Following the neoclassical assumption of
clearing labour markets, where there is a more attractive area to live in and
if labour mobility is perfect, then more and more workers will move to this
area which in turn will increase the supply of labour in this area and in turn
depress wages. If the attractiveness of that area compared to other areas do
not change, the wage rate will be set at such a rate that workers would be
indifferent between living in areas that are more attractive but with a lower
wage and living in areas which are more attractive and with a higher wage.
Henceforth, a sustained equilibrium with different wage rates across different
areas can happen The theory. The theory of compensating wage differentials
provides a theoretical framework to explain why the ‘underlying’ structure
of pay differs between geographical areas. Competition in labour markets
ensures that the net advantages of different jobs will tend to equality. Thus,
higher pay in some areas of the country is expected where the cost-of-living is
higher while higher pay is also necessary to compensate for a less pleasant
working environment. The rate of pay in the private sector represents
(according to the hypothesis) the exact rate necessary to attract and retain
staff. Thus all else equal a higher rate of pay in one area means that this
area is less attractive (either has low amenity levels or higher cost-of-
living). The pay offered in this area is set to counter the relative
unattractiveness of the region. Some empirical studies have tried to test this
assumption. Most of this research is interested in inter geographical wage
disparities. The research ask the question: how can geographical wage
differentials be explained? The empirical results found in the literature. Most
of the empirical results from the literature attempt to decompose the
geographical wage differentials according to human capital characteristics.
Areas with more skilled workers will tend to have higher mean wages. Though,
average wages may differ among different areas because they offer different
levels of amenities. It is usually believed in economics that wages in areas
where the level of amenity is high comparatively to other areas will be higher.
Empirical research has attempted to measure area characteristics in order to
measure this effect on average wages. Though, some characteristics may be
attractive for some workers but because workers may have different utilities,
other workers may not be attracted by these characteristics. The following
assumption is usually made: workers among a similar occupation will share
similar utility function, then it is possible to measure the characteristics of
areas on the mean wage of a particular occupation. Human capital. Some articles
have brought evidence that wages differ across areas in different countries
using a decomposition analysis of the mean wage. In 1992, Reilly used this
decomposition technique to decompose wage differentials between 6 local labour
markets in the UK. The decomposition allows to decompose mean wage differences
into two parts, one which is the consequence of individual characteristics in
those 6 labour markets and the other one which is due to unexplained
differences. The author finds that the differences in wages between labour
markets is at around 20%, and that between Aberdeen and Rochdale, 50% of this
difference is explained by workers' characteristics, the other part is not
explained. The unexplained differences can be thought of being consequences of
differences in local areas attractiveness. Though this author does not give any
evidence that this is the case. Similar results are obtained by García and
Molina for Spain with data from 1994 Pereira and Galego analysed wage
differentials in Portugal using dynamics. They also found similar results to
García and Molina and to Reilly. Area characteristics. Part of the
attractiveness of areas is the cost-of-living. An area with a lower cost-of-
living should be more attractive than areas with an expensive cost-of-living.
Unfortunately, it is difficult to measure within countries cost-of-living. In
an article published in 1983, Shah and Walker estimated a wage equation for
male white workers in the UK using the general household survey of 1973 The
cost-of-living proxy is taken from Reward Regional Surveys Ltd which publish
reports on cost-of-living and regional comparisons from 1974 up to at least
1996 The description of the construction of those cost-of-living is not clear.
Wage differentials change and sometimes are reversed when they introduce the
cost-of-living, Scotland and the South East of England are worse off when
introducing cost-of-living compared to the Midlands regions. This result can be
though of some evidence of the fact that differences in monetary reward are not
the same as the differences in real-term awards. This suggests that the
differences in wages between regions compensate at least partly for differences
in cost-of-living. In 1991, Blackaby and Murphy estimated standardised
geographical wage differentials and then explained these geographical wage
differentials with a set of weather, environmental and prices indexes. The
authors include other variables based on two other theories: efficiency wage
and search theory. The results provide some evidence that workers are not
suffering from money illusion as where areas with prices are higher by 10% than
another area also have wages 10% higher. In consequence, wage do compensate for
local differences in prices. In England, wages are usually thought of being
better in the South than in the North of the country. Though Blackaby and
Murphy show that wages when controlled for individual characteristics,
occupations characteristics, cost-of-living and industry mix are better in the
North than in the South for manual workers. Thus they conclude that it makes
sense for unemployed in the North to wait and look for a job in the North as
that is where they will get relatively better pay. This give some extra
evidence that wage differentials compensate, at least partly, for geographical
differences in cost-of-living. =Discussion= =Possible confusion with other
concepts= The terms compensation differential, pay differential, and wage
differential (see wage dispersion or economic inequality) are also used in
economics, but normally have a different meaning. They simply refer to
differences in total pay (or the wage rate) in any context. So a 'compensation
differential' can be explained by many factors, such as differences in the
skills of the workers in those jobs, the country or geographical area in which
those jobs are performed, or the characteristics of the jobs themselves. A
'compensating differential', in contrast, refers only to differences in pay due
to differences in the jobs themselves, for a given worker (or for two identical
workers). In the theory of price indices, economists also use the term
compensating variation, which is yet another unrelated concept. A 'compensating
variation' is the change in wealth required to leave a consumer's well-being
unchanged when prices change. =See also= =References= =Notes=
