Comparative statics In economics, comparative statics is the comparison of two
different economic outcomes, before and after a change in some underlying
exogenous parameter. As a study of "statics" it compares two different
equilibrium states, after the process of adjustment (if any). It does not study
the motion towards equilibrium, nor the process of the change itself.
Comparative statics is commonly used to study changes in supply and demand when
analyzing a single market, and to study changes in monetary or fiscal policy
when analyzing the whole economy. The term 'comparative statics' itself is more
commonly used in relation to microeconomics (including general equilibrium
analysis) than to macroeconomics. Comparative statics was formalized by John R.
Hicks (1939) and Paul A. Samuelson (1947) (Kehoe, 1987, p. 517) but was
presented graphically from at least the 1870s. For models of stable equilibrium
rates of change, such as the neoclassical growth model, comparative dynamics is
the counterpart of comparative statics (Eatwell, 1987). Linear approximation.
Comparative statics results are usually derived by using the implicit function
theorem to calculate a linear approximation to the system of equations that
defines the equilibrium, under the assumption that the equilibrium is stable.
That is, if we consider a sufficiently small change in some exogenous
parameter, we can calculate how each endogenous variable changes using only the
first derivatives of the terms that appear in the equilibrium equations. Here
formula_7 and formula_8 represent the changes in formula_1 and formula_3,
respectively, while formula_11 and formula_12 are the partial derivatives of
formula_13 with respect to formula_1 and The elements of formula_20 are
sometimes called the multipliers of the elements of "a" on the elements of "x".
Many equations and unknowns. All the equations above remain true in the case of
a system of formula_21 equations in formula_21 unknowns. In other words,
suppose formula_23 represents a system of formula_21 equations involving the
vector of formula_21 unknowns formula_1, and the vector of formula_27 given
parameters formula_3. If we make a sufficiently small change formula_8 in the
parameters, then the resulting changes in the endogenous variables can be
approximated arbitrarily well by formula_30. In this case, formula_11
represents the formula_21×formula_21 matrix of partial derivatives of the
functions formula_13 with respect to the variables formula_1, and formula_12
represents the formula_21×formula_27 matrix of partial derivatives of the
functions formula_13 with respect to the parameters formula_3. (The derivatives
in formula_11 and formula_12 are evaluated at the initial values of formula_1
and formula_3.) Note that if one wants just the comparative static effect of
one exogenous variable on one endogenous variable, Cramer's Rule can be used on
the totally differentiated system of equations formula_45. Stability. The
assumption that the equilibrium is stable matters for two reasons. First, if
the equilibrium were unstable, a small parameter change might cause a large
jump in the value of formula_1, invalidating the use of a linear approximation.
Moreover, Paul A. Samuelson's correspondence principle states that stability of
equilibrium has qualitative implications about the comparative static effects.
In other words, knowing that the equilibrium is stable may help us predict
whether each of the coefficients in the vector formula_47 is positive or
negative. Specifically, one of the "n" necessary and jointly sufficient
conditions for stability is that the determinant of the "n"×"n" matrix "B"
have a particular sign; since this determinant appears as the denominator in
the expression for formula_48, the sign of the determinant influences the signs
of all the elements of the vector formula_49 of comparative static effects. An
example of the role of the stability assumption. where formula_52 is the
quantity demanded, formula_53 is the quantity supplied, "P" is the price, "a"
and "c" are intercept parameters determined by exogenous influences on demand
and supply respectively, "b" < 0 is the reciprocal of the slope of the demand
curve, and "g" is the reciprocal of the slope of the supply curve; "g" > 0 if
the supply curve is upward sloped, "g" = 0 if the supply curve is vertical, and
"g" < 0 if the supply curve is backward-bending. If we equate quantity supplied
with quantity demanded to find the equilibrium price formula_54, we find that
formula_55 This means that the equilibrium price depends positively on the
demand intercept if "g" – "b" > 0, but depends negatively on it if "g" –
"b" < 0. Which of these possibilities is relevant? In fact, starting from an
initial static equilibrium and then changing "a", the new equilibrium is
relevant "only" if the market actually goes to that new equilibrium. Suppose
that price adjustments in the market occur according to where formula_57 > 0 is
the speed of adjustment parameter and formula_58 is the time derivative of the
price — that is, it denotes how fast and in what direction the price changes.
By stability theory, "P" will converge to its equilibrium value if and only if
the derivative formula_59 is negative. This derivative is given by This is
negative if and only if "g" – "b" > 0, in which case the demand intercept
parameter "a" positively influences the price. So we can say that while the
direction of effect of the demand intercept on the equilibrium price is
ambiguous when all we know is that the reciprocal of the supply curve's slope,
"g", is negative, in the only relevant case (in which the price actually goes
to its new equilibrium value) an increase in the demand intercept increases the
price. Note that this case, with "g" – "b" > 0, is the case in which the
supply curve, if negatively sloped, is steeper than the demand curve.
Comparative statics without constraints. Suppose formula_61 is a smooth and
strictly concave objective function where "x" is a vector of "n" endogenous
variables and "q" is a vector of "m" exogenous parameters. Consider the
unconstrained optimization problem formula_62. Let formula_63, the "n" by "n"
matrix of first partial derivatives of formula_61 with respect to its first "n"
arguments "x"1...,"x""n". The maximizer formula_65 is defined by the "n"×1
first order condition formula_66. Comparative statics asks how this maximizer
changes in response to changes in the "m" parameters. The aim is to find
formula_67. The strict concavity of the objective function implies that the
Jacobian of "f", which is exactly the matrix of second partial derivatives of
"p" with respect to the endogenous variables, is nonsingular (has an inverse).
By the implicit function theorem, then, formula_65 may be viewed locally as a
continuously differentiable function, and the local response of formula_65 to
small changes in "q" is given by Applying the chain rule and first order
condition, (See Envelope theorem). Application for profit maximization. Suppose
a firm produces "n" goods in quantities formula_72. The firm's profit is a
function "p" of formula_72 and of "m" exogenous parameters formula_74 which may
represent, for instance, various tax rates. Provided the profit function
satisfies the smoothness and concavity requirements, the comparative statics
method above describes the changes in the firm's profit due to small changes in
the tax rates. Comparative statics with constraints. A generalization of the
above method allows the optimization problem to include a set of constraints.
This leads to the general envelope theorem. Applications include determining
changes in Marshallian demand in response to changes in price or wage.
Limitations and extensions. One limitation of comparative statics using the
implicit function theorem is that results are valid only in a (potentially very
small) neighborhood of the optimum—that is, only for very small changes in
the exogenous variables. Another limitation is the potentially overly
restrictive nature of the assumptions conventionally used to justify
comparative statics procedures. Paul Milgrom and Chris Shannon pointed out in
1994 that the assumptions conventionally used to justify the use of comparative
statics on optimization problems are not actually necessary—specifically, the
assumptions of convexity of preferred sets or constraint sets, smoothness of
their boundaries, first and second derivative conditions, and linearity of
budget sets or objective functions. In fact, sometimes a problem meeting these
conditions can be monotonically transformed to give a problem with identical
comparative statics but violating some or all of these conditions; hence these
conditions are not necessary to justify the comparative statics. Milgrom and
Shannon developed a theory and method for comparative statics analysis using
only conditions that are independent of order-preserving transformations. The
method uses lattice theory and introduces the notions of quasi-supermodularity
and the single-crossing condition.
