Competitiveness Policy Council The Competitiveness Policy Council was an
independent federal advisory committee chartered in 1988 to advise the
President and the Congress on more effective policies to promote U.S.
competitiveness. The Council had a unique quadrapartite membership composed of
representatives from business, labor, government, and the public. The Council
began operation in 1991, and ceased operation in 1997 after the Republican-led
Congress failed to continue funding, and after Council members decided to close
out this successful experiment in the independent advisory function. Authority.
Authority for the Council is found in the Competitiveness Policy Council Act,
15 U.S.C. ยง4801 et seq. This Act was part of the larger Omnibus Trade and
Competitiveness Act of 1988. The authorization of appropriations for the
Council expired in Fiscal year 1992, but otherwise the statutory underpinnings
for the Council remain intact, and the Council could be revived by a future
President with a pro-competitive agenda. Notable Accomplishments. The Council
adopted a broad approach to American competitiveness defining it as the ability
of the United States to produce goods and services that meet the test of
international markets while its citizens earn a standard of living that is both
rising and sustainable over the long run. This definition differed from others
in that era which emphasized the trade balance rather than the overall impact
of governmental policies on national economic prosperity. The Council's first
report, "Building a Competitive America" (March 1992) explained that "three
elements permeate our society and most directly hurt our competitive position:
short-termism, perverse incentives, and absence of global thinking." To help
analyze the problems of faltering U.S. competitiveness, the Council in its
first year, established eight Subcouncils to study and recommend solutions for
the most critical problems hindering U.S. competitiveness. These Subcouncils
were: capital formation, education, training, public infrastructure, corporate
governance and financial markets, trade policy, manufacturing, and critical
technologies. Additional Subcouncils were established in later years.
Leadership, Composition, and Appointments. The Council was led by Dr. C. Fred
Bergsten, then the Director of the Institute for International Economics (now
the Peterson Institute). Chairman Bergsten was elected by nongovernmental
Council members at the first meeting. The Council was composed of 12 members
who were appointed through a well-crafted process dictated by statute that
provided for quadrapartite and bipartisan representation. Specifically, there
were three members from the business community, three from organized labor,
three from federal or state government, and three from academia and public
interest. Four members were appointed by the President, four by the Speaker of
the U.S. House of Representatives and the Minority Leader acting jointly, and
four by the Majority and Minority leaders of the U.S. Senate acting jointly.
Both Presidents George H.W. Bush and Bill Clinton made appointments. The
appointments process for the Council was unusual, in providing for equal weight
to representatives from business and labor. Charter. The Council's statutory
legislative charter contains a number of innovative administrative features.
For example, one duty of the Council is to create a "forum" where national
leaders with experience could identify and development recommendations to
address actual problems facing America. The Council is empowered to hold
hearings and to establish Subcouncils on any issue. An unusual provision of the
CPC Act provides that any discussion a the Subcouncil shall not be considered
to violate any Federal or state antitrust law. The establishment of the
Competitiveness Policy Council (CPC) was inspired, in part, by the favorable
reception to the 1985 Report of the President's Commission on Industrial
Competitiveness (chaired by John A. Young). A year following the Young
Commission Report, a private sector Council on Competitiveness was set up,
which remains in existence. The CPC developed a cooperative relationship with
the Council on Competitiveness which enhanced the CPC's work product. The two
Councils were easily distinguishable, however, in that the membership of the
federally-established CPC included a federal cabinet level official and s state
elected official. Thus, the deliberation of the CPC was able to benefit from
the input of governmental members. By contrast, the private-sector Council on
Competitiveness lacks governmental members. Important Recommendations. The
Council made a number of important recommendations during its years of
operation regarding pensions, education, public investment, trade negotiations,
and many other issues. Some of the recommendations by the Council were not
adopted. For example, the Council recommended an immediate implementation of
the provision in federal law calling for the Executive Branch to attach a
"competitiveness impact statement" to any new legislative proposal to the
Congress which may affect U.S. competitiveness. This recommendation was not
adopted. The Council also championed the centrality of manufacturing in any
national competitiveness strategy. The Obama Administration picked up on this
recommendation in September 2009 when the President appointed the first White
House counselor for manufacturing. Notable Experts. Over a hundred individuals
assisted the Council's efforts by serving in the Subcouncils. Demise of the
Council. In April 1996, the U.S. Congress approved a $50,000 appropriation for
the Council, but also provided that "this shall be the final Federal payment to
the Competitiveness Policy Council." In July 1996, a Report of the House
Appropriations Committee withheld new funding for the Council for FY1997, and
noted that "the Committee believes that the Council is duplicative of private
sector organizations, such as the Council on Competitiveness, which focus on
the same issues without the use of Federal funds."
