Comparative politics Comparative politics is a field and a method used in
political science, characterized by an empirical approach based on the
comparative method. Arend Lijphart argues that comparative politics does not
have a "substantive" focus in itself, but rather a "methodological" one: it
focuses on "the "how" but does not specify the "what" of the analysis." In
other words, comparative politics is not defined by the object of its study,
but rather by the method it applies to study political phenomena. Peter Mair
and Richard Rose advance a slightly different definition, arguing that
comparative politics is defined by a combination of a "substantive" focus on
the study of countries' political systems and a "method" of identifying and
explaining similarities and differences between these countries using common
concepts. Rose states that, on his definition: "The focus is explicitly or
implicitly upon more than one country, thus following familiar political
science usage in excluding within-nation comparison. Methodologically,
comparison is distinguished by its use of concepts that are applicable in more
than one country." When applied to specific fields of study, comparative
politics may be referred to by other names, such as for example comparative
government (the comparative study of forms of government) or comparative
foreign policy (comparing the foreign policies of different States in order to
establish general empirical connections between the characteristics of the
State and the characteristics of its foreign policy). Sometimes, especially in
the United States, the term "comparative politics" is used to refer to "the
politics of foreign countries." This usage of the term, however, is often
considered incorrect. "Comparative political science" as a general term for an
area of study, as opposed to a methodology of study, can be seen as redundant.
The political only shows as political when either an overt or tacit comparison
is being made. A study of a single political entity, whether a society,
subculture or period, would show the political as simple brute reality without
comparison with another society, subculture, or period. Methodology. The
comparative method is - together with the experimental method, the statistical
method and the case study approach - one of the four fundamental scientific
methods which can be used to test the validity of theoretical propositions,
often with the use of empirical data i.e. to establish relationships among two
or more empirical variables or concept while all other variables are held
constant. In particular, the comparative method is generally used when neither
the experimental nor the statistical method can be employed: on the one hand,
experiments can only rarely be conducted in political science; on the other
hand the statistical method implies the mathematical manipulation of
quantitative data about a large number of cases, while sometimes political
research must be conducted by analyzing the behavior of qualitative variables
in a small number of cases. The case study approach cannot be considered a
scientific method according to the above definition, however it can be useful
to gain knowledge about single cases, which can then be put to comparison
according to the comparative method. Comparative strategies. Several different
strategies can be used in comparative research.
