National income policy agreement (Finland) Finnish national income policy
agreements or comprehensive income policy agreements (, often called "tupo"; )
are tripartite agreements between Finnish trade unions, employers'
organizations, and the Finnish government. They are policy documents covering a
wide range of economic and political issues, such as salaries, taxation,
pensions, unemployment benefits, and housing costs. They represent collective
bargaining taken to its logical maximum, reaching virtually all wage-earners.
Their enforcement is made easier by the universal validity of collective labour
agreements. However, they are voluntary agreements and are not considered
government legislation, i.e. they do not represent central planning of the
economy. In national income policy agreements, the government and the
employees' and employers' organizations attempt to reach a common understanding
of the best choices for the national economy in terms of economic growth and
real wages. The basic conundrum is simple: employees want higher salaries,
employers want no wage hikes. The government wants to maintain international
competitiveness and a high employment rate, while simultaneously ensuring
sufficient tax revenues and keeping inflation in check. National income policy
agreements are usually valid for a two-year period. They are not compulsory: if
the employers' and employees' national organisations cannot agree on terms, no
agreement is signed. In that case, negotiations on salaries are carried out by
individual trade federations with no government participation. Sometimes talks
are not even initiated due to differences of opinion between employers' and
employees' organizations. The first national income policy agreement was
negotiated by National Labour Dispute Conciliator Keijo Liinamaa. In 1967,
Liinamaa was given a special task by Prime Minister Rafael Paasio: Liinamaa was
to negotiate a comprehensive economic deal with employers' organisations and
labour unions in order to prevent inflation due to rising wages. These
negotiations resulted in the first national income policy agreement, the so-
called "Liinamaa I" and brought fame to Liinamaa, a later caretaker prime
minister. The tradition of comprehensive agreements has been particularly
persistent since then, even if there are always doomsayers predicting their
end. Currently, there is no such agreement. This follows from the political
pressures to increase public sector competitivity that led to comparatively
higher increases in public sector wages, particularly nurses' wages. In 2008,
the main employer's union Confederation of Finnish Industries, representing 70%
of Finland's GDP, announced that new national income policy agreements will not
be made, and that they will radically reduce the influence of the central
union, and close down the special office that has prepared previous agreements.
The reasons cited were the inflexibility of comprehensive agreements, their
incompatibility with global markets and the differences between different
industries. This was met by accusations of irresponsibility from some trade
union leaders. The agreements have ultimately been an effective way to curb
inflation, particularly in recent times where globalization has placed pressure
on both the employers and employees. The consensus policy unravelled several
"perpetual inflation machine" problems: wages tied to price indices, constant
competition over nominal wages between different employee unions resulting in
constant nominal wage hikes, the government effectively subsidising these wage
hikes by subsidising exports based on costs (including wages), and perpetual
strikes to increase minor benefits (particularly Niilo Wälläri's seamen's
union). On the other hand, a comprehensive agreement maintains distortions that
have arisen between different industries, i.e. when wages are too low in one
industry relative to other industries.
