Complementary good In economics, a complementary good is a good with a negative
cross elasticity of demand, in contrast to a substitute good. This means a
good's demand is increased when the price of another good is decreased.
Conversely, the demand for a good is decreased when the price of another good
is increased. If goods A and B are complements, an increase in the price of A
will result in a leftward movement along the demand curve of A and cause the
demand curve for B to shift in; less of each good will be demanded. A decrease
in price of A will result in a rightward movement along the demand curve of A
and cause the demand curve B to shift outward; more of each good will be
demanded. Examples. demanded will be at D2 with a new price P2. Perfect
complement. A perfect complement is a good that "has" to be consumed with
another good. The indifference curve of a perfect complement will exhibit a
right angle, as illustrated by the figure at the right. Few goods in the real
world will behave as perfect complements. One example is a left shoe and a
right; shoes are naturally sold in pairs, and the ratio between sales of left
and right shoes will never shift noticeably from 1:1 - even if, for example,
someone is missing a leg and buys just one shoe. The degree of complementarity,
however, does not have to be mutual; it can be measured by cross price
elasticity of demand. In the case of video games, a specific video game (the
complement good) has to be consumed with a video game console (the base good).
It does not work the other way: a video game console does not have to be
consumed with that game. Example. A classic example of mutually perfect
complements is the case of pencils and erasers. Imagine an accountant who will
need to prepare financial statements, but in doing so he or she must use
pencils to make all calculations and an eraser to correct errors. The
accountant knows that for every 3 pencils, 1 eraser will be needed. Any more
pencils will serve no purpose, because he or she will not be able to erase the
calculations. Any more erasers will not be useful either, because there will
not be enough pencils for him or her to make a large enough mess with in order
to require more erasers.
