Comparative advantage In economics, the law of comparative advantage refers to
the ability of a party to produce a particular good or service at a lower
marginal and opportunity cost over another. Even if one country is more
efficient in the production of all goods (absolute advantage in all goods) than
the other, both countries will still gain by trading with each other, as long
as they have different relative efficiencies. For example, if, using machinery,
a worker in one country can produce both shoes and shirts at 6 per hour, and a
worker in a country with less machinery can produce either 2 shoes or 4 shirts
in an hour, each country can gain from trade because their internal trade-offs
between shoes and shirts are different. The less-efficient country has a
comparative advantage in shirts, so it finds it more efficient to produce
shirts and trade them to the more-efficient country for shoes. Without trade,
its opportunity cost per shoe was 2 shirts; by trading, its cost per shoe can
reduce to as low as 1 shirt depending on how much trade occurs (since the more-
efficient country has a 1:1 trade-off). The more-efficient country has a
comparative advantage in shoes, so it can gain in efficiency by moving some
workers from shirt-production to shoe-production and trading some shoes for
shirts. Without trade, its cost to make a shirt was 1 shoe; by trading, its
cost per shirt can go as low as 1/2 shoe depending on how much trade occurs.
Another example: Say you have John who makes $300 an hour and he hires a maid
who works for $25 an hour. It takes John 1 hour to clean his house compared to
his maid who takes 8 hours to clean his house. John has an absolute advantage
over his maid but the maid has a comparative advantage. This is because if John
cleans his house by himself, he loses $300. If he hires the maid, he makes a
profit of $100. The net benefits to each country are called the gains from
trade. Origins of the theory. Comparative advantage was first described by
David Ricardo who explained it in his 1817 book "On the Principles of Political
Economy and Taxation" in an example involving England and Portugal. In Portugal
it is possible to produce both wine and cloth with less labor than it would
take to produce the same quantities in England. However the relative costs of
producing those two goods are different in the two countries. In England it is
very hard to produce wine, and only moderately difficult to produce cloth. In
Portugal both are easy to produce. Therefore while it is cheaper to produce
cloth in Portugal than England, it is cheaper still for Portugal to produce
excess wine, and trade that for English cloth. Conversely England benefits from
this trade because its cost for producing cloth has not changed but it can now
get wine at a lower price, closer to the cost of cloth. The conclusion drawn is
that each country can gain by specializing in the good where it has comparative
advantage, and trading that good for the other. However, it is also worth
mentioning that R. Torrens was an actual pioneer in the field of theoretical
basis for the theory of comparative advantage. In 1815 he published 'An Essay
on the External Corn Trade' which involved critical elements of the law of
comparative advantage. Modern Theories. Classical comparative advantage theory
was extended in two directions: Ricardian theory and Heckscher-Ohlin-Samuelson
theory (HOS theory). In both theories, the comparative advantage concept is
formulated for 2 country, 2 commodity case. It can easily be extended to the 2
country, many commodity case or many country, 2 commodity case. But in the case
with many countries (more than 3 countries) or many commodities (more than 3
commodities), the notion of comparative advantage loses its facile features and
requires totally different formulation. In these general cases, HOS theory
totally depends on Arrow-Debreu type general equilibrium theory but gives few
information other than general contents. Ricardian theory was formulated by
Jones' 1961 paper, but it was limited to the case where there are no traded
intermediate goods. In view of growing outsourcing and global procuring, it is
necessary to extend the theory to the case with traded intermediate goods. This
was done by Shiozawa's 2007 paper. Until now, this is the unique general theory
which accounts traded input goods. Effect of trade costs. Trade costs,
particularly transportation, reduce and may eliminate the benefits from trade,
including comparative advantage. Paul Krugman gives the following example. In
the absence of transportation costs, it is efficient for Britain to produce
cloth, and Portugal to produce wine, as, assuming that these trade at equal
price (1 unit of cloth for 1 unit of wine) Britain can then obtain wine at a
cost of 100 labor units by producing cloth and trading, rather than 110 units
by producing the wine itself, and Portugal can obtain cloth at a cost of 80
units by trade rather than 90 by production. However, in the presence of trade
costs of 15 units of labor to import a good (alternatively a mix of export
labor costs and import labor costs, such as 5 units to export and 10 units to
import), it then costs Britain 115 units of labor to obtain wine by trade –
100 units for producing the cloth, 15 units for importing the wine, which is
more expensive than producing the wine locally, and likewise for Portugal.
Thus, if trade costs exceed the production advantage, it is not advantageous to
trade. Krugman proceeds to argue more speculatively that changes in the cost of
trade (particularly transportation) "relative" to the cost of production may be
a factor in changes in global patterns of trade: if trade costs decrease, such
as with the advent of steam-powered shipping, trade should be expected to
increase, as more comparative advantages in production can be realized.
Conversely, if trade costs increase, or if production costs decrease faster
than trade costs (such as via electrification of factories), then trade should
be expected to decrease, as trade costs become a more significant barrier.
Effects on the economy. Conditions that maximize comparative advantage do not
automatically resolve trade deficits. In fact, many real world examples where
comparative advantage is attainable may require a trade deficit. For example,
the amount of goods produced can be maximized, yet it may involve a net
transfer of wealth from one country to the other, often because economic agents
have widely different rates of saving. As the markets change over time, the
ratio of goods produced by one country versus another variously changes while
maintaining the benefits of comparative advantage. This can cause national
currencies to accumulate into bank deposits in foreign countries where a
separate currency is used. Macroeconomic monetary policy is often adapted to
address the depletion of a nation's currency from domestic hands by the
issuance of more money, leading to a wide range of historical successes and
failures. Considerations. Development economics. The theory of comparative
advantage, and the corollary that nations should specialize, is criticized on
pragmatic grounds within the import substitution industrialization theory of
development economics, on empirical grounds by the Singer–Prebisch thesis
which states that terms of trade between primary producers and manufactured
goods deteriorate over time, and on theoretical grounds of infant industry and
Keynesian economics. In older economic terms, comparative advantage has been
opposed by mercantilism and economic nationalism. These argue instead that
while a country may initially be comparatively disadvantaged in a given
industry (such as Japanese cars in the 1950s), countries should shelter and
invest in industries until they become globally competitive. Further, they
argue that comparative advantage, as stated, is a static theory – it does not
account for the possibility of advantage changing through investment or
economic development, and thus does not provide guidance for long-term economic
development. Much has been written since Ricardo as commerce has evolved and
cross-border trade has become more complicated. Today trade policy tends to
focus more on "competitive advantage" as opposed to "comparative advantage".
One of the most indepth research undertakings on "competitive advantage" was
conducted in the 1980s as part of the Reagan administration's Project Socrates
to establish the foundation for a technology-based competitive strategy
development system that could be used for guiding international trade policy.
Free mobility of capital in a globalized world. "Experience, however, shows,
that the fancied or real insecurity of capital, when not under the immediate
control of its owner, together with the natural disinclination which every man
has to quit the country of his birth and connexions, and entrust himself with
all his habits fixed, to a strange government and new laws, checks the
emigration of capital." "International trade (governed by comparative
advantage) becomes, with the introduction of free capital mobility,
interregional trade (governed by Absolute advantage)." Adam Smith developed the
principle of absolute advantage. The economist Paul Craig Roberts notes that
the comparative advantage principles developed by David Ricardo do not hold
where the factors of production are internationally mobile. Limitations to the
theory may exist if there is a single kind of utility. Yet the human need for
food and shelter already indicates that multiple utilities are present in human
desire. The moment the model expands from one good to multiple goods, the
absolute may turn to a comparative advantage. The opportunity cost of a forgone
tax base may outweigh perceived gains, especially where the presence of
artificial currency pegs and manipulations distort trade. Global labor
arbitrage, where one country exploits the cheap labor of another, would be a
case of absolute advantage that is not mutually beneficial. Economist Ha-Joon
Chang criticized the comparative advantage principle, contending that it may
have helped developed countries maintain relatively advanced technology and
industry compared to developing countries. In his book "Kicking Away the
Ladder", Chang argued that all major developed countries, including the United
States and United Kingdom, used interventionist, protectionist economic
policies in order to get rich and then tried to forbid other countries from
doing the same. For example, according to the comparative advantage principle,
developing countries with a comparative advantage in agriculture should
continue to specialize in agriculture and import high-technology widgits from
developed countries with a comparative advantage in high technology. In the
long run, developing countries would lag behind developed countries, and
polarization of wealth would set in. Chang asserts that premature free trade
has been one of the fundamental obstacles to the alleviation of poverty in the
developing world. Recently, Asian countries such as South Korea, Japan and
China have utilized protectionist economic policies in their economic
development.
