Compact theory Compact theory refers to two theories related to the development
of federal constitutions. Compact theory in the United States. Regarding the
Constitution of the United States, the compact theory holds that the nation was
formed through a compact agreed upon by all the states, and that the federal
government is consequently a creation of the states. Consequently, states
should be the final arbiters over whether the federal government had
overstepped the limits of its authority as set forth in the compact. Leading
proponents of this view of the U.S. Constitution primarily originated from
Virginia and other southern states. Notable proponents of the theory include
Thomas Jefferson, James Madison, St. George Tucker, John Taylor of Caroline,
and Abel P. Upshur.  The leading nineteenth century commentary on the
Constitution, Justice Joseph Story's "Commentaries on the Constitution of the
United States" (1833), likewise rejected the compact theory, concluding that
the Constitution was established directly by the people, not by the states, and
that it constitutes supreme law, not a mere compact. In the years before the
Civil War, the compact theory was used by southern states to argue that they
had a right to nullify federal law and to secede from the union. For example,
during the Nullification Crisis of 1828-1832, John C. Calhoun argued in his
South Carolina Exposition and Protest that the states, as the parties to a
compact, had the right to judge for themselves whether the terms of the compact
were being honored. Calhoun described this "right of judging" as "an essential
attribute of sovereignty," which the states retained when the Constitution was
formed. Calhoun said the states had the right to nullify, or veto, any laws
that were inconsistent with the compact. When the southern states seceded in
1860-61, they relied on the compact theory to justify secession. The southern
states argued that the northern states had violated the compact by undermining
and attacking the institution of slavery and the slaveholders' property rights
in their slaves. The southern states stated that they therefore were justified
in withdrawing from the compact among the states. The United States Supreme
Court has rejected the idea that the Constitution is a compact among the
states. Rather, the Court has stated that the Constitution was established
directly by the people of the United States, not by the states. In one of the
Supreme Court's first significant decisions, "Chisholm v. Georgia" (1793),
Chief Justice John Jay stated that the Constitution was established directly by
the people. Jay noted the language of the Preamble of the Constitution, which
says that the Constitution was ordained and established by "We the people," and
stated: "Here we see the people acting as sovereigns of the whole country, and,
in the language of sovereignty, establishing a Constitution by which it was
their will that the State governments should be bound." In "Martin v. Hunter's
Lessee" (1816), the Supreme Court explicitly rejected the idea that the
Constitution is a compact among the states, stating: "The Constitution of the
United States was ordained and established not by the States in their sovereign
capacities, but emphatically, as the preamble of the Constitution declares, by
'the people of the United States.'" The Court contrasted the earlier Articles
of Confederation with the Constitution, characterizing the Articles of
Confederation as a compact among states, while stating that the Constitution
was established not by the states, but by the people. Likewise, in "McCulloch
v. Maryland" (1819), the Supreme Court stated that the federal Constitution
proceeded directly from the people, and was not created by the states. The
Court stated that the Constitution was binding on the states and could not be
negated by the states. The Court again contrasted the Articles of
Confederation, which was established by the states, to the Constitution, which
was established by the people. After the Civil War, in "Texas v. White" (1869),
a case discussing the legal status of the southern states that had attempted to
secede, the Supreme Court stated that the union was not merely a compact among
states; rather, the union was "something more than a compact." Compact theory
in Canada. In the Canadian context, compact theory posits that Confederation
was an agreement between the two founding peoples, French and English, and that
therefore Quebec should have special veto powers relating to its position in
the federal structure. However, compact theory was rejected by the Supreme
Court of Canada in the 1981 Patriation Reference. Compact theory is often
advanced by Quebec nationalists.
