Concurrent majority Concurrent majority refers in general to the concept of
preventing majorities from oppressing minorities by allowing various minority
groups veto power over laws. The most vocal proponents of the theory have
tended to be minority groups, such as farmers in an industrial society or
nonwhites in a predominately white society. The concurrent majority is intended
to prevent the tyranny of the majority that can otherwise occur in an unlimited
democracy. Prior to the American Revolution, all governments were controlled by
small minorities of ruling elites; large parts of the population were
completely disfranchised, even in countries like Switzerland whose governments
(local, regional, and federal) were constitutionally democratic by modern
standards. The conception of government that materialized during the separation
of the United States from the United Kingdom marked movement away from such
control towards wider enfranchisement. The problem of tyranny then became a
problem of limiting the power of a majority. The US Constitution. Even so, the
widening of the franchise caused concern. The framers of the United States
Constitution, even while reiterating that the people held national sovereignty,
worked to ensure that a simple majority of voters could not infringe upon the
liberty of the rest of the people. One protection from this was separation of
powers, such as bicameralism in the Congress and the three "separate" branches
of the central government: legislative, executive, and judicial. Having two
houses was intended to serve as a brake on popular movements that might
threaten particular groups, with the House representing the common people and
the Senate defending the interests of the state governments. The House was to
be elected by popular vote, while the Senate were appointed by state
legislators. Executive veto, the implied power of judicial review by the
Supreme Court, the possibility of state nullification of central government
laws or outright secession by states, and armed rebellion of citizens all
created further obstacles to overbearing majority rule. Calhoun and
nullification. During the first part of the 19th century, John C. Calhoun of
South Carolina revived and expounded upon the concurrent majority doctrine. An
ardent advocate of states' rights, Calhoun served as Vice President and
Senator. He noted that the North, with its industrial economy, had become far
more populous than the South. As the South's agricultural economy differed
vastly from that of the North, the difference in power afforded by population
threatened interests Calhoun considered essential to the South. As national
policy, driven by the North, became ever more hostile to the South, Calhoun
argued more stridently for a requirement of concurrent majority by geographic
region. Following the Tariff of 1828, referred to by Southerners as the "Tariff
of Abominations", Calhoun wrote (anonymously at the time) the South Carolina
Exposition and Protest. The document threatened secession of South Carolina if
the tariff was not repealed. After another protective Tariff of 1832 was passed
instead of a repeal of the 1828 tariff, Calhoun attempted to fight both with
the doctrine of nullification. The doctrine, which essentially said that any
state might declare specific federal laws void within the borders of the state,
required a concurrent majority of the legislatures of each state in addition to
the federal legislature to assent to a law for it to have nation-wide effect.
South Carolina passed the Ordinance of Nullification of the two tariffs and
began preparations to defend the nullification against federal enforcement. A
Compromise Tariff of 1833 was passed, avoiding armed conflict and ending the
Nullification Crisis. Calhoun's philosophy of concurrent majority had found
little support in the Southern states outside of South Carolina.
