Concession (politics) In politics, a concession is the act of a losing
candidate publicly yielding to a winning candidate after an election, when the
overall result of the vote has become clear. Refusal to concede. Concession,
"per se", is entirely optional, and a candidate will sometimes refuse to
concede defeat despite the vote count being against them, especially if they
suspect electoral fraud. In that case the candidate would likely demand a
recount of the votes or other investigations into the alleged fraud. Sometimes
concession may be denied not because of any specific fraud allegations, but
simply because of ill will accumulated over the campaign. Timing of concession.
If the vote is relatively close, it can be unclear when it is appropriate for a
losing candidate to concede an election. On election night, pressures from a
media looking for news to report, an opposition campaign anxious to declare
victory, and one's own campaign unwilling to concede defeat if there is any
hope of a last-minute turnaround all weigh on the decision of the losing
candidate. Though a spoken concession does not necessarily deny a candidate
office if there is a drastic reversal in the vote count, it does practically
prevent demands for recount. It is exceedingly rare for a concession, once
issued, to be retracted; such an event occurred in the United States 2000
presidential election, when Democratic candidate Al Gore, Jr. telephoned
Republican George W. Bush to concede the contest. Gore was apparently unaware
of the close vote count in the state of Florida, and when he realized this,
proceeded to cancel his concession address. A losing candidate commonly offers
a private concession directly to the winning candidate (usually by telephone)
before any public announcement is made. Concession speech. In the broadcast
age, the concession speech of a candidate for high office reaches a wide
audience, and is seen as the final swan song of a lost campaign. Out of
courtesy, the winner of the campaign usually waits for a concession speech (if
one is forthcoming) before delivering their own acceptance speech. A losing
candidate usually thanks their supporters for their valiant efforts, and points
to the non-electoral successes of the campaign in building party strength and
raising issues to attention that would not otherwise be in public discussion.
It is also traditional, unless the campaign has been exceptionally bitter, to
congratulate the winning candidate and wish them well in office, perhaps even
offering a parting word of advice.
