National Republican Congressional Committee The National Republican
Congressional Committee (NRCC) is the Republican Hill committee which works to
elect Republicans to the United States House of Representatives. The NRCC was
formed in 1866, when the Republican caucuses of the House and Senate formed a
"Congressional Committee". It supports the election of Republicans to the House
through direct financial contributions to candidates and Republican Party
organizations; technical and research assistance to Republican candidates and
Party organizations; voter registration, education and turnout programs; and
other Party-building activities. It is a registered 527 group, and its current
slogan is "Building a Lasting Majority". The NRCC is always chaired by a
Republican member of the House, who may serve up to two consecutive terms. The
current chair is Rep. Pete Sessions of Texas. Recent former chairmen include
Rep. Bill Paxon (1994–98), Rep. Tom Davis (1998–2002), Rep. Tom Reynolds
(2002–2006), who was seen as Paxon's protégé and who represented his former
district in Erie County, New York, and Rep. Tom Cole (2006–2008). It is
governed by an Executive Committee of 11 members, which includes the party's
Leader in the House "ex-officio", and other members elected by the Republican
Conference following a House election. NRCC Leadership. The NRCC is governed by
its chairman, U.S. Rep. Pete Sessions (TX-32), and an executive committee
composed of Republican members of the U.S. House of Representatives. The
Chairman is elected by the House Republican Conference after each Congressional
election. Republican Leader John Boehner and the seven other elected leaders of
the Republican Conference of the House of Representatives serve as ex-officio
members of the NRCC's executive committee. The day-to-day operations of the
NRCC are overseen by Executive Director Guy Harrison, who manages a staff
involved in campaign strategy development, planning and management, research,
communications, fundraising, administration, and legal compliance. Young Guns
Program. Founded in the 2007–2008 election cycle by Congressmen Eric Cantor,
Kevin McCarthy and Paul Ryan, the Young Guns Program began as an organization
of House Republicans dedicated to electing open seat and challenger candidates
nationwide. During the 2008 cycle, through a partnership of Republican
volunteers, donors and 59 members of the House of Representatives, five House
GOP challengers won against incumbent Democrats. Four of those were Young Guns
– Tom Rooney (FL-16), Bill Cassidy (LA-06), Lynn Jenkins (KS-02), and Pete
Olson (TX-22). Under the leadership of Chairman Sessions, the NRCC adopted the
Young Guns program as the candidate recruitment and training program for House
Republicans and it is designed to assist Republican candidates for the U.S.
House of Representatives build a foundation for victory. This program is open
to all Republican candidates – regardless of a primary or convention
situation in their districts – with the ultimate goal of ensuring whoever the
Republican nominee is, they are able to build the strongest campaign possible.
Those enrolled work with NRCC staff to meet rigorous benchmarks designed to
improve their campaign structure, fundraising, communications and online
strategy. There are three levels of the Young Guns program – “On the
Radar”, “Contender”, and “Young Gun”. In 2010, 92 campaigns were
granted "Young Gun" status. Incumbent Retention. As Republicans work to expand
the numbers of seats they hold in the House of Representatives, the NRCC
created its “Patriot Program” to aid incumbents in their re-election
efforts. This program serves as a gauge by which potentially targeted
incumbents commit themselves to meet rigorous goals in attempts to strengthen
their campaigns and work towards victory. These "Patriots" work with the NRCC
to develop aggressive goals, and plans to meet such goals for fundraising,
coalitions outreach, grassroots development, eCampaign operations, volunteer
recruitment, and a number of additional aspects of their re-election campaigns.
They have the full support and participation of the NRCC and Republican House
Leadership. There are currently 26 enrolled incumbents in the NRCC’s
“Patriot Program” Fundraising. In 2000 and 2002, one-third of the
Committee's $210.8 million raised was in soft money donations. As Congress
considered prohibiting such donations, the Committee stepped up its efforts,
holding record-breaking events featuring President George W. Bush.[http://
www.nytimes.com/2001/06/20/politics/
20CAMP.html?ex=1148184000&en=e3e10651fe0a22a3&ei=5070]. Especially after the
ban, the NRCC's fundraising sources and techniques have been criticized. For
the 2004 election cycle, its top three donors included two Indian tribal
clients of Jack Abramoff. Others include gambling interests (also related to
Abramoff).[http://www.capitaleye.org/
abramoff_recips_detail.asp?type=R&Name=National+Republican+Congressional+Cmte]
On September 21, 2006 Chairman Tom Reynolds met with lobbyists in Washington,
D.C. to warn them to contribute only to Republicans and not to challengers from
the Democratic Party because their donations would be tracked and they would
lose favors among the Republican members of Congress. Similar activities of the
K Street Project occurred when Davis was head of the NRCC; the organization was
fined by the Federal Election Commission for transferring funds between PACs
for the same candidates in violation of contribution limits. The NRCC has also
offered awards such as "Physician of the Year", "Businessman of the Year",
"Columnist of the Year" and "Congressional Order of Merit" to thousands of
individuals each year. In comparison to other groups, a larger number of donors
to the NRCC do not declare an occupation or employer, making connections
difficult; this may be due to the nature of its donor pool, which consists of
more individuals than groups, according to the Federal Election Commission.
Automated phone calls. In 2006, just days before the November 7 midterm
Congressional elections, there were numerous reports of a series of automated
phone calls ("robocalls") being authorized by the NRCC, with the apparent
intention to confuse and annoy the supporters of Democratic candidates for the
House of Representatives. The automated call would typically begin by saying,
"Hello, I'm calling with information about ___" and naming the Democratic
candidate. If the recipient hung up, the call would be repeated, often several
times, thus leading voters to believe incorrectly that the Democratic campaign
was harassing them. The NRCC used the tactic in at least 53 competitive House
races. In New Hampshire, the state attorney general's office requested that the
NRCC end the robocalls, but many individuals in the state continued to report
receiving them. New Hampshire News Article The Democratic Congressional
Campaign Committee sent the NRCC a cease-and-desist letter. The DCCC letter
cited the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) regulation requiring that a
prerecorded telephone call must identify the responsible entity at the
beginning of the message, and must include the entity's telephone number.
Because the NRCC's calls did not name the NRCC at the beginning and did not
provide a contact phone number, the DCCC charged the NRCC with "a pattern of
willful noncompliance with FCC requirements". [http://abcnews.go.com/images/
Politics/NRCC%20ceasedesist.pdf] Allegations of embezzlement. On March 13, 2008
the NRCC stated that its former treasurer, Christopher J. Ward, had apparently
transferred "several hundred thousand dollars" in NRCC funds to "his personal
and business bank accounts". An estimated $724,000 in losses were embezzled
from the NRCC by Ward between 2001 and 2007. Ward has served as treasurer for
83 Republican committees and has done work for the Swift Boat Veterans for
Truth. On June 6, 2008 the Department of Justice, in filing a civil forfeiture
proceeding against Ward's house, alleged that Ward "made over $500,000 in
unauthorized withdrawals" and that he used the money to make his mortgage
payments and for home renovation. The Federal Election Commission (FEC)
conducted a probe into disclosure reports submitted by the NRCC during Ward's
tenure as treasurer. Guy Harrison, the executive director of NRCC, agreed to
pay a $10,000 civil fine and signed a conciliation agreement with the FEC on
June 10, 2010. 2008 Congressional Elections. In 2008 the NRCC concentrated on
trying to help incumbent Republicans win re-election. Even so, the committee
had to make "triage"-type decisions about allocating its funds. In October
2008, it canceled several hundred thousand dollars worth of television
advertising time slated for the re-election campaigns of Michele Bachmann,
Marilyn Musgrave, and Tom Feeney, having concluded that they could not win. The
decision drew criticism from the conservative Family Research Council, which
stated, "It appears that the NRCC is abandoning social conservative candidates
and the issues for which they stand…." 2010 Congressional Elections. In 2010,
Republican candidates won a historic amount of seats in the House of
Representatives after completing a "rout" of Democrats. Rep. Sessions and the
NRCC staff received praise for harnessing voter sentiment and contributing to
Republican gains. The NRCC raised and spent tens of millions of dollars on
Independent Expenditure advertising. Republicans won in 52 of the 66 seats
where the NRCC made those expenditures. The NRCC made some of its biggest gains
in New York, where two incumbents won reelection and five seats flipped from
being held by Democrats to being held by Republicans. In Pennsylvania, the
Committee retained seven incumbents and flipped five seats from being held by
Democrats to being held by Republicans. The Committee made gains across the
midwest, where it won control of both North and South Dakota, and made sizeable
gains in Illinois, Wisconsin, and Michigan. The Committee targeted numerous
veteran Democrats who held important posts in their party’s leadership. The
NRCC worked to help GOP candidates defeat Committee Chairmen John Spratt
(Budget), Ike Skelton (Armed Services), and James Oberstar (Transportation and
Infrastructure). In each of these cases, Republicans prevailed over the
Democrats.
