Consumer organization Consumer organizations are advocacy groups that seek to
protect people from corporate abuse like unsafe products, predatory lending,
false advertising, astroturfing and pollution. Consumer organizations may
operate via protests, campaigning or lobbying. They may engage in single-issue
advocacy (e.g., the British Campaign for Real Ale (CAMRA), which campaigned
against keg beer and for cask ale) or they may set themselves up as more
general consumer watchdogs, such as the Consumers' Association in the UK. One
common means of providing consumers useful information is the independent
comparative survey or test of products or services, involving different
manufacturers or companies (e.g., "Which?", "Consumer Reports", etcetera).
Another arena where consumer organizations have operated is food safety. The
needs for campaigning in this area are less easy to reconcile with their
traditional methods, since the scientific, dietary or medical evidence is
normally more complex than in other arenas, such as the electric safety of
white goods. The current standards on mandatory labelling, in developed
countries, have in part been shaped by past lobbying by consumer groups. The
aim of consumer organizations may be to establish and to attempt to enforce
consumer rights. Effective work has also been done, however, simply by using
the threat of bad publicity to keep companies' focus on the consumers' point of
view. Consumer organizations may attempt to serve consumer interests by
relatively direct actions such as creating and/or disseminating market
information, and prohibiting specific acts or practices,or by promoting
competitive forces in the markets which directly or indirectly affect consumers
(such as transport, electricity, communications, etc.). Consumer organizations
in various countries. National Organization. Fiji. Consumer Council of Fiji
Fiji Consumers Association France. UFC Que Choisir India. Grahak Shakti-
Bengaluru-Karnataka-Non profit Non Political Voluntary Consumer Organisation
working for the empowerment of Consumer for over two and half decades.Very
dedicated and doing yeomen service to the society. They have a large membership
base with about 21 Life Timers who contribute their time and energy honorarily.
It is driven by a passionate Managing Trustee who leads from front and puts in
his money to steer the organisation. They are very principled and have earned
Consumer Confidence. They have faced several crisis for being bold and
uncompromising in their outlook. Remarkable indeed. Pakistan. The Consumers Eye
Pakistan (TCEP) is a registered social welfare non governmental organization
(NGO) of Pakistan an independent and authoritative voice for consumers since
year 2005, building a powerful movement to help protect and empower consumers
in Pakistan and to create consumer awareness against substandard, unregistered,
counterfeit, and adulterated products. The Consumers Eye Pakistan is working to
promote and serve for standardization and Quality consciousness culture in
Pakistan. The Consumers Eye Pakistan is organizer of Quality Standard Award in
Pakistan, collaboration with Pakistan Standards and Quality Control Authority
(PSQCA) Ministry of Science and Technology Government of Pakistan and actively
involved in improving quality and standards of the citizens of Pakistan.
Consumer VOICE Pakistan (CVP) is a Voluntary Organization in Interest of
Consumer Education-is the Voice of and for the consumers in every sense. A
voluntary action group in Pakistan, it consists of academicians, professionals
and volunteers channelising their energies towards creating informed consumers.
It raises awareness in consumers not only about malpractices perpetuated in the
market place, but also about her/his rights. Consumer VOICE aims at being the
most powerful tool in the hands of the consumer to help them fight for value
for their money. Consumer awareness has become important because of the
liberalizing economy. Consumers need guidance to make informed choice in the
products and services available. They need protection against deficient
services and products with timely information and intervention. Our Mission is
to promote right choices in a volatile and dynamic market place by providing
consumer education for all through integrating experiential good practices and
scientific knowledge for the safety and health of consumers and the
environment.. Consumer VOICE Pakistan (CVP) publishes monthly Consumer VOICE
magazine in Pakistan.
