Constituent state A constituent state, constituent entity, or constituent part,
is a territorial and constitutional entity forming part of a sovereign state. A
constituent state holds administrative jurisdiction over a defined geographic
territory and is a form of regional government. Federated entities. Constituent
entities united in a federal union under a federal government are more
specifically known as federated states. Within a federacy. Administrative units
that are not federated but enjoy a greater degree of autonomy or self-
government than others within the same country can be considered constituent
states of a larger sovereign state. This relationship is called a federacy.
Autonomous republics like Karakalpakstan in Uzbekistan and Crimea in Ukraine
are examples. States existing in free association with another can be
considered constituent states of a sovereign entity. For example, the Cook
Islands, New Zealand and Niue constitute the three constituent entities of the
Realm of New Zealand, united under a single head of state, which is the Queen
of New Zealand. Breakaway states. The term can also be applied as an
alternative to formal recognition of a secessionist state that has unilaterally
declared independence, and whose "de jure" sovereignty remains in dispute. The
Caucasus. The South Caucasus region consists of a number of breakaway and
autonomous republics in addition to the states of Armenia, Azerbaijan and
Georgia recognised by the United Nations. The breakaway republics of Abkhazia
and South Ossetia, which have effectively maintained independence since
declaration, are considered constituent republics of Georgia by the majority of
world governments. The republic of Nagorno-Karabakh, which is also independent
in effect, is considered by the United Nations to be a constituent entity of
Azerbaijan. Cyprus. The country of Cyprus is divided between two independent
political entities: the internationally-recognised Republic of Cyprus in the
south, and the Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus, which is recognised as a
sovereign state only by Turkey. Both entities are given the title of
constituent state of Cyprus by the Organisation of Islamic Cooperation, and the
Annan Plan for reuniting Cyprus consistently used the term constituent state to
refer to each entity. Palestine. The term constituent state can also be applied
in describing the region of Palestine at present, which is divided between the
governments of Israel and the State of Palestine. It has also been used to
label both states in proposals for federal solutions to the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict. Somalia. Because of the ongoing war in Somalia, the Somali country is
now divided into a number of constituent states with varying degrees of
independence from the Transitional Federal Government. The breakaway republic
of Somaliland in the north, which maintains "de facto" independence over its
territory, is still regarded by member states of the United Nations as a
constituent state of Somalia despite its declaration of independence in 1991.
The states of Puntland and Galmudug in central Somalia retain control over
their own territories with little oversight from the TFG, which is based in
Mogadishu in the south. The administrations in these states have stated that,
unlike Somaliland, they do not seek outright independence from Somalia, and are
merely maintaining stability until such a time when the transitional government
can effectively implement its constitution within the states. In the south and
in opposition to the central government are regions administered by various
Islamic insurgent groups, most notably Hizbul Islam and al-Shabaab, both of
which seek to establish Sharia law within the country. Kosovo/Serbia. Kosovo
has unilaterally declared independence from the Republic of Serbia in early
2008. Administrative entities. Palau. Palau is divided into sixteen
administrative divisions termed "states", which were before 1984 called
municipalities. The change in terminology reflects the fact that these
divisions are afforded a larger degree of autonomy than before, with each state
having its own constitution. As a unitary republic, however, the government of
Palau is centralised and these divisions exist solely to establish regional
government; they are not united in a federal union. Burma. Like Palau, the
government of Myanmar, or Burma, presently operates as a unitary state, with
sovereignty confined within the central government. Burma comprises a number of
"states", which exist alongside the country's regional divisions. Both "states"
and "divisions" can be described as ethnically-defined; while the Bamar remain
predominant within divisions, the states are mostly dominated by minority
groups. In terms of politics, the use of the term "state" in this context is
largely historical, with a number of these states having been united in various
federal unions during the British colonial period. At present, most states are
afforded a greater degree of autonomy than other divisions. Political
separatism in many states is rampant, and territory controlled by the central
government in these cases is limited. In these cases, jurisdiction within a
state is mostly confined to its respective regional government. In addition,
various proposals have been made for instituting federalism in Burma, which
would allow these states to implement individual constitutions. Constituent
country. Another form of constituent entity is a country over which a devolved
government has been granted regional jurisdiction by and under a larger
sovereign government. For example, Greenland is a constituent country of the
Kingdom of Denmark, with its own government in place and little oversight from
the Danish government. Other uses. The term "constituent state" is sometimes
also used to refer to member states of an international organisation. It is
used within the European Union to refer to member states. It is also used to
refer to sovereign states in bilateral negotiations or agreements between two
or more states. The term was also applied to former Soviet Republics within the
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics.
