Conscription Conscription is the compulsory enlistment of people in some sort
of national service, most often military service. Conscription dates back to
antiquity and continues in some countries to the present day under various
names. The modern system of near-universal national conscription for young men
dates to the French Revolution in the 1790s, where it became the basis of a
very large and powerful military. Most European nations later copied the system
in peacetime, so that men at a certain age would serve 1–3 years on active
duty and then transfer to the reserve force. In China, the State of Qin
instituted universal military service following the registration of every
household. This allowed huge armies to be levied, and was instrumental in the
creation of the Qin Empire that conquered the whole of China in 221BC.
Conscription is controversial because of conscientious objection to service or
because of political objection to service for a disliked government or an
unpopular war, and because it violates individual rights. Those conscripted may
evade service, sometimes by leaving the country. Some selection systems
accommodate these attitudes by providing alternative service outside combat-
operations roles or even outside the military, such as Zivildienst in Austria
and Switzerland. As of the early 21st century, many states no longer conscript
soldiers, relying instead upon professional militaries with volunteers enlisted
to meet the demand for troops. The ability to rely on such an arrangement,
however, presupposes some degree of predictability with regard to both war-
fighting requirements and the scope of hostilities. Many states that have
abolished conscription therefore still reserve the power to resume it during
wartime or times of crisis. In the United States, conscription, also called
"the draft", ended in 1973, but males between 18 and 25 are required to
register with the Selective Service System to enable a reintroduction of
conscription if necessary. History. Ilkum. Around the reign of Hammurabi (1791-
1750 BC), the Babylonian Empire used a system of conscription called "Ilkum".
Under the system those eligible were required to serve in the royal army in
time of war. During times of peace they were instead required to provide labour
for other activities of the state. In return for this service, people subject
to it gained the right to hold land. It is possible that this right was not to
hold land "per se" but specific land supplied by the state. Various forms of
avoiding military service are recorded. While it was outlawed by the Code of
Hammurabi, the hiring of substitutes appears to have been practiced both before
and after the creation of the code. Later records show that Ilkum commitments
could become regularly traded. In other places, people simply left their towns
to avoid their Ilkum service. Another option was to sell Ilkum lands and the
commitments along with them. With the exception of a few exempted classes, this
was forbidden by the Code of Hammurabi. China. Universal conscription in China
dates back to the State of Qin, which eventually became the Qin Empire of
221BC. Following unification, historical records show that a total of 300,000
conscript soldiers and 500,000 conscript labourers constructed the Great Wall
of China In the following dynasties, universal conscription was abolished and
reintroduced on numerous occasions. , universal military conscription is
theoretically mandatory in the People's Republic of China, and reinforced by
law. However, due to the large population of China and large pool of candidates
available for recruitment, the People's Liberation Army has always had
sufficient volunteers, so conscription has not been required in practice at
all. Medieval levies. Under the feudal conditions for holding land in the
medieval period, most peasants and freemen were liable to provide one man of
suitable age per family for military duty when required by either the king or
the local lord. The levies raised in this way fought as infantry under local
superiors. Although the exact laws varied greatly depending on the country and
the period, generally these levies were only obliged to fight for one to three
months. Most were subsistence farmers, and it was in everyone's interest to
send the men home for harvest-time. In medieval Scandinavia the 'leiðangr'
(Old Norse), 'leidang' (Norwegian), 'leding', (Danish), 'ledung' (Swedish),
'lichting' (Dutch), 'expeditio' (Latin) or sometimes 'leþing' (Old English),
was a levy of free farmers conscripted into coastal fleets for seasonal
excursions and in defence of the realm. The bulk of the Anglo-Saxon English
army, called the fyrd, was composed of part-time English soldiers drawn from
the landowning minor nobility. These thegns were the land-holding aristocracy
of the time and were required to serve with their own armour and weapons for a
certain number of days each year. The historian David Sturdy has cautioned
about regarding the "fyrd" as a precursor to a modern national army composed of
all ranks of society, describing it as a "ridiculous fantasy":Sturdy, David
"Alfred the Great" Constable (1995), p153 Medieval levy in Poland was known as
the "pospolite ruszenie". Military slavery. The system of military slaves was
widely used in the Middle East, beginning with the Egyptians training Mamluks
from the 9th century, to the Turks and Ottoman Empire throughout the 19th
century. In the middle of the 14th century, Ottoman Sultan Murad I developed
personal troops to be loyal to him, with a slave army called the "Kapıkulu".
The new force was built by taking Christian children from newly conquered
lands, especially from the far areas of his empire, in a system known as the
"devşirme" (translated "gathering" or "converting"). The captive children were
persuaded to convert to Islam. The Sultans had the young boys trained over
several years. Those who showed special promise in fighting skills were trained
in advanced warrior skills, put into the sultan's personal service, and turned
into the Janissaries, the elite branch of the "Kapıkulu". A number of
distinguished military commanders of the Ottomans, and most of the imperial
administrators and upper-level officials of the Empire, such as Pargalı
İbrahim Pasha and Sokollu Mehmet Paşa, were recruited in this way. By 1609,
the Sultan's "Kapıkulu" forces increased to about 100,000. In later years,
Sultans turned to the Barbary Pirates to supply their Jannissaries corps. Their
attacks on ships off the coast of Africa or in the Mediterranean, and
subsequent capture of able-bodied men for ransom or sale provided some captives
for the Sultan's system. Starting in the 17th century, Christian families
living under the Ottoman rule began to submit their sons into the Kapikulu
system willingly, as they saw this as a potentially invaluable career
opportunity for their children. Eventually the Sultan turned to foreign
volunteers from the warrior clans of Circassians in southern Russia to fill his
Janissary armies. As a whole the system began to break down, the loyalty of the
Jannissaries became increasingly suspect. Mahmud II forcibly disbanded the
Janissary corps in 1826. Similar to the Janissaries in origin and means of
development were the Mamluks of Egypt in the Middle Ages. The Mamluks were
usually captive non-Muslim Iranian and Turkish children who had been kidnapped
or bought as slaves from the Barbary coasts. The Egyptians assimilated and
trained the boys and young men to become Islamic soldiers who served the Muslim
caliphs and the Ayyubid sultans during the Middle Ages. The first mamluks
served the Abbasid caliphs in 9th century Baghdad. Over time they became a
powerful military caste. On more than one occasion, they seized power, for
example, ruling Egypt from 1250–1517. From 1250 Egypt had been ruled by the
Bahri dynasty of Kipchak origin. Slaves from the Caucasus served in the army
and formed an elite corp of troops. They eventually revolted in Egypt to form
the Burgi dynasty. The Mamluks' excellent fighting abilities, massed Islamic
armies, and overwhelming numbers succeeded in overcoming the Christian Crusader
fortresses in the Holy Land. The Mamluks were the most successful defense
against the Mongol Ilkhanate of Persia and Iraq from entering Egypt. On the
western coast of Africa, Berber Muslims captured non-Muslims to put to work as
laborers. They generally converted the younger people to Islam and many became
quite assimilated. In Morocco, the Berber looked south rather than north. The
Moroccan Sultan Moulay Ismail, called "the Bloodthirsty" (1672–1727),
employed a corps of 150,000 black slaves, called his Black Guard. He used them
to coerce the country into submission. Invention of modern conscription. Modern
conscription, the massed military enlistment of national citizens, was devised
during the French Revolution, to enable the Republic to defend itself from the
attacks of European monarchies. Deputy Jean-Baptiste Jourdan gave its name to
the 5 September 1798 Act, whose first article stated: "Any Frenchman is a
soldier and owes himself to the defense of the nation." It enabled the creation
of the "Grande Armée", what Napoleon Bonaparte called "the nation in arms,"
which overwhelmed European professional armies that often numbered only into
the low tens of thousands. More than 2.6 million men were inducted into the
French military in this way between the years 1800 and 1813. The defeat of the
Prussian Army in particular shocked the Prussian establishment, which had
believed it was invincible after the victories of Frederick the Great. The
Prussians were used to relying on superior organization and tactical factors
such as order of battle to focus superior troops against inferior ones. Given
approximately equivalent forces, as was generally the case with professional
armies, these factors showed considerable importance. However, they became
considerably less important when the Prussian armies faced forces that
outnumbered their own in some cases by more than ten to one. Scharnhorst
advocated adopting the "levée en masse", the military conscription used by
France. The "Krümpersystem" was the beginning of short-term compulsory service
in Prussia, as opposed to the long-term conscription previously used. In the
Russian Empire, the military service time "owed" by serfs was 25 years at the
beginning of the 19th century. In 1834 it was decreased to 20 years. The
recruits were to be not younger than 17 and not older than 35. In 1874 Russia
introduced universal conscription in the modern pattern, an innovation only
made possible by the abolition of serfdom in 1861. New military law decreed
that all male Russian subjects, when they reached the age of 20, were eligible
to serve in the military for six years. World Wars. The range of eligible ages
for conscripting was expanded to meet national demand during the World Wars. In
the United States, the Selective Service System drafted men for World War I
initially in an age range from 21 to 30 but expanded its eligibility in 1918 to
an age range of 18 to 45. In the case of a widespread mobilization of forces
where service includes homefront defense, ages of conscripts may range much
higher, with the oldest conscripts serving in roles requiring lesser mobility.
Expanded-age conscription was common during the Second World War: in Britain,
it was commonly known as "call-up" and extended to age 51. Nazi Germany termed
it Volkssturm ("People's Storm") and included men as young as 16 and as old as
60. During the Second World War, both Britain and the Soviet Union conscripted
women. The United States was on the verge of drafting women into the Nurse
Corps because it anticipated it would need the extra personnel for its planned
invasion of Japan. However the Japanese surrendered and the idea was abandoned.
The Netherlands. Conscription, which was called "Service Duty" () in the
Netherlands, was first employed in 1810 by French occupying forces. Napoleon's
brother Louis Bonaparte, who was King of Holland from 1806 to 1810, had tried
to introduce conscription a few years earlier, unsuccessfully. Every man aged
20 years or older had to enlist. By means of drawing lots it was decided who
had to undertake service in the French army. It was possible to arrange a
substitute against payment. Later on, conscription was used for all men over
the age of 18. Postponement was possible, due to study, for example.
Conscientious objectors could perform an alternative civilian service instead
of military service. For various reasons, this forced military service was
criticized at the end of the twentieth century. Since the Cold War was over, so
was the direct threat of a war. Instead, the Dutch army was employed in more
and more peacekeeping operations. The complexity and danger of these missions
made the use of conscripts controversial. Furthermore the conscription system
was thought to be unfair as only men were drafted. In the European part of
Netherlands, compulsory attendance has been officially suspended since 1 May
1997. Between 1991 and 1996, the Dutch armed forces phased out their conscript
personnel and converted to an all-volunteer force. The last conscript troops
were inducted in 1995, and demobilized in 1996. The suspension means that
citizens are no longer forced to serve in the armed forces, as long as it is
not required for the safety of the country. Since then, the Dutch army is an
all-volunteer force. However, to this day, every male citizen aged 17 gets a
letter in which he is told that he has been registered but does not have to
present himself for service. The Dutch army allowed its male soldiers to have
long hair from the early 1970s to the end of conscription in the mid 1990s.
Even though it is generally thought that conscription has been abolished in the
Netherlands, it is compulsory attendance that was abolished, not conscription.
The laws and systems which provide for the conscription of armed forces
personnel still remain in place. In Curaçao and Aruba, conscription is still
in existence. Britain. Britain introduced conscription for the first time in
1916 (halfway through World War I) and abolished it in 1920, and reintroduced
it again in 1939 on the outbreak of World War II. It remained in force until
1960. In all, 8,000,000 men were drafted, as well as several hundred thousand
women. The introduction of conscription in May 1939, before the war began, was
largely due to pressure from the French, who emphasized the need for a large
British army to oppose the Germans. Starting in early 1942 unmarried women age
19–30 were conscripted. Most were sent to the factories, but they could
volunteer for the Auxiliary Territorial Service (ATS) and other women's
services. None were assigned to combat roles unless they volunteered. By 1943
women were liable to some form of directed labour up to age 51. During the
Second World War, 1.4 million British men volunteered for service and 3.2
million were conscripted. Volunteers comprised 20% of the Army, 40% of the
Royal Navy, and 50% of the Royal Air Force. The abolition of conscription in
Britain was announced on 4 April 1957, by recently-elected prime minister
Harold Macmillan, with the last conscripts being recruited three years later.
United States. Colonial and Early National. In America before 1862, combat duty
was always voluntary, but white men aged 18 to 45 were usually required to join
local militia units. Colonial militia laws—and after 1776 those of the
states—required able-bodied white men to enroll in the militia and to undergo
a minimum of military training, all without pay. Colonial Pennsylvania
(controlled by Quakers) did not have such laws. Members of pacifist religious
denominations were exempt. When combat troops were needed some of the
militiamen volunteered for short terms of service, for which they were paid.
Following this system in its essentials, the Continental Congress in 1778
recommended that the states draft men from their militias for one year's
service in the Continental army; this first national conscription was
irregularly applied and failed to fill the Continental ranks. In 1814,
President James Madison proposed conscription of 40,000 men for the army, but
the War of 1812 ended before Congress took any action. An 1840 proposal for a
standing army of 200,000 men included conscription, but it never passed and
military service was voluntary before 1862. Civil War. Although both North and
South resorted to conscription during the Civil War, in neither region did the
system work effectively. The Confederate Congress on April 16, 1862, passed an
act requiring military service for three years from all males aged eighteen to
thirty-five not legally exempt, and it later extended the obligation. The U.S.
Congress followed on July 17, 1862, with an act authorizing a militia draft
within a state when it could not meet its quota with volunteers. This state-
administered system failed in practice and on March 3, 1863, Congress passed
the first genuine national conscription law, setting up under the Union army an
elaborate machinery for enrolling and drafting men between twenty and forty-
five years of age. Quotas were assigned in each state, the deficiencies in
volunteers to be met by conscription. But men drafted could provide substitutes
or, until mid-1864, avoid service by paying commutation money. Many eligibles
pooled their money to cover the cost of anyone drafted. Families used the
substitute provision to select which man should go into the army and which
should stay home. There was much evasion and overt resistance to the draft,
especially in Catholic areas. The great draft riot in New York City in July
1863 involved Irish immigrants who had been signed up as citizens to swell the
machine vote, not realizing it made them liable for the draft. Of the 168,649
men procured for the Union through the draft, 117,986 were substitutes, leaving
only 50,663 who had their personal services conscripted. The problem of
Confederate desertion was aggravated by the inequitable inclinations of
conscription officers and local judges. The three conscription acts of the
Confederacy exempted certain categories, most notably the planter class, and
enrolling officers and local judges often practiced favoritism, sometimes
accepting bribes. Attempts to effectively deal with the issue were frustrated
by conflict between state and local governments on the one hand and the
national government of the Confederacy. World War I. In 1917 the administration
of Woodrow Wilson decided to rely primarily on conscription, rather than
voluntary enlistment, to raise military manpower for World War I. The Selective
Service Act of 1917 was carefully drawn to remedy the defects in the Civil War
system and—by allowing exemptions for dependency, essential occupations, and
religious scruples—to place each man in his proper niche in a national war
effort. The act established a "liability for military service of all male
citizens"; authorized a selective draft of all those between twenty-one and
thirty-one years of age (later from eighteen to forty-five); and prohibited all
forms of bounties, substitutions, or purchase of exemptions. Administration was
entrusted to local boards composed of leading civilians in each community.
These boards issued draft calls in order of numbers drawn in a national lottery
and determined exemptions. In 1917 and 1918 some 24 million men were registered
and nearly 3 million inducted into the military services, with little of the
resistance that characterized the Civil War. World War II. In 1940 Congress
passed the first peace-time draft legislation, which was led by Grenville
Clark. It was renewed (by one vote) in summer 1941. It involved questions as to
who should control the draft, the size of the army, and the need for
deferments. The system worked through local draft boards comprising community
leaders who were given quotas and then decided how to fill them. There was very
little draft resistance. The nation went from a surplus manpower pool with high
unemployment and relief in 1940 to a severe manpower shortage by 1943. Industry
realized that the Army urgently desired production of essential war materials
and foodstuffs more than soldiers. (Large numbers of soldiers were not used
until the invasion of Europe in summer 1944.) In 1940 to 1943, the Army often
transferred soldiers to civilian status in the Enlisted Reserve Corps in order
to increase production. Those transferred would return to work in essential
industry, although they could be called back to active duty if the Army needed
them. Others were discharged if their civilian work was deemed absolutely
essential. There were instances of mass releases of men to increase production
in various industries. Blacks and Asians were drafted under the same terms as
whites. One contentious issue involved the drafting of fathers, which was
avoided as much as possible. The drafting of 18-year olds was desired by the
military but vetoed by public opinion. Farmers demanded and were generally
given occupational deferments (many volunteered anyway, and those who stayed at
home were not eligible for postwar veteran's benefits). Later in the war, in
light of the tremendous amount of manpower that would be necessary for the
invasion of France, many earlier deferment categories became draft eligible.
Drafting of women. , countries that were drafting women into military service
included Benin, Chad China, Cuba, Eritrea, Israel, Libya, Malaysia, North
Korea, Peru, Taiwan, and Tunisia. In the United Kingdom during World War II,
beginning in 1941, women were brought into the scope of conscription but, as
all women with dependent children were exempt and many women were informally
left in occupations such as nursing or teaching, the number conscripted was
relatively few. ^  In 2002, Sweden considered female conscription on the
grounds that excluding them goes against the ideology of equality. In the USSR,
there was no systematic conscription of women for the armed forces, but the
severe disruption of normal life and the high proportion of civilians affected
by World War II after the German invasion attracted many volunteers for what
was termed "The Great Patriotic War". Medical doctors of both sexes could and
would be conscripted (as officers). Also, the free Soviet university education
system required Department of Chemistry students of both sexes to complete an
ROTC course in NBC defense, and such female reservist officers could be
conscripted in times of war. The United States came close to drafting women
into the Nurse Corps in preparation for a planned invasion of Japan. In 1981 in
the United States, several men filed lawsuit in the case "Rostker v. Goldberg",
alleging that the Selective Service Act of 1948 violates the Due Process Clause
of the Fifth Amendment by only requiring that men register with the Selective
Service System (SSS). The Supreme Court eventually upheld the Act, stating that
"the argument for registering women was based on considerations of equity, but
Congress was entitled, in the exercise of its constitutional powers, to focus
on the question of military need, rather than 'equity.'" On October 1, 1999 in
the Taiwan Area, the Judicial Yuan of the Republic of China in its
Interpretation 490 considered that the physical differences between males and
females and the derived role differentiation in their respective social
functions and lives would not make drafting only males a violation of the
Constitution of the Republic of China. Though women are conscripted in Taiwan,
transsexual persons are exempt. Traditionally conscription has been limited to
the male population. Women and handicapped males have been exempted from
conscription. Many societies have traditionally considered military service as
a test of manhood and a rite of passage from boyhood into manhood.
Conscientious objection. A conscientious objector is an individual whose
personal beliefs are incompatible with military service, or, more often, with
any role in the armed forces. In some countries, conscientious objectors have
special legal status, which augments their conscription duties. For example,
Sweden used to allow conscientious objectors to choose a service in the
"weapons-free" branch, such as an airport fireman, nurse or telecommunications
technician. Most refuse such service, as they feel that such roles are a part
of the military complex. The reasons for refusing to serve are varied. Some
conscientious objectors are so for religious reasons — notably, the members
of the historic peace churches, pacifist by doctrine; Jehovah's Witnesses,
while not strictly pacifists, refuse to participate in the armed forces on the
ground that they believe Christians should be neutral in worldly conflicts.
Evading the draft. The New York Draft Riots (July 11 to July 16, 1863; known at
the time as "Draft Week"), were violent disturbances in New York City that were
the culmination of discontent with new laws passed by Congress to draft men to
fight in the ongoing American Civil War. The Central Asian Revolt started in
the summer of 1916, when the Russian Empire government ended its exemption of
Muslims from military service. The conscription also became unpopular in Grand
Duchy of Finland during the reign of Nicholas II and was suspended; instead
Finland paid a levy tax, "military millions" as compensation for abolition of
conscription. In the USA and some other countries, the Vietnam War saw new
levels of opposition to conscription and the Selective Service System. Many
people opposed to and facing conscription chose to either apply for
classification and assignment to civilian alternative service or noncombatant
service within the military as conscientious objectors, or to evade the draft
by fleeing to a neutral country. A small proportion, like Muhammad Ali, chose
to resist the draft by publicly and politically fighting conscription. Some
people resist at the point of registration for the draft. In the USA around
1970, for example, the draft resistance movement has focused on mandatory draft
registration. Others resist at the point of induction, when they are ordered to
put on a uniform, when they are ordered to carry or use a weapon, or when they
are ordered into combat. In the United States, especially during the Vietnam
War, some used political connections to ensure that they were placed well away
from any potential harm, serving in what was termed a Champagne unit. Many
would avoid military service altogether through college deferments, by becoming
fathers, or serving in various exempt jobs (teaching was one possibility).
Others used educational exemptions, became conscientious objectors or pretended
to be conscientious objectors, although they might then be drafted for non-
combat work, such as serving as a combat medic. It was also possible they could
be asked to do similar civilian work, such as being a hospital orderly. It was,
in fact, quite easy for those with some knowledge of the system to avoid being
drafted. A simple route, widely publicized, was to get a medical rejection.
While a person could claim to have symptoms (or feign homosexuality) if enough
physicians sent letters that a person had a problem, he might well be rejected.
It often wasn't worth the Army's time to dispute this claim. Such an approach
worked best in a larger city where there was no stigma to not serving, and the
potential draftee was not known to those reviewing him. For others, the most
common method of avoiding the draft was to cross the border into another
country. People who have been "called up" for military service and who
attempted to avoid it in some way were known as "draft-dodgers". Particularly
during the Vietnam War, US draft-dodgers usually made their way to Canada,
Mexico, or Sweden. Many people looked upon draft-dodgers with scorn as being
"cowards", but some supported them in their efforts. In the late years of the
Vietnam War, objections against it and support for draft-dodgers was much more
outspoken, because of the casualties suffered by American troops, and the
actual cause and purpose of the war being heavily questioned. Toward the end of
the US draft, an attempt was made to make the system somewhat fairer by turning
it into a lottery, with each of the year's calendar dates randomly assigned a
number. Men born on lower numbered dates were called up for review. For the
reasons given above, this did not make the system any fairer, and the entire
system ended in 1973. By 1975, the draft was no longer mandatory. Today,
American men aged 18–25 are encouraged to sign up for the Military, but there
has not been a call-up since the Vietnam Era. In Israel, the Muslim and
Christian Arab minority are exempt from mandatory service, as are permanent
residents such as the Druze of the Golan Heights. Male Ultra-Orthodox Jews may
apply for a deferment of draft to study in Yeshiva, and the deferment tends to
become an exemption, while female religious Jews can be exempted after
presenting "religious declaration" to the IDF authorities, and some (primarily
National Religious or Modern Orthodox) choose to volunteer for national service
instead. Male Druze and Circassian Israeli citizens are liable, by agreement
with their community leaders (Female Druze and Circassian are exempt from
service). Members of the exempted groups can still volunteer, but very few do,
except that Bedouin have a relatively large number who tend to volunteer
(usually for financial reasons). Arguments against conscription. Slavery.
American libertarians oppose it because, as Ron Paul says, since "Conscription
is wrongly associated with patriotism, when it really represents slavery and
involuntary servitude." The philosopher Ayn Rand opposed it because "Of all the
statist violations of individual rights in a mixed economy, the military draft
is the worst. It is an abrogation of rights. It negates man’s fundamental
right—the right to life—and establishes the fundamental principle of
statism: that a man’s life belongs to the state, and the state may claim it
by compelling him to sacrifice it in battle." Economics. It can be argued that
in a cost-to-benefit ratio, conscription during peace time is not worthwhile.
Months or years of service amongst the most fit and capable subtracts from the
productivity of the economy; add to this the cost of training them, and in some
countries paying them. Compared to these extensive costs, some would argue
there is very little benefit; if there ever was a war then conscription and
basic training could be completed quickly, and in any case there is little
threat of a war in most countries with conscription. In the United States,
every male resident must register with the Selective Service System on his 18th
birthday and is available for a draft. The cost of conscription can be related
to the parable of the broken window. The cost of the work, military service,
does not disappear even if no salary is paid. The work effort of the conscripts
is effectively wasted, as an unwilling workforce is extremely inefficient. The
impact is especially severe in wartime, when civilian professionals are forced
to fight as amateur soldiers. Not only is the work effort of the conscripts
wasted and productivity lost, but professionally-skilled conscripts are also
difficult to replace in the civilian workforce. Every soldier conscripted in
the army is taken away from his civilian work, and away from contributing to
the economy which funds the military. This is not a problem in an agrarian or
pre-industrialized state where the level of education is universally low, and
where a worker is easily replaced by another. However, this proves extremely
problematic in a post-industrial society where educational levels are high and
where the workforce is highly sophisticated and a replacement for a conscripted
specialist is difficult to find. Even direr economic consequences result if the
professional conscripted as an amateur soldier is killed or maimed for life;
his work effort and productivity is irrevocably lost. Arguments for
conscription. Political and moral motives. Jean Jacques Rousseau argued
vehemently against professional armies, feeling it was the right and privilege
of every citizen to participate to the defense of the whole society and a mark
of moral decline to leave this business to professionals. He based this view on
the development of the Roman republic, which came to an end at the same time as
the Roman army changed from a conscript to professional force. Similarly,
Aristotle linked the division of armed service among the populace intimately
with the political order of the state. Niccolò Machiavelli argued strongly for
conscription, seeing the professional armies as the cause of the failure of
societal unity in Italy. Other proponents, such as William James, consider both
mandatory military and national service as ways of instilling maturity in young
adults. Some proponents, such as Jonathan Alter and Mickey Kaus, support a
draft in order to reinforce social equality, create social consciousness, break
down class divisions and for young adults to immerse themselves in public
enterprise. Economic & resource efficiency. It is estimated by the British
military that in a professional military, a company deployed for active duty in
peacekeeping corresponds to three inactive companies at home. Salaries for each
are paid from the military budget. In contrast, volunteers from a trained
reserve are in their civilian jobs when they are not deployed.
