Constitutional dictatorship A Constitutional dictatorship is a form of
government in which dictatorial powers are exercised during an emergency. The
dictator is not absolute and the dictator's authority remains limited by the
constitution. The early Roman Republic made provision for a dictator who could
govern for a period of time but whose actions remained subject to review at the
conclusion of the dictator's term. The United States Constitution has a similar
dictator clause stating that the President "may adjourn to such Time as he
shall think proper". However, this can only be done when the two houses are on
disagreement over when to adjourn. Abraham Lincoln, President of the United
States during the American Civil War, exercised extraordinary powers to
preserve the Union. Lincoln's dictatorial actions included directly ordering
the arrest and detention of dissenters and the suspension of the right to writs
of Habeas Corpus. Yet Lincoln remained subject to Congressional oversight,
judicial review and periodic elections. The German Republic that succeeded the
Imperial German government at the close of the First World War, otherwise known
as the Weimar Republic, adopted a constitutional provision expressly enabling
the President to rule by decree and without consultation with the legislative
branch. This provision was used by Adolf Hitler to consolidate his powers upon
his selection as Chancellor by President Hindenburg. Franklin D. Roosevelt,
President of the United States during the Great Depression and the Second World
War, also exercised extraordinary powers in response to both emergencies.
Roosevelt's actions included the temporary suspension of the right of contract,
in violation of the United States Constitution, as well as the closing of banks
and a moratorium on foreclosures. Later, meeting a perceived threat by Japanese
nationals and Japanese-Americans, Roosevelt ordered their relocation to
internment camps. In the 21st century, John Yoo, attorney and legal theorist,
has offered a theory of the unitary executive supporting virtually
unconstrained authority to be wielded by the United States President in his
capacity as commander in chief of the armed forces. The Yoo theory provides the
intellectual foundation for many of the actions undertaken by the
administration of George W. Bush since the attacks of September 11, 2001. From
Classical Rome through Lincoln, Weimar, and Roosevelt to John Yoo's theory of
the unitary executive, the idea of a Constitutional dictatorship remains
viable.
