Consumer choice Consumer choice is a theory of microeconomics that relates
preferences for consumption goods and services to consumption expenditures and
ultimately to consumer demand curves. The link between personal preferences,
consumption, and the demand curve is one of the most closely studied relations
in economics. Consumer choice theory is a way of analyzing how consumers may
achieve equilibrium between preferences and expenditures by maximizing utility
as subject to consumer budget constraints. Preferences are the desires by each
individual for the consumption of goods and services that translate into
choices based on income or wealth for purchases of goods and services to be
combined with the consumer's time to define consumption activities. Consumption
is separated from production, logically, because two different consumers are
involved. In the first case consumption is by the primary individual; in the
second case, a producer might make something that he would not consume himself.
Therefore, different motivations and abilities are involved. The models that
make up consumer theory are used to represent prospectively observable demand
patterns for an individual buyer on the hypothesis of constrained optimization.
Prominent variables used to explain the rate at which the good is purchased
(demanded) are the price per unit of that good, prices of related goods, and
wealth of the consumer. The fundamental theorem of demand states that the rate
of consumption falls as the price of the good rises. This is called the
"substitution effect". Clearly if one does not have enough money to pay the
price then they cannot buy any of that item. As prices rise, consumers will
substitute away from higher priced goods and services, choosing less costly
alternatives. Subsequently, as the wealth of the individual rises, demand
increases, shifting the demand curve higher at all rates of consumption. This
is called the "income effect". As wealth rises, consumers will substitute away
from less costly inferior goods and services, choosing higher priced
alternatives. Model setup. Economists' modern solution to the problem of
mapping consumer choices is indifference curve analysis. For an individual,
indifference curves and an assumption of constant prices and a fixed income in
a two-good world will give the following diagram. The consumer can choose any
point on or below the budget constraint line BC. This line is diagonal since it
comes from the equation formula_1. In other words, the amount spent on both
goods together is less than or equal to the income of the consumer. The
consumer will choose the indifference curve with the highest utility that is
within his budget constraint. Every point on I3 is outside his budget
constraint so the best that he can do is the single point on I2 that is tangent
to his budget constraint. He will purchase X* of good X and Y* of good Y.
Indifference curve analysis begins with the utility function. The utility
function is treated as an index of utility. All that is necessary is that the
utility index change as more preferred bundles are consumed. Indifference
curves are typically numbered with the number increasing as more preferred
bundles are consumed. However, it is not necessary that numbers be used - any
indexing system would suffice - colors for example. The advantage of numbers is
that their use makes the math simpler. Numbers used to index indifference
curves have no cardinal significance. For example if three indifference curves
are labeled 1, 4, and 16 respectively that means nothing more than the bundles
"on" indifference curve 4 are more preferred than the bundles "on" indifference
curve I. The fact that the index number is a multiple of another is of no
significance. For example, the bundles of good on 4 does not mean that they are
four times more satisfying than those on 1. As noted they merely mean they are
more satisfying. Income effect and price effect deal with how the change in
price of a commodity changes the consumption of the good. The theory of
consumer choice examines the trade-offs and decisions people make in their role
as consumers as prices and their income changes. Substitution effect. The
substitution effect is the effect observed with changes in relative price of
goods. This effect basically affects the movement along the curve. These curves
can be used to predict the effect of changes to the budget constraint. The
graphic below shows the effect of a price increase for good Y. If the price of
Y increases, the budget constraint will pivot from BC2 to BC1. Notice that
because the price of X does not change, the consumer can still buy the same
amount of X if he or she chooses to buy only good X. On the other hand, if the
consumer chooses to buy only good Y, he or she will be able to buy less of good
Y because its price has increased. To maximize the utility with the reduced
budget constraint, BC1, the consumer will re-allocate consumption to reach the
highest available indifference curve which BC1 is tangent to. As shown on the
diagram below, that curve is I1, and therefore the amount of good Y bought will
shift from Y2 to Y1, and the amount of good X bought to shift from X2 to X1.
The opposite effect will occur if the price of Y decreases causing the shift
from BC2 to BC3, and I2 to I3. If these curves are plotted for many different
prices of good Y, a demand curve for good Y can be constructed. The diagram
below shows the demand curve for good Y as its price varies. Alternatively, if
the price for good Y is fixed and the price for good X is varied, a demand
curve for good X can be constructed. Income effect. Another important item that
can change is the money income of the consumer. The income effect is the
phenomenon observed through changes in purchasing power. It reveals the change
in quantity demanded brought by a change in real income (utility). Graphically,
as long as the prices remain constant, changing the income will create a
parallel shift of the budget constraint. Increasing the income will shift the
budget constraint right since more of both can be bought, and decreasing income
will shift it left. Depending on the indifference curves, as income increases,
the amount purchased of a good can either increase, decrease or stay the same.
In the diagram below, good Y is a normal good since the amount purchased
increased as the budget constraint shifted from BC1 to the higher income BC2.
Good X is an inferior good since the amount bought decreased as the income
increases. formula_6 Price effect as sum of substitution and income effects.
Every price change can be decomposed into an income effect and a substitution
effect; the price effect is the sum of substitution and income effects. The
substitution effect is a price change that alters the slope of the budget
constraint but leaves the consumer on the same indifference curve. In other
words, it illustrates the consumer's new consumption basket after the price
change while being compensated as to allow the consumer to be as happy as he or
she was previously. By this effect, the consumer is posited to substitute
toward the good that becomes comparatively less expensive. In the illustration
below this corresponds to an imaginary budget constraint denoted SC being
tangent to the indifference curve I1. If the good in question is a "normal
good", then the income effect from the rise in purchasing power from a price
fall reinforces the substitution effect. If the good is an "inferior good",
then the income effect will offset in some degree the substitution effect. If
the income effect for an inferior good is sufficiently strong, the consumer
will buy less of the good when it becomes less expensive, a Giffen good
(commonly believed to be a rarity). formula_16 The substitution effect
increases the amount demanded of good formula_8 from formula_18 to formula_19.
In the example, the income effect of the price fall in formula_18 partly
offsets the substitution effect as the amount demanded of formula_8 goes from
formula_19 to formula_23. Thus, the price effect is the algebraic sum of the
substitution effect and the income effect. Assumptions. Note the assumptions do
not guarantee that the demand curve will be negatively sloped. A positively
sloped curve is not inconsistent with the assumptions. Use Value. In Marx's
critique of political economy, any labor-product has a value and a use value,
and if it is traded as a commodity in markets, it additionally has an exchange
value, most often expressed as a money-price. Marx acknowledges that
commodities being traded also have a general utility, implied by the fact that
people want them, but he argues that this by itself tells us nothing about the
specific character of the economy in which they are produced and sold. Labor-
leisure tradeoff. Consumer theory can also be used to analyze a consumer's
choice between leisure and labor. Leisure is considered one good (often put on
the horizontal-axis) and consumption is considered the other good. Since a
consumer has a finite and scarce amount of time, he must make a choice between
leisure (which earns no income for consumption) and labor (which does earn
income for consumption). or When a consumer chooses no leisure formula_27 then
formula_28 and formula_29. From this labor-leisure tradeoff model, the
substitution and income effects of various changes in price caused by welfare
benefits, labor taxation, or tax credits can be analyzed.
