Consent of the governed "Consent of the governed" is a phrase synonymous with a
political theory where in a government's legitimacy and moral right to use
state power is only justified and legal when derived from the people or society
over which that political power is exercised. This theory of "consent" is
historically contrasted to the divine right of kings and has often been invoked
against the legitimacy of colonialism. Article 21 of the Universal Declaration
of Human Rights states that "The will of the people shall be the basis of the
authority of government." Types of consent. A key question is whether the
unanimous consent of the governed is required; if so, this would imply the
right of secession for those who do not want to be governed by a particular
collective. All democratic governments today allow decisions to be made even
over the overt dissent of a minority of voters, which in some theorists' view,
calls into question whether said governments can rightfully claim, in all
circumstances, to act with the consent of the governed. The theory of
hypothetical consent of the governed holds that one's oblige obey government
depends on whether the government is such that one "ought" to consent to it, or
whether the people, if placed in a state of nature without government, would
agree to said government. This theory has been rejected by some scholars, who
argue that, since government itself can commit aggression, creating a
government to safeguard the people from aggression would be similar to the
people, if given the choice of what animals to be attacked by, trading
"polecats and foxes for a lion," a trade that they would not make. Another
division that is sometimes made is between overt consent and tacit consent.
Overt consent, to be valid, would require voluntariness, a specific act on the
part of the consenters, a particular act consented to, and specific agents who
perform this action. Immigrating into a particular jurisdiction is sometimes
regarded as an overt act indicating consent to be ruled by that jurisdiction's
government. Not all who are ruled by a particular government have immigrated to
that jurisdiction, however; some were born there. It has been pointed out that
in jurisdictions where proportional representation is not used, but candidates
are instead elected by plurality vote, a candidate can be elected despite the
overt dissent of a majority of the people. Not every voter has necessarily had
an opportunity to vote on the constitutional provisions specifying that
plurality voting should be used; according to some theorists, this calls into
question whether said voters have consented to be governed by the candidates
who obtain plurality support. A counter-argument is that, by failing to act
through the process of constitutional amendment to change such provisions, the
people have consented to them. A rebuttal to this is that in some
jurisdictions, the means of amending the constitution are not completely in the
hands of the electorate; the same issues arise, in claiming that the
constitution left in place by the decisions of the people's elected
representatives is consented to by the people, as arise in claiming that any
other actions taken by said representatives are consented to by the people.
Some proponents of the "overt consent" theory hold that the act of voting
implies consent, while others question the connection between voting and
consenting to a particular scheme of representative, since some voters may
oppose the system as a whole but desire to influence decisions on particular
issues or candidates. The theory of tacit consent of the governed holds that if
the people live in a country that is not undergoing a rebellion, they have
consented to the rule of that country's government. In the United States.  The
appointment of the delegates to both these congresses was generally by popular
conventions, though in some instances by state assemblies. But in neither case
can the appointing body be considered the original depositary of the power by
which the delegates acted; for the conventions were either self-appointed
"committees of safety" or hastily assembled popular gatherings, including but a
small fraction of the population to be represented, and the state assemblies
had no right to surrender to another body one atom of the power which had been
granted to them, or to create a new power which should govern the people
without their will. The source of the powers of congress is to be sought solely
in the acquiescence of the people, without which every congressional
resolution, with or without the benediction of popular conventions or state
legislatures, would have been a mere "brutum fulmen"; and, as the congress
unquestionably exercised national powers, operating over the whole country, the
conclusion is inevitable that the will of the whole people is the source of
national government in the United States, even from its first imperfect
appearance in the second continental congress... Akhil Amar has argued that the
people have a right to change the U.S. Constitution by majority vote, without
regard to the supermajority of state legislatures required by Article V of the
U.S. Constitution.
