Consumers' Research Consumers' Research is a defunct non-profit organization
established in 1929 by Stuart Chase and F.J. Schlink after the success of their
book "Your Money's Worth: a study in the waste of the Consumer's Dollar"
galvanized interest in testing products on behalf of consumers. It published a
monthly magazine called "Consumers' Research Bulletin". Staff from this
organization protested and left to form Consumers Union in 1936. The magazine
published by Consumers Union, now called Consumer Reports, gained popularity
and market share over the "Bulletin" and supplanted its relevance. History.
Consumers' Research published comparative test results on brand-name products
and publicized deceptive advertising claims. Founding. In 1927 Schlink and
Chase, encouraged by the public response to the publishing of their book "Your
Money's Worth", solicited financial, editorial, and technical support from
patrons of other activist magazines to support the creation of an organization
to offer consumers the unbiased services of “an economist, a scientist, an
accountant, and goodness knows what more”. Schlink founded this organization,
Consumers' Research, and migrated the existing subscriber base of a White
Plains, New York organization's "Consumer's Club Commodity List" to support the
"Consumers' Research Bulletin" published by his new organization. This was a
publication with the mission to “investigate, test and report reliably …
hundreds of common commodities purchased.” This magazine would “accept no
money or compensation of any kind from manufacturers, dealers, advertising
agencies or other commercial enterprises”. In 1927 the circulation of the
bulletin was 565; by 1932 there were 42,000 subscribers. In addition to the
magazine the organization also published books, pamphlets, and reports. In 1933
Schlink and Arthur Kallet, a board member of Consumers’ Research and former
colleague of Schlink at the American Standards Association, published
100,000,000 Guinea Pigs. The book was to become one of the best-selling books
of the decade and the metaphor of consumers being guinea pigs exploited by
commercial enterprises moved readers as an appropriate description of the
public during the Depression. Consumers Research moved in 1933 to a laboratory
in Washington, New Jersey. After the move Schlink began to take more control
over the management of the organization and rapidly hired and fired many staff.
When Schlink established Consumers’ Research he appointed his wife and close
friends to compose the majority of seats on the board of directors and staff
noted that he held control of hiring, firing, and the organization's editorial
and budget decisions. When the organization grew the staff began to question
its mission. Schlink's control and resulting protests. In 1927 at the start of
publication "Consumers' Research Bulletin" discussed conceptual issues, but by
1934 ratings of products and guidance for purchases filled more than 75% of
each issue. Around this time Chase left the organization to pursue other
interests, and Schlink began to take more control over management. By 1935
Consumers’ Research had a staff of 50, used 200 consultants, and was
sponsored by such respected and established journalists such as Alexander
Crosby of "The Nation", Arthur Kellog of "The Survey", and George Soule of "The
New Republic". Each of these also wrote in their own magazines about consumer
activism. In spring of 1935 the workers began to openly complain about
management practices. In August 1935 many workers formed a chapter of the
Technical, Editorial, and Office Assistant's Union. In response to this,
Schlink fired John Heasty, the appointed president of the union, and the union
organizers responded with a strike at Consumers Research. Schlink counter-
responded to the strike by hiring strikebreakers and armed security and by
filing legal grievances against protestors. The negative publicity this dispute
attracted pleased Consumers' Research critics. Kallet seeks a solution. The
positions between Consumer Reports and the strikers became more entrenched and
less reconcilable, and the strikers began to have more discussions about the
working conditions of employees. Arthur Kallet emerged as a leader who proposed
the creation of a new organization which would evaluate products and take into
account the working conditions under which those products were created. The
organization proposed would also engage promote boycotts, educational
campaigns, and have alliances with other organizations, which were activities
Consumers Research avoided. At the end of 1935 the protesters called for
mediation. Reinhold Niebuhr, a religious philosopher, chaired an arbitration
group which included the America Civil Liberties Union’s Roger Nash Baldwin,
the educator George Counts, and the socialist Norman Thomas. Schlink rejected
this arbitration and the Consumers' Research board of directors accused the
strikers of being communists. This organization, Consumers Union, published its
first magazine "Consumers Union Reports" in May 1936. The previous strike was
very successful at drawing attention to the protesters and the magazine was
founded with public attention and support. Within two years the circulation of
this new magazine surpassed the subscriptions to "Consumers' Research
Bulletin", which the organization continued to publish. As of 1987 it had less
than 1% of the subscribers which Consumers Union's magazine had. The magazine
eventually ceased publication. Accomplishments. From its New Jersey location,
Consumers' Research continually organized petitions to Franklin D. Roosevelt
urging him to establish a federal Department of the Consumer. This department
would organize all consumer protection agencies and have as goals the
prevention of monopoly and prevention of fraud to consumers. Because of
Consumers' Research, and womens' groups, and home economics activists, there
was a Consumer Advisory Board, a labor advisory committee, and a business
advisory committee in the National Recovery Administration. In 1933 Roosevelt
appointed Mary Harriman Rumsey to head the Consumer Advisory Board. Caroline F.
Ware, Paul Douglas, Walton Hale Hamilton, and Dexter Keezer were other consumer
representatives involved in this effort. Legacy. Consumers' Research was a
founding organization in the consumer protection movement. Consumers Union grew
strongly while Consumers' Research languished. In its later years, Consumers'
Research stopped testing products and instead focused on providing consumer
advice and covering policy issues from health and safety issues to cable TV
competition. The establishment of Consumers Union was one of the major events
influencing the consumer movement after World War I. Other important
organizations formed in the same era were the New Deal programs aimed at
promoting economic recovery after the Great Depression by increasing consumer
representation in the market, with the Consumer Advisory Board within the
National Recovery Administration and the Consumers' Counsel within the United
States Department of Agriculture being notable among them.
