Constitutionalism Constitutionalism has a variety of meanings. Most generally,
it is "a complex of ideas, attitudes, and patterns of behavior elaborating the
principle that the authority of government derives from and is limited by a
body of fundamental law". Usage. Constitutionalism has prescriptive and
descriptive uses. Law professor Gerhard Casper captured this aspect of the term
in noting that: "Constitutionalism has both descriptive and prescriptive
connotations. Used descriptively, it refers chiefly to the historical struggle
for constitutional recognition of the people's right to 'consent' and certain
other rights, freedoms, and privileges…. Used prescriptively … its meaning
incorporates those features of government seen as the essential elements of the
… Constitution." Descriptive use. One example of constitutionalism's
descriptive use is law professor Bernard Schwartz's 5 volume compilation of
sources seeking to trace the origins of the U.S. Bill of Rights. Beginning with
English antecedents going back to the Magna Carta (1215), Schwartz explores the
presence and development of ideas of individual freedoms and privileges through
colonial charters and legal understandings. Then, in carrying the story
forward, he identifies revolutionary declarations and constitutions, documents
and judicial decisions of the Confederation period and the formation of the
federal Constitution. Finally, he turns to the debates over the federal
Constitution's ratification that ultimately provided mounting pressure for a
federal bill of rights. While hardly presenting a "straight-line," the account
illustrates the historical struggle to recognize and enshrine constitutional
rights and principles in a constitutional order. Prescriptive use. In contrast
to describing what constitutions are, a prescriptive approach addresses what a
constitution should be. As presented by Canadian philosopher Wil Waluchow,
constitutionalism embodies "the idea … that government can and should be
legally limited in its powers, and that its authority depends on its observing
these limitations. This idea brings with it a host of vexing questions of
interest not only to legal scholars, but to anyone keen to explore the legal
and philosophical foundations of the state." One example of this prescriptive
approach was the project of the National Municipal League to develop a model
state constitution. Authority of government. Whether reflecting a descriptive
or prescriptive focus, treatments of the concept of constitutionalism all deal
with the legitimacy of government. One recent assessment of American
constitutionalism, for example, notes that the idea of constitutionalism serves
to define what it is that "grants and guides the legitimate exercise of
government authority." Similarly, historian Gordon S. Wood described this
American constitutionalism as "advanced thinking" on the nature of
constitutions in which the constitution was conceived to be "a" set of
fundamental rules by which even the supreme power of the state shall be
governed.'" Ultimately, American constitutionalism came to rest on the
collective sovereignty of the people - the source that legitimized American
governments. Fundamental law empowering and limiting government. One of the
most salient features of constitutionalism is that it describes and prescribes
both the source and the limits of government power. William H. Hamilton has
captured this dual aspect by noting that constitutionalism "is the name given
to the trust which men repose in the power of words engrossed on parchment to
keep a government in order." Constitutionalism vs. constitutional questions.
The study of constitutions is not necessarily synonymous with the study of
constitutionalism. Although frequently conflated, there are crucial
differences. A discussion of this difference appears in legal historian
Christian G. Fritz's "American Sovereigns: The People and America's
Constitutional Tradition Before the Civil War", a study of the early history of
American constitutionalism. Fritz notes that an analyst could approach the
study of historic events focusing on issues that entailed "constitutional
questions" and that this differs from a focus that involves "questions of
constitutionalism." Constitutional questions involve the analyst in examining
how the constitution was interpreted and applied to distribute power and
authority as the new nation struggled with problems of war and peace, taxation
and representation. However, A similar distinction was drawn by British
constitutional scholar A.V. Dicey in assessing Britain's unwritten
constitution. Dicey noted a difference between the "conventions of the
constitution" and the "law of the constitution." The "essential distinction"
between the two concepts was that the law of the constitution was made up of
"rules enforced or recognised by the Courts," making up "a body of 'laws' in
the proper sense of that term." In contrast, the conventions of the
constitution consisted "of customs, practices, maxims, or precepts which are
not enforced or recognised by the Courts" yet they "make up a body not of laws,
but of constitutional or political ethics." Constitutional economics.
Constitutionalism has been the subject of criticism for its previous ignorance
of economic issues but this criticism is now taken into account by the
development of constitutional economics. Constitutional economics is a field of
economics and constitutionalism which describes and analyzes the specific
interrelationships between constitutional issues and the structure and
functioning of the economy. The term “constitutional economics” was used by
American economist – James M. Buchanan – as a name for a new academic sub-
discipline. Buchanan received in 1986 the Nobel Prize in Economic Sciences for
his “development of the contractual and constitutional bases for the theory
of economic and political decision-making.” Buchanan rejects “any organic
conception of the state as superior in wisdom, to the individuals who are its
members.” This philosophical position is, in fact, the very subject matter of
constitutional economics. A constitutional economics approach allows for a
combined economic and constitutional analysis, helping to avoid a one-
dimensional understanding. Buchanan believes that a constitution, intended for
use by at least several generations of citizens, must be able to adjust itself
for pragmatic economic decisions and to balance interests of the state and
society against those of individuals and their constitutional rights to
personal freedom and private happiness. Constitutional economics draws
substantial inspiration from the reformist attitude which is characteristic of
Adam Smith’s vision, and that Buchanan’s concept can be considered the
modern-day counterpart to what Smith called “the science of legislation.”
Concurrently with the rise of academic research in the field of constitutional
economics in the U.S. in the 1980s, the Supreme Court of India for almost a
decade had been encouraging public interest litigation on behalf of the poor
and oppressed by using a very broad interpretation of several articles of the
Indian Constitution. This is a vivid example of a "de facto" practical
application of the methodology of constitutional economics. The Russian school
of constitutional economics was created in the early twenty-first century with
the idea that constitutional economics allows for a combined economic and
constitutional analysis in the legislative (especially budgetary) process, thus
helping to overcome arbitrariness in the economic and financial decision-
making: for instance, when military expenses (and the like) dwarf the budget
spending on education and culture. In the English language, the word
“constitution” possesses a whole number of meanings, encompassing not only
national constitutions as such, but also charters of public organizations,
unwritten rules of various clubs, informal groups, etc. The Russian model of
constitutional economics, originally intended for transitional and developing
countries, focuses entirely on the concept of state constitution. In 2006, the
Russian Academy of Sciences officially recognized constitutional economics as a
separate academic sub-discipline.. Since many a country with transitional
political and economic system continues treating its constitution as an
abstract legal document disengaged from the economic policy of the state, the
practice of constitutional economics becomes there a decisive prerequisite for
democratic development of the state and society. Examples. Descriptive use.
Used descriptively, the concept of constitutionalism can refer chiefly to the
historical struggle for constitutional recognition of the people's right to
"consent" and certain other rights, freedoms, and privileges. United States.
American constitutionalism has been defined as a complex of ideas, attitudes,
and patterns of behavior elaborating the principle that the authority of
government derives from the people, and is limited by a body of fundamental
law. These ideas, attitudes and patterns of behavior, according to one analyst,
derive from "a dynamic political and historical process rather than from a
static body of thought laid down in the eighteenth century". In U.S. history,
constitutionalism—in both its descriptive and prescriptive sense—has
traditionally focused on the federal Constitution. Indeed, a routine assumption
of many scholars has been that understanding "American constitutionalism"
necessarily entails the thought that went into the drafting of the federal
Constitution and the American experience with that constitution since its
ratification in 1789. There is a rich tradition of state constitutionalism that
offers broader insight into constitutionalism in the United States. While state
constitutions and the federal Constitution operate differently as a function of
federalism—the coexistence and interplay of governments at both a national
and state level—they all rest on a shared assumption that their legitimacy
comes from the sovereign authority of the people or Popular sovereignty. This
underlying premise—embraced by the American revolutionaries with the
Declaration of Independence—unites the American constitutional tradition.
Both the experience with state constitutions before—and after—the federal
Constitution as well as the emergence and operation of the federal Constitution
reflect an on-going struggle over the idea that all governments in America
rested on the sovereignty of the people for their legitimacy. United Kingdom.
The United Kingdom is perhaps the best instance of constitutionalism in a
country that has an uncodified constitution. A variety of developments in
seventeenth-century England, including "the protracted struggle for power
between king and Parliament was accompanied by an efflorescence of political
ideas in which the concept of countervailing powers was clearly defined," led
to a well-developed polity with multiple governmental and private institutions
that counter the power of the state. Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth. From the
mid-sixteenth to the late eighteenth century, the Polish–Lithuanian
Commonwealth utilized the "liberum veto", a form of unanimity voting rule, in
its parliamentary deliberations. The "principle of "liberum veto" played an
important role in emergence of the unique Polish form of constitutionalism."
This constraint on the powers of the monarch were significant in making the "
[rule of law, religious tolerance and limited constitutional government ... the
norm in Poland in times when the rest of Europe was being devastated by
religious hatred and despotism." Prescriptive use. The prescriptive approach to
constitutionalism addresses what a constitution should be. Two observations
might be offered about its prescriptive use. United States. Starting with the
proposition that "'Constitutionalism' refers to the position or practice that
government be limited by a constitution, usually written," analysts take a
variety of positions on what the constitution means. For instance, they
describe the document as a document that may specify its relation to statutes,
treaties, executive and judicial actions, and the constitutions or laws of
regional jurisdictions. This prescriptive use of Constitutionalism is also
concerned with the principles of constitutional design, which includes the
principle that the field of public action be partitioned between delegated
powers to the government and the rights of individuals, each of which is a
restriction of the other, and that no powers be delegated that are beyond the
competence of government. Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth. The Constitution of
May 3, 1791, which historian Norman Davies calls "the first constitution of its
kind in Europe", was in effect for only a year. It was designed to redress
long-standing political defects of the Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth and its
traditional system of "Golden Liberty". The Constitution introduced political
equality between townspeople and nobility (szlachta) and placed the peasants
under the protection of the government, thus mitigating the worst abuses of
serfdom. United Kingdom. Constitutionalist was also a label used by some
independent candidates in UK general elections in the early 1920s. Most of the
candidates were former Liberal Party members, and many of them joined the
Conservative Party soon after being elected. The best known Constitutionalist
candidate was Winston Churchill in the 1924 UK general election. Dominican
Republic. After the democratically elected government of president Juan Bosch
in the Dominican Republic was deposed, the Constitutionalist movement was born
in the country. As opposed to said movement, the Anticonstitutionalist movement
was also born. Juan Bosch had to depart to Puerto Rico after he was deposed.
His first leader was Colonel Rafael Tomás Fernández Domínguez, and he wanted
Bosch to come back to power once again. Colonel Fernández Domínguez was
exiled to Puerto Rico where Bosch was. The Constitutionalists had a new leader:
Colonel Francisco Alberto Caamaño Deñó. Criticisms. Constitutionalism has
been the subject of criticism by numerous anarchist thinkers. For example,
Murray Rothbard, who coined the term "anarcho-capitalism", attacked
constitutionalism, arguing that constitutions are incapable of restraining
governments and do not protect the rights of citizens from their governments.
Rothbard wrote that [http://mises.org/rothbard/newlibertywhole.asp Murray N.
Rothbard, "For a New Liberty: The Libertarian Manifesto" (1978), p. 48. Islamic
constitutionalism. The scope and limits of constitutionalism in Muslim
countries have attracted growing interest in recent years. Authors such as Ann
E. Mayer define Islamic constitutionalism as "constitutionalism that is in some
form based on Islamic principles, as opposed to constitutionalism that has
developed in countries that happen to be Muslim but that has not been informed
by distinctively Islamic principles." However, the concrete meaning of the
notion remains contested among Muslim as well as Western scholars. Influential
thinkers like Mohammad Hashim Kamali and Khaled Abou El Fadl , but also younger
ones like Asifa Quraishi and Nadirsyah Hosen combine classic Islamic law with
modern constitutionalism. The constitutional changes initiated by the Arab
spring movement have already brought into reality many new hybrid models of
Islamic constitutionalism.
