Electoral district An electoral district (also known as a constituency, riding,
ward, division, electoral area or electorate) is a distinct territorial
subdivision for holding a separate election for one or more seats in a
legislative body. Generally, only voters who reside within the geographical
bounds of an electoral district (constituents) are permitted to vote in an
election held there. Terminology. The names for electoral districts vary across
countries and, occasionally, for the office being elected. The term
"constituency" is commonly used to refer to an electoral district; it can also
refer to the body of eligible voters within the represented area. Similarly, in
Australia and New Zealand, electoral districts are called "electorates",
however elsewhere the term "electorate" generally refers specifically to the
body of voters. In Canada, districts are colloquially called "ridings"
(stemming from an earlier British geographical subdivision). Local electoral
districts are sometimes called "wards", a term which also designates
administrative subdivisions of a municipality. In local government in the
Republic of Ireland voting districts are called "electoral areas". District
magnitude. "District magnitude" is the number of representatives elected from a
given district to the same legislative body. A "single-member district" has one
representative, while a "multi-member district" has more than one. Voting
systems that seek proportional representation (such as the single transferable
vote) inherently require multi-member districts, and the larger the district
magnitude the more proportional a system will tend to be (and the greater the
number of distinct parties or choices that can be represented.). An exception
is when a multi-member districts uses the winner-take-all method to select the
representative, as is the case with Singapore's Group Representation
Constituency. Under proportional representation systems, district magnitude is
an important determinant of the makeup of the elected body. With a larger
number of winners candidates are able to represent proportionately smaller
minorities; a 10% minority in a given district may secure no seats in a 5
member election but would be guaranteed a seat in a 9 member one because they
fulfill a Droop quota. The geographic distribution of minorities also affects
their representation - an unpopular nationwide minority can still secure a seat
if they are concentrated in a particular district. District magnitude can
sometimes vary within the same system during an election. In the Republic of
Ireland, for instance, national elections to Dáil Éireann are held using a
combination of 3, 4, and 5 member districts. In Hong Kong, the magnitude ranged
from 3 to 5 in 1998, when the current electoral system was introduced for
Legislative Council geographical constituency elections, and will range from 5
to 9 in the forthcoming election in September 2012. Apportionment and
redistricting. "Apportionment" is the process of allocating a number of
representatives to different regions, such as states or provinces.
Apportionment changes are often accompanied by "redistricting", the redrawing
of electoral district boundaries to accommodate the new number of
representatives. This redrawing is necessary under single-member district
systems, as each new representative requires their own district. Multi-member
systems, however, vary depending on other rules. Ireland, for example, redraws
its electoral districts after every census while Belgium uses its existing
state boundaries for electoral districts and instead increases the number of
representatives alloted to each. Apportionment is generally done on the basis
of population. Seats in the United States House of Representatives, for
instance, are reapportioned to individual states every 10 years following a
census, with some states that have grown in population gaining seats. The
United States Senate, by contrast, is apportioned without regard to population;
every state gets exactly two senators. "Malapportionment" occurs when voters
are under or over-represented due to variation in district population. Given
the complexity of this process, software is increasingly used to simplify the
task, while better supporting reproducible and more justifiable results.
Gerrymandering. "Gerrymandering" is the manipulation of electoral district
boundaries for political gain. By creating a few "forfeit" districts where
voters vote overwhelmingly for rival candidates, gerrymandering politicians can
manufacture more narrow wins among the districts they do seek to win.
Gerrymandering relies on the wasted vote effect, effectively concentrating
wasted votes among opponents while minimizing wasted votes among supporters.
Consequently, gerrymandering is typically done under voting systems using
single-member districts, which have more wasted votes. While much more
difficult, gerrymandering can also be done under proportional voting systems
when districts elect very few seats. By making three-member districts in
regions where a particular group has a slight majority, for instance,
gerrymandering politicians can effectively obtain 2/3 of that district's seats.
Similarly, by making four-member districts in regions where the same group has
slightly less than a majority, gerrymandering politicians can still secure
exactly half of the seats. However, any possible gerrymandering that
theoretically could occur would be much less effective because minority groups
can still elect at least one representative if they make up a significant
percentage of the population (e.g. 20-25%). Compare this to single-member
districts where 40-49% of the voters can be essentially shut out from any
representation. Swing seats and safe seats. Sometimes, particularly under non-
proportional winner-take-all voting systems, electoral districts can be prone
to landslide victories. A "safe seat" is one that is very unlikely to be won by
a rival politician due to the makeup of its constituency. Conversely, a "swing
seat" is one that could easily "swing" either way. In United Kingdom general
elections, the voting in a relatively small number of swing seats usually
determines the outcome of the entire election. Many politicians aspire to have
safe seats. Constituency work. Elected representatives may spend much of the
time serving the needs or demands of "constituents", meaning either voters or
residents of their district. This is more common in assemblies with many
single-member or small districts than those with fewer, larger districts. In a
looser sense, corporations and other such organizations can be referred to as
constituents, if they have a significant presence in an area. Many assemblies
allow free postage (through franking privilege or prepaid envelopes) from a
representative to a constituent, and often free telecommunications. Caseworkers
may be employed by representatives to assist constituents with problems.
Members of the U.S. Congress (both Representatives and Senators) working in
Washington, D.C. have a governmentally-staffed district office to aid in
"constituent services". Many state legislatures have followed suit. Likewise,
British MPs use their Parliamentary staffing allowance to appoint staff for
"constituency casework". Client politics and pork barrel politics are
associated with constituency work. Non-geographic democratic systems. Not all
democratic political systems use separate districts to conduct elections;
Israel, for instance, conducts parliamentary elections as a single, nationwide
entity, while the 20 electoral districts of Netherlands have a role in the
actual election, but no role whatsoever in the division of the seats. Ukraine
will elect half of the Verkhovna Rada (the Ukrainian parliament) in this way in
the October 2012 elections.
