Consumerism Consumerism is a social and economic order that encourages the
purchase of goods and services in ever-greater amounts. The term is often
associated with criticisms of consumption starting with Thorstein Veblen.
Veblen's subject of examination, the newly emergent middle class arising at the
turn of the twentieth century, comes to full fruition by the end of the
twentieth century through the process of globalization. In this sense,
consumerism is usually considered a part of media culture. Sometimes, the term
"consumerism" is also used to refer to the consumerists movement, consumer
protection or consumer activism, which seeks to protect and inform consumers by
requiring such practices as honest packaging and advertising, product
guarantees, and improved safety standards. In this sense it is a movement or a
set of policies aimed at regulating the products, services, methods, and
standards of manufacturers, sellers, and advertisers in the interests of the
buyer. In economics, consumerism refers to economic policies placing emphasis
on consumption. In an abstract sense, it is the belief that the free choice of
consumers should dictate the economic structure of a society (cf. Producerism,
especially in the British sense of the term). The term "consumerism" was first
used in 1915 to refer to "advocacy of the rights and interests of consumers"
(Oxford English Dictionary) but in this article the term "consumerism" refers
to the sense first used in 1960, "emphasis on or preoccupation with the
acquisition of consumer goods" (Oxford English Dictionary). History. Origins.
Consumerism has weak links with the Western world, but is in fact an
international phenomenon. People purchasing goods and consuming materials in
excess of their basic needs is as old as the first civilizations (e.g. Ancient
Egypt, Babylon and Ancient Rome). A great turn in consumerism arrived just
before the Industrial Revolution. In the nineteenth century, capitalist
development and the industrial revolution were primarily focused on the capital
goods sector and industrial infrastructure (i.e., mining, steel, oil,
transportation networks, communications networks, industrial cities, financial
centers, etc.). At that time, agricultural commodities, essential consumer
goods, and commercial activities had developed to an extent, but not to the
same extent as other sectors. Members of the working classes worked long hours
for low wages – as much as 16 hours per day, 6 days per week. Little time or
money was left for consumer activities. Further, capital goods and
infrastructure were quite durable and took a long time to be used up. Henry
Ford and other leaders of industry understood that mass production presupposed
mass consumption. After observing the assembly lines in the meat packing
industry, Frederick Winslow Taylor brought his theory of scientific management
to the organization of the assembly line in other industries; this unleashed
incredible productivity and reduced the costs of all commodities produced on
assembly lines. While previously the norm had been the scarcity of resources,
the Industrial Revolution created an unusual economic situation. For the first
time in history products were available in outstanding quantities, at
outstandingly low prices, being thus available to virtually everyone. So began
the era of mass consumption, the only era where the concept of consumerism is
applicable. Consumerism has long had intentional underpinnings, rather than
just developing out of capitalism. As an example, Earnest Elmo Calkins noted to
fellow advertising executives in 1932 that "consumer engineering must see to it
that we use up the kind of goods we now merely use", while the domestic
theorist Christine Frederick observed in 1929 that "the way to break the
vicious deadlock of a low standard of living is to spend freely, and even waste
creatively". The term "conspicuous consumption" spread to describe consumerism
in the United States in the 1960s, but was soon linked to debates about media
theory, culture jamming, and its corollary productivism. In the 21st century.
Beginning in the 1990s, the most frequent reason given for attending college
had changed to making a lot of money, outranking reasons such as becoming an
authority in a field or helping others in difficulty. This correlates with the
rise of materialism, specifically the technological aspect: the increasing
prevalence of compact disc players, digital media, personal computers, and
cellular telephones. Madeline Levine criticized what she saw as a large change
in American culture – “a shift away from values of community, spirituality,
and integrity, and toward competition, materialism and disconnection.”
Businesses have realized that wealthy consumers are the most attractive targets
of marketing. The upper class's tastes, lifestyles, and preferences trickle
down to become the standard for all consumers. The not so wealthy consumers can
“purchase something new that will speak of their place in the tradition of
affluence”. A consumer can have the instant gratification of purchasing an
expensive item to improve social status. Emulation is also a core component of
21st century consumerism. As a general trend, regular consumers seek to emulate
those who are above them in the social hierarchy. The poor strive to imitate
the wealthy and the wealthy imitate celebrities and other icons. The celebrity
endorsement of products can be seen as evidence of the desire of modern
consumers to purchase products partly or solely to emulate people of higher
social status. This purchasing behavior may co-exist in the mind of a consumer
with an image of oneself as being an individualist. Criticism. Overview. Since
consumerism began, various individuals and groups have consciously sought an
alternative lifestyle. These movements range on a spectrum from moderate
"simple living", "eco-conscious shopping", and "localvore"/"buying local", to
Freeganism on the extreme end. Building on these movements, ecological
economics is a discipline which addresses the macro-economic, social and
ecological implications of a primarily consumer-driven economy. In many
critical contexts, "consumerism" is used to describe the tendency of people to
identify strongly with products or services they consume, especially those with
commercial brand names and perceived status-symbolism appeal, e.g. a luxury
car, designer clothing, or expensive jewelry. A culture that is permeated by
consumerism can be referred to as a "consumer culture" or a "market culture".
Consumerism can take extreme forms such that consumers sacrifice significant
time and income not only to purchase but also to actively support a certain
firm or brand. Opponents of consumerism argue that many luxuries and
unnecessary consumer products may act as social mechanism allowing people to
identify like-minded individuals through the display of similar products, again
utilizing aspects of status-symbolism to judge socioeconomic status and social
stratification. Some people believe relationships with a product or brand name
are substitutes for healthy human relationships lacking in societies, and along
with consumerism, create a cultural hegemony, and are part of a general process
of social control in modern society. Other researchers argue that the struggle
for symbols of social distinction promoted by consumer culture creates
narcissistic, hostile relations between individuals, which can be criminogenic
in locations where consumer products are difficult to acquire, or where
individuals simply see no limit to their acquisition. Critics of consumerism
often point out that consumerist societies are more prone to damage the
environment, contribute to global warming and use up resources at a higher rate
than other societies. Dr. Jorge Majfud says that "Trying to reduce
environmental pollution without reducing consumerism is like combatting drug
trafficking without reducing the drug addiction." Critics of consumerism
include Pope Benedict XVI, German historian Oswald Spengler (who said, "Life in
America is exclusively economic in structure and lacks depth"), and French
writer Georges Duhamel, who held "American materialism up as a beacon of
mediocrity that threatened to eclipse French civilization". In an opinion
segment of "New Scientist" magazine published in August 2009, reporter Andy
Coghlan cited William Rees of the University of British Columbia and
epidemiologist Warren Hern of the University of Colorado at Boulder, saying
that human beings, despite considering themselves civilized thinkers, are
"subconsciously still driven by an impulse for survival, domination and
expansion... an impulse which now finds expression in the idea that inexorable
economic growth is the answer to everything, and, given time, will redress all
the world's existing inequalities." According to figures presented by Rees at
the annual meeting of the Ecological Society of America, human society is in a
"global overshoot", consuming 30% more material than is sustainable from the
world's resources. Rees went on to state that at present, 85 countries are
exceeding their domestic "bio-capacities", and compensate for their lack of
local material by depleting the stocks of other countries, which have a
material surplus due to their lower consumption. Not all anti-consumerists
oppose consumption in itself, but they argue against increasing the consumption
of resources beyond what is environmentally sustainable. Jonathan Porritt
writes that consumers are often unaware of the negative environmental impacts
of producing many modern goods and services, and that the extensive advertising
industry only serves to reinforce increasing consumption. Likewise, other
ecological economists such as Herman Daly recognize the inherent conflict
between consumer-driven consumption and planet-wide ecological degradation.
Response to criticism. Most of the response to criticism comes from libertarian
thought. Libertarian criticisms of the anti-consumerist movement are largely
based on the perception that it leads to elitism. Namely, libertarians believe
that no person should have the right to decide for others what goods are
necessary for living and which aren't, or that luxuries are necessarily
wasteful, and thus argue that anti-consumerism is a precursor to central
planning or a totalitarian society. Twitchell, in his book "Living It Up",
sarcastically remarked that the logical outcome of the anti-consumerism
movement would be a return to the sumptuary laws that existed in ancient Rome
and during the Middle Ages, historical periods prior to the era of Karl Marx in
the 19th century. Historian James Livingston's book "Against Thrift: Why
Consumer Culture is Good for the Economy, the Environment, and Your Soul" 2011,
is a pro-consumerist argument from the left. He argues that under-consumption
caused the current economic crisis, and goes beyond that to make a moral case
for spending more and saving less. Further reading. Books Video Journals
