Consumer A consumer is a person or group of people that are the final users of
products and or services generated within a social system. A consumer may be a
person or group, such as a household. The concept of a consumer may vary
significantly by context. Economics and marketing. The consumer is the one who
pays to consume the goods and services produced. As such, consumers play a
vital role in the economic system of a nation. In the absence of effective
consumer demand, producers would lack one of the key motivations to produce: to
sell to consumers. Typically, when business people and economists talk of
"consumers", they are talking about "the person as consumer", an aggregated
commodity item with little individuality other than that expressed in the
decision to buy or not to buy. However, there is a trend in marketing to
individualize the concept. Instead of generating broad demographic profiles and
psycho-graphic profiles of market segments, marketers have started to engage in
personalized marketing, permission marketing, and mass customization. There is
increasing backlash from the public over use of the label "consumer" rather
than "customer", with many finding it offensive and derogatory. Law and
politics. The law primarily uses the notion of the consumer in relation to
consumer protection laws, and the definition of consumer is often restricted to
living persons (i.e. not corporations or businesses) and excludes commercial
users. A typical legal rationale for protecting the consumer is based on the
notion of policing market failures and inefficiencies, such as inequalities of
bargaining power between a consumer and a business. As of all potential voters
are also consumers, consumer protection takes on a clear political
significance. Concern over the interests of consumers has also spawned much
activism, as well as incorporation of consumer education into school curricula.
There are also various non-profit publications, such as "Consumer Reports" and
"Choice Magazine", dedicated to assist in consumer education and decision
making, and "Which?" in the UK. In India, the Consumer Protection Act 1986
clearly differentiates a consumer as consuming a commodity or service either
for his personal domestic use or to earn his livelihood. Only consumers are
protected as per this act and any person, entity or organization purchasing a
commodity for commercial reasons are exempted from any benefits of this act.
Furthermore, Indian case law has quite a few references on how to distinguish a
consumer from a customer. Public reaction. While use of the term "consumer" is
widespread among governmental, business and media organisations, many
individuals and groups find the label objectionable because it assigns a
limited and passive role to their activities.
