Consumer price index A consumer price index (CPI) measures changes in the price
level of consumer goods and services purchased by households. The CPI in the
United States is defined by the Bureau of Labor Statistics as "a measure of the
average change over time in the prices paid by urban consumers for a market
basket of consumer goods and services." The CPI is a statistical estimate
constructed using the prices of a sample of representative items whose prices
are collected periodically. Sub-indexes and sub-sub-indexes are computed for
different categories and sub-categories of goods and services, being combined
to produce the overall index with weights reflecting their shares in the total
of the consumer expenditures covered by the index. It is one of several price
indices calculated by most national statistical agencies. The annual percentage
change in a CPI is used as a measure of inflation. A CPI can be used to index
(i.e., adjust for the effect of inflation) the real value of wages, salaries,
pensions, for regulating prices and for deflating monetary magnitudes to show
changes in real values. In most countries, the CPI is, along with the
population census and the USA National Income and Product Accounts, one of the
most closely watched national economic statistics. Introduction. Two basic
types of data are needed to construct the CPI: price data and weighting data.
The price data are collected for a sample of goods and services from a sample
of sales outlets in a sample of locations for a sample of times. The weighting
data are estimates of the shares of the different types of expenditure in the
total expenditure covered by the index. These weights are usually based upon
expenditure data obtained from expenditure surveys for a sample of households
or upon estimates of the composition of consumption expenditure in the National
Income and Product Accounts. Although some of the sampling of items for price
collection is done using a sampling frame and probabilistic sampling methods,
many items and outlets are chosen in a commonsense way (purposive sampling)
that does not permit estimation of confidence intervals. Therefore, the
sampling variance cannot be calculated. In any case, a single estimate is
required in most of the purposes for which the index is used. The index is
usually computed monthly, or quarterly in some countries, as a weighted average
of sub-indices for different components of consumer expenditure, such as food,
housing, clothing, each of which is in turn a weighted average of sub-sub-
indices. At the most detailed level, the elementary aggregate level, (for
example, men's shirts sold in department stores in San Francisco), detailed
weighting information is unavailable, so indices are computed using an
unweighted arithmetic or geometric mean of the prices of the sampled product
offers. (However, the growing use of scanner data is gradually making weighting
information available even at the most detailed level.) These indices compare
prices each month with prices in the price-reference month. The weights used to
combine them into the higher-level aggregates, and then into the overall index,
relate to the estimated expenditures during a preceding whole year of the
consumers covered by the index on the products within its scope in the area
covered. Thus the index is a fixed-weight index, but rarely a true Laspeyres
index, since the weight-reference period of a year and the price-reference
period, usually a more recent single month, do not coincide. It takes time to
assemble and process the information used for weighting which, in addition to
household expenditure surveys, may include trade and tax data. Ideally, the
weights would relate to the composition of expenditure during the time between
the price-reference month and the current month. There is a large technical
economics literature on index formulae which would approximate this and which
can be shown to approximate what economic theorists call a true cost of living
index. Such an index would show how consumer expenditure would have to move to
compensate for price changes so as to allow consumers to maintain a constant
standard of living. Approximations can only be computed retrospectively,
whereas the index has to appear monthly and, preferably, quite soon.
Nevertheless, in some countries, notably in the United States and Sweden, the
philosophy of the index is that it is inspired by and approximates the notion
of a true cost of living (constant utility) index, whereas in most of Europe it
is regarded more pragmatically. The coverage of the index may be limited.
Consumers' expenditure abroad is usually excluded; visitors' expenditure within
the country may be excluded in principle if not in practice; the rural
population may or may not be included; certain groups such as the very rich or
the very poor may be excluded. Saving and investment are always excluded,
though the prices paid for financial services provided by financial
intermediaries may be included along with insurance. The index reference
period, usually called the base year, often differs both from the weight-
reference period and the price reference period. This is just a matter of
rescaling the whole time-series to make the value for the index reference-
period equal to 100. Annually revised weights are a desirable but expensive
feature of an index, for the older the weights the greater is the divergence
between the current expenditure pattern and that of the weight reference-
period. Calculating the CPI for a single item. formula_1 Alternatively, the CPI
can be performed as formula_2. The "updated cost" (i.e. the price of an item at
a given year, e.g.: the price of bread in 1982) is divided by the initial year
(the price of bread in 1970), then multiplied by one hundred. Calculating the
CPI for multiple items. Example: The prices of 95,000 items from 22,000 stores,
and 35,000 rental units are added together and averaged. They are weighted this
way: Housing: 41.4%, Food and Beverage: 17.4%, Transport: 17.0%, Medical Care:
6.9%, Other: 6.9%, Apparel: 6.0%, Entertainment: 4.4%. Taxes (43%) are not
included in CPI computation. formula_3 Weighting. Weights and sub-indices.
Weights can be expressed as fractions or ratios summing to one, as percentages
summing to 100 or as per mille numbers summing to 1000. On the European Union's
Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices (HICP), for example, each country computes
some 80 prescribed sub-indices, their weighted average constituting the
national HICP. The weights for these sub-indices will consist of the sum of the
weights of a number of component lower level indices. The classification is
according to use, developed in a national accounting context. This is not
necessarily the kind of classification that is most appropriate for a Consumer
Price Index. Grouping together of substitutes or of products whose prices tend
to move in parallel might be more suitable. For some of these lower level
indexes detailed reweighing to make them be available, allowing computations
where the individual price observations can all be weighted. This may be the
case, for example, where all selling is in the hands of a single national
organisation which makes its data available to the index compilers. For most
lower level indexes, however, the weight will consist of the sum of the weights
of a number of elementary aggregate indexes, each weight corresponding to its
fraction of the total annual expenditure covered by the index. An 'elementary
aggregate' is a lowest-level component of expenditure, one which has a weight
but within which, weights of its sub-components are usually lacking. Thus, for
example: Weighted averages of elementary aggregate indexes (e.g. for men's
shirts, raincoats, women's dresses, etc.) make up low level indexes (e.g. Outer
garments). Weighted averages of these in turn provide sub-indices at a higher,
more aggregated level,(e.g. clothing) and weighted averages of the latter
provide yet more aggregated sub-indices (e.g. Clothing and Footwear). Some of
the elementary aggregate indexes, and some of the sub-indexes can be defined
simply in terms of the types of goods and/or services they cover, as in the
case of such products as newspapers in some countries and postal services,
which have nationally uniform prices. But where price movements do differ or
might differ between regions or between outlet types, separate regional and/or
outlet-type elementary aggregates are ideally required for each detailed
category of goods and services, each with its own weight. An example might be
an elementary aggregate for sliced bread sold in supermarkets in the Northern
region. Most elementary aggregate indexes are necessarily 'unweighted' averages
for the sample of products within the sampled outlets. However, in cases where
it is possible to select the sample of outlets from which prices are collected
so as to reflect the shares of sales to consumers of the different outlet types
covered, self-weighted elementary aggregate indexes may be computed. Similarly,
if the market shares of the different types of product represented by product
types are known, even only approximately, the number of observed products to be
priced for each of them can be made proportional to those shares. Estimating
weights. How the weights are calculated, and in how much detail, depends upon
the availability of information and upon the scope of the index. In the UK the
RPI does not relate to the whole of consumption, for the reference population
is all private households with the exception of a) pensioner households that
derive at least three-quarters of their total income from state pensions and
benefits and b) "high income households" whose total household income lies
within the top four per cent of all households. The result is that it is
difficult to use data sources relating to total consumption by all population
groups. The situation in most countries comes somewhere between these two
extremes. The point is to make the best use of whatever data are available. The
nature of the data used for weighting. Even with the necessary adjustments, the
National Account estimates and Household Expenditure Surveys usually diverge.
The "statistical sources" required for regional and outlet-type breakdowns are
usually weaker. Only a large-sample Household Expenditure survey can provide a
regional breakdown. Regional population data are sometimes used for this
purpose, but need adjustment to allow for regional differences in living
standards and consumption patterns. Statistics of retail sales and market
research reports can provide information for estimating outlet-type breakdowns,
but the classifications they use rarely correspond to COICOP categories. The
increasingly widespread use of bar codes, scanners in shops has meant that
detailed cash register printed receipts are provided by shops for an increasing
share of retail purchases. This development makes possible improved Household
Expenditure surveys, as Statistics Iceland has demonstrated. Survey respondents
keeping a diary of their purchases need to record only the total of purchases
when itemised receipts were given to them and keep these receipts in a special
pocket in the diary. These receipts provide not only a detailed breakdown of
purchases but also the name of the outlet. Thus response burden is markedly
reduced, accuracy is increased, product description is more specific and point
of purchase data are obtained, facilitating the estimation of outlet-type
weights. There are only two general principles for the estimation of weights:
use all the available information and accept that rough estimates are better
than no estimates. Reweighing. Ideally, in computing an index, the weights
would represent current annual expenditure patterns. In practice they
necessarily reflect past sing the most recent data available or, if they are
not of high quality, some average of the data for more than one previous year.
Some countries have used a three-year average in recognition of the fact that
household survey estimates are of poor quality. In some cases some of the data
sources used may not be available annually, in which case some of the weights
for lower level aggregates within higher level aggregates are based on older
data than the higher level weights. Infrequent reweighing saves costs for the
national statistical office but delays the introduction into the index of new
types of expenditure. For example, subscriptions for Internet Service entered
index compilation with a considerable time lag in some countries, and account
could be taken of digital camera prices between re-weightings only by including
some digital cameras in the same elementary aggregate as film cameras. Owner-
occupiers and the price index. The way in which owner-occupied dwellings should
be dealt with in a Consumer Price Index has been, and remains, a subject of
heated controversy in many countries. Various approaches have been considered,
each with their advantages and disadvantages. The economists' approach. Leaving
aside the quality of public services, the environment, crime and so forth, and
regarding the standard of living as a function of the level and composition of
individuals’ consumption, this standard depends upon the amount and range of
goods and services they consume. These include the service provided by rented
accommodation, which can readily be priced, and the similar services yielded by
a flat or house owned by the consumer who occupies it. Its cost to a consumer
is, according to the economic way of thinking, an “opportunity cost”,
namely what he or she sacrifices by living in it. This cost, according to many
economists, is what should form a component of a Consumer Price Index.
Opportunity cost can be looked at in two ways, since there are two alternatives
to continuing to live in an owner-occupied dwelling. One — supposing that it
is one year’s cost that is to be considered — is to sell it, earn interest
on the owner’s capital thus released, and buy it back a year later, making an
allowance for its physical depreciation. This can be called the “alternative
cost” approach. The other, the “rental equivalent” approach, is to let it
to someone else for the year, in which case the cost is the rent that could be
obtained for it. Most people do not think about their dwelling in either of
these ways, but this does not bother the theoretical economist for whom
consistent logic is what matters. There are, of course, practical problems in
implementing either of these economists’ approaches. Thus, with the
alternative cost approach, if house prices are rising fast the cost can be
negative and then become sharply positive once house prices start to fall, so
such an index would be very volatile. On the other hand, with the rental
equivalent approach, there may be difficulty in estimating the movement of
rental values of types of property which are not actually rented. If one or
other of these measures of the consumption of the services of owner-occupied
dwellings is included in consumption, then it must be included in income too,
for income equals consumption plus saving. This means that if the movement of
incomes is to be compared with the movement of the Consumer Price Index,
incomes must be expressed as money income plus this imaginary consumption
value. That is logical, but it may not be what users of the index want.
Although the argument has been expressed in connection with owner-occupied
dwellings, the logic applies equally to all durable consumer goods and
services. Furniture, carpets and domestic appliances are not used up soon after
purchase in the way that food is. Like dwellings, they yield a consumption
service that can continue for years. Furthermore, since strict logic is to be
adhered to, there are durable services as well that ought to be treated in the
same way; the service consumers derive from appendectomies or crowned teeth
continue for a long time. Since estimating values for these components of
consumption has not been tackled, the economic theorists are torn between their
desire for intellectual consistency and their recognition that inclusion of the
opportunity cost of the use of durables is impracticable. Spending. Another
approach is to concentrate on spending. Everyone agrees that repairs and
maintenance expenditure of owner-occupied dwellings should be covered in a
Consumer Price Index, but the spending approach would include mortgage interest
too. This turns out to be quite complicated, conceptually as well as in
practice. To explain what is involved, consider a Consumer Price Index computed
with reference to 2009 for just one sole consumer who bought her house in 2006,
financing half of this sum by raising a mortgage. The problem is to compare how
much interest such a consumer would now be paying with the interest that was
paid in 2009. Since the aim is to compare like with like, that requires an
estimate of how much interest would be paid now in the year 2010 on a similar
house bought and 50% mortgage-financed three years ago, in 2007. It does not
require an estimate of how much that identical person is paying now on the
actual house she bought in 2006, even though that is what personally concerns
her now. A Consumer Price Index compares how much it would cost now to do
exactly what consumers did in the reference-period with what it cost then.
Application of the principle thus requires that the index for our one house
owner should reflect the movement of the prices of houses like hers from 2006
to 2007 and the change in interest rates. If she took out a fixed-interest rate
mortgage it is the change in interest rates from 2006 to 2007 that counts; if
she took out a variable interest mortgage it is the change from 2009 to 2010
that counts. Thus her current index with 1999 as reference-period will stand at
more than 100 if house prices or, in the case of a fixed-interest mortgage,
interest rates rose between 2006 and 2007. The application of this principle in
the owner-occupied dwellings component of a Consumer Price Index is known as
the “debt profile” method. It means that the current movement of the index
will reflect past changes in dwelling prices and interest rates. Some people
regard this as odd. Quite a few countries use the debt profile method, but in
doing so most of them behave inconsistently. Consistency would require that the
index should also cover the interest on consumer credit instead of the whole
price paid for the products bought on credit if it covers mortgage interest
payments. Products bought on credit would then be treated in the same way as
owner-occupied dwellings. Variants of the debt profile method are employed or
have been proposed. One example is to include down payments as well as
interest. Another is to correct nominal mortgage rates for changes in dwelling
prices or for changes in the rest of the Consumer Price Index to obtain a
“real” rate of interest. Also, other methods may be used alongside the debt
profile method. Thus several countries include a purely notional cost of
depreciation as an additional index component, applying an arbitrarily
estimated, or rather guessed, depreciation rate to the value of the stock of
owner-occupied dwellings. Finally, one country includes both mortgage interest
and purchase prices in its index. Transaction prices. Taking account of the
transaction prices agreed; Furthermore, expenditure on enlarging or
reconstructing an owner-occupied dwelling would be covered, in addition to
regular maintenance and repair. Two arguments of an almost theological
character are advanced in connection with this transactions approach. One
argument is that purchases of new dwellings are treated as Investment in the
System of National Accounts, so should not enter a consumption price index. It
is said that this is more than just a matter of terminological uniformity. For
example it may be thought to help understanding and facilitate economic
analysis if what is included under the heading of Consumption is the same in
the Consumer Price Index and in the national income and expenditure accounts.
Since these accounts include the equivalent rental value of owner-occupied
dwellings, the equivalent rental approach would have to be applied in the
Consumer Price Index too. But the national accounts do not apply it to other
durables, so the argument demands consistency in one respect but accepts its
rejection in another. The other argument is that the prices of new dwellings
should exclude that part reflecting the value of the land, since this is an
irreproducible and permanent asset that cannot be said to be consumed. This
would presumably mean deducting site value from the price of a dwelling, site
value presumably being defined as the price the site would fetch at auction if
the dwelling were not on it. How this is to be understood in the case of
multiple dwellings remains unclear. Confusion. It is apparent that much of the
muddle in discussing the merits of the different approaches arises from the
promiscuous mixing up of arguments about feasibility, about dislike or approval
of the way the index would move under a particular approach and about
principles of various, often incompatible, sorts. Feasibility is naturally
important. The difficulty of dealing with site values is obvious. Statisticians
in a country lacking a good dwelling price index (which is required for all
except the rental equivalent method) will go along with a proposal to use such
an index only if they can obtain the necessary additional resources that will
enable them to compile one. Even obtaining mortgage interest rate data can be a
major task in a country with a multitude of mortgage lenders and many types of
mortgage. Dislike of the effect upon the behaviour of the Consumer Price Index
arising from the adoption of some methods can be a powerful, if sometimes
unprincipled, argument. Dwelling prices are volatile and so, therefore, would
be an index incorporating the current value of a dwelling price sub-index
which, in some countries, would have a large weight under the third approach.
Furthermore, the weight for owner-occupied dwellings could be altered
considerably when reweighting was undertaken. (It could even become negative
under the alternative cost approach if weights were estimated for a year during
which house prices had been rising steeply). Then, there is the point that a
rise in interest rates designed to halt inflation could paradoxically make
inflation appear higher if current interest rates showed up in the index.
Economists’ principles are not acceptable to all; nor is insistence upon
consistency between the treatment of owner-occupied dwellings and other
durables. Clarity. Much would be gained if two sets of problems were
distinguished.* Which question is to be answered is, as just stated, a policy
matter, depending upon the purposes the index is to serve. It is not an issue
for statisticians to decide. Their job is the technical, professional one of
compiling one or more indexes that answer the selected question or questions as
well as possible, given the resources at their disposal. In a perfect world
this is how the owner-occupied dwellings issue would be resolved. But the world
is not perfect. History. Between 1971 and 1977, the United States CPI increased
47%. In 2009, the Consumer Price Index fell for the first time since 1955.
Criticisms. Bias due to product selection. Some critics claim that the US
consumer price index's market basket does not account for certain common
household items which did not exist or were less common when the tracking
began. If the prices on these items are dropping, then the CPI could be
artificially high by failing to account for them. Some examples are computers
or DVD players, which generally decrease in cost based on time since they were
first developed. The market basket includes primarily items which do not see
price spikes due to innovation, such as food, apparel, utilities, and
education. The market basket is not well defined. Bias due to quality
improvement. The CPI measures the cost of purchasing a product without
accounting for the quality of the product. As a result, when consumers choose
to buy higher-quality cars or computers, the CPI can increase despite the fact
that lower-cost products are still available. While this occurred because the
consumer was able to afford higher quality products, the resulting CPI increase
can be a sign of economic difficulty. Additionally, the value to the consumer
may increase by a greater factor than the cost, again resulting in an apparent
decrease in purchasing power when measured in cost per car, as in the CPI, but
an actual increase in purchasing power when measured in cost over value.
