Conservatism Conservatism (, "to retain") is a political and social philosophy
that promotes retaining traditional social institutions. A person who follows
the philosophies of conservatism is referred to as a traditionalist or
conservative. Some conservatives seek to preserve things as they are,
emphasizing stability and continuity, while others oppose modernism and seek a
return to "the way things were". The first established use of the term in a
political context was by François-René de Chateaubriand in 1819, following
the French Revolution. The term, historically associated with right-wing
politics, has since been used to describe a wide range of views. Edmund Burke,
an Anglo-Irish politician who served in the British House of Commons and
opposed the French Revolution, is credited as one of the founders of
conservativism in Great Britain. According to Hailsham, a former chairman of
the British Conservative Party, "Conservatism is not so much a philosophy as an
attitude, a constant force, performing a timeless function in the development
of a free society, and corresponding to a deep and permanent requirement of
human nature itself." Development of Western conservatism. English
conservatism. Theologian Benjamin Wiker argues that Aristotle had ideas similar
to those of some modern conservatives. Modern European conservatives such as
Edmund Burke have found the extreme idealism of either democracy may endanger
broader liberties, and similarly reject "abstract reason" as a guide for
political theory. English conservatism, which was called Toryism, emerged
during the Restoration (1660–1688). It supported a hierarchical society with
a monarch who ruled by divine right. However the Glorious Revolution (1688),
which established constitutional government, led to a reformulation of Toryism
which now considered sovereignty vested in the three estates of Crown, Lords,
and Commons. Conservatives typically see Richard Hooker as the founding father
of conservatism, the Marquess of Halifax as important for his pragmatism, David
Hume articulated conservative mistrust of rationalism in politics, and Edmund
Burke was the leading early theorist. There is a debate in the historiography,
because Hooker lived too early, Halifax did not belong to any party, Hume was
not involved in politics, and Burke was a Whig. In the 19th century,
Conservatives rejected Burke because of his defense of Catholic emancipation,
and found inspiration in Bolingbroke instead. John Reeves, who wrote a Tory
response to the French Revolution, is ignored. Conservatives also objected to
Burke's support of the American Revolution, which the Tory Samuel Johnson, for
example, attacked in "Taxation No Tyranny". Conservatism developed in
Restoration England from royalism. Royalists supported absolute monarchy,
arguing that the sovereign governed by divine right. They opposed the theory
that sovereignty derived from the people, the authority of parliament and
freedom of religion. Robert Filmer’s "Patriarcha: or the Natural Power of
Kings", which had been written before the English Civil War, became accepted as
the statement of their doctrine. Following the Glorious Revolution of 1688, the
conservatives, known as Tories, accepted that the three estates of Crown,
Lords, and Commons held sovereignty jointly. However Toryism became
marginalized during the long period of Whig ascendency. The party, which was
renamed the Conservative Party in the 1830s, returned as a major political
force after becoming home to both paternalistic aristocrats and free market
capitalists in an uneasy alliance. Edmund Burke was the private secretary to
the Marquis of Rockingham and official pamphleteer to the Rockingham branch of
the Whig Party. Together with the Tories, they were the conservatives in the
late 18th century United Kingdom. Burke's views were a mixture of liberal and
conservative, with the crucial caveat that the meaning of these terms in this
time period was markedly different from popular conceptions of the present day.
He supported the American Revolution but abhorred the violence of the French
Revolution. He accepted the liberal ideals of private property and the
economics of Adam Smith, but thought that economics should be kept subordinate
to the conservative social ethic, that capitalism should be subordinate to the
medieval social tradition and that the business class should be subordinate to
aristocracy. He insisted on standards of honor derived from the medieval
aristocratic tradition, and saw the aristocracy as the nation's natural
leaders. That meant limits on the powers of the Crown, since he found the
institutions of Parliament to be better informed than commissions appointed by
the executive. He favored an established church, but allowed for a degree of
religious toleration. Burke justified the social order on the basis of
tradition: tradition represented the wisdom of the species and he valued
community and social harmony over social reforms. In the 19th century, conflict
between wealthy businessmen and the aristocracy split the British conservative
movement, with the aristocracy calling for a return to medieval ideas while the
business classes called for laissez-faire capitalism. Although conservatives
opposed attempts to allow greater representation of the middle class in
parliament, in 1834 they conceded that electoral reform could not be reversed
and promised to support further reforms so long as they did not erode the
institutions of church and state. These new principles were presented in the
Tamworth Manifesto which is considered by historians to be the basic statement
of the beliefs of the new Conservative Party. Some conservatives lamented the
passing of a pastoral world where the ethos of "noblesse oblige" had promoted
respect from the lower classes. They saw the Anglican Church and the
aristocracy as balances against commercial wealth. They worked toward
legislation for improved working conditions and urban housing. This viewpoint
would later be called Tory Democracy. However since Burke there has always been
tension between traditional aristocratic conservatism and the wealthy business
class. By the late 19th century, the traditional business supporters of the UK
Liberal Party had joined the Conservatives, making them the party of business
and commerce. Whig history is liberal historiography, written to show the
inevitable progress of mankind. Its opposite is conservative historiography or
"Toryism." English historian A.J.P. Taylor explains, "Toryism rests on doubt in
human nature; it distrusts improvement, clings to traditional institutions,
prefers the past to the future. It is a sentiment rather than a principle."
German Conservatism. Conservative thought developed alongside nationalism in
Germany, culminating in Germany's victory over France in the Franco-Prussian
War, the creation of the unified German Empire in 1871, and the simultaneous
rise of Otto von Bismarck on the European political stage. Bismarck's "balance
of power" model maintained peace in Europe for decades at the end of the 19th
century, and his "revolutionary conservatism" led to significant popular
reforms in insurance law, labor, and wages. These and other policies made
socialism seem less desirable to the average German family, and propelled
Bismarck to high renown during his lifetime. With the rise of Nazism in 1933,
agrarian conservatism faded and was supplanted by a more command-based economy
and forced social integration. Though Adolf Hitler succeeded in garnering the
support of many German industrialists, prominent traditionalists openly and
secretly opposed his policies of euthanasia, genocide, and attacks on organized
religion, including Claus von Stauffenberg, Dietrich Bonhoeffer, Henning von
Tresckow, Bishop Clemens August Graf von Galen, and the monarchist Carl
Friedrich Goerdeler. More recently, the work of conservative CDU leader Helmut
Kohl helped bring about German Reunification, along with the closer integration
of Europe in the form of the Maastricht Treaty. Today, German conservatism is
often associated with Chancellor Angela Merkel, whose tenure has been marked by
attempts to save the common European currency (EURO) from demise. United
States. In the United States, conservatism is rooted in the American Revolution
and its commitment to conserve the rights and liberties of Englishmen. Most
European conservative writers do not accept American conservatism as genuine;
they consider it to be a variety of liberalism. Continental (Latin)
conservatism. Another form of conservatism developed in France in parallel to
conservatism in Britain. It was influenced by Counter-Enlightenment works by
men such as Joseph de Maistre and Louis de Bonald. Latin conservatism was less
pragmatic and more reactionary than the conservatism of Burke. Many Continental
or Traditionalist conservatives do not support separation of Church and state,
with most supporting state recognition of and cooperation with the Catholic
Church, such as had existed in France before the Revolution. Eventually
conservatives added patriotism and nationalism to the list of traditional
values they support. German conservatives were the first to embrace
nationalism, which was previously associated with liberalism and the Revolution
in France. Today, movements that use the name "conservative" have a wide
variety of views. Forms of conservatism. Liberal conservatism. Liberal
conservatism is a variant of conservatism that combines conservative values and
policies with classical liberal stances. As these latter two terms have had
different meanings over time and across countries, liberal conservatism also
has a wide variety of meanings. Historically, the term often referred to the
combination of economic liberalism, which champions laissez-faire markets, with
the classical conservatism concern for established tradition, respect for
authority and religious values. It contrasted itself with classical liberalism,
which supported freedom for the individual in both the economic and social
spheres. Over time, the general conservative ideology in many countries adopted
economic liberal arguments, and the term "liberal conservatism" was replaced
with "conservatism". This is also the case in countries where liberal economic
ideas have been the tradition, such as the United States, and are thus
considered conservative. In other countries where liberal conservative
movements have entered the political mainstream, such as Italy and Spain, the
terms "liberal" and "conservative" may be synonymous. The liberal conservative
tradition in the United States combines the economic individualism of the
classical liberals with a Burkean form of conservatism (which has also become
part of the American conservative tradition, such as in the writings of Russell
Kirk). A secondary meaning for the term "liberal conservatism" that has
developed in Europe is a combination of more modern conservative (less
traditionalist) views with those of social liberalism. This has developed as an
opposition to the more collectivist views of socialism. Often this involves
stressing what are now conservative views of free-market economics and belief
in individual responsibility, with social liberal views on defence of civil
rights, environmentalism and support for a limited welfare state. This
philosophy is that of Swedish Prime Minister Fredrik Reinfeldt. In continental
Europe, this is sometimes also translated into English as social conservatism.
Conservative liberalism. Conservative liberalism is a variant of liberalism
that combines liberal values and policies with conservative stances, or, more
simply, the right wing of the liberal movement. The roots of conservative
liberalism are found at the beginning of the history of liberalism. Until the
two World Wars, in most European countries the political class was formed by
conservative liberals, from Germany to Italy. Events after World War I brought
the more radical version of classical liberalism to a more conservative (i.e.
more moderate) type of liberalism. Libertarian conservatism. Libertarian
conservatism describes certain political ideologies within the United States
and Canada which combine libertarian economic issues with aspects of
conservatism. Its five main branches are Constitutionalism,
paleolibertarianism, neolibertarianism, small government conservatism and
Christian libertarianism. They generally differ from paleoconservatives, in
that they are in favor of more personal and economic freedom. Agorists such as
Samuel Edward Konkin III labeled libertarian conservatism right-libertarianism.
In contrast to paleoconservatives, libertarian conservatives support strict
laissez-faire policies such as free trade, opposition to any national bank and
opposition to business regulations. They are vehemently opposed to
environmental regulations, corporate welfare, subsidies, and other areas of
economic intervention. Many of them have views in accord to Ludwig von Mises.
However, many of them oppose abortion, as they see it as a positive liberty and
consider abortion to violate the non-aggression principle because abortion is
aggression toward the unborn. Fiscal conservatism. ...is to the property of the
citizen, and not to the demands of the creditor of the state, that the first
and original faith of civil society is pledged. The claim of the citizen is
prior in time, paramount in title, superior in equity. The fortunes of
individuals, whether possessed by acquisition or by descent or in virtue of a
participation in the goods of some community, were no part of the creditor's
security, expressed or implied...[The public, whether represented by a monarch
or by a senate, can pledge nothing but the public estate; and it can have no
public estate except in what it derives from a just and proportioned imposition
upon the citizens at large. Green conservatism. Green conservatism is a term
used to refer to conservatives who have incorporated green concerns into their
ideology. One of the first uses of the term "green conservatism" was by former
United States Republican House Speaker Newt Gingrich, in a debate on
environmental issues with John Kerry. Around this time, the green conservative
movement was sometimes referred to as the "crunchy con" movement, a term
popularized by "National Review" magazine and the writings of Rod Dreher. The
group Republicans for Environmental Protection seeks to strengthen the
Republican Party's stance on environmental issues, and supports efforts to
conserve natural resources and protect human and environmental health. National
and traditional conservatism. National conservatism is a political term used
primarily in Europe to describe a variant of conservatism which concentrates
more on national interests than standard conservatism as well as upholding
cultural and ethnic identity, while not being outspokenly nationalist or
supporting a far-right approach. In Europe, national conservatives are usually
eurosceptics. National conservatism is heavily oriented towards the traditional
family and social stability as well as in favour of limiting immigration. As
such, national conservatives can be distinguished from economic conservatives,
for whom free market economic policies, deregulation and fiscal conservatism
are the main priorities. Some commentators have identified a growing gap
between national and economic conservatism: "most parties of the Right are run
by economic conservatives who, in varying degrees, have marginalized social,
cultural, and national conservatives." National conservatism is also related to
traditionalist conservatism. Traditionalist conservatism is a political
philosophy emphasizing the need for the principles of natural law and
transcendent moral order, tradition, hierarchy and organic unity, agrarianism,
classicism and high culture, and the intersecting spheres of loyalty. Some
traditionalists have embraced the labels "reactionary" and
"counterrevolutionary", defying the stigma that has attached to these terms
since the Enlightenment. Having a hierarchical view of society, many
traditionalist conservatives, including a few Americans, defend the monarchical
political structure as the most natural and beneficial social arrangement.
Cultural and social conservatism. Cultural conservatives support the
preservation of the heritage of one nation, or of a shared culture that is not
defined by national boundaries. The shared culture may be as divergent as
Western culture or Chinese culture. In the United States, the term "cultural
conservative" may imply a conservative position in the culture war. Cultural
conservatives hold fast to traditional ways of thinking even in the face of
monumental change. They believe strongly in traditional values and traditional
politics, and often have an urgent sense of nationalism. Social conservatism is
distinct from cultural conservatism, although there are some overlaps. Social
conservatives believe that the government has a role in encouraging or
enforcing what they consider traditional values or behaviors. A social
conservative wants to preserve traditional morality and social mores, often
through civil law or regulation. Social change is generally regarded as
suspect. A second meaning of the term "social conservatism" developed in the
Nordic countries and continental Europe. There it refers to liberal
conservatives supporting modern European welfare states. Social conservatives
(in the first meaning of the word) in many countries generally favor the pro-
life position in the abortion controversy and oppose human embryonic stem cell
research (particularly if publicly funded); oppose both eugenics and human
enhancement (transhumanism) while supporting bioconservatism; support a
traditional definition of marriage as being one man and one woman; view the
nuclear family model as society's foundational unit; oppose expansion of civil
marriage and child adoption rights to couples in same-sex relationships;
promote public morality and traditional family values; oppose atheism,
especially militant atheism, secularism and the separation of church and state;
support the prohibition of drugs, prostitution, and euthanasia; and support the
censorship of pornography and what they consider to be obscenity or indecency.
Most conservatives in the U.S. support the death penalty. Religious
conservatism. Religious conservatives principally seek to apply the teachings
of particular religions to politics, sometimes by merely proclaiming the value
of those teachings, at other times by having those teachings influence laws.
Progressive conservatism. Progressive conservatism incorporates progressive
policies alongside conservative policies. It stresses the importance of a
social safety net to deal with poverty, support of limited redistribution of
wealth along with government regulation to regulate markets in the interests of
both consumers and producers. Progressive conservatism first arose as a
distinct ideology in the United Kingdom under Prime Minister Benjamin
Disraeli's "One Nation" Toryism. There have been a variety of progressive
conservative governments. In the UK, the Prime Ministers Disraeli, Stanley
Baldwin, Neville Chamberlain, Winston Churchill, Harold Macmillan, and present
Prime Minister David Cameron are progressive conservatives. The Catholic
Church's "Rerum Novarum" (1891) advocates a progressive conservative doctrine
known as social Catholicism. In the United States, the administration of
President William Howard Taft was progressive conservative and he described
himself as "a believer in progressive conservatism" and President Dwight D.
Eisenhower declared himself an advocate of "progressive conservatism". In
Germany, Chancellor Leo von Caprivi promoted a progressive conservative agenda
called the "New Course". In Canada, a variety of conservative governments have
been progressive conservative, with Canada's major conservative movement being
officially named the Progressive Conservative Party of Canada from 1942 to
2003. In Canada, the Prime Ministers Arthur Meighen, R.B. Bennett, John
Diefenbaker, Joe Clark, Brian Mulroney, and Kim Campbell led progressive
conservative federal governments. Historic Conservatism in different countries.
Conservative political parties vary widely from country to country in the goals
they wish to achieve. Both conservative and liberal parties tend to favor
private ownership of property, in opposition to communist, socialist and green
parties, which favor communal ownership or laws requiring social responsibility
on the part of property owners. Where conservatives and liberals differ is
primarily on social issues. Conservatives tend to reject behavior that does not
conform to some social norm. For many years, conservative parties fought to
stop extension of voting rights to groups such as to non-Christians, non-whites
and women. Modern conservative parties often define themselves by their
opposition to liberal or labour parties. The United States usage of the term
"conservative" is unique to that country. According to Alan Ware, Belgium,
Denmark, Iceland, Finland, France, Greece, Iceland, Luxembourg, Netherlands,
Norway, Sweden, Switzerland, and the UK retained viable conservative parties
into the 1980s. Ware said that Australia, Germany, Israel, Italy, Japan, Malta,
New Zealand, Spain and the US had no conservative parties, although they had
either Christian Democrats or liberals as major right-wing parties. Canada,
Ireland, and Portugal had right-wing political parties that defied
categorization: the Progressive Conservative Party of Canada; Fianna Fáil,
Fine Gael, and Progressive Democrats in Ireland; and the Social Democratic
Party of Portugal. Since then, the Swiss People's Party has moved to the
extreme right and is no longer considered to be conservative. Klaus von Beyme,
who developed the method of party categorization, found that no modern Eastern
European parties could be considered conservative, although the communist and
communist-successor parties had strong similarities. In Italy, which was united
by liberals and radicals ("risorgimento"), liberals not conservatives emerged
as the party of the Right. In the Netherlands, conservatives merged into a new
Christian democratic party in 1980. In Austria, Germany, Portugal and Spain,
conservatism was transformed into and incorporated into fascism or the far
right. In 1940, all Japanese parties were merged into a single fascist party.
Following the war, Japanese conservatives briefly returned to politics but were
largely purged from public office. Louis Hartz explained the absence of
conservatism in Australia or the United States as a result of their settlement
as radical or liberal fragments of Great Britain. Although he said English
Canada had a negligible conservative influence, subsequent writers claimed that
loyalists opposed to the American Revolution brought a Tory ideology into
Canada. Hartz explained conservatism in Quebec and Latin America as a result of
their settlement as feudal societies. The American conservative writer Russell
Kirk provided the opinion that conservatism had been brought to the US and
interpreted the American revolution as a "conservative revolution".
Conservative elites have long dominated Latin American nations. Mostly this has
been achieved through control of and support for civil institutions, the church
and the armed forces, rather than through party politics. Typically the church
was exempt from taxes and its employees immune from civil prosecution. Where
national conservative parties were weak or non-existent, conservatives were
more likely to rely on military dictatorship as a preferred form of government.
However in some nations where the elites were able to mobilize popular support
for conservative parties, longer periods of political stability were achieved.
Chile, Colombia and Venezuela are examples of nations that developed strong
conservative parties. Argentina, Brazil, El Salvador and Peru are examples of
nations where this did not occur. The Conservative Party of Venezuela
disappeared following the Federal Wars of 1858-1863. Chile's conservative
party, the National Party disbanded in 1973 following a military coup and did
not re-emerge as a political force following the subsequent return to
democracy. The conservative Union Nationale governed the province of Quebec in
periods from 1936 to 1960, in a close alliance with English Canadian business
elites and the Catholic Church. This period, known as the Great Darkness ended
with the Quiet Revolution and the party went into terminal decline. Belgium.
Founded in 1945 as the Christian People's Party, the Flemish Christian
Democrats (CD&V) dominated politics in post-war Belgium. In 1999, the party's
support collapsed and it became the country's fifth largest party. Canada.
Canada's "Conservatives" had their roots in the Loyalists - Tories - who left
America after the American Revolution. They developed in the socio-economic and
political cleavages that existed during the first three decades of the 19th
century, and had the support of the business, professional and established
Church (Anglican) elites in Ontario and to a lesser extent in Quebec. Holding a
monopoly over administrative and judicial offices, they were called the "Family
Compact" in Ontario and the "Chateau Clique" in Quebec. John A. Macdonald's
successful leadership of the movement to confederate the provinces and his
subsequent tenure as prime minister for most of the late 19th century rested on
his ability to bring together the English-speaking Protestant oligarchy and the
ultramontane Catholic hierarchy of Quebec and to keep them united in a
conservative coalition. The Conservatives combined pro-market liberalism and
Toryism. They generally supported an activist government and state intervention
in the marketplace, and their policies were marked by "noblesse oblige", a
paternalistic responsibility of the elites for the less well-off. From 1942,
the party was known as the Progressive Conservatives, until 2003, when the
national party merged with the Canadian Alliance to form the Conservative Party
of Canada. Colombia. The Colombian Conservative Party, founded in 1849, traces
its origins to opponents of General Francisco de Paula Santander's 1833-37
administration. While the term "liberal" had been used to describe all
political forces in Colombia, the conservatives began describing themselves as
"conservative liberals" and their opponents as "red liberals". From the 1860s
until the present, the party has supported strong central government, and
supported the Catholic Church, especially its role as protector of the sanctity
of the family, and opposed separation of church and state. Its policies include
the legal equality of all men, the citizen's right to own property and
opposition to dictatorship. It has usually been Colombia's second largest
party, with the Colombian Liberal Party being the largest. Denmark. Founded in
1915, the Conservative People's Party of Denmark. was the successor of "Højre"
(literally "right"). In the 2005 election it won 18 out of 179 seats in the
"Folketing" and became a junior partner in coalition with the Liberals. The
party is preceded by 11 years by the Young Conservatives (KU), today the youth
movement of the party. The Party suffered a major defeat in the parliamentary
elections of September 2011 in which the party lost more than half of its seat
and also lost governmental power. Finland. The conservative party in Finland is
the National Coalition Party (in Finnish "Kansallinen Kokoomus", "Kok"). The
party was founded in 1918 when several monarchist parties united. Although in
the past the party was right-wing, today it is a moderate party. While the
party advocates economic liberalism, it is committed to the social market
economy. France. Following the Second World War, conservatives in France
supported Gaullist groups and have been nationalistic, and emphasized
tradition, order, and the regeneration of France. Gaullists held divergent
views on social issues. The number of Conservative groups, their lack of
stability, and their tendency to be identified with local issues defy simple
categorization. Conservatism has been the major political force in France since
the second world war. Unusually, post-war French conservatism was formed around
the personality of a leader, Charles de Gaulle, and did not draw on traditional
French conservatism, but on the Bonapartism tradition. Gaullism in France
continues under the Union for a Popular Movement. The word "conservative"
itself is a term of abuse in France. Greece. The main interwar conservative
party was called the People's Party (PP), which supported constitutional
monarchy and opposed the republican Liberal Party. It was able to re-group
after the Second World War as part of a "United Nationalist Front" which
achieved power campaigning on a simple anticommunist, ultranationalist
platform. However, the vote received by the PP declined, leading them to create
an expanded party, the Greek Rally, under the leadership of the charismatic
General Alexandros Papagos. The conservatives opposed the far right
dictatorship of the colonels (1967–1974) and established the New Democratic
Party following the fall of the dictatorship. The new party had four
objectives: to confront Turkish expansionism in Cyprus, to reestablish and
solidify democratic rule, to give the country a strong government, and to make
a powerful moderate party a force in Greek politics. The Independent Greeks, a
newly formed political party in Greece has also supported conservatism,
particularly national and religious conservatism. The Founding Declaration of
the Independent Greeks strongly emphasises in the preservation of the Greek
state and it's sovereignty, the Greek people and the Greek Orthodox Church.
Iceland. Founded in 1926 as the Conservative Party, Iceland's Independence
Party adopted its current name in 1929. From the beginning they have been the
largest vote-winning party, averaging around 40%. They combine liberalism and
conservatism, supporting nationalization and opposed to class conflict. While
mostly in opposition during the 1930s, they embraced economic liberalism, but
accepted the welfare state after the war and participated in governments
supportive of state intervention and protectionism. Unlike other Scandanivian
conservative (and liberal) parties, it has always had a large working-class
following. Luxembourg. Luxembourg's major conservative party, the Christian
Social People's Party (CSV or PCS) was formed as the Party of the Right in
1914, and adopted its present name in 1945. It was consistently the largest
political party in Luxembourg and dominated politics throughout the 20th
century. Norway. The Conservative Party of Norway (Norwegian: Høyre, literally
"right") was formed by the old upper class of state officials and wealthy
merchants to fight the populist democracy of the Liberal Party, but lost power
in 1884 when parliamentarian government was first practised. It formed its
first government under parliamentarism in 1889, and continued to alternate in
power with the Liberals until the 1930s, when Labour became the dominant
political party. It has elements both of paternalism, stressing the
responsibilities of the state and of economic liberalism. It first returned to
power in the 1960s. Sweden. Sweden's conservative party, the Moderate Party,
was formed in 1904, two years after the founding of the liberal party. The
party emphasizes tax reductions, deregulation of private enterprise, and
privatization of schools, hospitals and kindergartens. Switzerland. There are a
number of conservative parties in Switzerland's parliament, the Federal
Assembly. These include the largest, the Swiss People's Party (SVP), the
Christian Democratic People's Party (CVP), represented in the Federal Council
or cabinet by Doris Leuthard (in 2011), and the Conservative Democratic Party
of Switzerland (BDP), which is a spliter of the SVP created after a failed
attempt to expel Eveline Widmer-Schlumpf from the SVP. The Swiss People's Party
(SVP or UDC) was formed from the 1971 merger of the Party of Farmers, Traders,
and Citizens, formed in 1917 and the smaller Swiss Democratic Party, formed in
1942. The SVP emphasized agricultural policy, and was strong among farmers in
German-speaking Protestant areas. As Switzerland considered closer relations
with the European Union in the 1990s, the SVP adopted a more militant
protectionist and isolationist stance. This stance has allowed it to expand
into German-speaking Catholic mountainous areas. The Anti-Defamation League has
accused them of manipulating issues such as immigration, Swiss neutrality and
welfare benefits, awakening anti-Semitism and racism. The Council of Europe has
called the SVP "extreme right", although some scholars dispute this
classification. Hans-Georg Betz for example describes it as "populist radical
right". United Kingdom. Conservatism in the United Kingdom is related to its
counterparts in other Western nations, but has a distinct tradition. Edmund
Burke is often considered the "father of conservatism" in the English-speaking
world. Burke was a Whig, while the term "Tory" is given to the later
Conservative Party. One Australian scholar argues, "For Edmund Burke and
Australians of a like mind, the essence of conservatism lies not in a body of
theory, but in the disposition to maintain those institutions seen as central
to the beliefs and practices of society." The old established form of English
and, after the Act of Union, British conservatism, was the Tory Party. It
reflected the attitudes of a rural land owning class, and championed the
institutions of the monarchy, the Anglican Church, the family, and property as
the best defence of the social order. In the early stages of the industrial
revolution, it seemed to be totally opposed to a process that seemed to
undermine some of these bulwarks. The new industrial elite were seen by many as
enemies to the social order. Robert Peel was able to reconcile the new
industrial class to the Tory landed class by persuading the latter to accept
the repeal of the Corn Laws in 1846. He created a new political group that
sought to preserve the old status quo while accepting the basics of laissez-
faire and free trade. The new coalition of traditional landowners and
sympathetic industrialists constituted the new Conservative Party. Benjamin
Disraeli gave the new party a political ideology. As a young man, he was
influenced by the romantic movement and medievalism, and developed a
devastating critique of industrialism. In his novels, he outlined an England
divided into two nations, each living in perfect ignorance of each other. He
foresaw, like Karl Marx, the phenomenon of an alienated industrial proletariat.
His solution involved a return to an idealised view of a corporate or organic
society, in which everyone had duties and responsibilities towards other people
or groups. This "one nation" conservatism is still a significant tradition in
British politics. It has animated a great deal of social reform undertaken by
successive Conservative governments. Although nominally a Conservative,
Disraeli was sympathetic to some of the demands of the Chartists and argued for
an alliance between the landed aristocracy and the working class against the
increasing power of the middle class, helping to found the Young England group
in 1842 to promote the view that the rich should use their power to protect the
poor from exploitation by the middle class. The conversion of the Conservative
Party into a modern mass organisation was accelerated by the concept of Tory
Democracy attributed to Lord Randolph Churchill, father of Britain's wartime
Prime Minister Winston Churchill. A Liberal-Conservative coalition during World
War I, coupled with the ascent of the Labour Party, hastened the collapse of
the Liberals in the 1920s. After World War II, the Conservative Party made
concessions to the socialist policies of the Left. This compromise was a
pragmatic measure to regain power, but also the result of the early successes
of central planning and state ownership forming a cross-party consensus. This
was known as Butskellism, after the almost identical Keynesian policies of Rab
Butler on behalf of the Conservatives, and Hugh Gaitskell for Labour. However,
in the 1980s, under the leadership of Margaret Thatcher, and the influence of
Keith Joseph, there was a dramatic shift in the ideological direction of
British conservatism, with a movement towards free-market economic policies. As
one commentator explains, "The privatization of state owned industries,
unthinkable before, became commonplace Thatcher's government and has now been
imitated all over the world." Some commentators have questioned whether
Thatcherism was consistent with the traditional concept of conservatism in the
United Kingdom, and saw her views as more consistent with radical classical
liberalism. Thatcher was described as "a radical in a conservative party", and
her ideology has been seen as confronting "established institutions" and the
"accepted beliefs of the elite", both concepts incompatible with the
traditional conception of conservatism as signifying support for the
established order and existing social convention. Modern Conservatism in
different countries. While conservatism has been seen as an appeal to
traditional, hierarchical society, some writers, such as Samuel P. Huntington,
see it as situational. Under this definition, conservatives are seen as
defending established the established institutions of their time. Australia.
The largest party in Australia, the Liberal Party of Australia adheres to the
principles of social conservatism and Australian conservatism. It is Liberal in
the sense of economics. The party is considered to be more right-wing that the
Conservative Party (UK). Other conservative parties are the National Party of
Australia, a sister party of the Liberals, Family First Party, Democratic Labor
Party, Shooters Party and the Katter's Australian Party The second largest
party in the country, the Australian Labor Party's dominant faction is Labor
Right, a socially conservative element. Australia is generally considered one
of the most conservative western nations. Australia undertook significant
economic reform under the Australian Labor Party in the mid-1980s. Consequently
issues like protectionism, welfare reform, privatisation and deregulation are
no longer debated in the political space as they are in Europe or North
America. Moser and Catley explain, "In America, 'liberal' means left-of-center,
and it is a pejorative term when used by conservatives in adversarial political
debate. In Australia, of course, the conservatives are in the Liberal Party."
Jupp points out that, "[the decline in English influences on Australian
reformism and radicalism, and appropriation of the symbols of Empire by
conservatives continued under the Liberal Party leadership of Sir Robert
Menzies, which lasted until 1966." Bosnia and Herzegovina. Founded 1990 as
Party of Democratic Action. It's one of the first Conservative parties in
Bosnia after Yugoslavia collapse. It is also known as Bosniak Conservative
Party. There is also Croatian Democratic Community of Bosnia and Herzegovina
(HDZBIH) which is considered Croatian Conservative Party and Serbian Democratic
Party as Serbian Conservative Party. Conservativism is very popular in Bosnia.
Korea, South. South Korea's major conservative party, the Saenuri Party or
새누리당, changed its form throughout its history. First it was the
Democratic-Republican Party(1963~1980); its head was Park Chung-hee who seized
power in a 1961 military coup d'état and ruled as an unelected military
strongman until his formal election as president in 1963. He was president for
16 years, until his assassination on October 26, 1979. The Democratic Justice
Party inherited the same ideology as the Democrati-Republican Party. Its head,
Chun Doo-hwan, also gained power through a coup. His followers called
themselves the Hanahoe. The Democratic Justice Party changed its form and acted
to suppress the opposition party and to follow the people's demand for direct
elections. The party's Roh Tae-woo became the first president who was elected
through direct election. The next form of the major conservative party was the
Democratic-Liberal Party. Again, through election, its second leader, Kim
Young-sam, became the fourteenth president of Korea. When the conservative
party was beaten by the opposition party in the general election, it changed
its form again to follow the party members' demand for reforms. It became the
New Korean Party. It changed again one year later since the President Kim
Young-sam was blamed by the citizen for the IMF. It changed its name to
Hannara-dang(1998~2011). In the election of 1997, the Hannara-dang became the
opposition party for the first time. In the 2002 election the party lost again.
The present form, the Saenuri Party was created in 2011. They changed their
name because President Lee Myung-bak was accused of conspiracy in, for example,
the Four Rivers Project, and of both family and personal corruption. United
States. The meaning of "conservatism" in America has little in common with the
way the word is used elsewhere. As Ribuffo (2011) notes, "what Americans now
call conservatism much of the world calls liberalism or neoliberalism." Since
the 1950s conservatism in the United States has been chiefly associated with
the Republican Party. However, during the era of segregation many Southern
Democrats were conservatives, and they played a key role in the Conservative
Coalition that controlled Congress from 1937 to 1963. Major movements within
American conservatism include support for tradition, law-and-order,
Christianity, anti-communism, and a defense of "Western civilization from the
challenges of modernist culture and totalitarian governments." Economic
conservatives and libertarians favor small government, low taxes, limited
regulation, and free enterprise. Social conservatives see traditional social
values as threatened by secularism, so they support school prayer and oppose
abortion and homosexuality. Neoconservatives want to expand American ideals
throughout the world and show a strong support for Israel. Paleoconservatives,
in opposition to multiculturalism, press for restrictions on immigration. Most
U.S. conservatives prefer Republicans over Democrats, and most factions favor a
strong foreign policy and a strong military. The conservative movement of the
1950s attempted to bring together these divergent strands, stressing the need
for unity to prevent the spread of "Godless Communism", which Reagan later
labeled an "evil empire". During the Reagan administration, conservatives also
supported the so-called "Reagan Doctrine" under which the U.S., as part of a
Cold War strategy, provided military and other support to guerrilla
insurgencies that were fighting governments aligned with the Soviet Union.
Other modern conservative beliefs include opposition to a world government and
skepticism about the importance or validity of various environmental issues.
Most recently, the Tea Party movement, founded in 2009, has proven a large
outlet for populist American conservative ideas. Their stated goals include
rigorous adherence to the U.S. Constitution, lower taxes, and opposition to a
growing role for the federal government in health care. Electorally, it was
considered a key force in Republicans reclaiming control of the U.S. House of
Representatives in 2010. Psychology. Following the Second World War,
psychologists conducted research into the different motives and tendencies that
account for ideological differences between left and right. The early studies
focused on conservatives, beginning with Theodor W. Adorno's "The Authoritarian
Personality" (1950). This book has been heavily criticized on theoretical and
methodological grounds, but some of its findings have been confirmed by further
empirical research. In 1973, British psychologist Glenn Wilson published an
influential book providing evidence that a general factor underlying
conservative beliefs is "fear of uncertainty". A meta-analysis of research
literature by Jost, Glaser, Kruglanski, and Sulloway in 2003 found that many
factors, such as intolerance of ambiguity and need for cognitive closure,
contribute to the degree of one's political conservatism. A study by Kathleen
Maclay stated these traits "might be associated with such generally valued
characteristics as personal commitment and unwavering loyalty." The research
also suggested that while most people are resistant to change, liberals are
more tolerant of it. According to psychologist Bob Altemeyer, individuals who
are politically conservative tend to rank high in Right-Wing Authoritarianism
on his RWA scale. This finding was echoed by Theodor Adorno. A study done on
Israeli and Palestinian students in Israel found that RWA scores of right-wing
party supporters were significantly higher than those of left-wing party
supporters. However, a 2005 study by H. Michael Crowson and colleagues
suggested a moderate gap between RWA and other conservative positions. "The
results indicated that conservatism is not synonymous with RWA." Psychologist
Felicia Pratto and her colleagues have found evidence to support the idea that
a high Social Dominance Orientation (SDO) is strongly correlated with
conservative political views, and opposition to social engineering to promote
equality, though Pratto's findings have been highly controversial. Pratto and
her colleagues found that high SDO scores were highly correlated with measures
of prejudice. They were refuted in this claim by David J. Schneider, who wrote
that "correlations between prejudice and political conservative are reduced
virtually to zero when controls for SDO are instituted". Kenneth Minogue
criticized Pratto's work, saying "It is characteristic of the conservative
temperament to value established identities, to praise habit and to respect
prejudice, not because it is irrational, but because such things anchor the
darting impulses of human beings in solidities of custom which we do not often
begin to value until we are already losing them. Radicalism often generates
youth movements, while conservatism is a condition found among the mature, who
have discovered what it is in life they most value." A 1996 study on the
relationship between racism and conservatism found that the correlation was
stronger among more educated individuals, though specifically anti-Black racism
did not increase. They also found that the correlation between racism and
conservatism could be entirely accounted for by their mutual relationship with
social dominance orientation. The authors concluded that opposition to
affirmative action, especially among more highly educated conservatives, was
better explained by social dominance orientation than by principled
conservatism. A 2008 research report found that conservatives are happier than
liberals, and that as income inequality increases, this difference in relative
happiness increases, because conservatives (more than liberals) possess an
ideological buffer against the negative hedonic effects of economic inequality.
