Constituent country Constituent country is a term sometimes used in contexts in
which a country makes up a part of a larger political entity, such as a
sovereign state. The term "constituent country" does not have any defined legal
meaning, and is used simply to refer to a "country" which is a constituent part
of something else. In unitary states. Denmark. However, this terminology is not
consistent. The Faroes are also referred to as a "self-governing territory" or
similar by (e.g.) the Prime Minister of the Faroe Islands and the Royal Danish
Ministry of Foreign Affairs. Similarly, the Danish Government also refers to
Greenland as an "autonomous province" and neither of the laws forming
Greenland's constitution refer to Greenland as a country. France. French
regions (e.g., Pays d'Auge, Pays de la Loire, and Pays de Caux) often bear the
appellation "" ("land"), which is sometimes also used in reference to other
nations (e.g., "Pays-Bas" is the French name of the Netherlands). In 2004, the
French overseas collectivity of French Polynesia was legally designated as a
"pays d'outre-mer au sein de la République", translated as an "overseas
country inside the Republic". The Constitutional Council of France ruled that
this was merely a change of appellation and did not represent a constitutional
change in legal status. Netherlands. Each is expressly designated as a "land"
in Dutch law by the Charter for the Kingdom of the Netherlands. Unlike the
German and Austrian "Bundesländer", "landen" is consistently translated as
"countries" by the Dutch government. New Zealand. However, the Constitutions of
the Cook Islands and of Niue do not describe either as a country, nor do the
New Zealand Acts which brought those constitutions into force. United Kingdom.
However, the kingdom itself is a "unitary" one and not a personal union. The
principality of Wales ceased to exist in 1542, the kingdoms of England and
Scotland in 1707, and the kingdom of Ireland in 1801 (or 1953). Further, the
word "country" does not always appear in the acts of union which established
the modern nation. The term can be particularly controversial when applied to
Northern Ireland, which was created when Ireland was partitioned in 1921.
Northern Ireland had a devolved parliament from 1921–73 and an assembly from
1973–74, 1982–86, and 1999 to the present. After referenda in Wales and
Scotland in 1997, new devolved governments were created in Scotland, Wales but
not England, which remains directly under the Parliament of the United Kingdom
in London. At sporting events such as rugby union, an alternate title, Home
Nations is used, which in these contexts sometimes includes Ireland as a whole.
In federal states. Soviet Union. The Soviet Union was a Union of the free
associate Soviet Socialist Republics, by constitution. In reality, the Union
was represented as a single uniform state. Germany and Austria. The states of
Germany and of Austria are referred to as ' ("Federal Lands") and ' ("Member
States") in German, a usage implying their sovereignty in a manner parallel to
the American use of "" ( and "Gliedstaaten"). However, they are never
considered countries in their own right and are referred to as "Bundesländer"
or terms such as "states" in other languages to avoid confusion.
