Continental Europe Continental Europe, also referred to as mainland Europe or
simply the Continent (particularly by the British, Balearic and Canary
Spaniards, Icelanders and other European island nations plus peninsular
Scandinavians), is the continent of Europe, explicitly excluding European
islands. The most common definition of "continental Europe" excludes Cyprus,
Iceland, Ireland, Malta and the United Kingdom and its dependencies. Most
definitions of Continental Europe extend the boundaries of the continent to its
standard boundaries, the Ural Mountains, Ural River, Caspian Sea and the
Caucasus Mountains. Use in the United Kingdom. In the United Kingdom, "the
Continent" is used to refer to the mainland of Europe. It is widespread
practice in the media in the UK (and elsewhere) to use the word "Europe" to
mean continental Europe; that is, "Europe" excludes Britain, Iceland and
Ireland (though the term is sometimes used to refer to the European Union).
Occasionally, the term "mainland Europe" is used. A famous British newspaper
headline once read, "Fog in Channel; Continent Cut Off". It has also been
claimed that this was a regular weather forecast in Britain in the 1930s.
Derivatively, the adjective "continental" refers to the social practices or
fashion of continental Europe, as opposed to those in Britain. Examples include
breakfast, topless sunbathing and, historically, long-range driving before
Britain had motorways. The Continent, when compared exclusively to Britain, has
different electrical plugs, different timezone, different currency, drives on
the right, and uses the Metric system exclusively, etc. Scandinavia. Especially
in Germanic studies, "continental" refers to the European continent excluding
the Scandinavian peninsula, Britain, Ireland and Iceland. The reason for this
is that although the Scandinavian peninsula is attached to Continental Europe
by Karelia etc., it is usually reached by sea, not by land (which would require
travelling north as far as Tornio at the 66th parallel north). "Kontinenten"
– "the Continent" – is a vernacular Swedish expression excluding Sweden,
Norway and Finland, but including Denmark (even the Danish archipelago) and the
rest of continental Europe. In Norway, similarly, one speaks about
"Kontinentet" as a separate entity (in most cases referring to Germany, France
and the Benelux countries). Mediterranean and other Atlantic islands. "The
continent" may sometimes refer to the continental part of Italy (excluding
Sardinia, Sicily, etc.), the continental part of Spain (as opposed to the
Balearic islands, the Canary Islands, Alboran, etc.), the continental part of
France (as opposed to Corsica, etc.), the continental part of Portugal (as
opposed to the Madeira Islands and Azores), or the continental part of Greece
(as opposed to Ionian Islands, Aegean Islands, Crete). That is used from the
perspective of the island residents of each country to describe the continental
portion of their country or the continent (or mainland) as a whole.
