Criticism of Islam Criticism of Islam has existed since Islam's formative
stages. Early written criticism came from Christians, prior to the ninth
century, many of whom viewed Islam as a radical Christian heresy. Later there
appeared criticism from the Muslim world itself, and also from Jewish writers
and from ecclesiastical Christians. Objects of criticism include the morality
of the life of Muhammad, the last prophet of Islam, both in his public and
personal life. Issues relating to the authenticity and morality of the Quran,
the Islamic holy book, are also discussed by critics. Other criticisms focus on
the question of human rights in modern Islamic nations, and the treatment of
women in Islamic law and practice. In wake of the recent multiculturalism
trend, Islam's influence on the ability of Muslim immigrants in the West to
assimilate has been criticized. History. Early Islam. The earliest surviving
written criticisms of Islam are to be found in the writings of Christians, who
came under the early dominion of the Islamic Caliphate. One such Christian was
John of Damascus (c. 676–749 AD), who was familiar with Islam and Arabic. The
second chapter of his book, "The Fount of Wisdom", titled "Concerning
Heresies", presents a series of discussions between Christians and Muslims.
John claimed an Arian monk (whom he did not know was Bahira) influenced
Muhammad and viewed the Islamic doctrines as nothing more than a hodgepodge
culled from the Bible. Writing on Islam's claim of Abrahamic ancestry, John
explained that the Arabs were called "Saracens" (Greek Σαρακενοί,
Sarakenoi) because they were "empty" (κενός, kenos, in Greek) "of Sarah".
They were called "Hagarenes" because they were "the descendants of the slave-
girl Hagar". In the opinion of John Tolan, a Professor of Medieval History,
John's biography of Muhammad is "based on deliberate distortions of Muslim
traditions", but Tolan does not elaborate his statement. Medieval Islamic
world. According to Bernard Lewis, just as it is natural for a Muslim to assume
that the converts to his religion are attracted by its truth, it is equally
natural for the convert's former coreligionists to look for baser motives and
Ibn Kammuna's list seems to cover most of such nonreligious motives.
Maimonides, one of the foremost 12th century rabbinical arbiters and
philosophers, sees the relation of Islam to Judaism as primarily theoretical.
Maimonides has no quarrel with the strict monotheism of Islam, but finds fault
with the practical politics of Muslim regimes. He also considered Islamic
ethics and politics to be inferior to their Jewish counterparts. Maimonides
criticised what he perceived as the lack of virtue in the way Muslims rule
their societies and relate to one another. In his Epistle to Yemenite Jewry, he
refers to Mohammad, as ""hameshuga"" – "that madman". Enlightenment Europe.
In "Of the Standard of Taste", an essay by David Hume, the Quran is described
as an "absurd performance" of a "pretended prophet" who lacked "a just
sentiment of morals." Attending to the narration, Hume says, "we shall soon
find, that bestows praise on such instances of treachery, inhumanity, cruelty,
revenge, bigotry, as are utterly incompatible with civilized society. No steady
rule of right seems there to be attended to; and every action is blamed or
praised, so far as it is beneficial or hurtful to the true believers." Modern
Christianity. During a lecture given at the University of Regensburg in 2006,
Pope Benedict XVI quoted an unfavorable remark about Islam made at the end of
the 14th century by Manuel II Palaiologos, the Byzantine emperor. Truthfulness
of Islam and Islamic scriptures. Reliability. Reliability of the Quran.
According to traditional Islamic scholarship, all of the Qur'an was written
down by Muhammad's companions while he was alive (during AD 610-632), but it
was primarily an orally related document. The written compilation of the whole
Qur'an in its definite form as we have it now was not completed until many
years after the death of Muhammad. Critics reject the idea that the Quran is
miraculously perfect and impossible to imitate (2:2, 17:88-89, 29:47, 28:49).
The "Jewish Encyclopedia", for example, writes: "The language of the Koran is
held by the Mohammedans to be a peerless model of perfection. Critics, however,
argue that peculiarities can be found in the text. For example, critics note
that a sentence in which something is said concerning Allah is sometimes
followed immediately by another in which Allah is the speaker (examples of this
are suras xvi. 81, xxvii. 61, xxxi. 9, and xliii. 10.) Many peculiarities in
the positions of words are due to the necessities of rhyme (lxix. 31, lxxiv.
3), while the use of many rare words and new forms may be traced to the same
cause (comp. especially xix. 8, 9, 11, 16)." According to the "Jewish
Encyclopedia", "The dependence of Mohammed upon his Jewish teachers or upon
what he heard of the Jewish Haggadah and Jewish practices is now generally
conceded." John Wansbrough believes that the Quran is a redaction in part of
other sacred scriptures, in particular the Judaeo-Christian scriptures. Herbert
Berg writes that "Despite John Wansbrough's very cautious and careful inclusion
of qualifications such as "conjectural," and "tentative and emphatically
provisional", his work is condemned by some. Some of negative reaction is
undoubtedly due to its radicalness...Wansbrough's work has been embraced
wholeheartedly by few and has been employed in a piecemeal fashion by many.
Many praise his insights and methods, if not all of his conclusions." Hadith.
Hadith are Muslim traditions relating to the "Sunnah" (words and deeds) of
Muhammad. They are drawn from the writings of scholars writing between 844 and
874 CE, more than 200 years after the death of Mohammed in 632 CE. Within
Islam, different schools and sects have different opinions on the proper
selection and use of Hadith. The four schools of Sunni Islam all consider
Hadith second only to the Quran, although they differ on how much freedom of
interpretation should be allowed to legal scholars. Shi'i scholars disagree
with Sunni scholars as to which Hadith should be considered reliable. The
Shi'as accept the Sunnah of Ali and the Imams as authoritative in addition to
the Sunnah of Muhammad, and as a consequence they maintain their own,
different, collections of Hadith. It has been suggested that there exists
around the Hadith three major sources of corruption: political conflicts,
sectarian prejudice, and the desire to translate the underlying meaning, rather
than the original words verbatim. Muslim critics of the hadith, Quranists,
reject the authority of hadith on theological grounds, pointing to verses in
the Quran itself: ""Nothing have We omitted from the Book"", declaring that all
necessary instruction can be found within the Quran, without reference to the
Hadith. They claim that following the Hadith has led to people straying from
the original purpose of God's revelation to Muhammad, adherence to the Quran
alone. Syed Ahmed Khan (1817–1898) is often considered the founder of the
modernist movement within Islam, noted for his application of "rational
science" to the Quran and Hadith and his conclusion that the Hadith were not
legally binding on Muslims. His student, Chiragh ‘Ali, went further,
suggesting nearly all the Hadith were fabrications. Ghulam Ahmed Pervez
(1903–1985) was a noted critic of the Hadith and believed that the Quran
alone was all that was necessary to discern God's will and our obligations. A
fatwa, ruling, signed by more than a thousand orthodox clerics, denounced him
as a 'kafir', a non-believer. His seminal work, "Maqam-e Hadith" argued that
the Hadith were composed of "the garbled words of previous centuries", but
suggests that he is not against the "idea" of collected sayings of the Prophet,
only that he would consider any hadith that goes against the teachings of Quran
to have been falsely attributed to the Prophet. The 1986 Malaysian book
"Hadith: A Re-evaluation" by Kassim Ahmad was met with controversy and some
scholars declared him an apostate from Islam for suggesting that "“the hadith
are sectarian, anti-science, anti-reason and anti-women." John Esposito notes
that "Modern Western scholarship has seriously questioned the historicity and
authenticity of the "hadith"", maintaining that "the bulk of traditions
attributed to the Prophet Muhammad were actually written much later." He
mentions Joseph Schacht, considered the father of the revisionist movement, as
one scholar who argues this, claiming that Schacht "found no evidence of legal
traditions before 722," from which Schacht concluded that "the Sunna of the
Prophet is not the words and deeds of the Prophet, but apocryphal material"
dating from later. Other scholars, however, such as Wilferd Madelung, have
argued that "wholesale rejection as late fiction is unjustified". Orthodox
Muslims do not deny the existence of false hadith, but believe that through the
scholars' work, these false hadith have been largely eliminated. Lack of
secondary evidence. The traditional view of Islam has also been criticised for
the lack of supporting evidence consistent with that view, such as the lack of
archaeological evidence, and discrepancies with non-Muslim literary sources. In
the 1970s, what has been described as a "wave of sceptical scholars" challenged
a great deal of the received wisdom in Islamic studies. They argued that the
Islamic historical tradition had been greatly corrupted in transmission. They
tried to correct or reconstruct the early history of Islam from other,
presumably more reliable, sources such as coins, inscriptions, and non-Islamic
sources. The oldest of this group was John Wansbrough (1928–2002).
Wansbrough's works were widely noted, but perhaps not widely read. In 1972 a
cache of ancient Qur'ans in a mosque in Sana'a, Yemen was discovered –
commonly known as the Sana'a manuscripts. The German scholar Gerd R. Puin has
been investigating these Qur'an fragments for years. His research team made
35,000 microfilm photographs of the manuscripts, which he dated to early part
of the 8th century. Puin has not published the entirety of his work, but noted
unconventional verse orderings, minor textual variations, and rare styles of
orthography. He also suggested that some of the parchments were palimpsests
which had been reused. Puin believed that this implied an evolving text as
opposed to a fixed one. Morality. Muhammad. Muhammed is considered as one of
the prophets in Islam, its founder and a model for followers. Critics such as
Sigismund Koelle and former Muslim Ibn Warraq see some of Mohammed's actions as
immoral. Ka'b ibn al-Ashraf wrote a poetic eulogy commemorating the slain
Quraish notables; later, he had traveled to Mecca and provoked the Quraish to
fight the Prophet. He also wrote erotic poetry about Muslim women, which
offended the Muslims there. This poetry influenced so many that this too was
considered directly against the Constitution of Medina which states, "loyalty
gives protection against treachery" and "this document will not (be employed
to) protect one who is unjust or commits a crime." Other sources also state
that he was plotting to assassinate Muhammad. Muhammad called upon his
followers to kill Ka'b. Muhammad ibn Maslama offered his services, collecting
four others. By pretending to have turned against Muhammad, Muhammad ibn
Maslama and the others enticed Ka'b out of his fortress on a moonlit night, and
killed him in spite of his vigorous resistance. The Jews were terrified at his
assassination, and as the historian Ibn Ishaq put it "...there was not a Jew
who did not fear for his life". Morality of the Quran. According to some
critics, the morality of the Quran appears to be a moral regression when judged
by the standards of the moral traditions of Judaism and Christianity it says
that it builds upon. The "Catholic Encyclopedia", for example, states that "the
ethics of Islam are far inferior to those of Judaism and even more inferior to
those of the New Testament" and "that in the ethics of Islam there is a great
deal to admire and to approve, is beyond dispute; but of originality or
superiority, there is none." Slavery. Bernard Lewis writes: "In one of the sad
paradoxes of human history, it was the humanitarian reforms brought by Islam
that resulted in a vast development of the slave trade inside, and still more
outside, the Islamic empire." He notes that the Islamic injunctions against the
enslavement of Muslims led to massive importation of slaves from the outside.
According to Patrick Manning, Islam by recognizing and codifying the slavery
seems to have done more to protect and expand slavery than the reverse. Unlike
Western societies which in their opposition to slavery spawned anti-slavery
movements whose numbers and enthusiasm often grew out of church groups, no such
grass-roots organizations ever developed in Muslim societies. In Muslim
politics the state unquestioningly accepted the teachings of Islam and applied
them as law. Islam, by sanctioning slavery - however mild a form it generally
took - also extended legitimacy to the traffic in slaves. It was in the early
20th century (post World War I) that slavery gradually became outlawed and
suppressed in Muslim lands, largely due to pressure exerted by Western nations
such as Britain and France. Gordon describes the lack of homegrown Islamic
abolition movements as owing much to the fact that it was deeply anchored in
Islamic law. By legitimizing slavery and - by extension - traffic in slaves,
Islam elevated those practices to an unassailable moral plain. As a result, in
no part of the Muslim world was an ideological challenge ever mounted against
slavery. The political and social system in Muslim society would have taken a
dim view of such a challenge. Some Muslim leaders, like Fatimid caliph Al-Hakim
bi-Amr Allah did ban slavery, but it had little influence in the Islamic world.
The issue of slavery in the Islamic world in modern times is controversial.
Critics argue there is hard evidence of its existence and destructive effects.
Others maintain slavery in central Islamic lands has been virtually extinct
since mid-twentieth century, and that reports from Sudan and Somalia showing
practice of slavery is in border areas as a result of continuing war and not
Islamic belief. In recent years, according to some scholars, there has been a
"worrying trend" of "reopening" of the issue of slavery by some conservative
Salafi Islamic scholars after its "closing" earlier in the 20th century when
Muslim countries banned slavery and "most Muslim scholars" found the practice
"inconsistent with Qur'anic morality." Apostasy. According to Islamic law
apostasy is identified by a list of actions such as conversion to another
religion, denying the existence of God, rejecting the prophets, mocking God or
the prophets, idol worship, rejecting the sharia, or permitting behavior that
is forbidden by the sharia, such as adultery or the eating of forbidden foods
or drinking of alcoholic beverages. The majority of Muslim scholars hold to the
traditional view that apostasy is punishable by death or imprisonment until
repentance, at least for adult men of sound mind. Laws prohibiting religious
conversion run contrary to Article 18 of the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights, which states that "veryone has the right to freedom of thought,
conscience and religion; this right includes freedom to change his religion or
belief, and freedom, either alone or in community with others and in public or
private, to manifest his religion or belief in teaching, practice, worship and
observance." The English historian C. E. Bosworth suggests the traditional view
of apostasy hampered the development of Islamic learning, arguing that while
the organizational form of the Christian university allowed them to develop and
flourish into the modern university, "the Muslim ones remained constricted by
the doctrine of waqf alone, with their physical plant often deteriorating
hopelessly and their curricula narrowed by the exclusion of the non-traditional
religious sciences like philosophy and natural science," out of fear that these
could evolve into potential toe-holds for kufr, those people who reject God."
Islamic law. The four Sunni schools of Islamic jurisprudence, as well as Shi'a
scholars, agree on the difference of punishment between male and female. A sane
adult male apostate may be executed. A female apostate may be put to death,
according to the majority view, or imprisoned until she repents, according to
others. The Quran threatens apostates with punishment in the next world only,
the historian W. Heffening states, the traditions however contain the element
of death penalty. Muslim scholar Shafi'i interprets verse as adducing the main
evidence for the death penalty in Quran. The historian Wael Hallaq states the
later addition of death penalty "reflects a later reality and does not stand in
accord with the deeds of the Prophet." He further states that "nothing in the
law governing apostate and apostasy derives from the letter of the holy text."
William Montgomery Watt, in response to a question about Western views of the
Islamic Law as being cruel, states that "In Islamic teaching, such penalties
may have been suitable for the age in which Muhammad lived. However, as
societies have since progressed and become more peaceful and ordered, they are
not suitable any longer." Some contemporary Islamic jurists from both the Sunni
and Shia denominations together with Quran only Muslims have argued or issued
fatwas that state that either the changing of religion is not punishable or is
only punishable under restricted circumstances. For example, Grand Ayatollah
Hussein-Ali Montazeri argues that no Quranic verse prescribes an earthly
penalty for apostasy and adds that it is not improbable that the punishment was
prescribed by Muhammad at early Islam due to political conspiracies against
Islam and Muslims and not only because of changing the belief or expressing it.
Montazeri defines different types of apostasy. He does not hold that a
reversion of belief because of investigation and research is punishable by
death but prescribes capital punishment for a desertion of Islam out of malice
and enmity towards the Muslim. Human rights conventions. Some widely held
interpretations of Islam are inconsistent with Human Rights conventions that
recognize the right to change religion. In particular article 18 of the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights The right for Muslims to change their
religion is not afforded by the Iranian Shari'ah law, which specifically
forbids it. Muslim countries such as Sudan and Saudi Arabia, have the death
penalty for apostasy from Islam. These countries have criticized the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights for its perceived failure to take into account the
cultural and religious context of non-Western countries. In 1990, the
Organisation of Islamic Cooperation published a separate Cairo Declaration on
Human Rights in Islam compliant with Shari'ah. Although granting many of the
rights in the UN declaration, it does not grant Muslims the right to convert to
other religions, and restricts freedom of speech to those expressions of it
that are not in contravention of the Islamic law. Abul Ala Maududi, the founder
of Jamaat-e-Islami, wrote a book called Human Rights in Islam, in which he
argues that respect for human rights has always been enshrined in Sharia law
(indeed that the roots of these rights are to be found in Islamic doctrine) and
criticizes Western notions that there is an inherent contradiction between the
two. Western scholars have, for the most part, rejected Maududi's analysis.
Homosexuals. Critics such as lesbian activist Irshad Manji, former Muslims
Ehsan Jami and the Dutch politician Ayaan Hirsi Ali, have criticized Islam's
attitudes towards homosexuals. Most international human rights organizations,
such as Human Rights Watch and Amnesty International, condemn Islamic laws that
make homosexual relations between consenting adults a crime. Since 1994 the
United Nations Human Rights Committee has also ruled that such laws violated
the right to privacy guaranteed in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights
and the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights. In May 2008, the
sexual rights lobby group Lambda Istanbul (based in Istanbul, Turkey) was
banned by court order for violating a constitutional provision on the
protection of the family and an article banning bodies with objectives that
violate law and morality. Then this decision taken to the Court of Cassation
and the ban lifted. The ex-Muslim Ibn Warraq has noted that the Quran's
condemnation of homosexuality has frequently been ignored in practice, and that
Islamic countries were much more tolerant of homosexuality than Christian ones
until fairly recently. Violence. The 9/11 attack on the US and other recent
attacks by people who follow the Islamic faith, have led many non-Muslims to
indict Islam as a violent religion. The Qur'an's teachings on matters of war
and peace have become topics of heated discussion in recent years. On the one
hand, some critics claim that certain verses of the Qur'an sanction military
action against unbelievers as a whole both during the lifetime of Muhammad and
after. The Qur'an says, "Fight in the name of your religion with those who
fight against you." On the other hand, other scholars argue that such verses of
the Qur'an are interpreted out of context, and allows fighting only in self-
defense. "Jihad", an Islamic term, is a religious duty of Muslims. In Arabic,
the word "jihād" translates as a noun meaning "struggle". "Jihad" appears 41
times in the Quran and frequently in the idiomatic expression "striving in the
way of God "(al-jihad fi sabil Allah)"". Jihad is an important religious duty
for Muslims. A minority among the Sunni scholars sometimes refer to this duty
as the sixth pillar of Islam, though it occupies no such official status. In
Twelver Shi'a Islam, however, Jihad is one of the 10 Practices of the Religion.
The Qur'an calls repeatedly for jihad, or holy war, against unbelievers,
including, at times, Jews and Christians. Middle East historian Bernard Lewis
argues that "the overwhelming majority of classical theologians, jurists, and
traditionalists (specialists in the hadith) understood the obligation of jihad
in a military sense." Furthermore, Lewis maintains that for most of the
recorded history of Islam, from the lifetime of the Prophet Muhammad onward,
the word jihad was used in a primarily military sense. A number of jihads have
targeted Christians, Hindus, and Jews. David Cook, author of "Understanding
Jihad", said "In reading Muslim literature — both contemporary and classical
— one can see that the evidence for the primacy of spiritual jihad is
negligible. Today it is certain that no Muslim, writing in a non- Western
language (such as Arabic, Persian, Urdu), would ever make claims that jihad is
primarily nonviolent or has been superseded by the spiritual jihad. Such claims
are made solely by Western scholars, primarily those who study Sufism and/or
work in interfaith dialogue, and by Muslim apologists who are trying to present
Islam in the most innocuous manner possible." Cook argued that "Presentations
along these lines are ideological in tone and should be discounted for their
bias and deliberate ignorance of the subject" and that "t is no longer
acceptable for Western scholars or Muslim apologists writing in non-Muslim
languages to make flat, unsupported statements concerning the prevalence —
either from a historical point of view or within contemporary Islam—of the
spiritual jihad." Magdi Allam, an outspoken Egyptian-born Italian journalist,
has describes Islam as intrinsically violent and characterized by “hate and
intolerance”. Short-term and limited marriages. Contractually limited
marriage. Nikah Misyar () is a Nikah (marriage) carried out through the normal
contractual procedure, with the provision that the husband and wife give up
several rights by their own free will, such as living together, equal division
of nights between wives in cases of polygamy, the wife's rights to housing, and
maintenance money (""nafaqa""), and the husband's right of homekeeping and
access. Essentially the couple continue to live separately from each other, as
before their contract, and see each other to fulfil their needs in a legally
permissible (halaal) manner when they please. Professor Yusuf Al-Qaradawi
observes that he does not promote this type of marriage, although he has to
recognise that it is legal, since it fulfils all the requirements of the usual
marriage contract. He states his preference that the clause of renunciation be
not included within the marriage contract, but be the subject of a simple
verbal agreement between the parties. Islamic scholars like Ibn Uthaimeen or
Al-Albani claim, for their part, that misyar marriage may be legal, but not
moral. They agree that the wife can at any time, reclaim the rights which she
gave up at the time of contract. But, they are opposed to this type of marriage
on the grounds that it contradicts the spirit of the Islamic law of marriage
and that it has perverse effects on the woman, the family and the community in
general. For Al-Albani, misyar marriage may even be considered as illicit,
because it runs counter to the objectives and the spirit of marriage in Islam,
as described in the Quran: "And among His Signs is this, that He created for
you mates from among yourselves, that ye may dwell in tranquility with them,
and He has put love and mercy between your (hearts)…" Al-Albani also
underlines the social problems which result from the “misyar” marriage,
particularly in the event that children are born from this union. The children
raised by their mother in a home from which the father is always absent,
without reason, may suffer difficulties. The situation becomes even worse if
the wife is abandoned or repudiated by her husband "misyar", with no means of
subsistence, as usually happens. "Shaykh Ibn Baaz (may Allaah have mercy on
him) was asked about Misyaar marriage; this kind of marriage is where the man
marries a second, third or fourth wife, and the wife is in a situation that
compels her to stay with her parents or one of them in her own house, and the
husband goes to her at various times depending on the circumstances of both.
What is the Islamic ruling on this type of marriage? He replied:" Shaykh al-
Albaani was asked about Misyaar marriage and he disallowed it for two reasons:
Ibn Uthaymeen recognized the legality of “misyar” marriage under Shariah,
but came to oppose it due to what he considered to be its harmful effects.
Influence on the ability of Muslim immigrants in the West to assimilate. The
immigration of Muslims to Europe has increased in recent decades, and frictions
have developed between these new neighbours. Conservative Muslim social
attitudes on modern issues have caused controversy in Europe and elsewhere, and
scholars argue about how much these attitudes are a result of Islamic beliefs.
Some critics consider Islam to be incompatible with secular Western society;
their criticism has been partly influenced by a stance against multiculturalism
advocated by recent philosophers, closely linked to the heritage of New
Philosophers. Statements by proponents like Pascal Bruckner describe
multiculturalism as an invention of an "enlightened" elite who deny the
benefits of democratic rights to non-Westerners by chaining them to their
roots. They claim this allows Islam free rein to propagate abuses such as the
mistreatment of women and homosexuals, and in some countries slavery. They also
claim that multiculturalism allows a degree of religious freedom that exceeds
what is needed for personal religious freedom and is conducive to the creation
of organizations aimed at undermining European secular or Christian values.
Comparison with Communism and Fascist ideologies. In 2004, speaking to the
Acton Institute on the problems of "secular democracy", Cardinal George Pell
drew a parallel between Islam and Communism: "Islam may provide in the 21st
century, the attraction that communism provided in the 20th, both for those
that are alienated and embittered on the one hand and for those who seek order
or justice on the other." Pell also agrees in another speech that its capacity
for far-reaching renovation is severely limited. An Australian Islamist
spokesman, Keysar Trad, responded to the criticism: "Communism is a godless
system, a system that in fact persecutes faith". Writers such as Stephen
Suleyman Schwartz and Christopher Hitchens, describe Islamist attributes
similar to Fascism. Malise Ruthven, a Scottish writer and historian who focuses
his work on religion and Islamic affairs, opposes redefining Islamism as
`Islamofascism`, but also finds the resemblances between the two ideologies
"compelling". Responses to criticism. John Esposito has written many
introductory texts on Islam and the Islamic world. For example, he has
addressed issues like the rise of militant Islam, the veiling of women, and
democracy. Esposito emphatically argues against what he calls the "pan-Islamic
myth". He thinks that "too often coverage of Islam and the Muslim world assumes
the existence of a monolithic Islam in which all Muslims are the same." To him,
such a view is naive and unjustifiably obscures important divisions and
differences in the Muslim world. William Montgomery Watt in his book "Muhammad:
Prophet and Statesman" addresses Muhammad’s alleged moral failings. Watt
argues on a basis of moral relativism that Muhammad should be judged by the
standards of his own time and country rather than "by those of the most
enlightened opinion in the West today." Karen Armstrong, tracing what she
believes to be the West's long history of hostility toward Islam, finds in
Muhammad’s teachings a theology of peace and tolerance. Armstrong holds that
the "holy war" urged by the Quran alludes to each Muslim's duty to fight for a
just, decent society. Edward Said, in his essay "Islam Through Western Eyes",
stated that the general basis of Orientalist thought forms a study structure in
which Islam is placed in an inferior position as an object of study. He claims
the existence of a very considerable bias in Orientalist writings as a
consequence of the scholars' cultural make-up. He claims Islam has been looked
at with a particular hostility and fear due to many obvious religious,
psychological and political reasons, all deriving from a sense "that so far as
the West is concerned, Islam represents not only a formidable competitor but
also a late-coming challenge to Christianity." Cathy Young of Reason Magazine
notes that "criticism of the religion is enmeshed with cultural and ethnic
hostility" often painting the Muslim world as monolithic. While stating that
the terms "Islamophobia" and "anti-Muslim bigotry" are often used in response
to legitimate criticism of fundamentalist Islam and problems within Muslim
culture, she claimed "the real thing does exist, and it frequently takes the
cover of anti-jihadism." Deepa Kumar, the author of "Outside the Box: Corporate
Media, Globalization, and the UPS Strike", in her article titled 'Fighting
Islamophobia: A Response to Critics' says "The history of Islam is no more
violent than the history of any of the other major religions of the world.
Perhaps my critics haven't heard of the Crusades -- the religious wars fought
by European Christians from the 11th to the 13th centuries" referring to the
brutality of the crusades and then contrasting them to forbidding of acts of
vengeance and violence by the Sultan of Egypt Saladin, after he successfully
retook Jerusalem from the Crusaders. Speaking on the Danish Muhammad cartoon
controversy she says "The Danish cartoon of the prophet Mohammed with a bomb on
his head is nothing if not the visual depiction of the racist diatribe that
Islam is inherently violent. To those who can't understand why this argument is
racist, let me be clear: when you take the actions of a few people and
generalize it to an entire group -- all Muslims, all Arabs -- that's racism.
When a whole group of people are discriminated against and demonized because of
their religion or regional origin, that's racism." And "...Arabs and Muslims
are being scapegoated and demonized to justify a war that is ruining the lives
of millions."
