Contestable market In economics, the theory of contestable markets, associated
primarily with its 1982 proponent William J. Baumol, holds that there exist
markets served by a small number of firms, which are nevertheless characterized
by competitive equilibria (and therefore desirable welfare outcomes) because of
the existence of potential short-term entrants. A perfectly contestable market
has three main features. It is a market that has - Although, a perfectly
contestable market is not possible in real life, therefore we talk about the
degree of contestability of a market. The more contestable a market the closer
it will be to a perfectly contestable market. Economists argue that determining
price and output is not actually dependent on the type of industry, that is
whether it is a monopoly or perfectly competitive market, but, rather is the
real threat of competition. Hence, for example a monopoly protected by high
barriers to entry (e.g. it owns all the strategic resources) will make
supernormal or abnormal profits with no fear of competition. However, in this
same case if it did not own the strategic resources for production then other
firms could easily enter the market, leading to higher competition and thus
lower prices, thus making the market more contestable. Sunk costs are those
costs that cannot be recovered after a firm shuts down. For example a new firm
enters the steel industry. For this, the entrant needs to buy new machinery.
Now, if for any reason this new firm could not cope up with competition of the
incumbent firm then it will plan to move out of he market. However, if the new
firm cannot use or transfer the new machines that he bought for the production
of steel to other uses in another industry, then these fixed costs on machinery
become sunk costs. Hence if there are sunk costs present in the market it
impedes the first assumption of no exit barriers. Hence this market will not be
contestable and no firms would enter the steel industry. It is very important
for firms to have access to the same level of technology as that determines the
average cost of the product. An incumbent firm having more knowledge and access
to a technology for the production of a commodity would enjoy higher economies
of scale in the form of lower average cost of production. However a new firm
entering the market, not have information about the right technology will end
up incurring higher average cost of production. Hence, not being able to
compete with the existing firm. This will again lead to the incumbent firm
enjoying monopoly power and supernormal profit in the market as the new entrant
will exit the firm. A solution to this problem could be governments providing
equal access and knowledge to everyone in the market regarding new technology
and also provide financial resources for the same. Its fundamental features are
low barriers to entry and exit; in theory, a perfectly contestable market would
have no barriers to entry or exit ("frictionless reversible entry" in economist
William Brock's terms). Contestable markets are characterized by "hit and run"
competition; if a firm in a contestable market raises its prices much beyond
the average price level of the market, and thus begins to earn excess profits,
potential rivals will enter the market, hoping to exploit the price level for
easy profit. When the original incumbent firm(s) respond by returning prices to
levels consistent with normal profits, the new firms will exit. Because of
this, even a single-firm market can show highly competitive behavior. The
applicability of the theory to real world situations may be questioned,
however, particularly as there are very few markets which are completely free
of sunk costs and entry and exit barriers. Low-cost airlines remain a commonly-
referenced example of a contestable market; entrants have the possibility of
leasing aircraft and should be able to respond to high profits by quickly
entering and exiting. However, it is now generally admitted that Baumol's
judgment that the US airline industry was therefore best left deregulated was
incorrect, since the now duly deregulated industry is "well on its way" to
evolving into a concentrated oligopoly. More generally, experimental evidence
collected since the publication of Baumol's paper has suggested that perfectly
competitive markets would - if they existed - behave in the way Baumol
outlined, the performance of imperfectly contestable markets (i.e. real world
markets) depends "on actual rather than potential competition", perhaps in part
due to the range of "strategic responses" available to incumbents that were not
considered by Baumol as part of his theory. The theory of contestable markets
has been used to argue for weaker application of antitrust laws, as simply
observing a monopoly market may not prove that a firm is exploiting its market
power to control the price level. Baumol himself argued based on the theory for
both deregulation in certain industries and for more regulation in others.
