Contempt of Parliament In some jurisdictions, a house of parliament may declare
any act to constitute contempt, and this is not subject to judicial review. In
others, contempt of parliament is defined by statute; while parliament makes
the initial decision of whether to punish for contempt, the person or
organisation in contempt may appeal to the courts. Some jurisdictions consider
contempt of parliament to be a criminal offence. Australia. "Conduct (including
the use of words)... amounts, or is intended or likely to amount, to an
improper interference with the free exercise by a House or committee of its
authority or functions, or with the free performance by a member of the
member's duties as a member." Contempt decisions by the House of
Representatives or the Senate are thus subject to review by the Federal Courts.
Punishments are limited under the Act to (for individuals) a fine of $5,000
and/or six months' imprisonment, or (for corporations) a fine of $25,000. In
the Senate, allegations of contempt are heard by the Privileges Committee,
which decides whether or not contempt was committed, and if so, what punishment
is to be imposed. In practice, there have been very few times when a hearing
determined that anyone was in contempt, and on no occasions has anyone been
punished beyond a warning, with an apology and/or appropriate remedial action.
Canada. The power to find a person in contempt of Parliament stemmed from
Section 18 of the Constitution Act, 1867 in which "The privileges, immunities,
and powers to be held, enjoyed... shall not confer any privileges, immunities,
or powers exceeding those at the passing of such Act held, enjoyed, and
exercised by the Commons House of Parliament of the United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Ireland, and by the members thereof." Regarding the above-mentioned
"privileges," there is an important difference between the "individual
parliamentary privileges" and "collective parliamentary privileges." This
difference is also important in any case of "breach of privilege" as it applies
to Parliamentary privilege in Canada. Contempt citation cases for individuals.
Rarely has the Canadian federal parliament invoked its power to find an
individual in contempt: There were "contempt citation" cases in 1913, 1976,
2003, 2008 and 2011. The April 10, 2008 case involved Royal Canadian Mounted
Police deputy commissioner Barbara George who was cited for contempt for
deliberately misleading a parliamentary committee over an income trust scandal.
She was ultimately found in contempt but was not punished further than the
motion itself. The March 2011 contempt citation case involved Conservative MP
Bev Oda. While she was found to be "prima facie" in contempt by the Speaker,
Oda was not formally held in contempt because Parliament was dissolved before a
vote could be held on the matter. Contempt citation cases for governments. On
March 9, 2011, Speaker of the Canadian House of Commons Peter Milliken made two
Contempt of Parliament rulings: The first found that a Conservative Party
cabinet minister, Bev Oda, could possibly be in contempt of Parliament. The
second ruling found the Cabinet could possibly be in contempt of Parliament for
not meeting Opposition members' requests for details of proposed bills and
their cost estimates, an issue which had "been dragging on since the fall of
2010." Milliken ruled that both matters must go to their responsible
parliamentary committees and that the committee was required to report its
findings to the Speaker by March 21, 2011 — one day before the proposal of
the budget. Concerning the Speaker's first ruling, on March 18, 2011,
Opposition members of the committee (who outnumbered the government members)
said they still judged Oda to be in contempt of Parliament, despite her
testimony that day, but the committee process never proceeded far enough to
make a finding as to whether Oda was in contempt. Concerning the Speaker's
second ruling, on March 21, 2011, the committee tabled a report that found the
Government of Canada in contempt of Parliament. As such, a motion of no
confidence was introduced in the House. On March 25, 2011, Members of
Parliament voted on this motion, declaring a lack of confidence by a vote of
156 to 145 and forcing an election. The contempt finding is unique in Canadian
history. In a wider context, it is the first time that a government in the 54-
member Commonwealth of Nations has been found in contempt of Parliament.
Although it led to a successful vote of non-confidence that forced an election.
Earlier that week, all three opposition parties had indicated that they would
oppose the government's budget, and though that vote was never scheduled, a
budget is a confidence matter in its own right. The resulting election
devastated two of the opposition parties who supported the contempt motion,
with the Liberals losing more than half their seats to drop to third place in
the Commons for the first time, while the Bloc Québécois was nearly wiped
out, with both their leaders also personally losing their ridings. The
Conservatives gained seats to form a majority government, while the New
Democratic Party won a record number of seats to form the Official Opposition.
Hong Kong. Contempt of the Legislative Council is a criminal offence. United
Kingdom. Contempt of Parliament consists of interference with parliamentary
privilege and of certain acts that obstruct the house and its members in their
business. The same rules as apply to the House of Commons apply to the House of
Lords "mutatis mutandis" (i.e. with the necessary modifications). Parliamentary
privilege consists of freedom of speech on the floor of the House and in
committee, freedom from arrest, regulating its membership and exclusive
cognisance of internal affairs. Privilege extends to the publication of papers
and reports by order of the House, including the official record 'Hansard'.
Freedom from arrest originally prevented the arrest (on criminal as well as
civil grounds) of members, their goods and their staff. The freedom from arrest
of servants and goods were removed in the 18th century as the privilege was
open to abuse, as was immunity from arrest for criminal acts. MPs today are
only protected from arrest on civil grounds, for contempt of court. Regulation
of composition extends to determining who is elected and whether they may take
their seat. The result of elections is now "de facto" a matter for an Election
Court composed of High Court judges, who issue a certificate to the Speaker in
the case of elections where the result is disputed. The House also has
exclusive right to determine whether members may take up their seat, including
whether a member is eligible to take the relevant oath. Exclusive cognisance of
internal affairs extends to the right to determine the oaths to be taken by
members and who may take them ("Bradlaugh v Gossett"), the right to determine
who may use House of Commons facilities and the exclusion of the jurisdiction
of the courts as to alcohol sale offences within the Palace of Westminster. In
the United Kingdom, it has been alleged that arresting a member of Parliament
in the course of carrying out his duties may constitute contempt of Parliament,
although immunity from criminal arrest was removed by the Parliamentary
Privilege Acts of the 18th century. It is further contempt to bribe or attempt
to bribe any member (and for any member to accept or solicit a bribe), to
disrupt the sittings of the House or a committee—wherever it is sitting, to
refuse to appear before a committee to testify, to refuse to answer any
question put by a committee, to lie to a committee or to refuse to swear an
oath when testifying, or to otherwise obstruct the business of the House. MPs
accused of Contempt of Parliament may be suspended or expelled. They may also
be committed to the clock tower under Big Ben, although this practice hasn't
been used since Charles Bradlaugh was detained in 1880. Strangers (those who
are not members of the House) may be committed to prison during the life of the
Parliament. The House of Lords has the power to fine as well as to order
imprisonment for a term of years.
