Cord贸n Industrial Cord贸n Industrial (or in plural Cordones industriales; ) is
an organ of popular power or of workers democracy. Cordones were established in
Chile by the working class during the Salvador Allende Popular Unity government
(1970-1973). Historical context. The "cordones" were established by the
independent activity of working class people and were initially established to
pressure the government to socialize a number of companies that refused to
accept workers rights. Their formation were extended and their creation-pace
accelerated in response to sabotage and strikes organized by employers'
organizations and the capitalist class that aimed to destabilize the Salvador
Allende democratically elected socialist government and derail the
implementation of a socialist programme. Initially created as organs to exert
social pressure on the ruling government they ultimately became a base for
working class political power itself. The first "cord贸n" was established on
June 19, 1972 when workers from 30 different factories join to formulate the
"Cordon Cerrillos". Structure. Each "Cord贸n" was a group of factories and
companies, which coordinated the tasks of workers in the same zone. By the time
the Salvador Allende government was overthrown on September 11, 1973 military
coup 31 "cordones" had been established and were operational. Of the 31
"cordones" 8 of them were within the Chilean capital of Santiago. Cordones and
the State. The independent nature of these organs of "poder popular" from the
bureaucracies of the official trade union body (C.U.T.), the state (the
National Congress of Chile) and the leadership of the parties forming the
governing Popular Unity coalition (viz. Socilaist Party, Communist Party, etc.)
created a complex situations for those attempting to implement socialism within
the framework of existing democratic institutions. Some political organisations
such as the Revolutionary Left Movement (which was not part of the popular
unity coalition) and the Marxist-Leninist faction of Popular Unitary Action
Movement saw these organs of popular power as embryonic social organs for a new
more democratic form of (worker) state. Criticism. Non communists saw the the
Cordones Industriales as the instruments to enable the state to steal property
from private citizens. They went on to add that the state companies would have
gone bankrpupt as state is incapable of runninng a business at a profit.
