Cornelius Castoriadis Cornelius Castoriadis (; March 11, 1922 – December 26,
1997) was a Greek-French philosopher, social critic, economist, psychoanalyst,
author of "The Imaginary Institution of Society", and co-founder of the
"Socialisme ou Barbarie" group. Life. Early life in Athens. Castoriadis was
born in Constantinople and his family moved in 1922 to Athens. He developed an
interest in politics after he came into contact with Marxist thought and
philosophy at the age of 13. His first active involvement in politics occurred
during the Metaxas Regime (1937), when he joined the Athenian Communist Youth
(Κομμουνιστική Νεολαία Αθήνας, "Kommounistiki Neolaia
Athinas"). In 1941 he joined the Communist Party of Greece (KKE), only to leave
one year later in order to become an active Trotskyist. The latter action
resulted in his persecution by both the Germans and the Communist Party. In
1944 he wrote his first essays on social science and Max Weber, which he
published in a magazine named "Archive of Sociology and Ethics" (Αρχείον
Κοινωνιολογίας και Ηθικής, "Archeion Koinoniologias kai
Ithikis"). During the December 1944 violent clashes between the communist-led
ELAS and the Papandreou government, aided by British troops, Castoriadis
heavily criticized the actions of the KKE. After earning degrees in political
science, economics and law from the University of Athens, he sailed to Paris,
where he remained permanently, to continue his studies under a scholarship
offered by the French Institute. Paris and leftist activity. Once in Paris,
Castoriadis joined the Trotskyist Parti Communiste Internationaliste, but broke
with it by 1948. He then joined Claude Lefort and others in founding the
libertarian socialist group and the journal "Socialisme ou Barbarie"
(1949–1966), which included Jean-François Lyotard and Guy Debord as members
for a while, and profoundly influenced the French intellectual left.
Castoriadis had links with the group around C.L.R. James until 1958. Also
strongly influenced by Castoriadis and "Socialisme ou Barbarie" were the
British group and journal "Solidarity" and Maurice Brinton. Career as economist
and distancing from Marxism. At the same time, he worked as an economist at the
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development until 1970, which was
also the year when he obtained French citizenship. Consequently, his writings
prior to that date were published pseudonymously, as Pierre Chaulieu, Paul
Cardan, etc. Castoriadis was particularly influential in the turn of the
intellectual left during the 1950s against the Soviet Union, because he argued
that the Soviet Union was not a communist, but rather a bureaucratic state,
which contrasted with Western powers mostly by virtue of its centralized power
apparatus. His work in the OECD substantially helped his analyses. In the
latter years of "Socialisme ou Barbarie", Castoriadis came to reject the
Marxist theories of economics and of history, especially in an essay on "Modern
Capitalism and Revolution" (first published in "Socialisme ou Barbarie",
1960–61; first English translation in 1963 by "Solidarity"). Psychoanalysis.
When Jacques Lacan's disputes with the International Psychoanalytical
Association led to a split and the formation of the École Freudienne de Paris
in 1964, Castoriadis became a member (as a non-practitioner). In 1969
Castoriadis split from the EFP with the "Quatrième groupe". He trained as a
psychoanalyst and began to practice in 1974. In his 1975 work, "L'institution
imaginaire de la société (Imaginary Institution of Society)", and in "Les
carrefours du labyrinthe (Crossroads in the Labyrinth)", published in 1978,
Castoriadis began to develop his distinctive understanding of historical change
as the emergence of irrecoverable otherness that must always be socially
instituted and named in order to be recognized. Otherness emerges in part from
the activity of the psyche itself. Creating external social institutions that
give stable form to what Castoriadis terms the "magma" of social significations
allows the psyche to create stable figures for the self, and to ignore the
constant emergence of mental indeterminacy and alterity. For Castoriadis, self-
examination, as in the ancient Greek tradition, could draw upon the resources
of modern psychoanalysis. Autonomous individuals—the essence of an autonomous
society—must continuously examine themselves and engage in critical
reflection. He writes: Figures of the Thinkable, p. 151 Castoriadis was not
calling for every individual to undergo psychoanalysis, per se. Rather, by
reforming education and political systems, individuals would be increasingly
capable of critical self- and social reflexion. He offers: "if psychoanalytic
practice has a political meaning, it is solely to the extent that it tries, as
far as it possibly can, to render the individual autonomous, that is to say,
lucid concerning her desire and concerning reality, and responsible for her
acts: holding herself accountable for what she does." Sovietology. In his 1980
"Facing The War" text, he took the view that Russia had become the primary
world military power. To sustain this, in the context of the visible economic
inferiority of the Soviet Union in the civilian sector, he proposed that the
society may no longer be dominated by the party-state bureaucracy but by a
"stratocracy" — a separate and dominant military sector with expansionist
designs on the world. He further argued that this meant there was no internal
class dynamic which could lead to social revolution within Russian society and
that change could only occur through foreign intervention. Later life. In 1980,
he joined the faculty of the École des Hautes Études en Sciences Sociales. He
died on December 26, 1997 from complications following heart surgery. Thought.
Edgar Morin proposed that Castoriadis' work will be remembered for its
remarkable continuity and coherence as well as for its extraordinary breadth
which was "encyclopaedic" in the original Greek sense, for it offered us a
"paideia," or education, that brought full circle our cycle of otherwise
compartmentalized knowledge in the arts and sciences. Castoriadis wrote essays
on mathematics, physics, biology, anthropology, psychoanalysis, linguistics,
society, economics, politics, philosophy, and art. One of Castoriadis' many
important contributions to social theory was the idea that social change
involves radical discontinuities that cannot be understood in terms of any
determinate causes or presented as a sequence of events. Change emerges through
the social imaginary without determinations, but in order to be socially
recognized must be instituted as revolution. Any knowledge of society and
social change “can exist only by referring to, or by positing, singular
entities…which figure and presentify social imaginary significations.”
Castoriadis used traditional terms as much as possible, though consistently
redefining them. Further, some of his terminology changed throughout the later
part of his career, with the terms gaining greater consistency but breaking
from their traditional meaning (neologisms). When reading Castoriadis, it is
helpful to understand what he means by the terms he uses, since he does not
redefine the terms in every piece where he employs them. Here are a few.
Autonomy/Heteronomy. The concept of autonomy appears to be a key theme in his
early postwar writings and he continued to elaborate on its meaning,
applications and limits until his death, gaining him the title of "Philosopher
of "Autonomy"". The word itself is of Greek origin, with "auto" meaning 'by-
itself' and "nomos" meaning law, defining the condition of creating one's own
laws, whether as an individual or a whole society. Castoriadis noticed that
while "all societies create their own institutions (laws, traditions and
behaviors), autonomous societies are those in which their members "are aware of
this fact", and explicitly self-institute (αυτο-νομούνται). In
contrast, the members of heteronomous societies (hetero = others) "attribute
their imaginaries to some extra-social authority" (i.e. God, ancestors,
historical necessity). This relates to what he identified as the need of
societies to legitimise their laws, or explain why their laws are good and
just. Tribal societies for example did that through religion, believing that
the laws were given to them by a super-natural ancestor or god and so must be
true. Capitalist societies legitimise their system (capitalism) through
'reason', claiming that their system makes logical sense. Castoriadis observes
that nearly all such efforts are tautological in that they legitimise a system
through rules defined by the system itself. So just like the Old Testament and
the Koran claim that 'There is only one God, God', capitalist societies first
define what logic is: the maximization of utility and minimization of cost, and
then base their system on that logic. As he explains in one of his lectures in
the Greek village of Leonidio in 1984, many newly founded societies start from
an autonomous state which is usually in the form of direct democracy, like the
town hall meetings during the American Independence and the local assemblies of
the Paris Commune. What they end up with however is a form of governance by
which, the citizens, do not legislate directly but delegate this power to a
group of experts who remain in power, largely unchecked by official means, for
a number of years. The ancient Greeks on the other hand developed a system of
continuous autonomy where the people (demos) voted constantly on matters of
government and law and where the elected rulers, the Archons, were mainly asked
to enforce them. In such a system, courts of law were governed by common
citizens who were appointed to the degree of judge briefly and army generals
were voted in by the people and had to convince them of the correctness of
their decisions. Taking some poetic licence to expand this point he says that
in this system, the president of the national treasury could have been a
Phoenician slave, since he would only be asked to implement the rulings of the
demos. Castoriadis' writings delve at length into the philosophy and politics
of the ancient Greeks who, as a true autonomous society knew that laws are man-
made and legitimization tautological. They challenged these laws on a constant
basis and yet obeyed them to the same degree (even to the extent of enforcing
capital punishment) proving that autonomous societies can indeed exist. The
Imaginary. This term originates in the writings of the French psychoanalyst
Jacques Lacan (see the Imaginary) and is strongly associated with Castoriadis'
work. To understand it better we might think of its usual context, the
""imaginary foundation of societies"". By that, Castoriadis means that
societies, together with their laws and legalizations, are founded upon a basic
conception of the world and man's place in it. Traditional societies had
elaborate imaginaries, expressed through various creation myths, by which they
explained how the world came to be and how it is sustained. Capitalism did away
with this mythic imaginary by replacing it with what it claims to be pure
reason (as examined above). That same imaginary is, interestingly enough, the
foundation of its opposing ideology, Communism. By that measure he observes,
first in his main criticism of Marxism, titled the "Imaginary Institution of
Society", as well as speaking in Brussels, that these two systems are more
closely related than was previously thought, since they share the same
industrial revolution type imaginary: that of a rational society where man's
welfare is materially measurable and infinitely improvable through the
expansion of industries and advancements in science. In this respect Marx
failed to understand that technology is not, as he claimed, the main drive of
social change, since we have historical examples where societies possessing
near identical technologies formed very different relations to them. An example
given in the book are France and England during the industrial revolution with
the second being much more liberal than the first. Similarly, In the issue of
ecology he observes that the problems facing our environment are only present
within the capitalist imaginary that values the continuous expansion of
industries. Trying to solve it by changing or managing these industries better
might fail, since it essentially acknowledges this imaginary as real, thus
perpetuating the problem. So, imaginaries are directly responsible for all
aspects of culture. The Greeks had an imaginary by which the world stems from
Chaos and the ancient Jews an imaginary by which the world stems from the will
of a pre-existing entity, God. The former developed therefore a system of
immediate democracy where the laws where ever changing according the people's
will while the second a theocratic system according to which man is in an
eternal quest to understand and enforce the will of God. Chaos. This is a
concept that one encounters frequently in Castoriadis' work (in all the
references above for example). According to that, the Greeks developed an
imaginary by which the world is a product of Chaos, as narrated by both Homer
and Hesiod. The word has since been promoted to a scientific term, but
Castoriadis is inclined to believe that although the Greeks "had" sometimes
expressed Chaos in that way (as a system too complex to be understood), they
mainly referred to it as "nothingness". He then concludes what made the ancient
Greeks different to other nations is exactly that core imaginary, which
essentially says, that if the world is created out of nothing then man can
indeed, in his brief time on earth, model it as he sees fit, without trying to
conform on some preexisting order like a divine law. He contrasted that sharply
to the Biblical imaginary, which sustains all Judaic societies to this day,
according to which, in the beginning of the world there was a God, a willing
entity and man's position therefore is to understand that Will and act
accordingly. The Ancient Greeks and the Modern West. Castoriadis views the
political organization of the ancient Greek city states as a model of an
autonomous society. He argues that their direct democracy was not based, as
many assume, in the existence of slaves and/or the geography of Greece, which
forced the creation of small city states, since many other societies had these
preconditions but did not create democratic systems. Same goes for colonisation
since the neighbouring Phoenicians, who had a similar expansion in the
Mediterranean, were monarchical till their end. During this time of
colonisation however, around the time of Homer's Epic poems, we observe for the
first time that the Greeks instead of transferring their mother city's social
system to the newly established colony, they, for the first time in known
history, legislate anew from the ground up. What also made the Greeks special
was the fact that, following above, they kept this system as a perpetual
autonomy which led to direct democracy. This phenomenon of autonomy is again
present in the emergence of the states of northern Italy during the
Renaissance, again as a product of small independent merchants. "Figures of the
Thinkable", p. 146 He argues that, in the last two centuries, ideas about
autonomy again come to the fore: "This extraordinary profusion reaches a sort
of pinnacle during the two centuries stretching between 1750 and 1950. This is
a very specific period because of the very great density of cultural creation
but also because of its very strong subversiveness." Lasting influence.
Castoriadis has influenced European (especially continental) thought in
important ways. His interventions in sociological and political theory have
resulted in some of the most well-known writing to emerge from the continent
(especially in the figure of Jürgen Habermas, who often can be seen to be
writing against Castoriadis). Hans Joas published a number of articles in
American journals in order to highlight the importance of Castoriadis' work to
a North American sociological audience, and the enduring importance of Johann
P. Arnason, both for his critical engagement with Castoriadis' thought, but
also for his sustained efforts to introduce Castoriadis' thought to the English
speaking public (especially during his editorship of the journal "Thesis
Eleven") must also be noted. In the last few years, there has been growing
interest in Castoriadis’s thought, including the publication of two
monographs authored by Arnason’s former students: Jeff Klooger’s
"Castoriadis: Psyche, Society, Autonomy" (Brill), and Suzi Adams's
"Castoriadis’ Ontology: Being and Creation" (Fordham University Press).
