Corporate Europe Observatory Corporate Europe Observatory (CEO), is a non-
profit research and campaign group working to expose and challenge the
privileged access and influence enjoyed by corporations and their lobby groups
in EU policy making. It is based in Amsterdam and Brussels. The team (2010)
consists of Belén Balanyá, Olivier Hoedeman, Nina Holland, Erik Wesselius,
Yiorgos Vassalos, Martin Pigeon, David Leloup, Pia Eberhardt, Kenneth Haar and
Helen Burley. Roel van den Bosch is CEO's financial administrator. Activities.
Corporate Europe Observatory (CEO) carries out research and publishes reports
on corporate lobbying activities at the EU and also UN level. Corporate Europe
Observatory works in close alliance with public interest groups and social
movements in and outside Europe to develop alternatives to the dominance of
corporate power. CEO is one of the founding and lead organisations in the
Alliance for Lobbying Transparency and Ethics Regulation (ALTER-EU). This
coalition of over 160 civil society groups, trade unions, academics and public
affairs firms is concerned with the increasing influence exerted by corporate
lobbyists on the political agenda in Europe, the resulting loss of democracy in
EU decision-making and the postponement, weakening, or blockage even, of
urgently needed progress on social, environmental and consumer-protection
reforms. In 2010 ALTER-EU published Bursting the Brussels Bubble - the battle
to expose corporate lobbying at the heart of the EU. This collection of
articles provides an insight into decision-making in the European Union and
reveals the tools of the lobbyists trade, which have allowed corporate
lobbyists to successfully embed themselves within this process. CEO was also
one of the main organiser of the Angry Mermaid Award at the UN climate talks in
Copenhagen in 2009, awarded to Monsanto and Roundtable on Responsible Soy for
lobbying for GM crops as a solution to climate change. CEO jointly organises
the 'Worst EU Lobbying Awards', which are given to the lobby group which uses
"the most deceptive, misleading or otherwise problematic lobbying tactics in
their attempts to influence EU decision-making" in a given year.
