Corporate nationalism State should deal with corporations rather than
individuals. "Corporate Nationalism" may be used to describe a political
philosophy and economic theory whose adherents are corporatists and believe
that the basic unit of the society, be it the family or other corporate groups,
has the same interests as the nation. Some therefore believe that the state
should deal primarily with "corporations", which may include companies,
worker's cooperatives, unions and so on, and allow these units to organize
themselves to serve their members as they feel fit. Corporations should work
mainly for the national good. The Christian Falangist Party of America espouses
this view. They do not reject the right of investors to make profit, but
believe they do not have the right to take actions such as moving factories to
other countries and thus endangering American workers. Also in the USA, the
left-wing New Alliance Party is said to have described Zionism as "Jewish
corporate nationalism", although the exact meaning of this presumed slur is not
clear. National corporations should be protected from foreign ownership. Norway
has a history of state campaigns to block foreign companies from taking over
major Norwegian firms. In 2005, PepsiCo was rumored to be planning a bid to
take over French food group Danone, arousing popular outcry. A former boss of
Danone said. "Danone is like Chartres cathedral, and one does not buy the
cathedral of Chartres." Corporations should (may) be nationalized. The phrase
may be used to describe national intervention in corporations, including
outright nationalization where the state assumes ownership of the corporation.
Some see recent US government interventions in the Financial industry,
including the effective nationalization of Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac are seen
as a form of corporate nationalism. The state is biased towards corporate
interests. Some libertarians in the USA consider that the end of slavery
coincided with the start of a regime "tainted" by aggressive "corporate
nationalism", or government intervention into the economy. In this view, the
destruction of chattel slavery preserved and perpetuated "bourgeois" slavery.
