Corrective Revolution The Corrective Revolution () is an expression used by
some self-described revolutionary governments in the Arab World to describe an
internal political or bureaucratic power struggle, and also to indicate
continued adherence to the ideals of an earlier revolution despite major policy
changes, or the absence/overthrow of its previous leadership. Egypt. The
Corrective Revolution was the name of Anwar El Sadat's change of policies after
succeeding the late Gamal Abdel Nasser as President of Egypt. His ascent to
power began in October 1970, and the Corrective Revolution reached full bloom
in early 1971. It involved purging Nasserist members of the government and
security forces, often considered pro-Soviet and leftwing, and drumming up
popular support by presenting the takeover as a continuation of the Egyptian
Revolution of 1952, while at the same time radically changing track on issues
of foreign policy, economy, and ideology. Sadat's Corrective Revolution also
included the imprisonment of other political forces in Egypt, including
liberals, and Islamists. The imprisonment of Islamists had a strong effect
later on, as these Islamists were often members of the Takfir wal-Hijra
movement and the Corrective Revolution marked the beginning of the crackdown
that caused them to spread across the Arab World, and Europe, ultimately
resulting in the spread of radical political Islam in these regions, and also
the assassination of Sadat. Syria. The Corrective Revolution, better known as
the Corrective Movement, was a military-pragmatist faction's takeover within
the Ba'ath Party regime of Syria in 1970, bringing Hafez al-Assad to power. It
was directed against a dominant ultraleft-wing faction of the party and, to
some extent, provoked by what Assad and his supporters saw as adventureous and
irresponsible foreign policies (notably the Syrian intervention in the Black
September conflict in Jordan, after which the Black September Palestinian
faction was named). As a result of the coup, de facto leader Salah Jadid was
ousted and the party was purged. South Yemen. The Corrective Revolution or
Corrective Step was the Abdel Fattah Ismail Marxist faction of the South Yemeni
National Liberation Front (NLF)'s successful internal coup in 1969. The leftist
takeover later led to the creation of the Yemeni Socialist Party (YSP), and
South Yemen's transformation into the only Arab state to embrace doctrinaire
Marxism.
