Cost–benefit analysis CBA is related to, but distinct from cost-effectiveness
analysis. In CBA, benefits and costs are expressed in monetary terms, and are
adjusted for the time value of money, so that all flows of benefits and flows
of project costs over time (which tend to occur at different points in time)
are expressed on a common basis in terms of their "net present value." Closely
related, but slightly different, formal techniques include cost-effectiveness
analysis, cost–utility analysis, economic impact analysis, fiscal impact
analysis and Social return on investment (SROI) analysis. Theory.
Cost–benefit analysis is often used by governments and other organizations,
such as private sector businesses, to evaluate the desirability of a given
policy. It is an analysis of the expected balance of benefits and costs,
including an account of foregone alternatives and the "status quo". CBA helps
predict whether the benefits of a policy outweigh its costs, and by how much
relative to other alternatives (i.e. one can rank alternate policies in terms
of the cost-benefit ratio). Generally, accurate cost-benefit analysis
identifies choices that increase welfare from a utilitarian perspective.
Assuming an accurate CBA, changing the status quo by implementing the
alternative with the lowest cost-benefit ratio can improve Pareto efficiency.
An analyst using CBA should recognize that perfect evaluation of all present
and future costs and benefits is difficult, and while CBA can offer a well-
educated estimate of the best alternative, perfection in terms of economic
efficiency and social welfare are not guaranteed. Process. The following is a
list of steps that comprise a generic cost-benefit analysis. Valuation. A
similar breakdown is employed in environmental analysis of total economic
value. Both costs and benefits can be diverse. Financial costs tend to be most
thoroughly represented in cost-benefit analyses due to relatively abundant
market data. The net benefits of a project may incorporate cost savings or
public willingness to pay compensation (implying the public has no legal right
to the benefits of the policy) or willingness to accept compensation (implying
the public has a right to the benefits of the policy) for the welfare change
resulting from the policy. The guiding principle of evaluating benefits is to
list all (categories of) parties affected by an intervention and add the
(positive or negative) value, usually monetary, that they ascribe to its effect
on their welfare. The actual compensation an individual would require to have
their welfare unchanged by a policy is inexact at best. Surveys (stated
preference techniques) or market behavior (revealed preference techniques) are
often used to estimate the compensation associated with a policy; however,
survey respondents often have strong incentives to misreport their true
preferences and market behavior does not provide any information about
important non-market welfare impacts. One controversy is valuing a human life,
e.g. when assessing road safety measures or life-saving medicines. However,
this can sometimes be avoided by using the related technique of cost-utility
analysis, in which benefits are expressed in non-monetary units such as
quality-adjusted life years. For example, road safety can be measured in terms
of "cost per life saved", without formally placing a financial value on the
life. However, such non-monetary metrics have limited usefulness for evaluating
policies with substantially different outcomes. Additionally, many other
benefits may accrue from the policy, and metrics such as 'cost per life saved'
may lead to a substantially different ranking of alternatives than traditional
cost-benefit analysis. Another controversy is valuing the environment, which in
the 21st century is typically assessed by valuing ecosystem services to humans,
such as air and water quality and pollution. Monetary values may also be
assigned to other intangible effects such as business reputation, market
penetration, or long-term enterprise strategy alignment. Time and Discounting.
CBA usually tries to put all relevant costs and benefits on a common temporal
footing using time value of money calculations. This is often done by
converting the future expected streams of costs and benefits into a present
value amount using a discount rate. Empirical studies and a technical framework
suggest that in reality, people do discount the future like this. The choice of
discount rate is subjective. A smaller rate values future generations equally
with the current generation. Larger rates (e.g. a market rate of return)
reflects humans' attraction to time inconsistency—valuing money that they
receive today more than money they get in the future. The choice makes a large
difference in assessing interventions with long-term effects, such as those
affecting climate change. One issue is the equity premium puzzle, in which
long-term returns on equities may be rather higher than they should be. If so
then arguably market rates of return should not be used to determine a discount
rate, as doing so would have the effect of undervaluing the distant future
(e.g. climate change). Risk and uncertainty. Risk associated with project
outcomes is usually handled using probability theory. This can be factored into
the discount rate (to have uncertainty increasing over time), but is usually
considered separately. Particular consideration is often given to risk
aversion—the irrational preference for avoiding loss over achieving gain.
Expected return calculations does not account for the detrimental effect of
uncertainty. Uncertainty in CBA parameters (as opposed to risk of project
failure etc.) can be evaluated using a sensitivity analysis, which shows how
results respond to parameter changes. Alternatively a more formal risk analysis
can be undertaken using Monte Carlo simulations. History. The concept of CBA
dates back to an 1848 article by Jules Dupuit and was formalized in subsequent
works by Alfred Marshall. The Corps of Engineers initiated the use of CBA in
the US, after the Federal Navigation Act of 1936 effectively required
cost–benefit analysis for proposed federal waterway infrastructure. Public
Policy. The application for broader public policy started from the work of Otto
Eckstein, who in 1958 laid out a welfare economics foundation for CBA and its
application for water resource development. Over the 1960’s, CBA was applied
in the US for water quality, recreation travel and land conservation. During
this period, the concept of option value was developed to represent the non-
tangible value of preserving resources such as national parks. CBA was later
expanded to address both intangible and tangible benefits of public policies
relating to mental illness, substance abuse, college education and chemical
waste policies. In the US, the National Environmental Policy Act of 1969 first
required the application of CBA for regulatory programs, and since then, other
governments have enacted similar rules. Government guidebooks for the
application of CBA to public policies include the Canadian guide for regulatory
analysis, Australian guide for regulation and finance, US guide for health care
programs, and US guide for emergency management programs. Transportation
Investment. CBA application for transport investment started in the UK, with
the M1 motorway project in 1960. It was later applied on many projects
including London Underground's Victoria Line. Later, the New Approach to
Appraisal (NATA) was introduced by the then Department for Transport,
Environment and the Regions. This presented cost–benefit results and detailed
environmental impact assessments in a balanced way. NATA was first applied to
national road schemes in the 1998 Roads Review but subsequently rolled out to
all transport modes. As of 2011 it was a cornerstone of transport appraisal in
the UK and is maintained and developed by the Department for Transport. The
EU's 'Developing Harmonised European Approaches for Transport Costing and
Project Assessment' (HEATCO) project, part of its Sixth Framework Programme,
reviewed transport appraisal guidance across EU member states and found that
significant differences exist between countries. HEATCO's aim was to develop
guidelines to harmonise transport appraisal practice across the EU. Transport
Canada promoted the use of CBA for major transport investments with the 1994
issuance of its Guidebook. In the US, both federal and state transport
departments commonly apply CBA, using a variety of available software tools
including HERS, BCA.Net, StatBenCost, Cal-BC, and TREDIS. Guides are available
from the Federal Highway Administration, Federal Aviation Administration,
Minnesota Department of Transportation, and the Transportation Research Board
Transportation Economics Committee. Accuracy. Reference class forecasting was
developed by professor Bent Flyvbjerg, University of Oxford, to increase
accuracy in estimates of costs and benefits. Daniel Kahneman, Nobel Prize
winner in economics, calls Flyvbjerg's counsel to use reference class
forecasting to de-bias forecasts, "the single most important piece of advice
regarding how to increase accuracy in forecasting.” Interest groups may
attempt to include or exclude significant costs from an analysis to influence
the outcome. In the case of the Ford Pinto (where, because of design flaws, the
Pinto was liable to burst into flames in a rear-impact collision), the
company's decision was not to issue a recall. Ford's cost–benefit analysis
had estimated that based on the number of cars in use and the probable accident
rate, deaths due to the design flaw would cost it about $49.5 million to settle
wrongful death lawsuits versus recall costs of $137.5 million. Ford overlooked
(or considered insignificant) the costs of the negative publicity that would
result, which forced a recall "and" damaged sales. In health economics, some
analysts think cost–benefit analysis can be an inadequate measure because
willingness-to-pay methods of determining the value of human life can be
influenced by income level. They support use of variants such as cost–utility
analysis and quality-adjusted life year to analyze the effects of health
policies. In environmental and occupational health regulation, it has been
argued that if modern cost-benefit analyses had been applied prospectively to
decisions such as whether to mandate the removal of lead from gasoline, build
the Hoover Dam in the Grand Canyon, and regulate workers' exposure to vinyl
chloride, these measures would not have been implemented even though they are
considered to be highly successful in retrospect. The Clean Air Act has been
cited in retrospective studies as a case where benefits exceeded costs, but the
knowledge of the benefits (attributable largely to the benefits of reducing
particulate pollution) was not available until many years later.
