Cost-push inflation Cost-push inflation is a type of inflation caused by
substantial increases in the cost of important goods or services where no
suitable alternative is available. A situation that has been often cited of
this was the oil crisis of the 1970s, which some economists see as a major
cause of the inflation experienced in the Western world in that decade. It is
argued that this inflation resulted from increases in the cost of petroleum
imposed by the member states of OPEC. Since petroleum is so important to
industrialised economies, a large increase in its price can lead to the
increase in the price of most products, raising the inflation rate. This can
raise the normal or built-in inflation rate, reflecting adaptive expectations
and the price/wage spiral, so that a supply shock can have persistent effects.
Keynesians argue that in a modern industrial economy, many prices are "sticky
downward" or "downward inflexible", so that instead of prices for non-oil-
related goods falling in this story, a supply shock would cause a recession,
i.e., rising unemployment and falling gross domestic product. It is the costs
of such a recession that likely causes governments and central banks to allow a
supply shock to result in inflation. They also note that though there was no
deflation in the 1980s, there was a definite fall in the inflation rate during
this period. Actual deflation was prevented because supply shocks are not the
only cause of inflation; in terms of the modern triangle model of inflation,
supply-driven deflation was counteracted by demand-pull inflation and built-in
inflation resulting from adaptive expectations and the price/wage spiral.
Monetarist economists such as Milton Friedman argue against the concept of
cost-push inflation because increases in the cost of goods and services do not
lead to inflation without the government and its central bank cooperating in
increasing the money supply. The argument is that if the money supply is
constant, increases in the cost of a good or service will decrease the money
available for other goods and services, and therefore the price of some those
goods will fall and offset the rise in price of those goods whose prices have
increased. One consequence of this is that monetarist economists do not believe
that the rise in the cost of oil was a direct cause of the inflation of the
1970s. They argue that although the price of oil went back down in the 1980s,
there was no corresponding deflation. See also. In simpler terms, this is
caused when cost of production rise and cause the price level to rise.
