Cost overrun A cost overrun, also known as a cost increase or budget overrun,
is an unexpected cost incurred in excess of a budgeted amount due to an
underestimation of the actual cost during budgeting. Cost overrun should be
distinguished from cost escalation, which is used to express an "anticipated"
growth in a budgeted cost due to factors such as inflation. Cost overrun is
common in infrastructure, building, and technology projects. A comprehensive
study of cost overrun published in the Journal of the American Planning
Association in 2002 found that 9 out of ten construction projects had
underestimated costs. Overruns of 50 to one hundred percent were also common.
Cost underestimation was found in each of 20 nations and five continents
covered by the study, and cost underestimation had not decreased in the 70
years for which data were available. For IT projects, an industry study by the
Standish Group found that the average cost overrun was 43 percent; 71 percent
of projects were over budget, exceeded time estimates, and had estimated too
narrow a scope; and total waste was estimated at $55 billion per year in the US
alone. Many major construction projects have incurred cost overruns. The Suez
Canal cost 20 times as much as the earliest estimates; even the cost estimate
produced the year before construction began underestimated the project's actual
costs by a factor of three. The Sydney Opera House cost 15 times more than was
originally projected, and the Concorde supersonic aeroplane cost 12 times more
than predicted. When Boston's "Big Dig" tunnel construction project was
completed, the project was 275 percent ($11 billion) over budget. The Channel
Tunnel between the UK and France had a construction cost overrun of 80 percent,
and a 140-percent financing cost overrun. Causes. Three types of explanation
for cost overrun exist: technical, psychological, and political-economic.
Technical explanations account for cost overrun in terms of imperfect
forecasting techniques, inadequate data, etc. Psychological explanations
account for overrun in terms of optimism bias with forecasters. Scope creep,
where the requirements or targets rises during the project, is common. Finally,
political-economic explanations see overrun as the result of strategic
misrepresentation of scope or budgets. All three explanations can be considered
forms of risk. A project's budgeted costs should always include cost
contingency funds to cover risks (other than scope changes imposed on the
project). As has been shown in cost engineering research, poor risk analysis
and contingency estimating practices account for many project cost overruns.
Numerous studies have found that the greatest cause of cost growth was poorly-
defined scope at the time that the budget was established. The "cost growth",
or overrun of the budget before cost contingency is added, can be predicted by
rating the extent of scope definition, even on complex projects with new
technology. Professor Bent Flyvbjerg of Oxford University and Martin Wachs of
University of California, Los Angeles have shown that big public-works projects
often have cost overruns due to strategic misrepresentation—"that is, lying",
as Flyvbjerg defines the term. Cost overrun is typically calculated in one of
two ways: either as a percentage, namely actual cost minus budgeted cost, in
percent of budgeted cost; or as a ratio of actual cost divided by budgeted
cost. For example, if the budget for building a new bridge was $100 million,
and the actual cost was $150 million, then the cost overrun may be expressed by
the ratio 1.5, or as 50 percent. Reference class forecasting was developed by
Flyvbjerg to eliminate or reduce cost overruns and benefit shortfalls. Daniel
Kahneman, Nobel Prize winner in economics, calls Flyvbjerg's counsel to use
reference class forecasting to de-bias estimates of costs and benefits, "the
single most important piece of advice regarding how to increase accuracy in
forecasting.”
