Cost-of-production theory of value In economics, the cost-of-production theory
of value is the theory that the price of an object or condition is determined
by the sum of the cost of the resources that went into making it. The cost can
compose any of the factors of production (including labor, capital, or land)
and taxation. The theory makes the most sense under assumptions of constant
returns to scale and the existence of just one non-produced factor of
production. These are the assumptions of the so-called non-substitution
theorem. Under these assumptions, the long run price of a commodity is equal to
the sum of the cost of the inputs into that commodity, including interest
charges. Historical development of theory. Historically, the most well known
proponent of such theories is probably Adam Smith. Piero Sraffa, in his
introduction to the first volume of the "Collected Works of David Ricardo",
referred to Adam Smith's adding up theory. Smith contrasted natural prices with
market price. Smith theorized that market prices would tend towards natural
prices, where outputs would be at what he characterized as the "level of
effectual demand". At this level, Smith's natural prices of commodities are the
sum of the natural rates of wages, profits, and rent that must be paid for
inputs into production. (Smith is ambiguous about whether rent is price-
determining or price determined. The latter view is the consensus of later
classical economists, with the Ricardo-Malthus-West theory of rent.) David
Ricardo mixed such cost of production theory of prices with the labor theory of
value, as that latter theory was understood by Eugen von Böhm-Bawerk and
others. This is the theory that prices tend toward proportionality to the
socially necessary labor embodied in a commodity. Ricardo sets this theory at
the start of the first chapter of his "Principles of Political Economy and
Taxation". Ricardo also refutes the labor theory of value in later sections of
that chapter. This refutation leads to what later became known as the
transformation problem. Karl Marx later takes up that theory in the first
volume of "Capital", while indicating that he is quite aware that the theory is
untrue at lower levels of abstraction. This has led to all sorts of arguments
over what both David Ricardo and Karl Marx "really meant". Nevertheless, it
seems undeniable that all the major classical economics and Marx explicitly
rejected the labor theory of price ([http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0002-8282
(195905)49%3A2%3C462%3AWWTLTO%3E2.0.CO%3B2-9]). A somewhat different theory of
cost-determined prices is provided by the "neo-Ricardian School" [http://
homepage.newschool.edu/~het/schools/neoric.htm] of Piero Sraffa and his
followers. The Polish economist Michał Kalecki [http://homepage.newschool.edu/
~het/profiles/kalecki.htm] distinguished between sectors with "cost-determined
prices" (such as manufacturing and services) and those with "demand-determined
prices" (such as agriculture and raw material extraction). One might think of
this theory as equivalent to modern theories of markup-pricing, full-cost
pricing, or administrative pricing. Ever since Hall and Hitch, economists have
found that the evidence gathered in surveys of businessmen support such
theories. Most contemporary economists accept neoclassical economics or
mainstream economics. The non-substitution theorem is presented in graduate
level microeconomics textbooks as a theorem of mainstream economics. Also many
mainstream economists think they can justify theories of full-cost pricing
within their theory. The majority of mainstream economists would probably then
accept this theory as an element in their theory which does not give adequate
attention to issues of consumer demand and marginal utility. Market price.
Market price is an economic concept with commonplace familiarity; it is the
price that a good or service is offered at, or will fetch, in the marketplace;
it is of interest mainly in the study of microeconomics. Market value and
market price are equal only under conditions of market efficiency, equilibrium,
and rational expectations. In economics, returns to scale and economies of
scale are related terms that describe what happens as the scale of production
increases. They are different terms and are not to be used interchangeably.
Labor theory of value. The labor theories of value (LTV) are theories in
economics according to which the true values of commodities are related to the
labor needed to produce them. There are many different accounts of labor value,
with the common element that the "value" of an exchangeable good or service is,
or ought to be, or tends to be, or can be considered as, equal or proportional
to the amount of labor required to produce it (including the labor required to
produce the raw materials and machinery used in production). Different labor
theories of value prevailed amongst classical economists through to the mid-
19th century. It is especially associated with Adam Smith and David Ricardo.
Since that time it is most often associated with Marxian economics; while among
modern mainstream economists it is considered to be superseded by the marginal
utility approach. Taxes and subsidies. Taxes and subsidies change the price of
goods and services. A marginal tax on the sellers of a good will shift the
supply curve to the left until the vertical distance between the two supply
curves is equal to the per unit tax; when other things remain equal, this will
increase the price paid by the consumers (which is equal to the new market
price), and decrease the price received by the sellers. Marginal subsidies on
production will shift the supply curve to the right until the vertical distance
between the two supply curves is equal to the per unit subsidy; when other
things remain equal, this will decrease price paid by the consumers (which is
equal to the new market price) and increase the price received by the
producers.
