CountyWatch CountyWatch is a direct action group in the United Kingdom that was
set up in 2004 to remove what they consider to be wrongly placed county
boundary signs that do not mark the historic or ancient county boundaries of
England and Wales. Since 2005, Count Nikolai Tolstoy has been Patron of
CountyWatch. CountyWatch and its supporters claim to have removed, re-sited or
erected 80 county boundary signs in Dorset, County Durham, Greater Manchester,
Hampshire, Lancashire, Lincolnshire, North Yorkshire, Somerset and
Warwickshire. A prominent member of the group is Anthony Bennett, a British
politician. In May 2002 Bennett was prosecuted for removing 29 metric road
signs that he claimed were illegal and that he was preventing the law from
being broken. He buried the signs in four locations under bushes. Initially
found guilty of theft and criminal damage, his theft conviction was overturned
in October 2002 on appeal. The judge stated that "there was no evidence of
dishonesty or that he intended to permanently deprive the owners of their
signs." His conviction for criminal damage was upheld, but the Judge discharged
the sentence, which had been 50 hours of community service. Beliefs.
CountyWatch sees the abolition of democratically elected county councils in the
UK as part of a long-term project to weaken the constituent nations of Europe,
notably the UK, and to concentrate power at two levels: Brussels (the European
Commission) and the "regions" within countries. CountyWatch believes in taking
direct action within the law to counter aspects of this project. There have
been similar illegal acts before. The former county of Humberside was extremely
unpopular with some of its residents. The book "The Fight for Yorkshire" by
Michael Bradford detailed a series of cases where signs were altered to read
"East Riding of Yorkshire" in North Humberside. None of these acts were ever
prosecuted and in 1996 Humberside was abolished. Direct action. Bedfordshire.
In August 2007, CountyWatch took its campaign to Bedfordshire, where, in
November 2006, Bedfordshire County Council erected four signs on the main roads
on the north, west and south sides out of Luton proclaiming 'Welcome to
Bedfordshire'. Luton is the largest town within the historic and ceremonial
county of Bedfordshire. Some letter writers still address mail to "Luton Beds".
Some organisations based in Luton, such as the University of Bedfordshire,
include 'Bedfordshire' as part of their address. In 1996, the Royal Mail
stopped using Postal Counties as a method of sorting mail, using instead the
post code. However, they have a "flexible addressing policy" whereby historic
counties can be used. Luton became a unitary authority on 1 April 1997.
Bedfordshire County Council no longer runs any services in the area covered by
Luton Borough Council. The County Council erected the signs only in November
2006 in a struggle to save Bedfordshire County Council from extinction against
rival bids from the Borough of Bedford to become a unitary Borough Council and
from Mid Bedfordshire and South Bedfordshire Councils to become another unitary
authority, to be called "Central Bedfordshire". The signs were unpopular with
some Luton residents, some of whom called the signs "snooty". Bedfordshire
County Council responded by saying, "Luton has been a unitary authority since
1997 and is therefore not part of Bedfordshire. In July 2007, the government
announced that Bedfordshire County Council would be abolished in 2010. On 9
August 2007, CountyWatch removed four "Welcome to Bedfordshire" signs from
Luton, claiming they were misleading to the public. One sign was removed from
the B653 to Wheathampstead and re-erected on the A505 near Stopsley in front of
a "Welcome to Luton" sign. The other three signs were removed from the A6, the
A505 and the B579. CountyWatch claimed these were being stored at a secure
location and added that the signs would be returned to the County Council if
they were re-sited on what CountyWatch deem to be the "true" Bedfordshire
boundaries. The County Council responded by stating that, "This is absolutely
crazy. We are proud of our county and we like to ensure that visitors are given
a warm welcome. The signs on the edge of Luton mark the boundaries of their
responsibilities and the beginnings of ours." For anyone still interested in
finding a 'Welcome to Bedfordshire' sign, look no further than the A428 at
Eynesbury, just South of St. Neots as you travel westbound under the bridge.
Berkshire. In April 2006 the group set up "Royal County of Berkshire" signs on
the ancient border between Berkshire and Oxfordshire. The signs were quickly
removed. The Mayor of Abingdon, once the county town of Berkshire, now
administered by Oxfordshire County Council, said "I still get letters addressed
to me with Abingdon, Berkshire, and many older people still have allegiances."
The Mayor of Wantage, however, noted, "I think Count Tolstoy and his supporters
are living in the past. They need to face reality. I know there are many older
people in Wantage who still think of themselves as Berkshire people, but the
reality is that time has moved on and we can't go backwards." The Mayor of
Faringdon said that "Faringdon should stay in Oxfordshire", noting that "when
we were in Berkshire, County Hall in Reading was so far away. It's much better
for us to get into Oxford." Dorset and Hampshire border. On 10 November 2005,
Tony Bennett removed a Dorset sign from Chewton Bunny at Highcliffe and moved
it to its historic location at the original County Gates border between
Bournemouth and Poole, claiming that while Bournemouth and neighbouring
Christchurch had been administered by Dorset County Council for the past 30
years, they remained historically Hampshire towns. Durham. In May 2006,
CountyWatch announced that it has been contacted by Durham residents who were
unhappy that Durham County Council had recently relocated signs from the
historic boundary between Durham and Yorkshire and relocated them to the
Darlington boundary. It would be travelling around Durham looking to see
whether signs were on what it consider to be the correct, true border and would
remove County Durham signs from the border with the unitary authority of
Darlington to the historic and currently ceremonial border with North Yorkshire
on the River Tees on 25 May 2006 and re-erect them on suitable posts along the
River Tees. The BBC and Tyne Tees Television filmed CountyWatch removing the
boundary signs at Royal Oak. Twelve signs with, "County Durham: Land of the
Prince Bishops" were removed. Three of them were re-erected along the historic
border between Yorkshire and Durham – the River Tees, also the current
ceremonial border. The Council were informed by CountyWatch of the location of
the other signs they removed. Durham County Council issued a statement saying
that CountyWatch's actions were "nothing more than sheer vandalism, no less
mindless or anti-social than smashing bus stops or phone boxes". On 31 May
2006, an article in "The Northern Echo" newspaper praised the group's actions,
calling the council's statement "a trifle wide of the mark" and ended the
article - "Carry on CountyWatch". Lancashire. In November 2005 CountyWatch
removed over thirty 'Welcome to Lancashire' signs from Blackburn, Blackpool,
Skelmersdale and Southport, placing all of them on the historic Lancashire/
Yorkshire border at Blacko near Nelson, where they telephoned the Council's
Solicitor. Lancashire County Council reacted by stating that "the cost of
replacing the signs would be met from taxpayers' money." and also that it would
be speaking to the police about the group. The Welcome to Lancashire signs were
erected on the boundaries with Blackburn with Darwen and Blackpool unitary
authorities by the county council in 2004 to show where its services begin.
CountyWatch responded stating that, "The sign says 'Welcome to Lancashire', it
doesn't say 'Welcome to the administrative unit of Lancashire County Council -
that would be all right." The signs which were dumped by the side of the A682
in Blacko, near to the historic border with Yorkshire, were recovered by
Lancashire County Council who stated that they would re-erect them. CountyWatch
also claimed to have removed the larger brown-coloured motorway signs on the
M6, M66 and M61 which read "Welcome to Lancashire the Red Rose County". They
also claimed that they had a legal right to remove signs under the section 131
of the Highways Act 1980 because "they misinform the public". Lincolnshire. On
27 July 2005, the BBC TV Look North regional news programme featured the group
and filmed it in the act of removing a "Welcome to the County of Lincolnshire"
sign near Brigg. Lincolnshire County Council Area Highways Manager Eric
Jorgensen described the group as "self-appointed and unelected" and stated that
taxpayers would be forced to pay for the signs to be replaced. On 22 September
2005, CountyWatch removed ten road signs stating: "Welcome to the County of
Lincolnshire" between Brigg and Immingham, which the group claimed there was no
point in putting up a welcome sign 15 miles into the historic county.
CountyWatch claimed, "Lincolnshire starts where Yorkshire finishes – not 20
miles into Lincolnshire. We want them erected on the proper boundary".
Lincolnshire County Council however attacked the group for taking council
property and said "it will cost the taxpayer to put the signs back up". The
signs were deposited at a council depot after being removed. Somerset. In
August 2004, CountyWatch's first action was the removal of five signs saying
'Welcome to the County of Somerset', on the northern border of the non-
metropolitan county of Somerset with either Bath and North East Somerset or
North Somerset. The signs were taken down by CountyWatch members and relocated
on the historic borders of Somerset with neighbouring historic counties
Gloucestershire and Wiltshire. Nine new local authorities. On 25 July 2007, the
Local Government Minister, John Healey from the Department for Communities and
Local Government announced that nine all-purpose local authorities would be
created in 2009 in England. CountyWatch see this as the next phase of attempts
to replace the administration of England and Wales by county and district
councils with a series of so-called 'unitary' authorities, which combine the
administrative functions of both district councils and county councils. Region-
wide functions will be carried out by Regional Development Agencies and new
government quangos, following the announcement earlier in the month of the
abolition of unelected Regional Assemblies from 2010.
