Council on American–Islamic Relations The Council on American–Islamic
Relations (CAIR) is America's largest Muslim civil liberties advocacy
organization that deals with civil advocacy. It is headquartered on Capitol
Hill in Washington, D.C., with regional offices nationwide. Through media
relations, lobbying, and education, CAIR presents an Islamic perspective on
issues of importance to the American public, and seeks to empower the American
Muslim community and encourage its social and political activism. Annual
banquets, through which CAIR raises the majority of its funds, are attended by
American politicians, statesmen, interfaith leaders, activists and media
personalities. Critics of CAIR consider it to be pursuing an extremist Islamist
agenda. Mission and offices. CAIR's mission statement is "to enhance
understanding of Islam, encourage dialogue, protect civil liberties, empower
American Muslims, and build coalitions that promote justice and mutual
understanding". CAIR’s literature describes the group as promoting
understanding of Islam and protecting Muslim civil liberties. It has intervened
on behalf of many American Muslims who claim discrimination, profiling, or
harassment. Its stated core principles include supporting freedom of religion,
protecting all Americans' civil rights, and encouraging inter-faith dialogue.
CAIR believes that "the active practice of Islam strengthens the social and
religious fabric of our nation." CAIR is a nonprofit 501(c)(3) organization
with affiliates in 20 states (many of which manage multiple offices), and 33
chapters in the US. CAIR and its affiliates are managed by board members from
50 American cities, and combined employ more than 70 full-time staff, serving
millions of American Muslims. CAIR annual reports are available to all members
and donors, as well as internet users online. History. Early years
(1994–2001). CAIR was founded in June 1994 by three former officers of the
Islamic Association of Palestine (IAP)—Omar Ahmad (IAP President; became CAIR
President), Nihad Awad (IAP PR Director; became CAIR Secretary & Treasurer),
and Rafeeq Jaber (IAP Chicago Chapter President; became CAIR Vice President).
Also, Ibrahim Hooper became CAIR's communications director. As Nihad Awad later
said in an interview, "Omar suggested to me that we leave the IAP and
concentrate on combating anti-Muslim discrimination." CAIR's first office was
located in Washington D.C., as is its present-day headquarters on Capitol Hill.
Its founding was partly in response to the film "True Lies", starring Arnold
Schwarzenegger which Arab and Muslim groups condemned for its stereotyping of
Arab and Muslim villains. The offices opened a month before the film's release.
CAIR's first advocacy campaign was in response to an offensive greeting card
that used the term "shia" to refer to human excrement. CAIR led a national
campaign and used activists to pressure the greeting card company, which
eventually withdrew the card from the market. CAIR opened its first chapter in
the San Francisco Bay area. In 1995, CAIR handled its first case of hijab (the
headscarf traditionally worn by Muslim women) discrimination, in which a Muslim
employee was denied the right to wear the hijab; this type of complaint is now
one of the most common received by CAIR's civil rights department. CAIR
continued its advocacy work in the aftermath of the April 19, 1995 Oklahoma
City bombing of the Murrah Federal Building. Following the attack, Muslim-
Americans were subjected to an upsurge in harassment and discrimination,
including a rise in hate crimes nationally; 222 hate crimes against Muslims
nationwide were reported in the days immediately following the bombing. The
bombing gave CAIR national stature for their efforts to educate the public
about Islam and religious bias in America; their report was featured on the
front page of "The New York Times" on August 28, 1995 and was subsequently
mentioned on "ABC World News Tonight". In 1996, CAIR began "CAIR-NET", a read-
only e-mail listserve aimed to help American Muslims identify and combat anti-
Muslim prejudice in the U.S. and Canada. CAIR-NET contains descriptions of
news, bias incidents or hate speech and hate crimes, often followed by
information as to who readers may contact to influence resolution of an issue.
CAIR also held its first voter registration drive in 1996; CAIR continues to
encourage active political participation by American Muslims, for them to
address political candidates and elected representatives with greater
frequency. In 1996 CAIR published a report "The Usual Suspects" regarding its
perception of anti-Muslim rhetoric in the media after the crash of TWA Flight
800. Their research showed 138 uses of the terms "Muslim" and "Arab" in the 48
hours after the crash in Reuters, UPI, and AP articles covering the incident.
The official NTSB report said that the probable cause was mechanical. In 1997
CAIR objected to the production of sneaker made by Nike with a design on the
heel similar to the Arabic word for "Allah". As part of an agreement reached
between CAIR officials and Nike representatives, Nike apologized to the Muslim
community, recalled the products carrying the design, launched an investigation
as to how the logo came about, and built a number of children's playgrounds
near some Islamic centers in America. Post-9/11 (2001–present). CAIR
condemned the September 11 attacks in 2001 "within hours of the first plane
crashing into the World Trade Center", which it considers to be consistent with
its general approach to terrorism. CAIR published a paid advertisement in the
"Washington Post" condemning 9/11 and terrorism in general. CAIR increased its
advocacy work again after the September 11 attacks. In October 2001 CAIR stated
that it was opposed to the US's Afghan campaign. By January 2002, four months
after the attacks, the CAIR said that it had received 1,658 reports of
discrimination, profiling, harassment, and physical assaults against persons
appearing Arab or Muslim, a three-fold increase over the prior year. The
reports included beatings, death threats, abusive police practices, and
employment and airline-related discrimination." In its 2002 civil rights
report, CAIR concluded that "the status of Muslim civil rights has deteriorated
sharply", and complained that "the sweeping actions of the government have
disturbed the lives of individuals and ethnic and religious communities." The
largest percentage of complaints had to do with alleged profiling of Muslims at
US airports. CAIR has conducted investigations, issued reports, held press
conferences, filed lawsuits, and organized political action to protest aspects
of U.S. counterterrorism policy. From 2002–2004 CAIR organized the Library
Project, an effort to "put quality materials about Islam in all 17,000 public
libraries in the United States." The initiative sent a set of 18 books and
tapes to public libraries written by Muslim and non-Muslim authors on Islamic
history and practices, as well as an English translation of the Quran. As of
December 2004, CAIR received 7804 sponsorships for the $150 set. The initiative
was funded with an initial $500,000 matching contribution from Saudi Prince Al-
Waleed bin Talal bin Abdul Aziz Al Saud, whose donation to the Twin Towers Fund
was refused by then-Mayor Rudy Guliani because it came with a letter
attributing US support for Israel for the 9/11 attacks. In 2003 CAIR employee
Randall "Ismael" Royer was arrested for his role in the Northern Virginia jihad
terrorist network. In 2004 CAIR launched a "Not In the Name of Islam" petition
in order to "disassociate the faith of Islam from the violent acts of a few
Muslims." It encouraged Islamic organizations, mosques, and individuals to sign
it. The petition repudiated terrorism and any group that committed such acts,
citing a portion of the Quran that told believers to stand for justice even if
it was against friends or family. The petition was posted on CAIR's homepage,
and garned over 690,000 signatures before being taken down in a sitewide
renovation in 2007. In 2005 CAIR coordinated the joint release of a fatwa by
344 American Muslim organizations, mosques, and imams nationwide that stated:
"Islam strictly condemns religious extremism and the use of violence against
innocent lives. There is no justification in Islam for extremism or terrorism.
Targeting civilians' life and property through suicide bombings or any other
method of attack is "haram" or forbidden—and those who commit these barbaric
acts are criminals, not martyrs." The fatwa cited passages from the Quran and
hadith that prohibit violence against innocent people and injustice, and was
signed by the Fiqh Council of North America. Authors Kim Ezra Shienbaum and
Jamal Hasan felt it did not go far enough in that it did not address attacks on
military targets. Also in 2005, following the Qur'an desecration controversy of
2005 at the Guantanamo Bay detention camp, CAIR initiated an "Explore the
Quran" campaign, aimed at providing free copies of the Quran to any person who
requested it. Nearly 34,000 Americans requested a copy. In 2006, during the
protests over cartoons depicting Muhammad, CAIR responded by launching an
educational program "Explore the Life of Muhammad", to bring "people of all
faiths together to learn more about the Islamic Prophet Muhammad and to use
mutual understanding as a counterweight to the tensions created by the cartoon
controversy". It provided free copies of a DVD or book about the life of
Muhammad to any person who requested it. Almost 16,000 Americans requested
materials. In June 2006, CAIR announced a $50 million project to create a
better understanding of Islam and Muslims in the US. ($10 million per year for
five years), in a project to be spearheaded by Paul Findley, a former US
Congressman. California Senator Barbara Boxer in December 2006 withdrew a
"certificate of accomplishment" originally given to former CAIR official Basim
Elkarra after Boxer's staff looked into CAIR, and she became concerned about
some of CAIR's past statements and actions, and statements by some law
enforcement officials that it provides aid to international terrorist groups.
In May 2007, the U.S. filed an action against the Holy Land Foundation (the
largest Muslim charity in the United States at the time) for providing funds to
Hamas, and federal prosecutors filed pleadings. Along with 300 other
organizations, they listed CAIR (and its chairman emeritus, Omar Ahmad),
Islamic Society of North America (largest Muslim umbrella organization in the
United States), Muslim American Society and North American Islamic Trust as
unindicted co-conspirators, a legal designation that can be employed for a
variety of reasons including grants of immunity, pragmatic considerations, and
evidentiary concerns. While being listed as co-conspirator does not mean that
CAIR has been charged with anything, the organization was concerned that the
label will forever taint it. In response, National Association of Muslim
Lawyers and National Association of Criminal Defense Lawyers sent a letter to
Attorney General Alberto R. Gonzales, saying that the move to list the largest
Muslim organizations in America as unindicted co-conspirators was an effort to
smear the entire Muslim community. They also stated that the list breached the
department’s own guidelines against releasing the names of unindicted co-
conspirators. The Investigative Project on Terrorism reported that on August 7,
2007, a Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) agent testified at the Holy Land
Foundation trial that CAIR was "listed as a member of the Muslim Brotherhood's
Palestine Committee", that it had received money from the Foundation
(conflicting with Nihad Awad's Congressional testimony), and that co-founders
Awad and Omar Ahmad were "listed as individual members the Brotherhood
Palestine Committee in America." On October 22, 2007, the Holy Land Foundation
trial ended in a mistrial. CAIR stated that the reason for the mistrial, and no
convictions on any of the charges, was that the charges were built on "fear,
not facts." In 2008, the FBI discontinued its long-standing relationship with
CAIR. Officials said the decision followed the conviction of the HLF directors
for funneling millions of dollars to Hamas, revelations that Nihal Awad had
participated in planning meetings with HLF, and CAIR's failure to provide
details of its ties to Hamas. During a 2008 retrial of the HLF case, FBI
Special Agent Lara Burns labeled CAIR "a front group for Hamas." In January
2009, the FBI's DC office instructed all field offices to cut ties with CAIR,
as the ban extended into the Obama administration. U.S. Congressmen Sue Myrick
(R-NC), Trent Franks (R-AZ), John Shadegg (R-AZ), and Paul Broun (R-GA) wrote
Attorney General Eric Holder on October 21, 2009, that they were very concerned
about CAIR's relationships with terrorist groups, and requesting that the
Department of Justice (DOJ) provide each Congressman a summary of DOJ's
evidence and findings that led DOJ to name CAIR an unindicted co-conspirator in
the Holy Land Foundation terrorism trial. The four Congressmen also wrote House
of Representatives Sergeant at Arms Wilson Livingood a letter the same day
asking that he work with members of the House Judiciary, Homeland Security, and
Intelligence Committees to determine if CAIR was successful in placing interns
in the committees' offices, to review FBI and DOJ evidence regarding CAIR's
Hamas ties, and to determine whether CAIR is a security threat. Congresswoman
Loretta Sanchez (D-CA), "appalled", said "I urge the rest of my colleagues to
join me in denouncing this witch hunt." She was echoed by Keith Ellison (D-MN),
the first Muslim elected to the U.S. Congress, in a speech that included a
statement by the House's Tri-Caucus. The four Republican Congressmen, joined by
Senator Tom Coburn (R-OK) and Congressman Patrick McHenry (R-NC), then wrote
IRS Commissioner Douglas H. Shulman on November 16, 2009, asking that CAIR be
investigated for excessive lobbying and failing to register as a lobbying
organization. CAIR condemned the Fort Hood shooting and expressed prayers for
the victims and condolences for their families. CAIR pointed to an arrest of
five men in Pakistan on December 10, 2009, as a "success story" between Muslims
and Muslim community organizations (like CAIR) and American law enforcement
authorities. When the five men left Washington for Karachi on November 28, the
families of the men discovered an extremist videotape. Worried, they contacted
CAIR, which setup a meeting with the FBI on December 1, and the families shared
their sons' computers and electronic devices with FBI agents. A U.S. law
enforcement official described them as models of cooperation. CAIR hoped the
event would ease "strained" relations of American Muslims with the FBI. Hours
after it was announced by President Barack Obama that Osama bin Laden had been
killed, CAIR put out a statement: "We join our fellow citizens in welcoming the
announcement that Osama bin Laden has been eliminated as a threat to our nation
and the world through the actions of American military personnel. As we have
stated repeatedly since the 9/11 terror attacks, bin Laden never represented
Muslims or Islam. In fact, in addition to the killing of thousands of
Americans, he and Al Qaeda caused the deaths of countless Muslims worldwide. We
also reiterate President Obama's clear statement tonight that the United States
is not at war with Islam." In June 2011, CAIR lost its federal tax-exempt
status for failure to file the appropriate 990 forms for the previous three
years. (This does not apply to the local chapters, however.) A spokesman blamed
it on an incorrect filing. In January 2012 CAIR's Michigan chapter took a
stance along with the American-Arab Anti-Discrimination Committee in defending
four Muslim high school football players who attacked a quarterback during a
game. The organizations claimed the players were targeted for criminal
prosecution over the attack because of their ethnic origin. A judge later
dropped the charges after deciding they had no merit. Projects and media. CAIR
conducts research on the American Muslim community, releasing annual reports on
public opinion and demographic statistics on the community, as well as annual
Civil Rights reports concerning issues such as hate crimes, discrimination, and
profiling. It also sponsors voter registration drives and outreach, and
interfaith relations with other religious groups in America. Local CAIR
chapters such as the Michigan chapter organized a "Remember Through Service"
campaign which was a video and billboard media campaign which featured positive
representations of Muslim-Americans including a Muslim first responder during
the September 11th World Trade Center events. CAIR officials are often
interviewed by major national, local, and international media on news programs
involving Muslims in America. In five years CAIR officials were cited over
11,000 times by media, including CNN, MSNBC, BBC, ABC, Fox, NBC, CBS,
"Washington Post", "USA Today", and the "New York Times". Editorials written by
CAIR officials are published nationwide. Partners and relationships. CAIR
officials have met or regularly meet with current and former U.S. Presidents,
members of their respective administrations, members of the United States
Congress, governors, mayors, members of state legislatures, and county
commissioners. Several CAIR affiliates have received proclamations and
citations from mayors and county commissioners. The organization itself has
received praise from congressmen and women to top military officials such as
General Wesley Clark, who "applaudits efforts to ensure that all
Americans…are treated equally and given the same constitutional rights." CAIR
also regularly meets with national, state, and local law enforcement officials
including the Department of Homeland Security. CAIR has conducted diversity/
sensitivity training on Islam and Muslims for the FBI, US Armed Forces, several
local and state law enforcement agencies, and many U.S. corporations. CAIR
works in close cooperation with other civic and civil liberties groups such as
the American Civil Liberties Union, Amnesty International, NAACP, Hispanic
Unity, Organization of Chinese Americans, Japanese American Citizens League,
Sikh Mediawatch, Jewish Council on Urban Affairs, and Resource Task Force. CAIR
has also formed a partnership with the National Council of Churches and held
discussions with representatives of the National Association of Evangelicals.
In 2003, the Ohio chapter of the American Civil Liberties Union gave its annual
Liberty Flame Award to the Ohio chapter of CAIR "for contributions to the
advancement and protection of civil liberties." CAIR is also a member of the
American Muslim Political Coordination Council (AMPCC), created in 1999, along
with the American Muslim Alliance (AMA), American Muslim Council (AMC), and
Muslim Public Affairs Council (MPC). AMPCC's primary concern is to coordinate
the member organizations on activism and lobbying. Reverend Jesse Jackson was a
keynote speaker at CAIR's 15 annual banquet. Criticism. Critics of CAIR,
including six members of the U.S. House of Representatives and Senate, have
alleged ties between the CAIR founders and Hamas. The founders, Omar Ahmad and
Nihad Awad, had earlier been officers of the Islamic Association of Palestine
(IAP), described by a former FBI analyst and US Treasury Department
intelligence official as "intimately tied to the most senior Hamas leadership."
Both Ahmad and Awad participated in a meeting held in Philadelphia on October
3, 1993, that involved senior leaders of Hamas, the Holy Land Foundation (which
was designated in 1995 by Executive Order, and later convicted in court, as an
organization that had raised millions of dollars for Hamas), and the IAP. Based
on electronic surveillance of the meeting, the FBI reported that "the
participants went to great length and spent much effort hiding their
association with the Islamic Resistance Movement ." Participants at the meeting
discussed forming a "political organization and public relations" body, "whose
Islamic hue is not very conspicuous." Critics also point to a July 1994 meeting
identifying CAIR as one of the four U.S. organizations comprising the working
organizations of the Palestine Committee of the U.S. Muslim Brotherhood, the
parent organization and supporter of Hamas. CAIR has responded by noting that
Hamas was only designated a terrorist organization in January 1995 and did not
commit its first wave of suicide bombings until late 1994, after Awad made the
comment. Daniel Pipes and investigative reporter Steven Emerson accuse CAIR of
being a front for Hamas, having ties to terrorism, as well as "offering a
platform to conspiratorial Israel-bashers." The Anti-Defamation League and
Emerson have also accused CAIR of having a long record of propagating
antisemitic propaganda. Journalist Jake Tapper criticizes CAIR for refusing to
condemn specifically Osama bin Laden and Islamic extremism, but rather making
only vague and generic criticisms. Furthermore, critics point to a statement
made by Omar Ahmad (a joint founder of CAIR) in 1998 in which he said that
Muslim Americans "have a duty to deliver the message of Islam" and that "Islam
isn't in America to be equal to any other faith, but to become dominant." Pipes
has accused CAIR of demanding that a billboard declaring Osama bin Laden "the
sworn enemy" be brought down in 1998 as "offensive to Moslems", denying bin
Laden's responsibility for the Africa embassy bombings, calling the conviction
of the 1993 World Trade Center bombers "a travesty of justice," calling the
conviction of the blind Sheikh Omar Abdel Rahman a "hate crime", calling the
extradition order of suspected Hamas terrorist Mousa Mohammed Abu Marzook
"anti-Islamic", calling President Bush's closing of the Holy Land Foundation
for collecting money used to support Hamas "unjust" and "disturbing", praising
and defending convicted murderer H. Rap Brown as well as convicted attempted
murderer Adnan Chaudhry, and their LA office head calling Israelis "zionazis";
he also quotes the FBI's former chief of counterterrorism Steven Pomerantz
saying that CAIR "effectively" gives aid to international terrorist groups.
CAIR raised suspicions by raising its annual budget of around $3 million (as of
2007) in part through large donations from people and foundations identified
with Arab governments. The article further suggests that because CAIR's
Washington chapter has repeatedly issued controversial statements, it has been
difficult "for senior government officials to associate with the group." Some
Muslims criticize CAIR for being overly conservative from a religious
standpoint, for example by taking the disputed position that all Moslem women
are required to veil their hair. Zuhdi Jasser (founder of American Islamic
Forum for Democracy) has been stridently critical of CAIR by claiming that it
is focused on "victimology" and also said that CAIR has received "significant
Saudi financing". Neuroscientist and best-selling author Sam Harris, noted
mainly for his contribution to the New Atheism movement, criticized CAIR by
doubting their legitimacy saying CAIR is "an Islamist public relations firm
posing as a civil-rights lobby". The organization has also been criticized for
its lawsuit seeking to overturn Oklahoma State Question 755, a proposition that
would prevent Shari'a law in that state. CAIR's Oklahoma director filed the
suit, which he says unfairly targets Muslims and is in violation of the First
Amendment. In April 2011, Rep. Frank Wolf, R-Va. cited a 2009 letter sent from
CAIR's executive director, Nihad Awad, to Muammar Gaddafi asking Gaddafi for
funding for a project called the Muslim Peace Foundation at a U.S. House of
Representatives Appropriations sub-committee hearing with Robert Mueller. The
letter also said, in part, "I am pleased to send to Your Excellency in my name
most solemn assurances of thanks and appreciation for the efforts you exert in
the service of Islam, Muslims and all mankind through your initiative to teach
Islam, spread the culture of Islam, and solve disputes, for which you are known
internationally." Steven Emerson called the funding request "hypocritical."
while CAIR spokesman, Ibrahim Hooper, said that the organization didn't receive
any money from the Libyan government and also that CAIR was one of the first
American organizations to call for a no-fly zone Responses to criticisms. CAIR
suggested that "the statements and agendas of our detractors will show that
they represent the extremes in our society." CAIR also stated on its website
that in 2004 an FBI agent said "false claims originate from one or two biased
sources," and that a senior FBI official said CAIR would just have to live with
them. In early 2007, the "New York Times" wrote that "more than one government
official described the standards used by critics to link CAIR to terrorism as
akin to McCarthyism, essentially guilt by association." At that time (prior to
the Holy Land trial), the "Times" called efforts to link the organization to
Hamas and Hezbollah "unsuccessful," citing a retired FBI official who was
active through 2005 and who suggested that while "of all the groups, there is
probably more suspicion about CAIR", you don't get "cold hard facts" although
the article goes on to cite the suspicious background of some of CAIR's donors
as a source of contention within members of the organization itself. The
"Times" also noted that even though a handful of its former members had faced
prosecution, no criminal charges had at the time ever been linked to CAIR. CAIR
also says that accusations against it have their roots in its refusal to
endorse the U.S.'s blanket condemnation of Hezbollah and Hamas, though it says
it did criticize Hamas for civilian deaths. Senator Boxer's 2006 decision to
withdraw a "certificate of accomplishment" originally given to former CAIR
official Basim Elkarra on grounds of suspicions about the organization's
background "provoked an outcry from organizations that vouch for the group's
advocacy, including the ACLU and the California Council of Churches. "They have
been a leading organization that has advocated for civil rights and civil
liberties in the face of fear and intolerance, in the face of religious and
ethnic profiling," said Maya Harris, executive director of the ACLU of Northern
California. Litigation. A book entitled "" by Paul David Gaubatz and Paul
Sperry was published in October 2009. According to the "Charlotte Observer", it
portrays CAIR "as a subversive organization allied with international
terrorists." Consequently, CAIR brought a federal civil lawsuit against Dave
Gaubatz and his son (who had obtained the book's CAIR source documents as a
CAIR intern) for allegedly stealing the documents. U.S. District Judge Colleen
Kollar-Kotelly concluded that the Gaubatzs "unlawfully obtained access to, and
have already caused repeated public disclosure of, material containing CAIR's
proprietary, confidential and privileged information," which CAIR says included
names, addresses, telephone numbers and e-mail addresses of CAIR employees and
donors. As a result the judge ordered Gaubatz to remove certain documents from
his website. Judge Kollar-Kotelly also said that CAIR's employees have reported
a dramatic increase in the number of threatening communications since the
release of Mr. Gaubatz's book. Gaubatz agreed in early November to return more
than 12,000 pages of disputed CAIR records while the judge considered the
lawsuit, but in late November before he could do so the U.S. Government, which
previously had no role in the lawsuit, filed a motion in the case under seal,
and FBI agents served the Gaubatzes' attorneys with a grand jury subpoena
demanding the CAIR records.
