Counter-terrorism Counter-terrorism (also spelled counterterrorism)
incorporates the practices, tactics, techniques, and strategies that
governments, militaries, police departments and corporations adopt to attack
terrorist threats and/or acts, both real and imputed. The tactic of terrorism
is available to insurgents and governments. Not all insurgents use terror as a
tactic, and some choose not to use it because other tactics work better for
them in a particular context. Individuals, such as Timothy McVeigh, may also
engage in terrorist acts such as the Oklahoma City bombing. If the terrorism is
part of a broader insurgency, counter-terrorism may also form a part of a
counter-insurgency doctrine, but political, economic, and other measures may
focus more on the insurgency than the specific acts of terror. Foreign internal
defense (FID) is a term used for programs either to suppress insurgency, or
reduce the conditions under which insurgency could develop. Counter-terrorism
includes both the detection of potential acts and the response to related
events. Anti-terrorism versus counter-terrorism. Detentions following the
September 11, 2001 Terrorist Attack The concept of anti-terrorism emerges from
a thorough examining of the concept of terrorism and includes those measures
taken to protect society from terrorist acts. Terrorism is distinctly different
from acts that are intended to terrorize. In military contexts, almost all acts
are intended to create fear. But terrorism is the organized, premeditated use
of violence by non-state or state sponsored groups against combatants or non-
combatants in order to advance an ideological goal. Counter-terrorism refers to
offensive strategies intended to prevent, deter, preempt, and respond to
terrorism." In other words, counter-terrorism is a set of techniques for
denying an opponent the use of terrorism-based tactics, just as counter-air is
a set of techniques for denying the opponent the use of attack aircraft. Anti-
terrorism is defensive, intended to reduce the chance of an attack using
terrorist tactics at specific points, or to reduce the vulnerability of
possible targets to such tactics. ""Defensive measures used to reduce the
vulnerability of individuals and property to terrorist acts, to include limited
response and containment by local military and civilian forces."" To continue
the analogy between air and terrorist capability, offensive anti-air missions
attack the airfields of the opponent, while defensive anti-air uses anti-
aircraft missiles to protect a point on one's own territory. The Sri Lankan
Civil War, Colombian civil war, and the ongoing Israeli-Palestinian conflict,
are examples of conflicts where terrorism is present, along with other tactics,
so that participants use counter- and anti-terrorism to limit the opponent's
use of terror tactics. Units engaged in counter-terrorism include the US Navy
Seals and Delta Force. Planning. Building a counter-terrorism plan involves all
segments of a society or many government agencies. In dealing with foreign
terrorists, the lead responsibility is usually at the national level. Because
propaganda and indoctrination lie at the core of terrorism, understanding their
profile and functions increases the ability to counter terrorism more
effectively. See the series of articles beginning with intelligence cycle
management, and, in particular, intelligence analysis. HUMINT presents
techniques of describing the social networks that make up terrorist groups.
Also relevant are the motivations of the individual terrorist and the structure
of cell systems used by recent non-national terrorist groups. Most counter-
terrorism strategies involve an increase in standard police and domestic
intelligence. The central activities are traditional: interception of
communications, and the tracing of persons. New technology has, however,
expanded the range of military and law enforcement operations. Domestic
intelligence is often directed at specific groups, defined on the basis of
origin or religion, which is a source of political controversy. Mass
surveillance of an entire population raises objections on civil liberties
grounds. homegrown terrorists, especially lone wolves are often harder to
detect because of their citizenship or legal alien status and better ability to
stay under the radar. To select the effective action when terrorism appears to
be more of an isolated event, the appropriate government organizations need to
understand the source, motivation, methods of preparation, and tactics of
terrorist groups. Good intelligence is at the heart of such preparation, as
well as political and social understanding of any grievances that might be
solved. Ideally, one gets information from inside the group, a very difficult
challenge for HUMINT because operational terrorist cells are often small, with
all members known to one another, perhaps even related. Counterintelligence is
a great challenge with the security of cell-based systems, since the ideal, but
nearly impossible, goal is to obtain a clandestine source within the cell.
Financial tracking can play a role, as can communications intercept, but both
of these approaches need to be balanced against legitimate expectations of
privacy. Legal contexts. In response to the growing legislation. Human rights.
One of the primary difficulties of implementing effective counter-terrorist
measures is the waning of civil liberties and individual privacy that such
measures often entail, both for citizens of, and for those detained by states
attempting to combat terror. At times, measures designed to tighten security
have been seen as abuses of power or even violations of human rights. While
international efforts to combat terrorism have focused on the need to enhance
cooperation between states, proponents of human rights (as well as human
security) have suggested that more effort needs to be given to the effective
inclusion of human rights protection as a crucial element in that cooperation.
They argue that international human rights obligations do not stop at borders
and a failure to respect human rights in one state may undermine its
effectiveness in the international effort to cooperate to combat terrorism.
Preemptive neutralization. Some countries see preemptive attacks as a
legitimate strategy. This includes capturing, killing, or disabling suspected
terrorists before they can mount an attack. Israel, the United Kingdom, the
United States, and Russia have taken this approach, while Western European
states generally do not. Another major method of preemptive neutralization is
interrogation of known or suspected terrorists to obtain information about
specific plots, targets, the identity of other terrorists, whether or not the
interrogation subjects himself is guilty of terrorist involvement. Sometimes
more extreme methods are used to increase suggestibility, such as sleep
deprivation or drugs. Such methods may lead captives to offer false information
in an attempt to stop the treatment, or due to the confusion brought on by it.
These methods are not tolerated by European powers. In 1978 the European Court
of Human Rights ruled in the Ireland v. United Kingdom case that such methods
amounted to a practice of inhuman and degrading treatment, and that such
practices were in breach of the European Convention on Human Rights Article 3
(art. 3). Non-military. The human security paradigm outlines a non-military
approach which aims to address the enduring underlying inequalities which fuel
terrorist activity. Causal factors need to be delineated and measures
implemented which allow equal access to resources and sustainability for all
people. Such activities empower citizens providing 'freedom from fear' and
'freedom from want'. This can take many forms including the provision of clean
drinking water, education, vaccination programs, provision of food and shelter
and protection from violence, military or otherwise. Successful human security
campaigns have been characterized by the participation of a diverse group of
actors including governments, NGOs, and citizens. Foreign internal defense
programs provide outside expert assistance to a threatened government. FID can
involve both non-military and military aspects of counter-terrorism. Another
preventative action that has been used is the threat of and use of pork and
pork products against radical religious groups that feel that contact with pork
will render them unclean. The bodies of killed terrorists are daubed with lard
and buried wrapped in pigskin. Military. Terrorism has often been used to
justify military intervention in countries like Pakistan and Iran where
terrorists are said to be based. That was the main stated justification for the
U.S. invasion of Afghanistan. It was also a stated justification for the second
Russian invasion of Chechnya. History has shown that military intervention has
rarely been successful in stopping or preventing terrorism. Although military
action can disrupt a terrorist group's operations temporarily, it rarely ends
the threat. Thus repression by the military in itself (particularly if it is
not accompanied by other measures) usually leads to short term victories, but
tend to be unsuccessful in the long run (e.g. the French's doctrine described
in Roger Trinquier's book "Modern War" used in Indochina and Algeria). However,
new methods (see the new "Counterinsurgency" Field Manual) such as those taken
in Iraq have yet to be seen as beneficial or ineffectual. Preparation. Police,
fire, and emergency medical response organizations have obvious roles. Local
firefighters and emergency medical personnel (often called "first responders")
have plans for mitigating the effects of terrorist attacks, although police may
deal with threats of such attacks. Target-hardening. Whatever the target of
terrorists, there are multiple ways of hardening the targets to prevent the
terrorists from hitting their mark, or reducing the damage of attacks. One
method is to place Jersey barrier or other sturdy obstacles outside tall or
politically sensitive buildings to prevent car and truck bombing. Aircraft
cockpits are kept locked during flights, and have reinforced doors, which only
the pilots in the cabin are capable of opening. English train stations removed
their garbage cans in response to the Provisional IRA threat, as convenient
locations for depositing bombs. Scottish stations removed theirs after the 7th
of July bombing of London as a precautionary measure. The Massachusetts Bay
Transportation Authority purchased bomb-resistant barriers after the September
11 terrorist attacks. A more sophisticated target-hardening approach must
consider industrial and other critical industrial infrastructure that could be
attacked. Terrorists need not import chemical weapons if they can cause a major
industrial accident such as the Bhopal disaster or the Halifax explosion.
Industrial chemicals in manufacturing, shipping, and storage need greater
protection, and some efforts are in progress. To put this risk into
perspective, the first used 160 tons of chlorine. Industrial shipments of
chlorine, widely used in water purification and the chemical industry, travel
in 90 or 55 ton tank cars. To give one more example, the North American
electrical grid has already demonstrated, in the Northeast Blackout of 2003,
its vulnerability to natural disasters coupled with inadequate, possibly
insecure, SCADA (supervisory control and data acquisition) networks. Part of
the vulnerability is due to deregulation leading to much more interconnection
in a grid designed for only occasional power-selling between utilities. A very
few terrorists, attacking key power facilities when one or more engineers have
infiltrated the power control centers, could wreak havoc. Equipping likely
targets with containers (i.e., bags) of pig lard has been utilized to
discourage attacks by Islamist suicide bombers. The technique was apparently
used on a limited scale by British authorities in the 1940s. The approach stems
from the idea that Muslims perpetrating the attack would not want to be
"soiled" by the lard in the moment prior to dying. The idea has been suggested
more recently as a deterrent to suicide bombings in Israel. However, the actual
effectiveness of this tactic is probably limited as it is possible that a
sympathetic Islamic scholar could issue a fatwa proclaiming that a suicide
bomber would not be polluted by the swine products. Command and control. In
North America and other continents, for a threatened or completed terrorist
attack, the Incident Command System (ICS) is apt to be invoked to control the
various services that may need to be involved in the response. ICS has varied
levels of escalation, such as might be needed for multiple incidents in a given
area (e.g., the 2005 bombings in London or the 2004 Madrid train bombings, or
all the way to a National Response Plan invocation if national-level resources
are needed. National response, for example, might be needed for a nuclear,
biological, radiological, or large chemical attack. Damage mitigation. Fire
departments, perhaps supplemented by public works agencies, utility providers
(e.g., gas, water, electricity), and heavy construction contractors, are most
apt to deal with the physical consequences of an attack. Local security. Again
under an incident command model, local police can isolate the incident area,
reducing confusion, and specialized police units can conduct tactical
operations against terrorists, often using specialized counter-terrorist
tactical units. Bringing in such units will normally involve civil or military
authority beyond the local level. Medical services. Emergency medical services
will bring the more seriously affected victims to hospitals, which will need to
have mass casualty and triage plans in place. Public health agencies, from
local to national level, may be designated to deal with identification, and
sometimes mitigation, of possible biological attacks, and sometimes chemical or
radiologic contamination. Tactical units. Today, many countries have special
units designated to handle terrorist threats. Besides various security
agencies, there are elite tactical units, also known as special mission units,
whose role is to directly engage terrorists and prevent terrorist attacks. Such
units perform both in preventive actions, hostage rescue and responding to on-
going attacks. Countries of all sizes can have highly trained counter-terrorist
teams. Tactics, techniques and procedures for manhunting are under constant
development. Most of these measures deal with terrorist attacks that affect an
area, or threaten to do so. It is far harder to deal with assassination, or
even reprisals on individuals, due to the short (if any) warning time and the
quick exfiltration of the assassins. These units are specially trained in
tactics and are very well equipped for CQB with emphasis on stealth and
performing the mission with minimal casualties. The units include take-over
force (assault teams), snipers, EOD experts, dog handlers and intelligence
officers. See Counter-intelligence and counter-terrorism organizations for
national command, intelligence, and incident mitigation. The majority of
counter-terrorism operations at the tactical level, are conducted by state,
federal and national law enforcement agencies or intelligence agencies. In some
countries, the military may be called in as a last resort. Obviously, for
countries whose military are legally permitted to conduct police operations,
this is a non-issue, and such counter-terrorism operations are conducted by
their military. See Counter-intelligence for command, intelligence and warning,
and incident mitigation aspects of counter-terror. Examples of actions. Some
counterterrorist actions of the 20th century are listed below. See List of
hostage crises for a more extended list, including hostage-taking that did not
end violently. Designing Anti-terrorism systems. The scope for Anti-terrorism
systems is very large in physical terms (long borders, vast areas, high traffic
volumes in busy cities, etc.) as well as in other dimensions, such as type and
degree of terrorism threat, political and diplomatic ramifications, and legal
issues. In this environment, the development of a persistent Anti-terrorism
protection system is a daunting task. Such a system should bring together
diverse state-of-the-art technologies to enable persistent intelligence,
surveillance and reconnaissance missions, and enable potential actions.
Designing such a system-of-systems comprises a major technological project. A
particular design problem for this system is that it will face many
uncertainties in the future. The threat of terrorism may increase, decrease or
remain the same, the type of terrorism and location are difficult to predict,
and there are technological uncertainties. Yet we want to design a terrorism
system conceived and designed today in order to prevent acts of terrorism for a
decade or more. A potential solution is to incorporate flexibility into system
design for the reason that the flexibility embedded can be exercised in future
as uncertainty unfolds and updated information arrives. And the design and
valuation of a protection system should not be based on a single scenario, but
an array of scenarios. Flexibility can be incorporated in the design of the
terrorism system in the form of options that can be exercised in the future
when new information is available. Using these ‘real options’ will create a
flexible Anti-terrorism system that is able to cope with new requirements that
may arise. Law enforcement. + indicates military organization allowed to
operate domestically. Military. Given the nature of operational counter-
terrorism tasks national military organizations do not generally have dedicated
units whose sole responsibility is the prosecution of these tasks. Instead the
counter-terrorism function is an element of the role, allowing flexibility in
their employment, with operations being undertaken in the domestic or
international context. In some cases the legal framework within which they
operate prohibits military units conducting operations in the domestic arena;
United States Department of Defense policy, based on the Posse Comitatus Act,
forbids domestic counter-terrorism operations by the U.S. military. Units
allocated some operational counter-terrorism task are frequently Special Forces
or similar assets. In cases where military organisations do operate in the
domestic context some form of formal handover from the law enforcement
community is regularly required, to ensure adherence to the legislative
framework and limitations. such as the Iranian Embassy Siege, the British
police formally turned responsibility over to the Special Air Service when the
situation went beyond police capabilities. External links.
