Counter-recruitment Counter-recruitment is a strategy often taken up to oppose
war. Counter-recruitment is an attempt to prevent military recruiters from
enlisting civilians into the military. There are several methods commonly
utilized in a counter-recruitment campaign, ranging from the political speech
to direct action. Such a campaign can also target entities connected to the
military, such as intelligence agencies, or private corporations, especially
those with defense contracts. In the United States. Counter-recruitment (which
has long been a strategy of pacifist and other anti-war groups) received a
boost in the United States with the somewhat unpopularity of the war in Iraq
and brief recruitment difficulties of branches of the U.S. military,
particularly the Army; although the Army has met, or exceeded, its recruitment
goals year after year during that period.. Beginning in early 2005, the U.S.
counter-recruitment movement grew, particularly on high school and college
campuses, where it is often led by students who see themselves as targeted for
military service in a war they do not support. Early history. The counter-
recruitment movement was the successor to the anti-draft movement with the end
of conscription in the United States in 1973, just after the end of the Vietnam
War. The military increased its recruiting efforts, with the total number of
recruiters, recruiting stations, and dollars spent on recruiting each more than
doubling between 1971 and 1974. Anti-war and anti-draft activists responded
with a number of initiatives, using tactics similar to those used by counter-
recruiters today. Activists distributed leaflets to students, publicly debated
recruiters, and used equal-access provisions to obtain space next to recruiters
to dispute their claims. The American Friends Service Committee (A.F.S.C.) and
the Central Committee for Conscientious Objectors (C.C.C.O.) began publishing
counter-recruitment literature and attempting to coordinate the movement
nationally. These organizations have been continuously involved in counter-
recruitment to the present day. High schools. Most counter-recruitment work in
the U.S. is focused at the policy level of public school systems. This work is
generally done by parents and grandparents of school-aged children, and the
most common activity is information and advocacy with school officials
(principals, school boards, etc.) and with the general population in their
local school area. CR at the K12 level is categorically different from other
movements, since most of the students are underaged minors and parents are
their legal custodians and guardians, not the schools. The most common policy
goal is that the frequency of military recruiters' visits to public schools,
their locations in schools, and their types of activities be controlled rather
than unlimited. Many of the larger urban school districts have implemented such
guidelines since 2001. Other goals have included "truth in recruiting", that
counselors or curriculum elements be implemented to address the deficiency in
high school students' understanding of war and the military life, rather than
allowing military recruiters to perform that role. On high school campuses,
counter-recruitment activists since 2001 have also focused around a provision
of the No Child Left Behind Act, which requires that high schools provide
contact and other information to the military for all of their students who do
not opt out. Counter-recruitment campaigns have attempted to change school
policy to ban recruiters regardless of the loss of federal funds, to be active
about informing students of their ability to opt out, and/or to allow counter-
recruiters access to students equal to the access given to military recruiters.
These political campaigns have had some success, particularly in the Los
Angeles area, where one has been led by the Coalition Against Militarism in Our
Schools, and the San Francisco Bay Area. A simpler and easier, though perhaps
less effective, strategy by counter-recruiters has been to show up before or
after the school day and provide students entering or exiting their school with
opt-out forms, produced by the local school district or by a sympathetic
national legal organization such as the American Civil Liberties Union or the
National Lawyers Guild. Organizations which have attempted to organize such
campaigns on a national scale include A.F.S.C. and C.C.C.O., the Campus Antiwar
Network (C.A.N.), and the War Resisters League. Code Pink, with the Ruckus
Society, has sponsored training camps on counter-recruitment as well as
producing informational literature for use by counter-recruiters. United for
Peace and Justice has counter-recruitment as one of its seven issue-specific
campaigns. Mennonite Central Committee is another resource on the subject.
Colleges and universities. On U.S. college campuses, C.A.N. claims its protests
have chased recruiters off over a dozen schools since its founding in 2003,
including San Francisco State University, City College of New York, University
of Illinois at Chicago, UC Santa Cruz, and (in the first and perhaps most-known
protest, as president Bush was being inaugurated) Seattle Central Community
College, as well as disrupting recruitment at countless others. A common method
against military recruitment at schools which have non-discrimination policies
that protect lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender students has been to demand
that military recruitment be prevented in order to comply with these policies,
as these schools consider the Don't ask, don't tell policy discriminatory
against LGBT persons; however, with the repeal of DADT, the services are open
to homosexuals. C.A.N. also organized nationally coordinated student counter-
recruitment protests on December 6, 2005, as the Supreme Court heard arguments
in Rumsfeld v. FAIR to decide the legality of the Solomon Amendment, which
requires universities to allow military recruiters or forfeit their federal
funding. At colleges and universities, counter-recruitment activities have
resulted in discipline from university administrators, who have threatened
activists with penalties including expulsion, and law enforcement, who have
arrested and sometimes used physical violence against activists engaged in
counter-recruitment protest. C.A.N. says that it has faced ten "major free
speech cases" relating to its counter-recruitment activities. In every case,
all charges against students were dropped after a public defense campaign was
waged. Many counter-recruitment activities at universities also appear in the
Pentagon's surveillance database of anti-war protests, a portion of which was
leaked to NBC in December 2005. Proposition I/College Not Combat. One
significant result of the counter-recruitment movement was the passage, with
60% in support, of Proposition I/College Not Combat in San Francisco on
November 5, 2005. This proposition, which does not carry enforcement power,
declared the city's opposition to military recruitment in public high schools
and universities and stated that money should instead be directed toward
scholarships. It was written by Todd Chretien. Arguments surrounding
recruitment. In addition to the general debates supporting or opposing war, or
particular wars, and the alleged connection of the military to homophobia,
sexism, racism, militarism, and imperialism, there are debates about the
recruitment process itself. These debates, listed below, do not include
Recruiter Improprieties which are specifically defined in military regulations
and orders, or crimes such as sexual contact with minors, since both the
military as well as counter-recruiters are strongly opposed to them. Resistance
to military recruitment in Ireland. Military recruitment and resistance to it
has historically been a significant political issue in colonies of the British
Empire. This is true in Ireland especially as the campaigns for independence
from the British Empire intensified. The British Army raised many regiments
from English colonies to fight in conflicts such as the Crimean War, World War
I, and World War II. Irish songs opposing recruitment to the British army that
date from the mid-19th century provide some evidence that this colonial policy
was resisted - examples include Arthur McBride, Mrs. McGrath, and Johnny I
Hardly Knew Ye. However this cultural resistance is itself indicative of just
how widespread military recruitment actually was in Ireland at the time. Many
Irish people continued to be recruited in Ireland to fight in colonial
regiments until World War I. The Irish Home Rule Movement decided to support
English military recruitment in Ireland in the hope that by acting as loyal
subjects of the empire the empire would feel indebted to Ireland and grant it
independence. As the Irish independence movement shifted from parliamentary to
extra parliamentary channels after the 1916 Rising, and moving towards the
Irish War of Independence, there was a shift away from the earlier strategic
support for recruitment to the British Army. The Irish War of Independence
targeted police stations and this led to the replacement of colonial law
enforced by the Royal Irish Constabulary with martial law enforced by the
British Army. In this context, joining the British Army was no longer joining
an army to fight wars overseas but joining an organisation that was actually
fighting a war in Ireland. A cultural understanding of joining the British Army
as a kind of collaboration with an oppressive Empire then developed. This
opposition to military recruitment was more motivated by nationalism than
pacifism or opposition to militarism "per se" and often coincided with support
for Irish para-military organisations such as the Irish Volunteers and Irish
Republican Brotherhood. After the Irish War of Independence the British Army no
longer operated in the Southern Republic of Ireland and Irish people continued
to join the British Army for economic reasons as they had done when Ireland was
still part of the British Empire though now they had to first travel to England
in order to do so. The continued presence of the British Army in Northern
Ireland meant, especially during the height of "the troubles" between the 1970s
and 1990s, meant that military recruitment to the British Army was still a
highly political issue. Depending on your point of view, there was either
widespread popular resistance to the British Military in Northern Ireland or
the Irish Republican Army violently enforced non-cooperation with all aspects
of the British government in the nationalist communities they controlled. There
has been little or no opposition in Ireland to recruitment for the official
Irish army known as the Irish Defence Forces which are often described
primarily as peacekeepers despite their participation in dubious UN
interventions in recently liberated former colonies such as the Republic of the
Congo (Léopoldville) in the 1960s. Counter-recruitment in Canada. In response
to the Canadian Forces' role as a member of the International Security
Assistance Force in Afghanistan, an anti-war movement developed in Canada which
has tried to utilize counter-recruitment as a part of its efforts. In
particular, Operation Objection emerged as the umbrella counter-recruitment
campaign in Canada. Operation Objection claimed to have active counter-
recruitment operations in 8 to 10 Canadian cities. However, coordinated
attempts at counter-recruitment activism in Canada have been fairly limited as
of late, and for the most part, unsuccessful. In the 2005-06 academic year at
York University, the York Federation of Students, a federation representing ten
of the university's student unions, clashed with a Canadian Forces recruiter
forcibly removing the recruiter and the kiosk from the Student Center. York
University maintains that the Canadian Forces have the same right to recruit as
any other employer participating in career fairs on campus. On October 25,
2007, an attempt by the student union at the University of Victoria to ban
Canadian Forces from participating in career fairs on campus failed when the
student body voted overwhelmingly in favor of allowing the Canadian military to
participate in recruitment and career development activities available to
students. Approximately 500 students, five times the usual attendance, appeared
at the Annual General Meeting of the University of Victoria Students' Society
(UVSS), and voted to defeat the motion proposed to stop the Canadian Forces
from appearing on campus at career development events, with an estimated 25
votes in favor of the ban. Those voting against the ban argued that the ban was
a restriction on freedom of choice and an infringement of students' free
speech, that it went beyond the mandate of student government, and that student
union executives should not be advocating policy that does not reflect the
views of the fee-paying student body. In November 2007, the Minister of
Education for Prince Edward Island, Gerard Greenan, was requested by the
Council of Canadians to ban military recruitment on PEI campuses. The Minister
responded that military service "is a career and... we think its right to let
the Armed Forces have a chance to present this option to students."
