Craftivism Craftivism is a form of activism, typically incorporating elements
of anti-capitalism, environmentalism or third-wave feminism, that is centered
around practices of craft - most notably knitting. Practitioners are known as
craftivists. Background. The term craftivism was coined in 2003 by writer Betsy
Greer in order to join the separate spheres of craft and activism. Her favorite
self-created definition of the term states, “craftivism is a way of looking
at life where voicing opinions through creativity makes your voice stronger,
your compassion deeper & your quest for justice more infinite” Although the
term craftivism is a recent addition to crafting lexicon, the use of craft as
subversive can be found throughout history. First, the word craft is often
associated with trickery. To call someone crafty is to identify them as clever
and cunning In Greek, one would say to “spin” a plot. Similarly, the French
word for trick is tricoter, which means to tie or knot together. In the novel
"A Tale of Two Cities", the character Madame Defarge, a worker for the French
Revolution, secretly encodes the names of those soon to be executed in her
knitting. Third-wave feminism. Most forms of craftivism identify strongly with
the Third-wave feminism movement. They use the language of choice, and the
freedom to pursue whatever life interest they desire. Unlike their mothers’
generation of second-wave feminism, who rejected all things associated with the
home, Third-Wave feminists are reclaiming knitting, sewing, and other crafting
activities traditionally feminized and associated with the private sphere.
Through this reclamation, contemporary women want to reconnect with the female-
dominated art, to legitimatize the importance of undervalued craft, and to show
that 21st century women have the privilege to express themselves through craft,
thanks to the hard work of the Second-Wave feminists. Traditionally associated
with idle work and unproductive female activity in the home, craft was never
integrated into profit-making systems. Rather, it was marginalized and
undervalued. As a result, women’s significant and creative work in the
private sphere—clothing the family, knitting blankets, weaving the loom—did
not receive the same respect as male-dominated activity in the public realm.
Furthermore, the patriarchy has been successful in claiming these domestic
values for women and using it as a way to keep women in subservient roles.
Third Wave feminist crafters are attempting to subvert this association by
embracing domestic arts while identifying as feminists who are making the
choice to embrace domesticity. This act of resistance and shattering of the
public/private binary is expressed physically through public knitting and craft
circles who take a private-sphere activity and insert themselves in the male-
dominated spaces of the city One example would be the Anarchist Knitting Mob
who held a "Massive Knit" event in Washington Square Park to honor the death of
activist and urbanist Jane Jacobs. Knitters decorated the trees, benches, and
light posts with colorful yarn and unique patterns. Environmentalism.
Craftivism is also centered around ideas of environmentalism and
sustainability. When buying new materials, many craftivists choose organic
fabrics and fairly traded products such as home-spun yarns. Yet, even more
popular within the movement is the utilization of vintage, thrifted and
repurposed goods in order to minimize waste and promote reuse. This display of
resourcefulness acknowledges the finite resources on Earth, and the
valorization of quality over quantity. Craftivist, Betsy Greer, is quoted
saying, “While I think that crafting has become something fairly elite and
cliquish in some areas, at its heart, it is very much made for individuals who
value both their time and their money”. Anti-capitalism. Historically, craft
was the pre-capitalist form of production, where each created item possessed a
“use-value,” a term comparing the usefulness of an item to the exchange
equivalent. Now within a capitalist system of mass production, craft has become
a commodity to be bought and sold for money, where it is now referred to as
having an “exchange-value”. Due to this movement from use-value to
exchange-value, there is less emphasis on the time and skill expended to create
an object, and more importance on making it available to the masses as
inexpensively as possible. Traditionally associated with a strong community so
vital to the creation and distribution of craft, crafting has since lost its
use-value and has been “captured by capital”. A popular way to resist the
commoditization of craft is through the Do-It-Yourself or DIY movement.
Popularized through "zines" of the 1990s, DIY inspires people to be self-
sufficient and to rely less on the market for basic necessities that can easily
be created on one’s own. DIY is a resistance to the both the capitalist
nature of the fashion industry and pressures to conform and buy a style. An
example of this is the Counterfeit Crochet Project, which seeks to "debase and
defile designer items one step at a time". Crafters have also subverted the
market through the use of open source patterns and information sharing on the
internet. Sites like Burdastyle allow crafters to upload and download sewing
projects at no charge. Similarly, Cat Mazza's online software KnitPro allows
users to download images into detailed knitting patterns at no charge. Anti-
sweatshop. Efforts within the craftivist movement against capitalism focus
primarily on the international issue of sweatshops. Some craftivists believe
that either sewing one's own clothing or buying only hand-made is the best way
to protest unfair labor practices around the globe. Other craftivists take the
issue even further, using the act of crafting as a protest against sweatshops.
Artist and activist Cat Mazza created a campaign against the inhumane labor
practices of Nike through the creation of a giant blanket depicting Nike's
trademark swoosh. From 2003-2008, international crafters were asked to mail in
4x4 inch stitched squares to border the blanket and to sign a petition against
Nike. Mazza also created a second web-based software called Knitoscope that
transforms video into animated knitted stitches. Each video has a corresponding
testimony featuring various professionals who work against sweatshop labor.
Artist and Activist Kirsty Robertson feels that the subversive efforts of
craftivists against capitalism are limited by their dependency on the internet
and new communication. She points out that for this reason, global justice
knitters are not completely removed from the economy themselves Anti-war. Some
craftivists see their art form as a protest against war and violence. By
juxtaposing a colorful, soft, and fuzzy yarn with cold and dangerous weapons,
anti-war craftivists choose to make their statement. In 2006, Danish artist
Marianne Jorgensen stitched a giant pink “tank blanket” and placed it over
a M24 Chafee combat tank to protest the Iraq war. She has been making these
blankets since Denmark entered the Iraq War, and doesn't plan to stop until it
is over. She writes on her website that, "Unsimilar to a war, knitting signals
home, care, closeness and time for reflection...When tank is covered in pink,
it becomes completely unarmed and it loses its authority". Much like Jorgensen,
Canadian artist Barb Hunt works to question the acceptance of military logic in
society by creating knitted antipersonnel land mines out of wool. Similar to
her campaign against Nike, Cat Mazza started an anti-war effort entitled
"Stitch for Senate" on the fourth anniversary of the Iraq War. She enlisted two
people from each state to knit a soldier's helmet liner which would be sent on
to every senator. Unlike the apolitical Operation Home Front efforts that
knitted gear for soldiers, Mazza wanted "to start a dialogue about the war and
to get politicians to keep the promises they made during the midterm
elections". The Viral Knitting Project is an anti-war effort that translates
the 0/1 binary code of the dangerous Code Red computer virus into a knitting
pattern of knit/purl. The color and code relate to the anti-terrorism alerts of
post 9/11 United States. The project is attempting to "draw together links
between technology, culture, capitalism and war". Protest models. When
craftivists take to the street, they utilize various protest models. A popular
form of protest is the "knit-in," where knitters infiltrate a public space and
knit. They might ride a subway, occupy a civic building, or sit in a park. They
use the knit-in to draw attention to their issue of concern. The Revolutionary
Knitting Circle of Calgary, Canada stage a knit-in in front of Calgary's
financial office buildings during the summit of the G-8 nations in 2002. The
Knit-in not only provides an opportunity to protest against injustice, but also
allows for a running discussion about social issues between the stationary
knitters. Jack Bratich of Rutgers University argues that, "Knitting in public
also creates a gendered question of space. It rips open the enclosure of the
domestic space to public consumption, exposing productive work that has
contributed to women’s invisible and unpaid labor". Women are, thereby, able
to gain power from an activity that previously symbolized their repression.
Another form of craft-themed activism is guerilla art. The Texas-based group
Knitta places street art such as street pole cozies and antenna warmers in
cities throughout the country. Similarly, a blogger in England named "The
Lonely Craftivist"creates textile art with political messages in public spaces.
In transition. In the spring of 2009, an online debate began over the
definition of craftivism. The debate spread after the self-titled Craftivism
team on Etsy had an inner-group argument about the political affiliation of its
members, causing some members to leave the group. The original description of
the group states, "The Etsy Craftivism Team is a team of progressive Etsyans
who believe that craft and art can change the world. Some of us use our work to
carry messages of protest and political activism. Others believe that the act
of making craft can be an act of resistance. Still others see that by buying
and selling directly from the maker we are challenging the all pervasive
corporate culture that promotes profit over people.". Conservative members
accused the group of assuming a liberal agenda, and argued that politics should
not be involved. Some members of the group felt that the mere act of crafting
itself was political, while others felt that the act must also be attached to a
political message. Rayna Fahey from Radical Cross Stitch replied to a thread
stating “Personally if a John McCain supporter joined this group and told me
that my latest piece in support of indigenous sovereignty was a well-made piece
that serves the purpose for which it was designed well, I’d think that was
awesome and I’d have hope for the future of this world.”. In contrast,
craftivist Betsy Greer believes that "the personal is political," and that you
cannot separate the two.
