Crisis management Crisis management is the process by which an organization
deals with a major event that threatens to harm the organization, its
stakeholders, or the general public. The study of crisis management originated
with the large scale industrial and environmental disasters in the 1980s. Three
elements are common to most definitions of crisis: (a) a threat to the
organization, (b) the element of surprise, and (c) a short decision time.
Venette argues that "crisis is a process of transformation where the old system
can no longer be maintained." Therefore the fourth defining quality is the need
for change. If change is not needed, the event could more accurately be
described as a failure or incident. In contrast to risk management, which
involves assessing potential threats and finding the best ways to avoid those
threats, crisis management involves dealing with threats before, during, and
after they have occurred. It is a discipline within the broader context of
management consisting of skills and techniques required to identify, assess,
understand, and cope with a serious situation, especially from the moment it
first occurs to the point that recovery procedures start. Introduction. Crisis
management methods of a business or an organization are called Crisis
Management Plan. Crisis management is occasionally referred to as incident
management, although several industry specialists such as Peter Power argue
that the term crisis management is more accurate. A crisis mindset requires the
ability to think of the worst-case scenario while simultaneously suggesting
numerous solutions. Trial and error is an accepted discipline, as the first
line of defense might not work. It is necessary to maintain a list of
contingency plans and to be always on alert. Organizations and individuals
should always be prepared with a rapid response plan to emergencies which would
require analysis, drills and exercises. The credibility and reputation of
organizations is heavily influenced by the perception of their responses during
crisis situations. The organization and communication involved in responding to
a crisis in a timely fashion makes for a challenge in businesses. There must be
open and consistent communication throughout the hierarchy to contribute to a
successful crisis communication process. The related terms emergency management
and business continuity management focus respectively on the prompt but short
lived "first aid" type of response (e.g. putting the fire out) and the longer
term recovery and restoration phases (e.g. moving operations to another site).
Crisis is also a facet of risk management, although it is probably untrue to
say that Crisis Management represents a failure of Risk Management since it
will never be possible to totally mitigate the chances of catastrophes
occurring. Types of crisis. During the crisis management process, it is
important to identify types of crises in that different crises necessitate the
use of different crisis management strategies. Potential crises are enormous,
but crises can be clustered. Lerbinger categorized seven types of crises
Natural crises. Natural crises, typically natural disasters considered as 'acts
of God,' are such environmental phenomena as earthquakes, volcanic eruptions,
tornadoes and hurricanes, floods, landslides, tsunamis, storms, and droughts
that threaten life, property, and the environment itself. Technological crises.
Technological crises are caused by human application of science and technology.
Technological accidents inevitably occur when technology becomes complex and
coupled and something goes wrong in the system as a whole (Technological
breakdowns). Some technological crises occur when human error causes
disruptions (Human breakdowns). People tend to assign blame for a technological
disaster because technology is subject to human manipulation whereas they do
not hold anyone responsible for natural disaster. When an accident creates
significant environmental damage, the crisis is categorized as "megadamage".
Samples include software failures, industrial accidents, and oil spills.
Confrontation crises. Confrontation crises occur when discontented individuals
and/or groups fight businesses, government, and various interest groups to win
acceptance of their demands and expectations. The common type of confrontation
crises is boycotts, and other types are picketing, sit-ins, ultimatums to those
in authority, blockade or occupation of buildings, and resisting or disobeying
police. Crises of malevolence. An organization faces a crisis of malevolence
when opponents or miscreant individuals use criminal means or other extreme
tactics for the purpose of expressing hostility or anger toward, or seeking
gain from, a company, country, or economic system, perhaps with the aim of
destabilizing or destroying it. Sample crises include product tampering,
kidnapping, malicious rumors, terrorism, and espionage. Crises of
organizational misdeeds. Crises occur when management takes actions it knows
will harm or place stakeholders at risk for harm without adequate precautions.
Lerbinger specified three different types of crises of organizational misdeeds:
crises of skewed management values, crises of deception, and crises of
management misconduct. Crises of skewed management values. Crises of skewed
management values are caused when managers favor short-term economic gain and
neglect broader social values and stakeholders other than investors. This state
of lopsided values is rooted in the classical business creed that focuses on
the interests of stockholders and tends to disregard the interests of its other
stakeholders such as customers, employees, and the community Crises of
deception. Crises of deception occur when management conceals or misrepresents
information about itself and its products in its dealing with consumers and
others. Crises of management misconduct. Some crises are caused not only by
skewed values and deception but deliberate amorality and illegality. Workplace
violence. Crises occur when an employee or former employee commits violence
against other employees on organizational grounds. Rumors. False information
about an organization or its products creates crises hurting the
organization’s reputation. Sample is linking the organization to radical
groups or stories that their products are contaminated. Crisis Leadership.
Erika Hayes James, an organizational psychologist at the University of
Virginia’s Darden Graduate School of Business, identifies two primary types
of organizational crisis. James defines organizational crisis as “any
emotionally charged situation that, once it becomes public, invites negative
stakeholder reaction and thereby has the potential to threaten the financial
well-being, reputation, or survival of the firm or some portion thereof.”
Sudden crises. Sudden crises are circumstances that occur without warning and
beyond an institution’s control. Consequently, sudden crises are most often
situations for which the institution and its leadership are not blamed.
Smoldering crises. Smoldering crises differ from sudden crises in that they
begin as minor internal issues that, due to manager’s negligence, develop to
crisis status. These are situations when leaders are blamed for the crisis and
its subsequent effect on the institution in question. James categorises five
phases of crisis that require specific crisis leadership competencies. Each
phase contains an obstacle that a leader must overcome to improve the structure
and operations of an organization. James’s case study on crisis in the
financial services sector, for example, explores why crisis events erode public
trust in leadership. James's research demonstrates how leadership competencies
of integrity, positive intent, capability, mutual respect, and transparency
impact the trust-building process. Signal detection. Si Sense-making:
represents an attempt to create order and make sense, retrospectively, of what
occurs. Perspective-taking: the ability to consider another person's or group's
point of view. Preparation and prevention. It is during this stage that crisis
handlers begin preparing for or averting the crisis that had been foreshadowed
in the signal detection stage. Organizations such as the Red Cross's primary
mission is to prepare for and prevent the escalation of crisis events. Walmart
has been described as an emergency relief standard bearer after having
witnessed the incredibly speedy and well-coordinated effort to get supplies to
the Gulf Coast of the United States in anticipation of Hurricane Katrina.
Containment and damage control. Usually the most vivid stage, the goal of
crisis containment and damage control is to limit the reputational, financial,
safety, and other threats to firm survival. Crisis handlers work diligently
during this stage to bring the crisis to an end as quickly as possible to limit
the negative publicity to the organization, and move into the business recovery
phase. Business recovery. When crisis hits, organizations must be able to carry
on with their business in the midst of the crisis while simultaneously planning
for how they will recover from the damage the crisis caused. Crisis handlers
not only engage in continuity planning (determining the people, financial, and
technology resources needed to keep the organization running), but will also
actively pursue organizational resilience. Learning. In the wake of a crisis,
organizational decision makers adopt a learning orientation and use prior
experience to develop new routines and behaviors that ultimately change the way
the organization operates. The best leaders recognize this and are purposeful
and skillful in finding the learning opportunities inherent in every crisis
situation. Models and theories associated with crisis management. Crisis
Management Model. Successfully defusing a crisis requires an understanding of
how to handle a crisis – before they occur. Gonzalez-Herrero and Pratt found
the different phases of Crisis Management. There are 3 phases in any Crisis
Management are as below Management Crisis Planning. No corporation looks
forward to facing a situation that causes a significant disruption to their
business, especially one that stimulates extensive media coverage. Public
scrutiny can result in a negative financial, political, legal and government
impact. Crisis management planning deals with providing the best response to a
crisis. Contingency planning. Preparing contingency plans in advance, as part
of a crisis management plan, is the first step to ensuring an organization is
appropriately prepared for a crisis. Crisis management teams can rehearse a
crisis plan by developing a simulated scenario to use as a drill. The plan
should clearly stipulate that the only people to speak publicly about the
crisis are the designated persons, such as the company spokesperson or crisis
team members. The first hours after a crisis breaks are the most crucial, so
working with speed and efficiency is important, and the plan should indicate
how quickly each function should be performed. When preparing to offer a
statement externally as well as internally, information should be accurate.
Providing incorrect or manipulated information has a tendency to backfire and
will greatly exacerbate the situation. The contingency plan should contain
information and guidance that will help decision makers to consider not only
the short-term consequences, but the long-term effects of every decision.
Business continuity planning. When a crisis will undoubtedly cause a
significant disruption to an organization, a business continuity plan can help
minimize the disruption. First, one must identify the critical functions and
processes that are necessary to keep the organization running. Then each
critical function and or/process must have its own contingency plan in the
event that one of the functions/processes ceases or fails. Testing these
contingency plans by rehearsing the required actions in a simulation will allow
for all involved to become more sensitive and aware of the possibility of a
crisis. As a result, in the event of an actual crisis, the team members will
act more quickly and effectively. Structural-functional systems theory.
Providing information to an organization in a time of crisis is critical to
effective crisis management. Structural-functional systems theory addresses the
intricacies of information networks and levels of command making up
organizational communication. The structural-functional theory identifies
information flow in organizations as "networks" made up of members and "links".
Information in organizations flow in patterns called networks. Diffusion of
innovation theory. Another theory that can be applied to the sharing of
information is Diffusion of Innovation Theory. Developed by Everett Rogers, the
theory describes how innovation is disseminated and communicated through
certain channels over a period of time. Diffusion of innovation in
communication occurs when an individual communicates a new idea to one or
several others. At its most elementary form, the process involves: (1) an
innovation, (2) an individual or other unit of adoption that has knowledge of
or experience with using the innovation, (3) another individual or other unit
that does not yet have knowledge of the innovation, and (4) a communication
channel connecting the two units. A communication channel is the means by which
messages get from one individual to another. Role of apologies in crisis
management. There has been debate about the role of apologies in crisis
management, and some argue that apology opens an organization up for possible
legal consequences. "However some evidence indicates that compensation and
sympathy, two less expensive strategies, are as effective as an apology in
shaping people’s perceptions of the organization taking responsibility for
the crisis because these strategies focus on the victims’ needs. The sympathy
response expresses concern for victims while compensation offers victims
something to offset the suffering." Crisis leadership. James identifies five
leadership competencies which facilitate organizational restructuring during
and after a crisis. Crisis leadership research concludes that leadership action
in crisis reflects the competency of an organization, because the test of
crisis demonstrates how well the institution’s leadership structure serves
the organization’s goals and withstands crisis. Developing effective human
resources is vital when building organizational capabilities through crisis
management executive leadership. Unequal human capital theory. James postulates
that organizational crisis can result from discrimination lawsuits. James’s
theory of unequal human capital and social position derives from economic
theories of human and social capital concluding that minority employees receive
fewer organizational rewards than those with access to executive management. In
a recent study of managers in a "Fortune" 500 company, race was found to be a
predictor of promotion opportunity or lack thereof. Thus, discrimination
lawsuits can invite negative stakeholder reaction, damage the company's
reputation, and threaten corporate survival. Social media and crisis
management. Social media has accelerated the speed that information about a
crisis can spread. The viral affect of social networks such as Twitter means
that stakeholders can break news faster than traditional media - making
managing a crisis harder. This can be mitigated by having the right training
and policy in place as well as the right social media monitoring tools to
detect signs of a crisis breaking. Social media also gives crisis management
teams access to real-time information about how a crisis is impacting
stakeholder sentiment and the issues that are of most concern to them. The
crisis management mantra of Lanny Davis, former counsellor to Bill Clinton is
to “Tell it Early, Tell it All, Tell it Yourself”. A strategy employed at
the Clinton White House 1996 – 1998, to any breaking Organisations should
have a planned approach to releasing information to the media in the event of a
crisis. A media reaction plan should include a company media representative as
part of the Crisis Management Team (CMT). Since there is always a degree of
unpredictability during a crisis, it is best that all CMT members understand
how to deal with the media and be prepared to do so, should they be thrust into
such a situation. In 2010 Procter & Gamble Co called reports that its new
Pampers with Dry Max caused rashes and other skin irritations "completely
false" as it aimed to contain a public relations threat to its biggest diaper
innovation in 25 years. A Facebook group called "Pampers bring back the OLD
CRUISERS/SWADDLERS" rose to over 4,500 members. Pampers denied the allegation
and stated that only two complaints had been received for every one million
diapers sold. Pampers quickly reached out to people expressing their concerns
via social media, Pampers even held a summit with four influential “mommy
bloggers,” to help dispel the rumour. Pampers acted quickly and decisively to
an emerging crisis, before competitors and critics alike could fuel the fire
further. There is no truth. There is only perception. Examples of successful
crisis management. Tylenol (Johnson and Johnson). In the fall of 1982, a
murderer added 65 milligrams of cyanide to some Tylenol capsules on store
shelves, killing seven people, including three in one family. Johnson & Johnson
recalled and destroyed 31 million capsules at a cost of $100 million. The
affable CEO, James Burke, appeared in television ads and at news conferences
informing consumers of the company's actions. Tamper-resistant packaging was
rapidly introduced, and Tylenol sales swiftly bounced back to near pre-crisis
levels. Odwalla Foods. When Odwalla's apple juice was thought to be the cause
of an outbreak of E. coli infection, the company lost a third of its market
value. In October 1996, an outbreak of E. coli bacteria in Washington state,
California, Colorado and British Columbia was traced to unpasteurized apple
juice manufactured by natural juice maker Odwalla Inc. Forty-nine cases were
reported, including the death of a small child. Within 24 hours, Odwalla
conferred with the FDA and Washington state health officials; established a
schedule of daily press briefings; sent out press releases which announced the
recall; expressed remorse, concern and apology, and took responsibility for
anyone harmed by their products; detailed symptoms of E. coli poisoning; and
explained what consumers should do with any affected products. Odwalla then
developed - through the help of consultants - effective thermal processes that
would not harm the products' flavors when production resumed. All of these
steps were communicated through close relations with the media and through
full-page newspaper ads. Mattel. Mattel Inc., the toy maker, has been plagued
with more than 28 product recalls and in Summer of 2007, amongst problems with
exports from China, faced two product recalls in two weeks. The company "did
everything it could to get its message out, earning high marks from consumers
and retailers. Though upset by the situation, they were appreciative of the
company's response. At Mattel, just after the 7 a.m. recall announcement by
federal officials, a public relations staff of 16 was set to call reporters at
the 40 biggest media outlets. They told each to check their e-mail for a news
release outlining the recalls, invited them to a teleconference call with
executives and scheduled TV appearances or phone conversations with Mattel's
chief executive. The Mattel CEO Robert Eckert did 14 TV interviews on a Tuesday
in August and about 20 calls with individual reporters. By the week's end,
Mattel had responded to more than 300 media inquiries in the U.S. alone."
Examples of unsuccessful crisis management. Bhopal. The Bhopal disaster in
which poor communication before, during, and after the crisis cost thousands of
lives, illustrates the importance of incorporating cross-cultural communication
in crisis management plans. According to American University’s Trade
Environmental Database Case Studies (1997), local residents were not sure how
to react to warnings of potential threats from the Union Carbide plant.
Operating manuals printed only in English is an extreme example of
mismanagement but indicative of systemic barriers to information diffusion.
According to Union Carbide’s own chronology of the incident (2006), a day
after the crisis Union Carbide’s upper management arrived in India but was
unable to assist in the relief efforts because they were placed under house
arrest by the Indian government. Symbolic intervention can be counter
productive; a crisis management strategy can help upper management make more
calculated decisions in how they should respond to disaster scenarios. The
Bhopal incident illustrates the difficulty in consistently applying management
standards to multi-national operations and the blame shifting that often
results from the lack of a clear management plan. Ford and Firestone Tire and
Rubber Company. The Ford-Firestone Tire and Rubber Company dispute transpired
in August 2000. In response to claims that their 15-inch Wilderness AT, radial
ATX and ATX II tire treads were separating from the tire core—leading to
grisly, spectacular crashes—Bridgestone/Firestone recalled 6.5 million tires.
These tires were mostly used on the Ford Explorer, the world's top-selling
sport utility vehicle (SUV). Exxon. On March 24, 1989, a tanker belonging to
the Exxon Corporation ran aground in the Prince William Sound in Alaska. The
Exxon Valdez spilled millions of gallons of crude oil into the waters off
Valdez, killing thousands of fish, fowl, and sea otters. Hundreds of miles of
coastline were polluted and salmon spawning runs disrupted; numerous fishermen,
especially Native Americans, lost their livelihoods. Exxon, by contrast, did
not react quickly in terms of dealing with the media and the public; the CEO,
Lawrence Rawl, did not become an active part of the public relations effort and
actually shunned public involvement; the company had neither a communication
plan nor a communication team in place to handle the event—in fact, the
company did not appoint a public relations manager to its management team until
1993, 4 years after the incident; Exxon established its media center in Valdez,
a location too small and too remote to handle the onslaught of media attention;
and the company acted defensively in its response to its publics, even laying
blame, at times, on other groups such as the Coast Guard. These responses also
happened within days of the incident. Lessons learned in crisis management.
Impact of catastrophes on shareholder value. One of the foremost recognized
studies conducted on the impact of a catastrophe on the stock value of an
organization was completed by Dr Rory Knight and Dr Deborah Pretty (1996,
Templeton College, University of Oxford - commissioned by the Sedgewick Group).
This study undertook a detailed analysis of the stock price (post impact) of
organizations that had experienced catastrophes. The study identified
organizations that recovered and even exceeded pre-catastrophe stock price,
("Recoverers"), and those that did not recover on stock price, ("Non-
recoverers"). The average cumulative impact on shareholder value for the
recoverers was 5% plus on their original stock value. So the net impact on
shareholder value by this stage was actually positive. The non-recoverers
remained more or less unchanged between days 5 and 50 after the catastrophe,
but suffered a net negative cumulative impact of almost 15% on their stock
price up to one year afterwards. One of the key conclusions of this study is
that "Effective management of the consequences of catastrophes would appear to
be a more significant factor than whether catastrophe insurance hedges the
economic impact of the catastrophe". While there are technical elements to this
report it is highly recommended to those who wish to engage their senior
management in the value of crisis management. Crisis as Opportunity. To address
such shareholder impact, management must move from a mindset that manages
crisis to one that generates crisis leadership. Research shows that
organizational contributory factors affect the tendency of executives to adopt
an effective "crisis as opportunity" mindset. Since pressure is both a
precipitator and consequence of crisis, leaders who perform well under pressure
can effectively guide the organization through such crisis. James contends that
most executives focus on communications and public relations as a reactive
strategy. While the company’s reputation with shareholders, financial well-
being, and survival are all at stake, potential damage to reputation can result
from the actual management of the crisis issue. Additionally, companies may
stagnate as their risk management group identifies whether a crisis is
sufficiently “statistically significant”. Crisis leadership, on the other
hand, immediately addresses both the damage and implications for the
company’s present and future conditions, as well as opportunities for
improvement. Public sector crisis management. Corporate America is not the only
community that is vulnerable to the perils of a crisis. Whether a school
shooting, a public health crisis or a terrorist attack that leaves the public
seeking comfort in the calm, steady leadership of an elected official, no
sector of society is immune to crisis. In response to that reality, crisis
management policies, strategies and practices have been developed and adapted
across multiple disciplines. Schools and crisis management. In the wake of the
Columbine High School Massacre, the September 11 attacks in 2001, and shootings
on college campuses including the Virginia Tech massacre, educational
institutions at all levels are now focused on crisis management. A national
study conducted by the University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences (UAMS) and
Arkansas Children’s Hospital Research Institute (ACHRI) has shown that many
public school districts have important deficiencies in their emergency and
disaster plans (The School Violence Resource Center, 2003). In response the
Resource Center has organized a comprehensive set of resources to aid schools
is the development of crisis management plans. Crisis management plans cover a
wide variety of incidents including bomb threats, child abuse, natural
disasters, suicide, drug abuse and gang activities – just to list a few. In a
similar fashion the plans aim to address all audiences in need of information
including parents, the media and law enforcement officials. Government and
crisis management. Historically, government at all levels – local, state, and
national – has played a large role in crisis management. Indeed, many
political philosophers have considered this to be one of the primary roles of
government. Emergency services, such as fire and police departments at the
local level, and the United States National Guard at the federal level, often
play integral roles in crisis situations. To help coordinate communication
during the response phase of a crisis, the U.S. Federal Emergency Management
Agency (FEMA) within the Department of Homeland Security administers the
National Response Plan (NRP). This plan is intended to integrate public and
private response by providing a common language and outlining a chain-of-
command when multiple parties are mobilized. It is based on the premise that
incidences should be handled at the lowest organizational level possible. The
NRP recognizes the private sector as a key partner in domestic incident
management, particularly in the area of critical infrastructure protection and
restoration. The NRP is a companion to the National Incidence Management System
that acts as a more general template for incident management regardless of
cause, size, or complexity. FEMA offers free web-based training on the National
Response Plan through the Emergency Management Institute. Common Alerting
Protocol (CAP) is a relatively recent mechanism that facilitates crisis
communication across different mediums and systems. CAP helps create a
consistent emergency alert format to reach geographically and linguistically
diverse audiences through both audio and visual mediums. Elected officials and
crisis management. Historically, politics and crisis go hand-in-hand. In
describing crisis, President Abraham Lincoln said, “We live in the midst of
alarms, anxiety beclouds the future; we expect some new disaster with each
newspaper we read.” Crisis management has become a defining feature of
contemporary governance. In times of crisis, communities and members of
organizations expect their public leaders to minimize the impact of the crisis
at hand, while critics and bureaucratic competitors try to seize the moment to
blame incumbent rulers and their policies. In this extreme environment, policy
makers must somehow establish a sense of normality, and foster collective
learning from the crisis experience. In the face of crisis, leaders must deal
with the strategic challenges they face, the political risks and opportunities
they encounter, the errors they make, the pitfalls they need to avoid, and the
paths away from crisis they may pursue. The necessity for management is even
more significant with the advent of a 24-hour news cycle and an increasingly
internet-savvy audience with ever-changing technology at its fingertips. Public
leaders have a special responsibility to help safeguard society from the
adverse consequences of crisis. Experts in crisis management note that leaders
who take this responsibility seriously would have to concern themselves with
all crisis phases: the incubation stage, the onset, and the aftermath. Crisis
leadership then involves five critical tasks: sense making, decision making,
meaning making, terminating, and learning. Professional Organizations. There
are a number of professional industry associations that provide advice,
literature and contacts to turnaround professionals and academics. 1.
Turnaround Management Society (International / Focus on Europe) 2. Institute
for Turnaround (England) 3. Turnaround Management Association (International)
4. Institut für die Standardisierung von Unternehmenssanierungen (Germany)
