Criticism of capitalism Criticism of capitalism ranges from expressing
disagreement with the principles of capitalism in its entirety, to expressing
disagreement with particular outcomes of capitalism. Among those wishing to
replace capitalism with a different method of production and social
organization, a distinction can be made between those believing that capitalism
can only be overcome through revolution (e.g., revolutionary socialism) and
those believing that structural change can come slowly through political
reforms (e.g., social democracy). Some critics recognize merits in capitalism
and wish to balance capitalism with some form of social control, typically
through government regulation (e.g., the social market movement and the British
Labour Party). Issues. Democracy and political and economic freedom. Economist
Branko Horvat stated: "... it is now well known that capitalist development
leads to the concentration of capital, employment and power. It is somewhat
less known that it leads to the almost complete destruction of economic
freedom." Activists argue that capitalism leads to a significant loss of
political, democratic and economic power for the vast majority of the global
human population, because, they believe, capitalism creates very large
concentrations of money and property at the hands of a relatively small
minority of the global human population (the Elite or The Power Elite),
leading, they say, to very large, and increasing, wealth and income
inequalities between the elite and the majority of the population. Corporate
capitalism and inverted totalitarianism are terms used by the aforementioned
activists and critics of capitalism to describe a capitalist marketplace –
and society – characterized by the dominance of hierarchical, bureaucratic,
large corporations, which are legally required to pursue profit without concern
for the social welfare. Corporate capitalism has been criticized for the amount
of power and influence corporations and large business interest groups have
over government policy, including the policies of regulatory agencies and
influencing political campaigns. Many social scientists have criticized
corporations for failing to act in the interests of the people; they claim the
existence of large corporations seems to circumvent the principles of
democracy, which assumes equal power relations between all individuals in a
society. As part of the political left, activists against corporate power and
influence support a decreased income gap and improved economical equity. The
rise of giant (often multinational) corporations has been a topic of concern
among the aforementioned scholars, intellectuals and activists, who see the
large corporation as leading to deep, structural erosion of such basic human
rights and civil rights as equitable wealth and income distribution, equitable
democratic political and socio-economic power representation, and many other
human rights and needs. They have pointed out that, in their view, large
corporations create false needs in consumers and, they contend, have had a long
history of interference in, and distortion of, the policies of sovereign nation
states through high-priced legal lobbying, and other almost always legal,
powerful forms of influence peddling. Evidence supporting this belief includes,
in their view, invasive advertising (such as billboards, television ads,
adware, spam, telemarketing, child-targeted advertising, guerrilla marketing),
massive open or secret corporate political campaign contributions in so-called
"democratic" elections, corporatocracy, the revolving door between government
and corporations, regulatory capture, Too Big To Fail (also known as Too Big to
Jail), massive taxpayer-provided corporate bailouts, socialism/ communism for
the very rich and brutal, vicious, Darwinian capitalism for everyone else,
corporate welfare, and, they claim, seemingly endless global news stories about
corporate corruption (Martha Stewart and Enron, among many other examples).
Anti-corporate-activists express the view that large corporations answer only
to large shareholders, giving human rights issues, social justice issues,
environmental issues other issues of high significance to the bottom 99% of the
global human population virtually no consideration. Thomas Jefferson, one of
the founders of the United States, said "I hope we shall crush ... in its birth
the aristocracy of our moneyed corporations, which dare already to challenge
our government to a trial of strength and bid defiance to the laws of our
country". Franklin D. Roosevelt, in an April 29, 1938 message to Congress,
warned that the growth of private power could lead to fascism: Franklin D.
Roosevelt, "Recommendations to the Congress to Curb Monopolies and the
Concentration of Economic Power," April 29, 1938, in "The Public Papers and
Addresses of Franklin D. Roosevelt," ed. Samuel I. Rosenman, vol. 7, (New York,
MacMillan: 1941), pp. 305–315.[...] Statistics of the Bureau of Internal
Revenue reveal the following amazing figures for 1935: "Ownership of corporate
assets: Of all corporations reporting from every part of the Nation, one-tenth
of 1 percent of them owned 52 percent of the assets of all of them." United
States President Dwight D. Eisenhower criticized the notion of the confluence
of corporate power and de facto fascism, and, in his 1961 Farewell Address to
the Nation, brought attention to the "conjunction of an immense military
establishment and a large arms industry" in the United States and stressed "the
need to maintain balance in and among national programs – balance between the
private and the public economy, balance between cost and hoped for advantage."
Exploitation. Critics of capitalism view the system as inherently exploitative.
In an economic sense, exploitation is often related to the expropriation of
labor for profit and based on Marx's version of the labor theory of value. The
labor theory of value was supported by classical economists like David Ricardo
and Adam Smith who believed that "the value of a commodity depends on the
relative quantity of labor which is necessary for its production." In "Das
Kapital", Karl Marx identified the commodity as the basic unit of capitalist
organization. Marx described a "common denominator" between commodities, in
particular that commodities are the product of labor and are related to each
other by an exchange value (i.e., price). By using the labor theory of value,
Marxists see a connection between labor and exchange value, in that commodities
are exchanged depending on the socially necessary labor time needed to produce
them. However, due to the productive forces of industrial organization,
laborers are seen as creating more exchange value during the course of the
working day than the cost of their survival (food, shelter, clothing, etc.).
Marxists argue that capitalists are thus able to pay for this cost of survival,
while expropriating the excess labor (i.e., surplus value). Marxists further
argue that due to economic inequality, the purchase of labor cannot occur under
"free" conditions. Since capitalists control the means of production (e.g.,
factories, businesses, machinery) and workers control only their labor, the
worker is naturally coerced into allowing their labor to be exploited. Critics
argue that exploitation occurs even if the exploited consents, since the
definition of exploitation is independent of consent. In essence, workers must
allow their labor to be exploited or face starvation. Since some degree of
unemployment is typical in modern economies, Marxists argue that wages are
naturally driven down in free market systems. Hence, even if a worker contests
their wages, capitalists are able to find someone from the reserve army of
labor who is more desperate. Unions are the "traditional method" for workers to
have more bargaining power in the marketplace. The act (or threat) of striking
has historically been an organized action to withhold labor from capitalists,
without fear of individual retaliation. Some critics of capitalism, while
acknowledging the necessity of trade unionism, believe that trade unions simply
reform an already exploitative system, leaving the system of exploitation
intact. Lysander Spooner argued that "almost all fortunes are made out of the
capital and labour of other men than those who realize them. Indeed, large
fortunes could rarely be made at all by one individual, except by his sponging
capital and labour from others." Labor historian Immanuel Wallerstein has
argued that unfree labor—by slaves, indentured servants, prisoners, and other
coerced persons—is compatible with capitalist relations. Modern skeptics of
free market capitalism observe that while in major capitalist economies the
minimum wage is legislatively imposed by the state, there is no maximum wage
limit, which is supposedly determined by the forces of the free market. They
further argue that the minimum wage measure does not serve to set a lower limit
in a worker's earnings; it actually functions as an upper limit on the earnings
of a person that just enters the workforce. The existence of minimum wage,
coupled with the absence of maximum, permits rapid wealth accumulation and
leads to a phenomenon termed "plutonomy" by Citigroup. In effect, wages are
kept low for almost all of the population while the remaining minute percentage
is allowed to meet overwhelming profits. Academics such as Howard Gardner have
proposed the adoption of upper limits in individual wealth as "a solution that
would make the world a better place". Imperialism and political oppression.
Critics argue that the ills caused by capitalism include imperialism and
oppression. Although some of these violations occurred during a time period and
in states sometimes considered being more capitalist than today since the
government share of the economy was much smaller, U.S and European support of
multinational-friendly capitalist dictatorships in Latin America and Africa
lasted until the mid 1980s. Near the start of the 20th century, Vladimir Lenin
claimed that state use of military power to defend capitalist interests abroad
was an inevitable corollary of monopoly capitalism. Critics of capitalism
allege the system is responsible for not only economic exploitation, but
imperialist, colonialist and counter-revolutionary wars, repressions of workers
and trade unionists, genocides and . Marxists, importantly Vladimir Lenin,
argue that capitalism needs imperialism in order to survive. The unplanned
nature of capitalism, they say, inevitably overproduces commodities and
overuses resources, which leads it to expand its markets into and drain the
resources out of other, less-developed nations. The wealthy nations, they say,
must maintain cheap access to third world natural resources and unfree labor,
by force if necessary. They argue that the capitalist countries like England
initially were helped by the primitive accumulation of capital through the
"theft" of natural resources and exploitation of slave labor from large parts
of Asia, Africa and the Americas, which spurred the industrial revolution. They
see what they characterize as unjust exploitation, militarily (such as India in
19th century) or economically (e.g., through International Monetary Fund
structural adjustment programs during the 1980s), as part of the nature of
capitalism. The constant, capitalist drive to expand markets is viewed by many
as the primary cause of globalization. In his essay, "Imperialism: The Highest
Stage of Capitalism", Vladimir Lenin advanced the now widespread thesis that
the ‘New Imperialism’ of the late 19th and early 20th centuries was an
inevitable corollary of monopoly capitalism. According to Lenin, the export of
financial capital superseded the export of commodities; banking and industrial
capital merged to form large financial cartels and trusts in which production
distribution are highly centralized; and monopoly capitalists influenced state
policy to carve up the world into spheres of interest (Burnham). These trends
led states to defend their capitalist interests abroad through military power.
Inefficiency and waste. Some opponents criticize capitalism's perceived
inefficiency. They note a shift from pre-industrial reuse and thriftiness
before capitalism to a consumer-based economy that pushes "ready-made"
materials. It is argued that a sanitation industry arose under capitalism that
deemed trash valueless; a significant break from the past when much "waste" was
used and reused almost indefinitely. In the process, critics say, capitalism
has created a profit driven system based on selling as many products as
possible. Critics relate the "ready-made" trend to a growing garbage problem in
which 4.5 pounds of trash are generated per person each day (compared to 2.7
pounds in 1960). Anti-capitalist groups with an emphasis on conservation
include eco-socialists and social ecologists. Planned obsolescence has also
been criticized as a wasteful practice under capitalism. By designing products
to wear out faster than need be, new consumption is generated. This would
benefit corporations by increasing sales, while at the same time generating
excessive waste. A well-known example is the charge that Apple designed its
iPod to fail after 18 months. Critics view planned obsolescence as wasteful and
an inefficient use of resources. Other authors such as Naomi Klein have
criticized brand-based marketing for putting more emphasis on the company's
name-brand than on manufacturing products. In the tragedy of the anticommons,
reduced efficiency occurs due to interrelated property ownerships, where all
owners need to agree for the property to be optimally used. Inequality. Critics
argue that capitalism is associated with the unfair distribution of wealth and
power; a tendency toward market monopoly or oligopoly (and government by
oligarchy); imperialism, counter-revolutionary wars and various forms of
economic and cultural exploitation; repression of workers and trade unionists,
and phenomena such as social alienation, economic inequality, unemployment, and
economic instability. Critics have argued that there is an inherent tendency
toward oligopolistic structures when laissez-faire is combined with capitalist
private property. Capitalism is regarded by many socialists to be irrational in
that production and the direction of the economy are unplanned, creating many
inconsistencies and internal contradictions and thus should be controlled
through public policy. In the early 20th century, Vladimir Lenin argued that
state use of military power to defend capitalist interests abroad was an
inevitable corollary of monopoly capitalism. Che Guevara wrote:"Socialism and
Man in Cuba" A letter to Carlos Quijano, editor of "Marcha", a weekly published
in Montevideo, Uruguay; published as "From Algiers, for Marcha: The Cuban
Revolution Today" by on March 12, 1965 A modern critic of capitalism is Ravi
Batra, who focuses on inequality as a source of immiserization but also of
system failure. Batra popularised the concept "share of wealth held by richest
1%" as an indicator of inequality and an important determinant of depressions,
in his best-selling books in the 1980s. His approach is based on the ideas of
Indian philosopher P.R. Sarkar, founder of the Ananda Marga movement, who
developed the Law of Social Cycle to identify the problems of capitalism and
proposed the Progressive Utilization Theory (PROUT). In the United States, the
shares of earnings and wealth of the households in the top 1 percent of the
corresponding distributions are 21 percent (in 2006) and 37 percent (in 2009),
respectively. Critics, such as Ravi Batra, argue that the capitalist system has
inherent biases favoring those who already possess greater resources. The
inequality may be propagated through inheritance and economic policy. Rich
people are in a position to give their children a better education and
inherited wealth, and that this can create or increase large differences in
wealth between people who do not differ in ability or effort. One study shows
that in the U.S., 43.35% of the people in the "Forbes" magazine "400 richest
individuals" list were already rich enough at birth to qualify. Another study
indicated that in the US, wealth, race, and schooling are important to the
inheritance of economic status, but that IQ is not a major contributor, and the
genetic transmission of IQ is even less important. Batra has argued that the
tax and benefit legislation in the USA since the Reagan Presidency has
contributed greatly to the inequalities and economic problems and should be
repealed. Market failure. Market failure is a term used by economists to
describe the condition where the allocation of goods and services by a market
is not efficient. Keynesian economist Paul Krugman views this scenario in which
individuals' pursuit of self-interest leads to bad results for society as a
whole. From this, some critics of capitalism prefer economic intervention by
government to free markets. Some believe that the lack of perfect information
and perfect competition in a free market is grounds for government
intervention. Others perceive certain unique problems with a free market
including: monopolies, monopsonies, insider trading, and price gouging.
Legislation has been introduced to deal with these concerns (e.g., anti-trust
legislation or financial regulation). Also, governments overseeing capitalist
economies have been known to set mandatory price floors or price ceilings at
times, thereby interfering with the free market mechanism. This usually occurs
in times of crisis, or relating to goods and services viewed as strategically
important. Electricity, for example, is a good that has typically been subject
to price ceilings in many countries. Wages determined by a free market
mechanism are also commonly seen as a problem by those who argue that some
wages are unjustifiably low or unjustifiably high. Another perceived failure is
that free markets usually fail to deal with the problem of externalities, where
an action by an outside agent positively or negatively affects another agent
without any compensation. An example of an externality is pollution. More
generally, free market allocation of resources in areas such as health care,
unemployment, wealth inequality, and education are considered market failures
by some. Poor distribution of goods has also been identified as a market
failure. One critic noted that 200 million Indians went hungry in 1995, while
the Indian economy was exporting $625 million worth of wheat and $1.3 billion
worth of rice that same year. Market instability. Critics of capitalism,
particularly Marxists, identify market instability as a permanent feature of
capitalist economy. Marx believed that the unplanned and explosive growth of
capitalism does not occur in a smooth manner, but is interrupted by periods of
overproduction in which stagnation or decline occur (i.e., recessions). In the
view of Marxists, several contradictions in the capitalist mode of production
are present, particularly the internal contradiction between anarchy in the
sphere of capital (i.e., free market) and socialised production in the sphere
of labor (i.e., industrialism). Due to the unplanned nature of the system,
capitalists produce without knowing in advance what they can sell, while at the
same time unleashing huge productive capabilities through industrial
organization. The result is that crises are not caused by shortages, like a
crop failure, but rather from a production of too many goods. Marx and Engels,
in the "Communist Manifesto", highlighted what they saw as a uniquely
capitalist juxtaposition of overabundance and poverty: "Society suddenly finds
itself put back into a state of momentary barbarism. And why? Because there is
too much civilization, too much means of subsistence, too much industry, too
much commerce." Property. In discussions of the sensitive issue of property, it
is critical to make a clear distinction between private property and public
property: while the critics of capitalism listed/ discussed below are calling
for the abolition of private property and its transformation into the commons
or public property, they nonetheless retain respect for personal property
rights. Pierre-Joseph Proudhon and Friedrich Engels argue that the free market
is not necessarily free, but weighted towards those who already own private
property. They view capitalist regulations, including the enforcement of
private property on land and exclusive rights to natural resources, as unjustly
enclosing upon what should be owned by all, forcing those without private
property to sell their labor to capitalists and landlords in a market favorable
to the latter, thus forcing workers to accept low wages in order to survive. In
his criticism of capitalism, Pierre-Joseph Proudhon believed that the emphasis
on private property is the problem. He argued that property is theft, arguing
that private property leads to despotism: "Now, property necessarily engenders
despotism—the government of caprice, the reign of libidinous pleasure. That
is so clearly the essence of property that, to be convinced of it, one need but
remember what it is, and observe what happens around him. Property is the right
to use and abuse." Many left-wing anarchists, such as anarchist communists,
believe in replacing capitalist private property with a system where people can
lay claim to things based on personal use and claim that "Property is the
domination of an individual, or a coalition of individuals, over things; it is
not the claim of any person or persons to the use of things" and "this is,
usufruct, a very different matter. Property means the monopoly of wealth, the
right to prevent others using it, whether the owner needs it or not."
Mutualists and some anarchists support markets and private property, but not in
their present form. They argue that particular aspects of modern capitalism
violate the ability of individuals to trade in the absence of coercion.
Mutualists support markets and private property in the product of labor, but
only when these markets guarantee that workers will realize for themselves the
value of their labor. In recent times, most economies have extended private
property rights to include such things as patents and copyrights. Critics see
this as coercive against those with few prior resources. They argue that such
regulations discourage the sharing of ideas, and encourage nonproductive rent
seeking behavior, both of which enact a deadweight loss on the economy,
erecting a prohibitive barrier to entry into the market. Not all pro-
capitalists support the concept of copyrights, but those who do argue that
compensation to the creator is necessary as an incentive. Sustainability. An
economic system that produces strong economic growth and requires essentially
free trade may have a large effect on the environment. One of the main modern
criticisms to the sustainability of capitalism is related to the so called
commodity chains, or production/consumption chains. These terms refer to the
network of transfers of materials and commodities that is currently part of the
functioning of the global capitalist system. Examples include high tech
commodities produced in countries with low average wages by multinational
firms, and then being sold in distant high income countries; materials and
resources being extracted in some countries, turned into finished products in
some others and sold as commodities in further ones; countries exchanging with
each other the same kind of commodities for the sake of consumer's choice
(e.g., Europe both exporting and importing cars to and from the U.S.).
According to critics such processes, all of which produce pollution and waste
of resources, are an integral part of the functioning of capitalism (i.e., its
"metabolism"). Some leading conservation organizations such as the World Wide
Fund for Nature and the United Nations Environment Programme argue that the
impact of humanity on Earth is continually increasing. In 2004 they jointly
reported that "humanity's Ecological Footprint grew by 150% between 1961 and
2000" and that most of this growth occurred in the 27 wealthiest countries of
the world, in other words, the leading capitalist countries. Critics note that
the statistical methods used in calculating Ecological Footprint have been
criticized and some find the whole concept of counting how much land is used to
be flawed, arguing that there is nothing intrinsically negative about using
more land to improve living standards (rejection of the intrinsic value of
nature). Many environmentalists have long argued that the real dangers are due
to the world's current social institutions that they claim promote
environmentally irresponsible consumption and production. Under what they call
the "grow or die" imperative of capitalism, they say, there is little reason to
expect hazardous consumption and production practices to change in a timely
manner. They also claim that markets and states invariably drag their feet on
substantive environmental reform, and are notoriously slow to adopt viable
sustainable technologies. Immanuel Wallerstein, referring to the
externalization of costs as the "dirty secret" of capitalism, claims that there
are built-in limits to ecological reform, and that the costs of doing business
in the world capitalist economy are ratcheting upward because of deruralization
and democratization. Beyond environmental sustainability, there is the question
of labor market and consumer market sustainability. In a constant-growth model,
new individuals have to be constantly added to the free market economy (as
labourers and/or consumers). With birth rates in decline, where will these new
consumers and (cheap) labourers come from? History. According to contemporary
critics of capitalism, rapid industrialization in Europe created working
conditions viewed as unfair, including: 14-hour work days, child labor, and
shanty towns. Some modern economists argue that average living standards did
not improve, or only very slowly improved, before 1840. Early socialist
thinkers rejected capitalism altogether, attempting to create socialist
communities free of the perceived injustices of early capitalism. Among these
utopian socialists were Charles Fourier and Robert Owen. In 1848, Karl Marx and
Frederich Engels released the "Communist Manifesto", which outlined a political
and economic critique of capitalism based on the philosophy of historical
materialism. Pierre-Joseph Proudhon a contemporary of Marx was another notable
critic of capitalism, and was one of the first to call himself an anarchist. By
the early 20th century, myriad socialist tendencies (e.g., anarcho-syndicalism,
social democracy and Bolshevism) had arisen based on different interpretations
of current events. Governments also began placing restrictions on market
operations and created interventionist programs, attempting to ameliorate
perceived market shortcomings (e.g., Keynesian economics and the New Deal).
Starting with the 1917 Russian revolution, Communist states increased in
numbers, and a Cold War started with the developed capitalist nations.
Following the Revolutions of 1989, many of these Communist states adopted
market economies. The notable exceptions to this trend have been North Korea,
Cuba, and Venezuela, the latter instituting a philosophy referred to as
"Socialism of the 21st century". Criticisms. Marxian criticisms. Karl Marx saw
capitalism as a historical stage, once progressive but which would eventually
stagnate due to internal contradictions and would eventually be followed by
socialism. Karl Marx claimed that capitalism was nothing more than a necessary
stepping stone for the progression of man, which would then face a political
revolution before embracing the classless society. Marxists define capital as
"a social, economic relation" between people (rather than between people and
things). In this sense they seek to abolish capital. They believe that private
ownership of the means of production enriches capitalists (owners of capital)
at the expense of workers ("the rich get richer, and the poor get poorer"). In
brief, they argue that the owners of the means of production do not work and
therefore exploit the workerforce. In Karl Marx's view, the capitalists would
eventually accumulate more and more capital impoverishing the working class,
creating the social conditions for a revolution that would overthrow the
institutions of capitalism. Private ownership over the means of production and
distribution is seen as a dependency of non-owning classes on the ruling class,
and ultimately a source of restriction of human freedom. Marxists have offered
various related lines of argument claiming that capitalism is a contradiction-
laden system characterized by recurring crises having a tendency towards
increasing severity. They have argued that this tendency of the system to
unravel combined with a socialization process that links workers in a worldwide
market are two major factors that create the objective conditions for
revolutionary change. Capitalism is seen as just one stage in the evolution of
the economic system. Immanuel Wallerstein, approaching matters from a world-
systems perspective, cites the intransigence of rising real wages, rising costs
of material inputs, and steadily rising tax rates, along with the rise of
popular antisystemic movements as the most important global secular trends
creating unprecedented limiting pressures on the accumulation of capital.
According to Wallerstein, "the capitalist world-economy has now entered its
terminal crisis, a crisis that may last up to fifty years. The real question
before us is what will happen during this crisis, this transition from the
present world-system to some other kind of historical system or systems."
Normative Marxism advocates for a revolutionary overthrow of capitalism that
would lead to socialism, before eventually transforming into communism after
class antagonisms and the state ceased to exist. Marxism influenced social
democratic and labour parties as well as some moderate democratic socialists,
who seek change through existing democratic channels instead of revolution, and
believe that capitalism should be regulated rather than abolished,
supplementing the market economy with a mixed economy. Marxist and feminist
geographers critique capitalism primarily on the basis of social and
environmental justice. Marxian development geographers analyse the
"contractions" of capitalism, class struggle, uneven development and
imperialism in the global South by employing historical-material analysis
(‘little d’ development). This work investigates patterns of accumulation,
class formation and politics in rural and urban areas, the role of the state,
struggles over resources and the articulation of peasant production with
agrarian capitalism. Feminist political-economy researchers are interested in
the ways that these processes are gendered and also take into account a serious
consideration of social reproduction in concern with capitalist production
processes. In mainland China differences in terminology sometimes confuse and
complicate discussions of Chinese economic reform. Under Marxist ideology,
capitalism refers to a stage of history in which there is a class system in
which the proletariat is exploited by the bourgeoisie. Officially, according to
the Chinese governments State ideology, China is currently in the primary stage
of socialism with Chinese characteristics. However, because of Deng Xiaoping's
and subsequent leaders Chinese economic reforms, instituting pragmatism within
policy, China has undertaken policies that are commonly considered
capitalistic, including employing wage labor, increasing unemployment to
motivate those who are still working, transforming state owned enterprises into
joint stock companies, and encouraging the growth of the joint venture and
private capitalist sectors. A contrary Marxist view would describe China as
just another variant of capitalism (state capitalism), much like the former
USSR, which was also claiming to be operating on principals of socialism. This
is echoed by what Mao Tse-Tung termed "capitalist roaders" who he argued
existed within the ruling Party structures and would try to restore the
bourgeoisie and thus their class interests to power reflected in new policies,
while only keeping the outer appearance of socialism for legitimacy purposes.
Deng Xiaoping was identified as one of these "capitalist roaders" during the
Chinese Cultural Revolution, when he was placed under house arrest. Social
anarchist criticisms. Some social anarchists argue that capitalist ethics do
not entail any positive moral obligation to help others in need. Libertarian
socialist Noam Chomsky writes: "The idea of 'free contract' between the
potentate and his starving subject is a sick joke, perhaps worth some moments
in an academic seminar exploring the consequences of (in my view, absurd)
ideas, but nowhere else." Other critics regard private property to either be an
aggressive institution or a potentially aggressive one, rather than a defensive
one, and thus reject claims that relationships based on unequal private
property relations could be voluntary. Anarchists generally regard capitalism
as hierarchical and exploitative. Socialist criticisms. Socialists argue that
the accumulation of capital generates waste through externalities that require
costly corrective regulatory measures. They also point out that this process
generates wasteful industries and practices that exist only to generate
sufficient demand for products to be sold at a profit (such as high-pressure
advertisement); thereby creating rather than satisfying economic demand.
Socialists argue that capitalism consists of irrational activity, such as the
purchasing of commodities only to sell at a later time when their price
appreciates, rather than for consumption, even if the commodity cannot be sold
at a profit to individuals in need; therefore, a crucial criticism often made
by socialists is that "making money", or accumulation of capital, does not
correspond to the satisfaction of demand (the production of use-values). The
fundamental criterion for economic activity in capitalism is the accumulation
of capital for reinvestment in production; this spurs the development of new,
non-productive industries that don't produce use-value and only exist to keep
the accumulation process afloat (otherwise the system goes into crisis), such
as the spread of the financial industry, contributing to the formation of
economic bubbles. Socialists view private property relations as limiting the
potential of productive forces in the economy. According to socialists, private
property becomes obsolete when it concentrates into centralized, socialized
institutions based on private appropriation of revenue (but based on
cooperative work and internal planning in allocation of inputs) until the role
of the capitalist becomes redundant. With no need for capital accumulation and
a class of owners, private property in the means of production is perceived as
being an outdated form of economic organization that should be replaced by a
free association of individuals based on public or common ownership of these
socialized assets. Private ownership imposes constraints on planning, leading
to uncoordinated economic decisions that result in business fluctuations,
unemployment and a tremendous waste of material resources during crisis of
overproduction. Excessive disparities in income distribution lead to social
instability and require costly corrective measures in the form of
redistributive taxation, which incurs heavy administrative costs while
weakening the incentive to work, inviting dishonesty and increasing the
likelihood of tax evasion while (the corrective measures) reduce the overall
efficiency of the market economy. These corrective policies limit the incentive
system of the market by providing things such as minimum wages, unemployment
insurance, taxing profits and reducing the reserve army of labor, resulting in
reduced incentives for capitalists to invest in more production. In essence,
social welfare policies cripple the capitalism and its incentive system and are
thus unsustainable in the long-run. Marxists argue that the establishment of a
socialist mode of production is the only way to overcome these deficiencies.
Socialists and specifically Marxian socialists, argue that the inherent
conflict of interests between the working class and capital prevent optimal use
of available human resources and leads to contradictory interest groups (labor
and business) striving to influence the state to intervene in the economy in
their favor at the expense of overall economic efficiency. Early socialists
(Utopian socialists and Ricardian socialists) criticized capitalism for
concentrating power and wealth within a small segment of society that controls
the means of production and derives its wealth through a system of
exploitation. This creates a stratified society based on unequal social
relations that fails to provide equal opportunities for every individual to
maximize their potential, and does not utilise available technology and
resources to their maximum potential in the interests of the public. Religious
criticisms. Many religions have criticized or opposed specific elements of
capitalism; traditional Judaism, Christianity, and Islam forbid lending money
at interest. Christianity has been a source of both praise and criticism for
capitalism, particularly its materialist aspects. The first socialists drew
many of their principles from Christian values, against "bourgeois" values of
profiteering, greed, selfishness, and hoarding. Some Christian critics of
capitalism may not oppose capitalism entirely, but support a mixed economy in
order to ensure adequate labor standards and relations, as well as economic
justice. Pope Benedict XVI issued an encyclical Caritas in veritate (Charity in
Truth) in 2009; he stated: "The dignity of the individual and the demands of
justice require, particularly today, that economic choices do not cause
disparities in wealth to increase in an excessive and morally unacceptable
manner." and "Therefore, it must be borne in mind that grave imbalances are
produced when economic action, conceived merely as an engine for wealth
creation, is detached from political action, conceived as a means for pursuing
justice through redistribution." Islamic law recognizes the right to private
property but regulates economic activities. A 2.5% alms tax (Zakat) is levied
on all gold, crops, and cattle. Shia Twelver Muslims pay an additional 20% on
all savings (defined as income minus expenses on necessities like food and
shelter.) Usury or riba is forbidden, and religious law encourages the use of
capital to spur economic activity while placing the burden of risk along with
the benefit of profit with the owner of the capital. Methods of Islamic banking
have been developed. The Islamic constitution of Iran, which was drafted mostly
by Islamic clerics, criticizes "materialist schools of thought" that encourage
"concentration and accumulation of wealth and maximization of profit." Sayyid
Qutb, an Islamist writer, criticized capitalism in his 1951 book "The Battle
Between Islam and Capitalism".
