Criticism of debt This article is about criticism of, and arguments against
debt. There are many arguments against debt as an instrument and institution,
on a personal, family, social, corporate and governmental level. Usually these
refer to conditions under which debt should not be used as a solution, e.g. to
fund consumption for survival. Consumer debt and public debt deal with some of
these issues. Calls for debt relief to the developing countries have been more
and more insistent since the 1980s Latin American debt crisis, and, more
recently, the Argentine economic crisis. Developing countries' debt has often
been qualified as an odious debt and a mean of neocolonialism, in particular by
"third-worldism" ("tiers-mondisme") and the more recent alter-globalization
movement. Economics. Debt is a major source of money creation in modern
economies. Some economists, especially the Austrian school believe that
fractional reserve banking should not be allowed and banks should not be
allowed to lend money deposited in their accounts by individuals, unless they
approve so. Money creation should either be banned (Austrian school) or be a
government privilege. Fluctuations in debt levels are the same as fluctuation
in optimism (boom) and pessimism (bust). The middle path is to be advocated at
the individual or collective level. In boom times, the debt/GDP ratio rises,
this prepares tough times ahead, as sooner or later people are bound to realise
that the reality does not match their irrealistic expectations, then they
collectively stop to lend and borrow, bankruptcies and debt deflation follow.
Religion. The Biblical books of Deuteronomy (23:20) and Leviticus (25:37)
explicitly prohibit lending at interest, and are the source of two of the 613
mitzvot (Maimonides #534 & #535), the commands of God to the Jewish people.
According to Proverbs 22:7, "The rich rule over the poor, and the borrower is
slave of the lender". NRSV Christian philosophy has historically also been
concerned with these very issues, and the Catholic Church prohibited lending at
interest throughout most of the Middle Ages. The words for sin and debt are the
same in Aramaic, and the Lord's Prayer can be read as "redeem us from our
debts, as we redeem our debitors." The French philosopher Simone Weil has
argued that debt is evil, because it leads us to the false belief that the past
(a promise to pay later for instance) give us right to a certain future (a
given money sum at a given date). God wants us to remain in the present, in His
presence, so it is supposed that debt is something which moves us away from the
feeling of God's instantaneous presence. Islamic economics, concerned with the
equity of distribution of these things and the potential for unrest if simple
luck is permitted to cause some to starve while others prosper, simply for
having held a safer debt asset through a catastrophe, has alternative
instruments that do not obligate repayment in the sense of debt but instead act
as a joint venture type instrument. The justification for this is a hadith
which states as a rule of trade: ""nothing present for that which is absent"".
This avoids the problems of the devaluted asset or bad debt becoming a source
of unrest later on, should it be devalued or defaulted through no fault of the
borrower.
