Cross elasticity of demand formula_1. A negative cross elasticity denotes two
products that are complements, while a positive cross elasticity denotes two
substitute products. These two key relationships go against one's intuition,
but the reason behind them is fairly simple: assume products A and B are
"complements", meaning that an increase in the demand for A is caused by an
increase in the quantity demanded for B. Therefore, if the price of product B
decreases, then the demand curve for product A shifts to the right, increasing
A's demand, resulting in a "negative" value for the cross elasticity of demand.
The exact opposite reasoning holds for substitutes. Formula. The formula used
to calculate the coefficient cross elasticity of demand is Results for main
types of goods. In the example above, the two goods, fuel and cars (consists of
fuel consumption), are "complements"; that is, one is used with the other. In
these cases the cross elasticity of demand will be "negative", as shown by the
decrease in demand for cars when the price for fuel will rise. In the case of
perfect substitutes, the cross elasticity of demand is equal to positive
infinity. Where the two goods are "independent", or, as described in consumer
theory, if a good is independent in demand then the demand of that good is
independent of the quantity consumed of all other goods available to the
consumer, the cross elasticity of demand will be "zero": as the price of one
good changes, there will be no change in demand for the other good. When goods
are substitutable, the diversion ratio, which quantifies how much of the
displaced demand for product "j" switches to product "i", is measured by the
ratio of the cross-elasticity to the own-elasticity multiplied by the ratio of
product "i"s demand to product "j"s demand. In the discrete case, the diversion
ratio is naturally interpreted as the fraction of product "j" demand which
treats product "i" as a second choice, measuring how much of the demand
diverting from product "j" because of a price increase is diverted to product
"i" can be written as the product of the ratio of the cross-elasticity to the
own-elasticity and the ratio of the demand for product "i" to the demand for
product "j". In some cases, it has a natural interpretation as the proportion
of people buying product "j" who would consider product "i" their "second
choice".
