Cross-cultural studies Cross-cultural studies, sometimes called holocultural
studies or comparative studies, is a specialization in anthropology and sister
sciences (sociology, psychology, economics, political science) that uses field
data from many societies to examine the scope of human behavior and test
hypotheses about human behavior and culture. Cross-cultural studies is the
third form of cross-cultural comparisons. The first is comparison of case
studies, the second is controlled comparison among variants of a common
derivation, and the third is comparison within a sample of cases. Unlike
comparative studies, which examines similar characteristics of a few societies,
cross-cultural studies uses a sufficiently large sample so that statistical
analysis can be made to show relationships or lack of relationships between the
traits in question. These studies are surveys of ethnographic data. Cross-
cultural studies are applied widely in the social sciences, particularly in
cultural anthropology and psychology. History of cross-cultural studies. The
first cross-cultural studies were carried out by Abū Rayhān Bīrūnī, who
wrote detailed comparative studies on the anthropology of religions, peoples
and cultures in the Middle East, Mediterranean and especially the Indian
subcontinent. He presented his findings with objectivity and neutrality using
cross-cultural comparisons. Extensive cross-cultural studies were later carried
out by 19th century anthroplogists such as Tylor and Morgan. One of Tylor's
first studies gave rise to the central statistical issue of cross-cultural
studies: Galton's problem. Modern era of cross-cultural studies. The modern era
of cross-cultural studies began with George Murdock (1949). Murdock set up a
number of foundational data sets, including the Human Relations Area Files, and
the "Ethnographic Atlas." Together with Douglas R. White, he developed the
widely used Standard Cross-Cultural Sample, currently maintained by the open
access electronic journal World Cultures.
