Culture jamming Culture jamming (name coined in 1984) is a tactic used by many
anti-consumerist social movements to disrupt or subvert media culture and its
mainstream cultural institutions, including corporate advertising. It purports
to "expose the methods of domination" of mass society to foster progressive
change. Culture jamming is often seen as a form of subvertising. Many culture
jams are intended to expose apparently questionable political assumptions
behind commercial culture. Common tactics include re-figuring logos, fashion
statements, and product images as a means to challenge the idea of "what's
cool" along with assumptions about the personal freedoms of consumption.
Culture jamming sometimes entails transforming mass media to produce ironic or
satirical commentary about mass media, using the original medium's
communication method. Culture jamming is usually employed in opposition to a
perceived appropriation of public space, or as a reaction against social
conformity. Prominent examples of culture jamming include the adulteration of
billboard advertising by the BLF and Ron English and the street parties and
protests organised by Reclaim the Streets. While most culture jamming focuses
on subverting or critiquing political or advertising messages, some
practitioners focus on a more positive, musically inspired form of jamming that
brings together artists, scholars and activists to create new forms of cultural
production that transcend rather than merely criticize or negate the status
quo. Terms sometimes used synonymously with the term "culture jamming" include
Guerrilla semiotics and night discourse Origins of the term, etymology and
history. Origins and preceding influences. According to Vince Carducci,
although the term was coined by Negativland, culture jamming can be traced as
far back as the 1950s. One particularly influential group that was active in
Europe was the Situationist International and was led by Guy Debord. Their main
argument was based on the idea that in the past humans dealt with life and the
consumer market directly. They argued that this spontaneous way of life was
slowly deteriorating as a direct result of the new "modern" way of life.
Situationists saw everything from television to radio as a threat. The cultural
critic Mark Dery traces the origins of culture jamming to medieval carnival,
which Mikhail Bakhtin interpreted, in "Rabelais and his World," as an
officially sanctioned subversion of the social hierarchy. Modern precursors
might include: the media-savvy agit-prop of the anti-Nazi photomonteur John
Heartfield, the sociopolitical street theater and staged media events of '60s
radicals such as Abbie Hoffman, the German concept of Spaßguerilla, and in the
Situationist International (SI) of the 1950s and '60s. The SI first compared
its own activities to radio jamming in 1968, when it proposed the use of
guerrilla communication within mass media to sow confusion within the dominant
culture. Mark Dery's New York Times article on culture jamming, "The Merry
Pranksters And the Art of the Hoax" was the first mention, in the mainstream
media, of the phenomenon; Dery later expanded on this article in his 1993 Open
Magazine pamphlet, "Culture Jamming: Hacking, Slashing, and Sniping in the
Empire of the Signs", a seminal essay that remains the most exhaustive
historical, sociopolitical, and philosophical theorization of culture jamming
to date. Adbusters, a Canadian publication espousing an environmentalist
critique of consumerism, began promoting aspects of culture jamming after Dery
introduced editor Kalle Lasn to the term through a series of articles he wrote
for the magazine. In her critique of consumerism, "No Logo", the Canadian
cultural commentator and political activist Naomi Klein examines culture
jamming in a chapter that cites Dery and focuses on the work of Jorge
Rodriguez-Gerada. Tactics. Culture jamming is a form of disruption that plays
on the emotions of viewers and bystanders. Jammers want to disrupt the
unconscious thought process that takes place when most consumers view a popular
advertising and bring about a détournement. Activists that utilize this tactic
are counting on their meme to pull on the emotional strings of people and evoke
some type of reaction. The reactions that most cultural jammers are hoping to
evoke are behavioral change and political action. There are four emotions that
activists often want viewers to feel. These emotions – shock, shame, fear,
and anger, are believed to be the catalysts for social change. The basic unit
in which a message is transmitted in culture jamming is the meme. Memes are
condensed images that stimulate visual, verbal, musical, or behavioral
associations that people can easily imitate and transmit to others. The term
meme was first popularized by geneticist Richard Dawkins but later used by
cultural critics such as Douglas Rushkoff that claimed memes were a type of
media virus. Memes are seen as genes that can jump from outlet to outlet and
replicate themselves or mutate upon transmission just like a virus. Culture
jammers will often use common memes to such as the McDonald's golden arches or
Nike swoosh to engage people and force them to think about their eating habits
or fashion sense. In one example, jammer Jonah Perreti used the Nike symbol to
stir debate on sweatshop child labor and consumer freedom. Perreti made public
exchanges between himself and Nike over a disagreement. Perreti had requested
custom Nikes with the word "sweatshop" placed in the Nike symbol. Nike
naturally disagreed. Once this story was made public over Perreti's website it
spread world wide and sparked conversation and dialogue about Nike's use of
sweatshops. Jammers can also organize and participate in mass campaigns.
Examples of cultural jamming like Perreti's are more along the lines of tactics
that radical consumer social movements would use. These movements push people
to question the taken-for-granted assumption that consuming is natural and good
and aim to disrupt the naturalization of consumer culture; they also seek to
create systems of production and consumption that are more humane and less
dominated by global corporate hypercapitalism. Past mass events and ideas have
included "Buy Nothing Day", "Digital Detox Week", virtual sit-ins and protests
over the Internet, producing ‘subvertisements’ and placing them in public
spaces, and creating and enacting ‘placejamming’ projects where public
spaces are reclaimed and nature is re-introduced into urban places. The most
effective form of jamming is to use an already widely recognizable meme to
transmit the message. Once viewers are forced to take a second look at the
mimicked popular meme they are forced out of their comfort zone. Viewers are
presented with another way to view the meme and forced to think about the
implications presented by the jammer. More often than not, when this is used as
a tactic the jammer is going for shock value. For example, to make consumers
aware of the negative body image that big name apparel brands are causing, a
subvertisement of Calvin Klein's 'Obsession' was created and played world wide.
It depicted a young woman with an eating disorder throwing up into a toilet.
Another way that social consumer movements hope to utilize culture jamming
effectively is by employing a metameme. A metameme is a two-level message that
punctures a specific commercial image, but does so in a way that challenges
some larger aspect of the political culture of corporate domination. An example
would be the "true cost" campaign set in motion by Adbusters. "True Cost"
forced consumers to compare the human labor cost and conditions and
environmental drawbacks of products to the sales costs. Another example would
be the "Truth" campaigns that frequented television in the past years that
exposed the deception tobacco companies used to sell their products. Criticism.
Culture jamming is sometimes confused with artistic appropriation or with acts
of vandalism which have destruction or defacement as their primary goal.
Although the end result is not always easily distinguishable from these
activities, the intent of those participating in culture jamming differs from
that of people whose intent is either artistic or merely destructive. The lines
are not always clear-cut; some activities, notably street art, will fall into
two or even all three categories. Recently there have been arguments against
the validity and effectiveness of culture jamming. Some argue that culture
jamming is easily co-opted and commodified by the market, which tends to
"defuse" its potential for consumer resistance. Others posit that the culture
jamming strategy of rhetorical sabotage, used by Adbusters, is easily
incorporated and appropriated by clever advertising agencies, and thus is not a
very powerful means of social change. Yet other critics argue that without
moving beyond mere critique to offering an alternative economic, social,
cultural and/or political vision, jams quickly lose their power and resonance.
