Cultural hegemony In Marxist philosophy, cultural hegemony describes the
domination of a culturally diverse society by the ruling class, who manipulate
the culture of the society — the beliefs, explanations, perceptions, values,
and mores — so that their "Weltanschauung" becomes the worldview that is
imposed and accepted as the cultural norm; as the universally valid dominant
ideology that justifies the social, political, and economic "status quo" as
natural and inevitable, perpetual and beneficial for everyone, rather than as
artificial social constructs that benefit only the ruling class. As a
philosophy term and as a sociology term, "cultural hegemony" derived from the
Ancient Greek word "hegemony" (leadership and rule), the geopolitical method of
indirect imperial dominance, with which the "hegemon" (leader state) rules
subordinate states, by the implied means of power, the threat of the threat of
intervention, rather than by direct military force, that is, invasion,
occupation, and annexation. Background. Etymologic. In Ancient Greece (8th c.
BC – AD 6th c.), "hegemony" (leadership) denoted the politico–military
dominance of a city-state upon other city-states, as in the Hellenic League. In
the 19th century, hegemony (rule) denoted the geopolitical and cultural
predominance of one country upon other countries, as in the European
colonialism imposed in the Americas, Africa, and Asia. In the 20th century, the
political-science denotation of hegemony (dominance) expanded to include the
ruling-class cultural domination of a socially stratified society. By
manipulating the culture (values and mores) of the society, the ruling class
can intellectually dominate the other social classes with an imposed worldview
that ideologically justifies the social, political, and economic "status quo"
as natural and normal, inevitable and perpetual. Historical. In 1848, Karl Marx
proposed that the economic recessions and practical contradictions of a
capitalist economy would provoke the working class to proletarian revolution,
depose capitalism, restructure societal institutions (economic, political,
social) per rational, socialist models, and thus begin the transition to a
communist society. Therefore, the dialectical changes to the functioning of the
economy of a society determine its social superstructures (culture and
politics), and the composition of its economic and social classes. To that end,
Antonio Gramsci proposed a "strategic distinction", between a War of Position
and a War of Manœuvre. The war of position is an intellectual and cultural
struggle wherein the anti-capitalist revolutionary creates a proletarian
culture whose native value system counters the cultural hegemony of the
bourgeoisie. The proletarian culture will increase class consciousness, teach
revolutionary theory and historical analysis, and thus propagate further
revolutionary organisation among the social classes. On winning the war of
position, socialist leaders would then have the necessary political power and
popular support to begin the political manœuvre warfare of revolutionary
socialism. Cultural hegemony. The initial, theoretic application of cultural
domination was as an analysis of economic class, which Antonio Gramsci
developed to comprehend social class; hence, cultural hegemony proposes that
the prevailing cultural norms of a society, which are imposed by the ruling
class (bourgeois cultural hegemony), must not be perceived as natural and
inevitable, but must be recognized as artificial social constructs
(institutions, practices, beliefs) that must be investigated to discover their
roots as instruments of social-class domination. That such praxis of knowledge
is indispensable for the intellectual liberation of the proletariat, so that
urban workers and peasants can create their own culture, which specifically
addresses their social and economic needs as social classes. In a society,
cultural hegemony is neither a monolithic, intellectual praxis, nor a unified
system of values, but a complex of stratified social structures, wherein each
social and economic class has a societal purpose and an internal class-logic
that allows its members to behave in a way that is particular and different
from the behaviours of the members of other social classes, whilst co-existing
with them as constituents of the society. As a result of their different social
purposes, the classes will be able to coalesce into a society with a greater
social mission. In a person (man, woman, child) perceiving the social
structures of cultural hegemony, personal common sense has a dual structural
role (personal and public), thus, individual men and women apply personal
common sense to cope with daily life, and to explain (to themselves) the small
segment of the social order stratum that they experience as ″life in
society″, i.e. the "status quo". Publicly, the perceptual limitations of
common sense emerge and inhibit individual perception of the greater nature of
the systematic socio-economic exploitation made possible by cultural hegemony.
Because of the discrepancy in perceiving the "status quo" — the socio-
economic hierarchy of bourgeois culture — most men and women concern
themselves with their immediate (personal) concerns, rather than (publicly)
think about and question the fundamental sources of their social and economic
oppression, and consequent social and personal discontents. At the personal
level, cultural hegemony is perceptible; although each person in a society
lives a meaningful life in his or her social class, to him or her, the discrete
classes might appear to have little in common with individual private life.
Yet, when perceived as a whole society, the life of each person does contribute
to the greater societal hegemony. Although social diversity, economic variety,
and political freedom appear to exist — because most people "see" different
life-circumstances — they are incapable of perceiving the greater hegemonic
pattern created when the lives they witness coalesce as a society. The cultural
hegemony is manifested in and maintained by an existence of minor, different
circumstances that are not always fully perceived by the men and the women
living the culture. (See: "Entfremdung", Karl Marx's theory of alienation)
Gramsci’s intellectual influence. Cultural hegemony much influenced
Eurocommunism, the social sciences, and the activist politics of socially
liberal and progressive politicians. The analytic discourse of cultural
hegemony is important to research and synthesis in anthropology, political
science, sociology, and cultural studies; in education, cultural hegemony
developed critical pedagogy. In 1967, the German student movement leader Rudi
Dutschke reformulated Gramsci’s philosophy of cultural hegemony with the
phrase "Der lange Marsch durch die Institutionen" (The long march through the
institutions), denoting the war of position, in allusion to the Long March
(1934–35) of the Communist Chinese People's Liberation Army.
