Currency In economics, currency is a generally accepted medium of exchange.
These are usually the coins and banknotes of a particular government, which
comprise the physical aspects of a nation's money supply. The other part of a
nation's money supply consists of bank deposits (sometimes called deposit
money), ownership of which can be transferred by means of cheques, debit cards,
or other forms of money transfer. Deposit money and currency are money in the
sense that both are acceptable as a means of payment. Direct exchange of
commodities such as precious metals, furs, grain, etc. in early human societies
led to the first money proper in early civilizations. Until modern times,
precious metals such as gold or silver typically were used to retain the
commodity nature of the store of value function of money. However, nearly all
contemporary monetary systems are based on fiat money. Usually, a government
declares its currency (including notes and coins issued by the central bank) to
be legal tender, making it unlawful to not accept it as a means of repayment
for all debts, public and private. In major modern economies such as those of
the United States or the Euro Zone, most money is electronic, but the
"currency" of these polities may, depending on context, include all money or
just specie (i.e., various physical representations of money). History. Early
currency. Currency evolved from two basic innovations, both of which had
occurred by 2000 BC. Originally money was a form of receipt, representing grain
stored in temple granaries in Sumer in ancient Mesopotamia, then Ancient Egypt.
This first stage of currency, where metals were used to represent stored value,
and symbols to represent commodities, formed the basis of trade in the Fertile
Crescent for over 1500 years. However, the collapse of the Near Eastern trading
system pointed to a flaw: in an era where there was no place that was safe to
store value, the value of a circulating medium could only be as sound as the
forces that defended that store. Trade could only reach as far as the
credibility of that military. By the late Bronze Age, however, a series of
treaties had established safe passage for merchants around the Eastern
Mediterranean, spreading from Minoan Crete and Mycenae in the northwest to Elam
and Bahrain in the southeast. Although it is not known what functioned as a
currency to facilitate these exchanges, it is thought that ox-hide shaped
ingots of copper, produced in Cyprus may have functioned as a currency. It is
thought that the increase in piracy and raiding associated with the Bronze Age
collapse, possibly produced by the Peoples of the Sea, brought this trading
system to an end. It was only with the recovery of Phoenician trade in the
ninth and tenth centuries BC that saw a return to prosperity, and the
appearance of real coinage, possibly first in Anatolia with Croesus of Lydia
and subsequently with the Greeks and Persians. In Africa many forms of value
store have been used including beads, ingots, ivory, various forms of weapons,
livestock, the manilla currency, ochre and other earth oxides, and so on. The
manilla rings of West Africa were one of the currencies used from the 15th
century onwards to buy and sell slaves. African currency is still notable for
its variety, and in many places various forms of barter still apply. Coinage.
These factors led to the shift of the store of value being the metal itself: at
first silver, then both silver and gold, at one point there was bronze as well.
Now we have copper coins and other non-precious metals as coins. Metals were
mined, weighed, and stamped into coins. This was to assure the individual
taking the coin that he was getting a certain known weight of precious metal.
Coins could be counterfeited, but they also created a new unit of account,
which helped lead to banking. Archimedes' principle provided the next link:
coins could now be easily tested for their fine weight of metal, and thus the
value of a coin could be determined, even if it had been shaved, debased or
otherwise tampered with (see Numismatics). In most major economies using
coinage, copper, silver and gold formed three tiers of coins. Gold coins were
used for large purchases, payment of the military and backing of state
activities. Silver coins were used for midsized transactions, and as a unit of
account for taxes, dues, contracts and fealty, while copper coins represented
the coinage of common transaction. This system had been used in ancient India
since the time of the Mahajanapadas. In Europe, this system worked through the
medieval period because there was virtually no new gold, silver or copper
introduced through mining or conquest. Thus the overall ratios of the three
coinages remained roughly equivalent. Paper money. In premodern China, the need
for credit and for circulating a medium that was less of a burden than
exchanging thousands of copper coins led to the introduction of paper money,
commonly known today as banknotes. This economic phenomenon was a slow and
gradual process that took place from the late Tang Dynasty (618–907) into the
Song Dynasty (960–1279). It began as a means for merchants to exchange heavy
coinage for receipts of deposit issued as promissory notes from shops of
wholesalers, notes that were valid for temporary use in a small regional
territory. In the 10th century, the Song Dynasty government began circulating
these notes amongst the traders in their monopolized salt industry. The Song
government granted several shops the sole right to issue banknotes, and in the
early 12th century the government finally took over these shops to produce
state-issued currency. Yet the banknotes issued were still regionally valid and
temporary; it was not until the mid 13th century that a standard and uniform
government issue of paper money was made into an acceptable nationwide
currency. The already widespread methods of woodblock printing and then Pi
Sheng's movable type printing by the 11th century was the impetus for the
massive production of paper money in premodern China. At around the same time
in the medieval Islamic world, a vigorous monetary economy was created during
the 7th–12th centuries on the basis of the expanding levels of circulation of
a stable high-value currency (the dinar). Innovations introduced by Muslim
economists, traders and merchants include the earliest uses of credit, cheques,
promissory notes, savings accounts, transactional accounts, loaning, trusts,
exchange rates, the transfer of credit and debt, and banking institutions for
loans and deposits. In Europe, paper money was first introduced in Sweden in
1661. Sweden was rich in copper, thus, because of copper's low value,
extraordinarily big coins (often weighing several kilograms) had to be made.
The advantages of paper currency were numerous: it reduced transport of gold
and silver, and thus lowered the risks; it made loaning gold or silver at
interest easier, since the specie (gold or silver) never left the possession of
the lender until someone else redeemed the note; and it allowed for a division
of currency into credit and specie backed forms. It enabled the sale of stock
in joint stock companies, and the redemption of those shares in paper. However,
these advantages held within them disadvantages. First, since a note has no
intrinsic value, there was nothing to stop issuing authorities from printing
more of it than they had specie to back it with. Second, because it increased
the money supply, it increased inflationary pressures, a fact observed by David
Hume in the 18th century. The result is that paper money would often lead to an
inflationary bubble, which could collapse if people began demanding hard money,
causing the demand for paper notes to fall to zero. The printing of paper money
was also associated with wars, and financing of wars, and therefore regarded as
part of maintaining a standing army. For these reasons, paper currency was held
in suspicion and hostility in Europe and America. It was also addictive, since
the speculative profits of trade and capital creation were quite large. Major
nations established mints to print money and mint coins, and branches of their
treasury to collect taxes and hold gold and silver stock. At this time both
silver and gold were considered legal tender, and accepted by governments for
taxes. However, the instability in the ratio between the two grew over the
course of the 19th century, with the increase both in supply of these metals,
particularly silver, and of trade. This is called bimetallism and the attempt
to create a bimetallic standard where both gold and silver backed currency
remained in circulation occupied the efforts of inflationists. Governments at
this point could use currency as an instrument of policy, printing paper
currency such as the United States Greenback, to pay for military expenditures.
They could also set the terms at which they would redeem notes for specie, by
limiting the amount of purchase, or the minimum amount that could be redeemed.
By 1900, most of the industrializing nations were on some form of gold
standard, with paper notes and silver coins constituting the circulating
medium. Private banks and governments across the world followed Gresham's Law:
keeping gold and silver paid, but paying out in notes. This did not happen all
around the world at the same time, but occurred sporadically, generally in
times of war or financial crisis, beginning in the early part of the 20th
century and continuing across the world until the late 20th century, when the
regime of floating fiat currencies came into force. One of the last countries
to break away from the gold standard was the United States in 1971. No country
anywhere in the world today has an enforceable gold standard or silver standard
currency system. Banknote era. A banknote (more commonly known as a bill in the
United States and Canada) is a type of currency, and commonly used as legal
tender in many jurisdictions. With coins, banknotes make up the cash form of
all money. Banknotes are mostly paper, but Australia's Commonwealth Scientific
and Industrial Research Organisation developed the world's first polymer
currency in the 1980s that went into circulation on the nation's bicentenary in
1988. Now used in some 22 countries (over 40 if counting commemorative issues),
polymer currency dramatically improves the life span of banknotes and prevents
counterfeiting. Modern currencies. To find out which currency is used in a
particular country, check list of circulating currencies. Currency use is based
on the concept of lex monetae; that a sovereign state decides which currency it
shall use. Currently, the International Organization for Standardization has
introduced a three-letter system of codes (ISO 4217) to define currency (as
opposed to simple names or currency signs), in order to remove the confusion
that there are dozens of currencies called the dollar and many called the
franc. Even the pound is used in nearly a dozen different countries, all, of
course, with wildly differing values. In general, the three-letter code uses
the ISO 3166-1 country code for the first two letters and the first letter of
the name of the currency (D for dollar, for instance) as the third letter.
United States currency, for instance is globally referred to as USD. It is also
possible for a currency to be internet-based and digital, for instance, a
Bitcoin, the Ripple Pay system or Mintchip, and not tied to any specific
country. The International Monetary Fund uses a variant system when referring
to national currencies. Control and production. In most cases, a central bank
has monopoly control over emission of coins and banknotes (fiat money) for its
own area of circulation (a country or group of countries); it regulates the
production of currency by banks (credit) through monetary policy. In order to
facilitate trade between these currency zones, there are different exchange
rates, which are the prices at which currencies (and the goods and services of
individual currency zones) can be exchanged against each other. Currencies can
be classified as either floating currencies or fixed currencies based on their
exchange rate regime. In cases where a country does have control of its own
currency, that control is exercised either by a central bank or by a Ministry
of Finance. In either case, the institution that has control of monetary policy
is referred to as the monetary authority. Monetary authorities have varying
degrees of autonomy from the governments that create them. In the United
States, the Federal Reserve System operates without direct oversight by the
legislative or executive branches. A monetary authority is created and
supported by its sponsoring government, so independence can be reduced by the
legislative or executive authority that creates it. Several countries can use
the same name for their own distinct currencies (for example, "dollar" in
Australia, Canada and the United States). By contrast, several countries can
also use the same currency (for example, the euro), or one country can declare
the currency of another country to be legal tender. For example, Panama and El
Salvador have declared U.S. currency to be legal tender, and from 1791–1857,
Spanish silver coins were legal tender in the United States. At various times
countries have either re-stamped foreign coins, or used currency board issuing
one note of currency for each note of a foreign government held, as Ecuador
currently does. Each currency typically has a main currency unit (the dollar,
for example, or the euro) and a fractional currency, often valued at of the
main currency: 100 cents = 1 dollar, 100 centimes = 1 franc, 100 pence = 1
pound, although units of or are also common. Some currencies do not have any
smaller units at all, such as the Icelandic króna. Mauritania and Madagascar
are the only remaining countries that do not use the decimal system; instead,
the Mauritanian ouguiya is divided into 5 khoums, while the Malagasy ariary is
divided into 5 iraimbilanja. In these countries, words like "dollar" or "pound"
"were simply names for given weights of gold." Due to inflation khoums and
iraimbilanja have in practice fallen into disuse. (See non-decimal currencies
for other historic currencies with non-decimal divisions). Local currencies. In
economics, a local currency is a currency not backed by a national government,
and intended to trade only in a small area. Advocates such as Jane Jacobs argue
that this enables an economically depressed region to pull itself up, by giving
the people living there a medium of exchange that they can use to exchange
services and locally produced goods (In a broader sense, this is the original
purpose of all money.) Opponents of this concept argue that local currency
creates a barrier which can interfere with economies of scale and comparative
advantage, and that in some cases they can serve as a means of tax evasion.
Local currencies can also come into being when there is economic turmoil
involving the national currency. An example of this is the Argentinian economic
crisis of 2002 in which IOUs issued by local governments quickly took on some
of the characteristics of local currencies. One of the best examples of a local
currency is the original LETS currency, founded on Vancouver Island in the
early 1980s. In 1982 the Canadian Central Bank’s lending rates ran up to 14%
which drove chartered bank lending rates as high as 19%. The resulting currency
and credit scarcity left island residents with few options other than to create
a local currency. See also. Related concepts Accounting units Lists
