Curvilinear Disparity The Special Law of Curvilinear Disparity is a theory, put
forward by the political scientist John D. May, which posits that the rank and
file members of a political party tend to be more ideological than both the
leadership of that party and its voters. May contends that politically active
people can be classified into three major strata or echelons according to their
relative status within a party. Members of these divergent strata have
contrasting motivations for being politically active and calibrate their
ideological stances to differing extents as a result. Party strata. The three
strata are: The Party Elite, The Middle-Elite (or Sub-Leaders) and the Non-
Elite. Curvilinear disparity refers to the disparity in radicalism between the
middle-elite and both the party elite and the non-elite. Party elite. The party
elite consists of members of parliament, members of the governing executive,
party candidates, convention delegates and members of the national executive
committee. This strata usually consists of full-time professional politicians
who depend on elections to safeguard or further their careers. As a
consequence, they have strong incentives to prioritise electoral success over
personal ideological convictions. Members of the party elite are viewed as
being rational actors whose primary motivation stems from their desire to be
re-elected. As rationally self-interested politicians interested in vote
maximisation, members of the political elite adopt moderate viewpoints in order
to appeal to the median voter. These assumptions are in line with other
established theories in political science, including the median voter theorem.
The concept of "the median voter" is usually applied to political systems
featuring First-past-the-post electoral systems. In these systems, the highest
polling candidate is elected to represent each single-member electoral
district. This system differs from proportional representation, which features
more elaborate voting procedures and multi-member electoral districts. As there
can be only one winning candidate in each electoral district in First-past-the-
post elections, there is an incentive for voters to support viable candidates
and not "waste" their vote on hopefuls who have little chance of success. As a
result, it is much harder for smaller parties to gain representation in
parliament. Ultimately, there is a tendency for two-party systems to develop,
as voters coalesce around potential winning candidates. This tendency is known
as Duverger's law. In this kind of political landscape, in which there are two
viable political parties, party elites tend to favour "big tent" electoral
strategies that appeal to a broad range of the electorate rather than aiming
for an ideological niche. While curvilinear disparity is typically associated
with the Anglo-American political experience, however, it can theoretically
occur in any large party. Middle-elite / sub-leaders. The party middle-elite
consists of loyal party voters, party members, and regional or local office
holders. Unlike the party elite, this strata usually consists of volunteers and
part-time members who are not as directly affected by the electoral success of
the party. Since they willingly volunteer their free-time to political activism
and campaigning, the middle-elite often tend to hold more deeply embedded
ideological beliefs than both the party elite and non-elite (or floating
voters). The middle-elite tend to be strongly emotionally and psychologically
invested in politics and seek to project their ideological convictions to the
party elite and the public at large. Non-elite. The non-elite consists of
ordinary voters who occasionally give the party their support. The non-elite
are not as emotionally invested in the political process as the middle-elite
and are less likely to be motivated by ideological concerns. It is considered
to be the least ideological of the three strata, consisting of rational actors
who support the party which adopts political stances closest to their own
personal leanings (again, in concordance with the median voter theorem).
Examples. The British Labour Party. Under the leadership of Tony Blair, the
British Labour Party shifted towards a market-oriented approach to political
campaigning. This caused an ideological fissure within the party between
advocates of the New Labour approach and traditional supporters. In terms of
electoral strategy, the New Labour approach involved tailoring the "political
brand" of the party to suit the preferences of the electorate. These
preferences were chiefly ascertained by focus group studies and opinion polls.
In effect, market-oriented campaigning assisted the Labour Party in making its
policies consistent with the preferences of the median voter. “In the old
days the idea of the Labour Party was defined by a series of policy positions
– unilateral disarmament, exit from the European Union, opposition to the
sale of council houses and nationalisation. The question then arose as to
whether that range of policies were right for the current era. The whole
odyssey that the Labour Party took from 1979 to 1997 was an attempt to face up
to the fact that the electorate thought that these sets of policies were not
things that should govern this country. Some people didn’t go down that
odyssey of change and they remain as a group that is of no significance at all
in the political life of the country.” Using May's terminology, the advocates
of the New Labour approach can be regarded as the party elite, whereas the
disaffected members can be viewed as the middle-elite, with the latter being
more ideologically motivated and less moderate than the former. The primary
concern of the party elite was to ensure the future electability of the party,
having learned lessons and modified policy in response to prior electoral
failures. The main objective of the middle-elite, however, was to preserve the
socialist ideological heritage of the party and represent its traditional core
constituencies (i.e. unions and the working class), regardless of the electoral
consequences. There are some inconsistencies involved, in transposing May's
typology to this example. Some of the critics of the New Labour project (such
as Tony Benn), for example, were members of parliament and therefore
theoretically part of the party elite themselves. Analysis and criticism. There
is a lack of consensus among political scientists over the frequency and extent
to which Curvilinear Disparity takes place. In a study by Kitschelt and
Hellemans (1990), it is posited that whether Curvilinear Disparity occurs (and,
if so, to what extent) depends on the degree to which "ideologues... capture
less highly valued positions" within a party. In an analysis of the subject by
Norris (1995), however, British party elites were found on average to be more
ideologically motivated than both the middle-elite and the non-elite, contrary
to theoretical expectations.
