Daniel Patrick Moynihan Daniel Patrick Moynihan (March 16, 1927 – March 26,
2003) was an American politician and sociologist. A member of the Democratic
Party, he was first elected to the United States Senate for New York in 1976,
and was re-elected three times (in 1982, 1988, and 1994). He declined to run
for re-election in 2000. Prior to his years in the Senate, Moynihan was the
United States' Ambassador to the United Nations and to India, and was a member
of four successive presidential administrations, beginning with the
administration of John F. Kennedy, and continuing through that of Gerald Ford.
Early life and education. Moynihan was born in Tulsa, Oklahoma, the son of
Margaret Ann (née Phipps), a homemaker, and John Henry Moynihan, a reporter
for a daily newspaper in Tulsa. He and his brother, Michael Willard Moynihan,
spent most of their childhood summers at his grandfather's farm in Bluffton,
Indiana. After high school, Moynihan worked as a longshoreman before entering
City College of New York (CCNY), which at that time provided free higher
education. After a year at CCNY, he joined the United States Navy, receiving V-
12 officer training at Tufts University, where he graduated with a B.A. He was
on active duty from 1944 to 1947, last serving as gunnery officer of the USS
"Quirinus". He received an M.A. and Ph.D. in sociology from the Fletcher School
of Law and Diplomacy, also at Tufts. Moynihan then studied as a Fulbright
fellow at the London School of Economics. Many years later, he received an
honorary Doctor of Laws degree from Tufts. Political career. Moynihan's
political career started in the 1950s when he served as a member of New York
governor Averell Harriman's staff, a stint which ended following Harriman's
loss to Nelson Rockefeller in the 1958 general election. Two years later,
Moynihan was a delegate to the 1960 Democratic National Convention as part of
John F. Kennedy's delegate pool. Assistant Secretary of Labor; controversy over
the War on Poverty. Moynihan was an Assistant Secretary of Labor for policy in
the Kennedy Administration and in the early part of the Lyndon Johnson
Administration. In that capacity, he did not have operational responsibilities,
allowing him to devote all of his time to trying to formulate national policy
for what would become the War on Poverty. He had a small staff including Paul
Barton, Ellen Broderick, and Ralph Nader (who at 29 years of age, hitchhiked to
Washington, D.C. and got a job working for Moynihan in 1963). They took
inspiration from the book "Slavery" written by Stanley Elkins. Elkins
essentially contended that slavery had made black Americans dependent on the
dominant society, and that that dependence still existed a century later. This
supported the concept that government must go beyond simply ensuring that
members of minority groups have the same rights as the majority but must also
"act affirmatively" in order to counter the problem. Moynihan's research of
Labor Department data demonstrated that even as fewer people were unemployed,
more people were joining the welfare rolls. These recipients were families with
children but only one parent (almost invariably the mother). The laws at that
time permitted such families to receive welfare payments in certain parts of
the United States. Moynihan issued his research under the title "", now
commonly known as "The Moynihan Report". Moynihan's report fueled a debate over
the proper course for government to take with regard to the economic
underclass, especially blacks. Critics on the left attacked it as "blaming the
victim", a slogan coined by psychologist William Ryan. Some suggested that
Moynihan was propagating the views of racists because much of the press
coverage of the report focused on the discussion of children being born out of
wedlock. Despite Moynihan's warnings, the Aid to Families with Dependent
Children (AFDC) program included rules for payments only if the "Man out of the
house." (See Man out of the house (welfare rule).) Critics said that the nation
was paying poor women to throw their husbands out of the house. Moynihan
supported Richard Nixon's idea of a Guaranteed Annual Income (GAI). Daniel
Patrick Moynihan had significant discussions concerning a Basic Income
Guarantee with Russell B. Long and Louis O. Kelso. After the 1994 Republican
sweep of Congress, Moynihan agreed that correction was needed for a welfare
system that possibly encouraged women to raise their children without fathers:
"The Republicans are saying we have a helluva problem, and we do." Local New
York City politics and academic career. By the 1964 election, Moynihan was
politically supporting Robert F. Kennedy. For this reason he was not favored by
then-President Johnson, and he left the Johnson Administration in 1965. He ran
for office in the Democratic Party primary for the presidency of the New York
City Council, a position now known as the New York City Public Advocate.
However, he was defeated by Queens District Attorney Frank D. O'Connor. He then
became Director of the Harvard–MIT Joint Center for Urban Studies. With
turmoil and riots in the United States, Moynihan, "a national board member of
ADA incensed at the radicalism of the current anti-war and Black Power
movements" descided to "call for a formal alliance between liberals and
conservatives," and wrote that the next administration would have to be able to
unite the nation again. Nixon Administration. Connecting with President-elect
Richard Nixon in 1968, Moynihan joined Nixon's White House Staff as Counselor
to the President for Urban Affairs. He was very influential at that time, and
was one of the few people in Nixon's inner circle who had done academic
research related to social policies. In 1969, on the initiative of Nixon, NATO
tried to establish a third civil column, establishing a hub of research and
initiatives in the civil area, dealing as well with environmental topics.
Moynihan named Acid Rain and the Greenhouse effect as suitable international
challenges to be dealt by NATO. NATO was chosen, since the organization had
suitable expertise in the field, as well as experience with international
research coordination. The German government was skeptical and saw the
initiative as an attempt by the US to regain international terrain after the
lost Vietnam War. The topics gained momentum in civil conferences and
institutions. In 1970, Moynihan wrote a memo to President Nixon saying, "The
time may have come when the issue of race could benefit from a period of
'benign neglect.' The subject has been too much talked about. The forum has
been too much taken over to hysterics, paranoids, and boodlers on all sides. We
need a period in which Negro progress continues and racial rhetoric fades."
[http://www.aol.bartleby.com/73/1579.html] He argued that Nixon's conservative
tactics (particularly the speeches of Vice-President Spiro Agnew) were playing
into the hands of radicals. Moynihan regretted that critics misinterpreted his
memo as advocating that the government should neglect minorities. UN
Ambassador. Nixon appointed Moynihan as United States Ambassador to India,
where he served from 1973 to 1975. The relationship between the two countries
was at a low point. Ambassador Moynihan was alarmed that two great democracies
were cast as antagonists, and set out to fix things. He proposed that part of
the burdensome debt be written off, part used to pay for US embassy expenses in
India, and the remaining converted into Indian rupees to fund an Indo-US
cultural and educational exchange program that lasted for a quarter century. On
February 18, 1974, he presented to the Government of India a check for
16,640,000,000 rupees, which is equivalent to $2,046,700,000, which was the
greatest amount paid by a single check in the history of banking. The "Rupee
Deal" is logged in the Guinness Book of World Records for the world's largest
check, written by Ambassador Moynihan to Prime Minister Indira Gandhi.
President Gerald Ford appointed him as the United States Ambassador to United
Nations (UN), serving a rotation as President of the United Nations Security
Council in 1976. As ambassador, Moynihan took a hardline anti-communist stance,
in line with the agenda of the White House at the time. He was also
consistently a strong supporter of Israel, condemning UN Resolution 3379, which
declared Zionism to be a form of racism--a position that earned him a death
threat from the Permanent PLO Observer to the UN, Zehdi Terzi. He served as
Ambassador to the UN from June 1975 until February 1976. Later, he said he had
defended a "shameless" Cold War policy toward East Timor. Moynihan's thinking
began to change during his tenure at the UN In his 1993 book on nationalism,
"Pandaemonium", he wrote that as time progressed, he began to view the Soviet
Union in less ideological terms. He regarded it less as an expansionist,
imperialist Marxist state, and more as a weak realist state in decline. He
believed it was most motivated by self-preservation. This view would influence
his thinking in subsequent years, when he became an outspoken proponent of the
then-unpopular view that the Soviet Union was a failed state headed for
implosion. Nevertheless, for the duration of his tenure as ambassador, Moynihan
continued his hardline rhetoric, which he describes in "Pandaemonium" as
extreme: "I became something of an embarrassment to my own government, and
fairly soon left before I was fired." Career in the Senate. In 1976, Moynihan
was elected to the U.S. Senate from the State of New York, defeating U.S.
Representative Bella Abzug, Ramsey Clark, Paul O'Dwyer and Abraham Hirschfeld
in the Democratic primary, and Conservative Party incumbent James L. Buckley in
the general election. Shortly after election, Moynihan analyzed the State of
New York's budget to determine whether it was paying out more in federal taxes
than it received in spending. Finding that it was, he produced a yearly report
known as the "Fisc" (from the French). Moynihan's strong support for Israel
while UN Ambassador may have increased support for him among the state's Jewish
population. Moynihan's strong advocacy for New York's interests in the Senate,
buttressed by the "Fisc" reports and recalling his strong advocacy for US
positions in the UN, did at least on one occasion allow his advocacy to
escalate into a physical attack. Senator Kit Bond, nearing retirement in 2010,
recalled with some embarrassment in a conversation on civility in political
discourse that Moynihan had once "slugged on the Senate floor after Bond
denounced an earmark Moynihan had slipped into a highway appropriations bill.
Some months later Moynihan apologized, and the two occasionally would relax in
Moynihan’s office after a long day to discuss their shared interest in urban
renewal over a glass of port." Moynihan continued to be interested in foreign
policy as a Senator, sitting on the Select Committee on Intelligence. His
strongly anti-Soviet views became far more moderate, as he emerged as a critic
of the Ronald Reagan Administration's hawkish Cold War policies, such as
support for the Contras in Nicaragua. Moynihan argued there was no active
Soviet-backed conspiracy in Latin America, or anywhere. He suggested the
U.S.S.R. was suffering from massive internal problems, such as rising ethnic
nationalism and a collapsing economy. In a December 21, 1986 editorial in the
"New York Times", Moynihan predicted the imminent collapse of the Soviet Union.
He blasted the Reagan Administration's "consuming obsession with the expansion
of Communism – which is not in fact going on." In a September 8, 1990 letter
to Erwin Griswold, Moynihan wrote: "I have one purpose left in life; or at
least in the Senate. It is to try to sort out what would be involved in
reconstituting the American government in the aftermath of the cold war. Huge
changes took place, some of which we hardly notice.” Moynihan introduced
Section 1706 of the Tax Reform Act of 1986, which cost certain professionals
(like computer programmers, engineers, draftspersons, and designers) who
depended on intermediary agencies (consulting firms) a self-employed tax status
option, but other professionals (like accountants and lawyers) continued to
enjoy Section 530 exemptions from payroll taxes. This change in the tax code
was expected to offset the tax revenue losses of other legislation that
Moynihan proposed to change the law of foreign taxes of Americans working
abroad. Joseph Stack, who flew his airplane into a building housing IRS offices
on February 18 of 2010, posted a suicide note that, among many factors,
mentioned the Section 1706 change to the Internal Revenue Code. In the mid-
1990s, Moynihan was one of the Democrats to support the ban on the procedure
known as partial-birth abortion. He said of the procedure: "I think this is
just too close to infanticide. A child has been born and it has exited the
uterus. What on Earth is this procedure?" Earlier in his career in the Senate,
Moynihan had expressed his annoyance with the adamantly pro-choice interest
groups petitioning him and others on the issue. He challenged them saying, "you
women are ruining the Democratic Party with your insistence on abortion."
Moynihan broke with orthodox liberal positions of his party on numerous
occasions. As chairman of the Senate Finance Committee, in the 1990s, he
strongly opposed President Bill Clinton's proposal to expand health care
coverage to all Americans. Seeking to focus the debate over health insurance on
the financing of health care, Moynihan garnered controversy by stating that
"there is no health care crisis in this country." He voted against the death
penalty, the flag desecration amendment, the balanced budget amendment, the
Private Securities Litigation Reform Act, the Defense of Marriage Act, the
Communications Decency Act, and the North American Free Trade Agreement. He was
critical of proposals to replace the progressive income tax with a flat tax.
Moynihan surprised many in 1991 when he voted against authorization of the Gulf
War. Despite his earlier writings on the negative effects of the welfare state,
he surprised many people again by voting against welfare reform in 1996. He was
sharply critical of the bill and certain Democrats who crossed party lines to
support it. Public speaker. Moynihan was a popular public speaker with a
distinctly patrician style. He had some peculiar mannerisms of speech, in the
form of slight stuttering and drawn-out vowels for emphasis. Linguist Geoff
Nunberg compared his speaking style to that of William F. Buckley, Jr.
Commission on Government Secrecy. In the Post–Cold War Era, the 103rd
Congress enacted legislation directing an inquiry into the uses of government
secrecy. Moynihan chaired the Commission. The Committee studied and made
recommendations on the "culture of secrecy" that pervaded the United States
government and its intelligence community for 80 years, beginning with the
Espionage Act of 1917, and made recommendations on the statutory regulation of
classified information. The Committee's findings and recommendations were
presented to the President in 1997. As part of the effort, Moynihan secured
release from the Federal Bureau of Investigation of its classified Venona file.
This file documents the FBI's joint counterintelligence investigation, with the
United States Signals Intelligence Service, into Soviet espionage within the
United States. Much of the information had been collected and classified as
secret information for over 50 years. After release of the information,
Moynihan authored "Secrecy: The American Experience" where he discussed the
impact government secrecy has had on the domestic politics of America for the
past half century, and how myths and suspicion created an unnecessary partisan
chasm. Career as scholar. In addition to his career as a politician and a
diplomat, Moynihan worked as a sociologist. He was Director of the Joint Center
for Urban Studies at Harvard University and the Massachusetts Institute of
Technology, as well as a Fellow on the faculty in the Center for Advanced
Studies at Wesleyan University from 1964 to 1967. In magazines such as
"Commentary" and "The Public Interest", he published articles on urban ethnic
politics and on the problems of the poor in cities of the Northeast. Moynihan
coined the term "professionalization of reform," by which the government
bureaucracy thinks up problems for government to solve rather than simply
responding to problems identified elsewhere. Soon after his 1971 return to
Harvard, having served two years in the Nixon White House as Counselor to the
President, Moynihan became a professor in the Department of Government. In 1983
he was awarded the Hubert H. Humphrey Award given by the American Political
Science Association "in recognition of notable public service by a political
scientist." He wrote 19 books, leading his personal friend, columnist and
former professor George F. Will, to remark that Dr. Moynihan "wrote more books
than most senators have read." He also joined the Maxwell School of Citizenship
and Public Affairs as a public administration faculty after retiring from the
Senate. Moynihan's scholarly accomplishments led Michael Barone, writing in the
"Almanac of American Politics" to describe the senator as "the nation's best
thinker among politicians since Lincoln and its best politician among thinkers
since Jefferson." Moynihan's 1993 article, "Defining Deviancy Down", was
notably controversial. Death and posthumous honors. In 2003, Moynihan died at
the age of 76 after complications (infection) suffered from an emergency
appendectomy about a month earlier. He was survived by his wife of 39 years,
Elizabeth Brennan Moynihan, three grown children: Timothy Patrick Moynihan,
Maura Russell Moynihan, and John McCloskey Moynihan; and two grandchildren,
Michael Patrick and Zora Olea.
