Dan Siegel (attorney) Daniel Mark Siegel, or Dan Siegel, is a civil-rights
attorney at the Oakland-based law firm, Siegel & Yee, and former legal adviser
to Oakland Mayor Jean Quan. He specializes in employment and labor law. Early
Life and Education. Siegel was born and raised in New York City and on Long
Island. He attended high school in New York, graduating second in his class. He
attended Hamilton College (New York) in 1963-1967 majoring in Philosophy and
Religion; he received his B.A. degree there in 1967, graduating magna cum
laude. Law School. Siegel attended UC Berkeley's Boalt Hall from 1967-1970.
Student Activism. Siegel was a student activist in 1967-1970 while he attended
UC Berkeley's University of California, Berkeley, School of Law. He was also a
leader in the local Students for a Democratic Society. As UC Berkeley Student
President-Elect in 1969, Siegel is known for his role in the student rebellion
on "Bloody Thursday," when thousands of students clashed with hundreds of
California Highway Patrol officers and Alameda County sheriff's deputies sent
by the office of then-California governor Ronald Reagan to assert control over
a piece of property known as "People's Park." During a rally on Sproul Plaza on
that day, May 15, 1969, Siegel received the microphone as the crowd of 3,000
agitated to reclaim their community space, and when he yelled "Take the park!"
a riot ensued that ended with authorities firing at demonstrators, killing one.
State Bar of California controversy. Upon receiving his J.D. degree from the
University of California School of Law in 1970 and passing the California bar
examination, Siegel was denied a license to practice law by a subcommittee of
the State Bar of California. He appealed the subcommittee's decision, taking
his appeal to the California Supreme Court, which overruled the State Bar and
found that Siegel possessed the requisite "moral character" to practice law.
Professional career. Siegel & Yee. Today, Siegel is a civil rights attorney at
the Oakland-based law firm, Siegel & Yee. In recent years, he has won a series
of high-profile sexual harassment and employment discrimination lawsuits, and
has represented clients such as the National Union of Healthcare Workers. He
has served as both general counsel and Interim Executive Director of the
Pacifica Radio Foundation, and has currently serves as a director on both the
Pacifica National Board and the Local Station Board of KPFA-FM in Berkeley. In
2006 he completed an eight-year tenure on the Oakland Unified School District
Board of Directors. Institute for Policy Studies. According to KeyWiki's
article on Siegel, Siegel was a founder of the New American Movement and is
listed among "former fellows, project co-ordinators and staff" of the Institute
for Policy Studies. City of Oakland. Siegel, a long-time friend of Oakland
Mayor Jean Quan, served as her Legal Adviser until November 14, 2011, when he
resigned in protest. Siegel subsequently announced, via Twitter: "No longer
Mayor Quan's legal advisor. Resigned at 2 am. Support Occupy Oakland, not the
1% and its government facilitators." The "San Francisco Chronicle" described
Siegel as "one of Oakland's most active and vocal police critics". Personal
life. Siegel and his wife, Anne Butterfield Weills, have lived in Oakland since
1977. Weills is an attorney who is listed "of counsel" at Siegel & Yee. Weills
has two sons and a grandson. Her younger son, Michael Siegel, graduated from
Skyline High School in 1995 and is an associate attorney with Siegel & Yee.
Before becoming an attorney, Michael was a teacher in the Oakland Unified
School District. Anne Butterfield Weills (b. March 14, 1942) is the second
child of John C.S. Weills III and Audrey Davis. Weills' older son is
Christopher Weills Scheer (b. September 8, 1968).
