Debate Debate is contention in argument; dispute, controversy; discussion; esp.
the discussion of questions of public interest in Parliament or in any
assembly. Debate is a method of interactive and representational argument.
Debate is a broader form of argument than deductive reasoning, which only
examines whether a conclusion is a consequence of premisses, and factual
argument, which only examines what is or isn't the case, or rhetoric which is a
technique of persuasion. Though logical consistency, factual accuracy and some
degree of emotional appeal to the audience are important elements of the art of
persuasion, in debating, one side often prevails over the other side by
presenting a superior "context" and/or framework of the issue, which is far
more subtle and strategic. The outcome of a debate depends upon consensus or
some formal way of reaching a resolution, rather than the objective facts as
such. In a formal debating contest, there are rules for participants to discuss
and decide on differences, within a framework defining how they will interact.
Debating is commonly carried out in many assemblies of various types to discuss
matters and to make resolutions about action to be taken, often by a vote.
Deliberative bodies such as parliaments, legislative assemblies, and meetings
of all sorts engage in debates. In particular, in parliamentary democracies a
legislature debates and decides on new laws. Formal debates between candidates
for elected office, such as the leaders debates and the U.S. presidential
election debates, are sometimes held in democracies. Debating is also carried
out for educational and recreational purposes, usually associated with
educational establishments. The major goal of the study of debate as a method
or art is to develop the ability to debate rationally from either position with
equal ease. Informal debate is a common occurrence, the quality and depth of a
debate improves with knowledge and skill of its participants as debaters. The
outcome of a contest may be decided by audience vote, by judges, or by some
combination of the two. Debates are often organized for purely competitive
purposes. Debating for decision-making. Parliamentary Debate. In parliaments
and other legislatures, members debate proposals regarding legislation, vote,
and make resolutions which become laws. Debate between candidates for high
office. In jurisdictions which elect holders of high political office such as
president or prime minister, candidates sometimes debate in public, usually
during a general election campaign. U.S. presidential debates. Since the 1976
general election, debates between presidential candidates have been a part of
U.S. presidential campaigns. Unlike debates sponsored at the high school or
collegiate level, the participants, format, and rules are not independently
defined. Nevertheless, in a campaign season heavily dominated by television
advertisements, talk radio, sound bites, and spin, they still offer a rare
opportunity for citizens to see and hear the major candidates side by side. The
format of the presidential debates, though defined differently in every
election, is typically more restrictive than many traditional formats,
forbidding participants to ask each other questions and restricting discussion
of particular topics to short time frames. The presidential debates were
initially moderated in 1976, 1980, 1984 by the League of Women Voters, but The
Commission on Presidential Debates (CPD) was established in 1987 by the
Republican and Democratic parties. Its primary purpose is to sponsor and
produce debates for the United States presidential and vice presidential
candidates and to undertake research and educational activities relating to the
debates. The organization, which is a nonprofit, nonpartisan corporation,
sponsored all the presidential debates in 1988, 1992, 1996, 2000 and 2004.
However, in announcing its withdrawal from sponsoring the debates, the League
of Women Voters stated that it was withdrawing "because the demands of the two
campaign organizations would perpetrate a fraud on the American voter." In
2004, the Citizens' Debate Commission was formed in the hope of establishing an
independent sponsor for presidential debates, with a more voter-centric role in
the definition of the participants, format, and rules. Educational debating.
Competitive debate. In competitive debates teams compete, and one is judged the
winner by some criteria. There are many different styles of competitive debate,
organizations and rules. One purpose is to train young people who may in future
be required to debate and resolve matters. Competitive debate is carried out at
local, national, and international level. In schools and colleges competitive
debate often takes the form of a contest with explicit rules. It may be
presided over by one or more judges. Each side seeks to win, following the
rules. Each side is either in favor of ("for, 'Affirmative' "), or opposed to
("against, 'Negative' "), a statement (proposition, moot or Resolution). The
"for" side must argue supporting the proposition; the "against" side must
refute these arguments sufficiently to warrant not adopting the proposition;
they are not required to propose any alternative. Forms of debate.
Parliamentary debate. Parliamentary Debate (sometimes referred to as "parli" in
the United States) is conducted under rules derived from British parliamentary
procedure. It features the competition of individuals in a multi-person
setting. It borrows terms such as "government" and "opposition" from the
British parliament (although the term "proposition" is sometimes used rather
than "government" when debating in the United Kingdom). Throughout the world,
parliamentary debate is what most countries know as "debating", and is the
primary style practiced in the United Kingdom, India, Greece and most other
nations. The premier event in the world of parliamentary debate, the World
Universities Debating Championship, is conducted in the British Parliamentary
style. Even within the United Kingdom, however, British Parliamentary style is
not used exclusively; the English-Speaking Union runs the national
championships for schools in a unique format, known as the 'Mace' format after
the name of the competition, while simultaneously using British Parliamentary
format for the national universities championships. British Parliamentary
debate. The British Parliamentary debating style involves 4 teams; two
"government" or "proposition" teams support the motion, and two "opposition"
teams oppose it. In a competitive round, the teams are ranked first through
fourth with the first place team receiving 3 points, the second receiving 2,
the third receiving 1 and the fourth place receiving no points. This is the
style used by the World University Debating Championships, or WUDC. Canadian
Parliamentary debate. The Canadian Parliamentary debating style involves one
"government" team and one "opposition" team. In competition, the motion is
traditionally "squirrelable". This means that the assigned motion is not
intended to be debated, and may even be a quote from a film or a song. The
government team then "squirrels" the motion into something debatable by making
a series of logical links between the proposed motion and the one they propose
to debate. This makes the debate similar to a prepared debate for the
government team and an impromptu debate for the opposition team. American
Parliamentary debate. In the United States the American Parliamentary Debate
Association is the oldest national parliamentary debating organization, based
on the East Coast and including all of the Ivy League. The more recently
founded National Parliamentary Debate Association (NPDA) is now the largest
collegiate sponsor. Oxford-Style debate. Derived from the Oxford Union debating
society of Oxford University, "Oxford-Style" debate is a formal, competitive
debate format featuring a sharply framed motion that is proposed by one side
and opposed by another. A winner is declared in an Oxford-Style debate either
by the majority or by which team has swayed more audience members between the
two votes. Oxford Style debates follow a formal structure which begins with
audience members casting a pre-debate vote on the motion that is either for,
against or undecided. Each panelist presents a seven-minute opening statement,
after which the moderator takes questions from the audience with inter-panel
challenges. Finally, each panelist delivers a two-minute closing argument, and
the audience delivers their second (and final) vote for comparison against the
first. Mace debate. This style of debate is prominent in Britain at schools
level. Two teams of two debate an affirmative motion (e.g. "This house would
give prisoners the right to vote",) which one team will propose and the other
will oppose. Each speaker will make a seven-minute speech in the order; 1st
Proposition, 1st Opposition, 2nd Proposition, 2nd Opposition. After the first
minute of each speech, members of the opposing team may request a 'point of
information' (POI). If the speaker accepts they are permitted to ask a
question. POI's are used to pull the speaker up on a weak point, or to argue
against something the speaker has said. However after 6 minutes, no more POI's
are permitted. After all four have spoken the debate will be opened to the
floor, in which members of the audience will put questions to the teams. After
the floor debate, one speaker from each team (traditionally the first speaker),
will speak for 4 minutes. In these summary speeches it is typical for the
speaker to answer the questions posed by the floor, answer any questions the
opposition may have put forward, before summarising his or her own key points.
In the Mace format, emphasis is typically on analytical skills, entertainment,
style and strength of argument. The winning team will typically have excelled
in all of these areas. Public debate. The International Public Debate
Association (IPDA), inaugurated on February 15, 1997 at St. Mary's University
(Texas) in San Antonio, Texas, is a national debate league currently active in
the states of Arkansas, Louisiana, Kansas, Alabama, Texas, Mississippi,
Tennessee, Washington, Oregon, Idaho, Florida, and Oklahoma. Among
universities, IPDA is the fastest growing debate association within the United
States. Although evidence is used, the central focus of IPDA is to promote a
debate format that emphasizes public speaking and real-world persuasion skills
over the predominate use of evidence and speed. To further this goal, IPDA
predominantly uses lay judges in order to encourage an audience-centered debate
style. Furthermore, although the main goal of the debater is to persuade the
judge, IPDA also awards the best speakers within each tournament. IPDA offers
both team debate where two teams of two debate and individual debate. In both
team and individual debate a list of topics are given to the two sides thirty
minutes before the start of the round. A striking negotiation ensues to pick a
topic. The sides, one affirming the resolution and one negating the resolution,
then prepare an opening speech, a cross-examination of the other side, and
closing remarks for the round. While most member programs the International
Public Debate Association are associated with colleges or universities,
participation in IPDA tournaments is open to anyone whose education level is
equivalent to seventh-grade or higher. Australasia debate. Australasia style
debates consist of two teams who debate over an issue, more commonly called a
topic or proposition. The issue, by convention, is presented in the form of an
affirmative statement beginning with "That", for example, "That cats are better
than dogs," or "This House", for example, "This House would establish a world
government." The subject of topics varies from region to region. Most topics
however, are usually region specific to facilitate interest by both the
participants and their audiences. Each team has three members, each of whom is
named according to their team and speaking position within his/her team. For
instance the second speaker of the affirmative team to speak is called the
"Second Affirmative Speaker" or "Second Proposition Speaker", depending on the
terminology used. Each of the speakers' positions is based around a specific
role, the third speaker for example has the opportunity to make a rebuttal
towards the opposing teams argument introducing new evidence to add to their
position. The last speaker is called the "Team Advisor/Captain". Using this
style, the debate is finished with a closing argument by each of the first
speakers from each team and new evidence may not be introduced. Each of the six
speakers (three affirmative and three negative) speak in succession to each
other beginning with the Affirmative Team. The speaking order is as follows:
First Affirmative, First Negative, Second Affirmative, Second Negative, Third
Affirmative, and finally Third Negative. The context in which the Australasia
style of debate is used varies, but in Australia and New Zealand is mostly used
at the Primary and Secondary school level, ranging from small informal one-off
intra-school debates to larger more formal inter-school competitions with
several rounds and a finals series which occur over a year. World Universities
Peace Invitational Debate (WUPID). WUPID is an invitational tournament that
employs the BP or Worlds format of debating. It invites the top 30 debating
institutions in accordance to the list provided by the World Debate Website
administered by Colm Flynn. If any or some of the teams cannot participate than
replacements would be called in from the top 60 teams or based on strong
recommendations from senior members of the University Debating community. WUPID
was first held in December 2007 with Sydney University being crowned champion.
The second installation in 2008 saw Monash taking the trophy home. The third
WUPID will be held in University Putra Malaysia (UPM) in December 2009. The
first two tournaments were co-hosted by Univerisiti Kuala Lumpur (UNIKL). WUPID
was the brainchild of Daniel Hasni Mustaffa, Saiful Amin Jalun and Muhammad
Yunus Zakariah. They were all former debaters for UPM who took part at all
possible levels of debating from the Malaysian nationals to the World
Championship. Asian Universities Debating Championship. United Asian Debating
Championship is the biggest debating tournament in Asia, where teams from the
Middle East to Japan come to debate. It is traditionally hosted in southeast
Asia where participation is usually highest compared to other parts of Asia.
Asian debates are largely an adaptation of the Australasian format. The only
difference is that each speaker is given 7 minutes of speech time and there
will be points of information (POI) offered by the opposing team between the
2nd to 6th minutes of the speech. This means that the 1st and 7th minute is
considered the 'protected' period where no POIs can be offered to the speaker.
The debate will commence with the Prime Minister's speech (first proposition)
and will be continued by the first opposition. This alternating speech will go
on until the third opposition. Following this, the opposition bench will give
the reply speech. In the reply speech, the opposition goes first and then the
proposition. The debate ends when the proposition ends the reply speech. 4
minutes is allocated for the reply speech and no POI's can be offered during
this time. Policy debate. Policy debate is a form of speech competition in
which teams of two advocate for and against a resolution that typically calls
for policy change by the United States federal government or security
discourse. It is also referred to as cross-examination debate (sometimes
shortened to Cross-X, CX, or C-X) because of the 3-minute questioning period
following each constructive speech and the physical examination proceeding the
first rebuttals. Affirmative teams generally present a plan as a proposal for
implementation of the resolution. The negative will generally prove that it
would be better not to do the plan or that the opportunity costs to the plan
are so great that it should not be implemented. Classic debate. Classic debate
is a relatively new debate format, first created and primarily practiced in the
state of Minnesota. It was formed as an alternative to Policy debating. Certain
judges and coaches felt that the development of Policy had led it to become an
extremely specialized form of debate with heavy reliance on near-
incomprehensible speed in speaking and less emphasis on real-world arguments in
favor of "strategic" arguments that often bordered on the near-absurd. With a
structure similar to that of Policy, Classic debate emphasizes logic and real-
world discussion. For this reason, it is often nicknamed "Policy Lite". As
opposed to Policy, where each Affirmative proposes a new plan, Classic debate
is simpler: one resolution is chosen at the beginning of the season, which the
Affirmative affirms and Negative negates. The emphasis on depth instead of
breadth provided by the restriction can make for interesting rounds that often
come down to arguments that might otherwise pale in other formats. Conceptually
Classic debate is intended to develop skills that transfer directly to "real
world" debate settings. Classic has been accused as having an overt
conservative bias and rejecting the tropes of policy to a point that is
counter-intuitive. Extemporaneous debate. Extemporaneous debate is a style that
involves no planning in advance, and two teams with a first and second speaker.
While a majority of judges will allow debaters to cite current events and
various statistics (of which opponents may question the credibility) the only
research permitted are one or more articles given to the debaters along with
the resolution shortly before the debate. It begins with an affirmative first-
speaker constructive speech, followed by a negative; then an affirmative and
negative second-speaker constructive speech respectively. Each of these
speeches is six minutes in length, and is followed by two minutes of cross
examination. There is then an affirmative and negative first-speaker rebuttal,
and a negative and affirmative second-speaker rebuttal, respectively. These
speeches are each four minutes long. No new points can be brought into the
debate during the rebuttals. This style of debate generally centers around
three main contentions, although a team can occasionally use two or four. In
order for the affirmative side to win, all of the negative contentions must be
defeated, and all of the affirmative contentions must be left standing. Most of
the information presented in the debate must be tied in to support one of these
contentions, or "signposted". Much of extemporaneous debate is similar to the
form known as policy debate. One main difference, however, is that
extemporaneous debate focuses less on the implementation of the resolution.
Lincoln-Douglas debate. Lincoln-Douglas debate is primarily a form of United
States high school debate (though it also has a college form called NFA LD)
named after the Lincoln-Douglas Debates of 1858. It is a one-on-one event
focused mainly on applying philosophical theories to real world issues.
Debaters normally alternate sides from round to round as either the
"affirmative", which upholds the resolution, or "negative", which attacks it.
The resolution, which changes bimonthly, asks whether a certain policy or
action conforms to a specific value. Though established as an alternative to
policy debate, there has been a strong movement to embrace certain techniques
that originated in policy debate (and, correspondingly, a strong backlash
movement). Plans, counterplans, critical theory, postmodern theory, debate
about the theoretical basis and rules of the activity itself, and critics have
all reached more than occasional, if not yet universal, usage. Traditional L-
D debate attempts to be free of policy debate "jargon". Lincoln-Douglas
speeches can range from a conversational pace to well over 300 wpm (when trying
to maximize the number of arguments and depth of each argument's development).
This technique is known as spreading. There is also a growing emphasis on
carded evidence, though still much less than in policy debate. These trends
have created a serious rift within the activity between the debaters, judges,
and coaches who advocate or accept these changes, and those who vehemently
oppose them. Policy and Lincoln-Douglas debate tournaments are often held
concurrently at the same school. World Karl Popper Debate Championships. Each
year, the International Debate Education Association (IDEA) hosts an annual
Youth Forum, during which the World Karl Popper Debate Championships are held.
Nations from all around the world attend this Forum for the tournament, as well
as the 2-week debate training camp. Karl Popper debate, named after the famed
philosopher, is a widely used debate format in Eastern European and Central
Asian high schools. Originally created by the Open Society Institute as a more
flexible team debate format, Karl Popper debate has risen greatly in popularity
as the first format that many high school students learn. It focuses on
relevant and often deeply divisive propositions, emphasizing the development of
critical thinking skills, and tolerance for differing viewpoints. To facilitate
these goals, debaters work together in teams of three, and must research both
sides of each issue. Constructed similarly to the Oregon-Oxford debate format,
each side is given the opportunity to offer arguments and direct questions to
the opposing side. The first speakers of each side have 6 minutes to present
their constructive cases, or in the negative's case a rebuttal. The other 4
speakers each have 5 minutes to deliver a speech supporting their team's main
arguments. There is also an allotted 3 minutes after each of the first 4
speeches for cross-examination, during which the opposing team has a chance to
clarify what was stated in the preceding speech. Simulated legislature. High
school debate events such as Congressional Debate, Model United Nations,
European Youth Parliament, Junior State of America and the American Legion's
Boys/Girls State. Impromptu debate. Impromptu debate is a relatively informal
style of debate, when compared to other highly structured formats. The topic
for the debate is given to the participants between fifteen and twenty minutes
before the debate starts. The debate format is relatively simple; each team
member of each side speaks for five minutes, alternating sides. A ten-minute
discussion period, similar to other formats' "open cross-examination" time
follows, and then a five-minute break (comparable to other formats' preparation
time). Following the break, each team gives a 4-minute rebuttal. Public Forum
debate. Public Forum combines aspects of both Policy debate and Lincoln-Douglas
debate, with shorter speech lengths, but longer periods, called "cross-fires",
of interaction between the debaters. The basis of this type of debate is to
appeal for anyone who is eligible to become a jury member unlike Policy debate
or Lincoln-Douglas debate which requires experience in debate to judge. Paris-
style debating. This is a new, specifically French format. Two teams of five
debate on a given motion. One side is supposed to defend the motion while the
other must defeat it. The debate is judged on the quality of the arguments, the
strength of the rhetoric, the charisma of the speaker, the quality of the
humor, the ability to think on one's feet and, of course, the teamwork. The
first speaker of the Proposition (Prime Minister) opens the debate, followed by
the first speaker of the Opposition (Shadow Prime Minister), then the second
speaker of the Proposition and so on. Every speaker speaks for 6 minutes. After
the first minute and before the last minute, debaters from the opposite team
may ask Points of Information, which the speaker may accept or reject as he
wishes (although he is supposed to accept at least 2). The French Debating
Association organizes its National Debating Championship upon this style. Other
forms of debate. Online debating. With the increasing popularity and
availability of the Internet, differing opinions arise frequently. Though they
are often expressed via flaming and other forms of argumentation, which consist
primarily of assertions, there do exist formalized debating websites, typically
in the form of online forums or bulletin boards. The debate style is
interesting, as research and well thought out points and counterpoints are
possible because of the obvious lack of time restraints (although practical
time restraints usually are in effect, e.g., no more than 5 days between posts,
etc.). Forums are Moderated and welcome online debaters in a friendly format so
all may speak their pros and cons. Many people use this to strengthen their
points, or drop their weaker opinions on things, many times for debate in
formal debates (such as the ones listed above) or for fun arguments with
friends. The ease-of-use and friendly environments make new debaters welcome to
share their opinions in many communities. Some online debate communities and
forums practice Policy Debate through the use of uploaded speeches and preset
word counts to represent the time limits present in physical debate. These
virtual debates have the advantage of long periods of theoretical prep time, as
well as the ability to research during a round. There have been two World
Online Debating Championships, run by Debatewise and IDEA.
