Debt A debt is an obligation owed by one party (the debtor) to a second party,
the creditor; usually this refers to assets granted by the creditor to the
debtor, but the term can also be used metaphorically to cover moral obligations
and other interactions not based on economic value. A debt is created when a
creditor agrees to lend a sum of assets to a debtor. Debt is usually granted
with expected repayment; in modern society, in most cases, this includes
repayment of the original sum, plus interest. In finance, debt is a means of
using anticipated future purchasing power in the present before it has actually
been earned. Some companies and corporations use debt as a part of their
overall corporate finance strategy. Payment. Before a debt can be made, both
the debtor and the creditor must agree on the manner in which the debt will be
repaid, known as the standard of deferred payment. This payment is usually
denominated as a sum of money in units of currency, but can sometimes be
denominated in terms of goods or services. Payment can be made in increments
over a period of time, or all at once at the end of the loan agreement. Types
of debt. A company uses various kinds of debt to finance its operations. The
various types of debt can generally be categorized into: 1) secured and
unsecured debt, 2) private and public debt, 3) syndicated and bilateral debt,
and 4) other types of debt that display one or more of the characteristics
noted above. A debt obligation is considered secured, if creditors have
recourse to the assets of the company on a proprietary basis or otherwise ahead
of general claims against the company. Unsecured debt comprises financial
obligations, where creditors do not have recourse to the assets of the borrower
to satisfy their claims. Private debt comprises bank-loan type obligations,
whether senior or mezzanine. Public debt is a general definition covering all
financial instruments that are freely tradeable on a public exchange or over
the counter, with few if any restrictions. A basic loan or "term loan" is the
simplest form of debt. It consists of an agreement to lend a fixed amount of
money, called the principal sum or principal, for a fixed period of time, with
this amount to be repaid by a certain date. In commercial loans interest,
calculated as a percentage of the principal sum per year, will also have to be
paid by that date, or may be paid periodically in the interval, such as
annually or monthly. Such loans are also colloquially called bullet loans,
particularly if there is only a single payment at the end – the "bullet" –
without a "stream" of interest payments during the life of the loan. There are
many conventions on how interest is calculated – see day count convention for
some – while a standard convention is the annual percentage rate (APR),
widely used and required by regulation in the United States and United Kingdom,
though there are different forms of APR. In some loans, the amount actually
loaned to the debtor is less than the principal sum to be repaid; the
additional principal has the same economic effect as a higher interest rate
(see point), and is sometimes referred to as a , a play on "baker's dozen" –
owe twelve (a dozen), receive a loan of eleven (a banker's dozen). Note that
the effective interest rate is not equal to the discount: if one borrows $10
and must repay $11, then this is ($11–$10)/$10 = 10% interest; however, if
one borrows $9 and must repay $10, then this is ($10–$9)/$9 = 11 1/9%
interest. Rather than the entire principal amount of the loan being due at the
end of the loan, the principal may be slowly repaid or "amortized" over the
course of the loan – see amortizing loan. This is particularly common in
mortgages and in the minimum payment on credit cards. A syndicated loan is a
loan that is granted to companies that wish to borrow more money than any
single lender is prepared to risk in a single loan, usually many millions of
dollars. In such a case, a syndicate of banks can each agree to put forward a
portion of the principal sum. Loan syndication is a risk management tool that
allows the lead banks underwriting the debt to reduce their risk and free up
lending capacity. A bond is a debt security issued by certain institutions such
as companies and governments. A bond entitles the holder to repayment of the
principal sum, plus interest. Bonds are issued to investors in a marketplace
when an institution wishes to borrow money. Bonds have a fixed lifetime,
usually a number of years; with long-term bonds, lasting over 30 years, being
less common. At the end of the bond's life the money should be repaid in full.
Interest may be added to the end payment, or can be paid in regular
installments (known as coupons) during the life of the bond. Bonds may be
traded in the bond markets, and are widely used as relatively safe investments
in comparison to equity. Debt syndication. A syndicated loan is one that is
provided by a group of lenders and is structured, arranged, and administered by
one or several commercial banks or investment banks known as arrangers. Letters
of credit. The LC can also be the source of payment for a transaction, meaning
that redeeming the letter of credit will pay an exporter. Letters of credit are
used primarily in international trade transactions of significant value, for
deals between a supplier in one country and a customer in another. They are
also used in the land development process to ensure that approved public
facilities (streets, sidewalks, stormwater ponds, etc.) will be built. The
parties to a letter of credit are usually a beneficiary who is to receive the
money, the issuing bank of whom the applicant is a client, and the advising
bank of whom the beneficiary is a client. Almost all letters of credit are
irrevocable, i.e., cannot be amended or canceled without prior agreement of the
beneficiary, the issuing bank and the confirming bank, if any. In executing a
transaction, letters of credit incorporate functions common to giros and
Traveler's cheques. Typically, the documents a beneficiary has to present in
order to receive payment include a commercial invoice, bill of lading, and a
document proving the shipment was insured against loss or damage in transit.
However, the list and form of documents is open to imagination and negotiation
and might contain requirements to present documents issued by a neutral third
party evidencing the quality of the goods shipped, or their place of origin.
Accounting debt. In national accounting, debts are added according to those who
are indebted. Household debt is the debt held by households. "National" or
Public debt is the debt held by the various governmental institutions (federal
government, states, cities ...). Business debt is the debt held by businesses.
Financial debt is the debt held by the financial sector (from one financial
institution to another). Total debt is the sum of all those debts, excluding
financial debt to prevent double accounting. These various types of debt can be
computed in debt/GDP ratios. Those ratios help to assess the speed of
variations in the indebtness and the size of the debt due. For example, the USA
has a high consumer debt and a low public debt, while in eastern European
countries the opposite tends to be true. There are differences in the
accounting of debt for private and public agents. If a private agent promises
to pay something later, it has a debt, and this debt is enforceable by public
agents. If a public body passes a law stating that it'll pay something later (a
kind of promise), it keeps the right to change the law later (and not to pay).
This is why, for instance, the money governments promised to pay for
retirements does not show up in the public debt assessment, whereas the money
private companies promised to pay for retirements does. Securitization.
Securitization occurs when a company groups together assets or receivables and
sells them in units to the market through a trust. Any asset with a cashflow
can be securitized. The cash flows from these receivables are used to pay the
holders of these units. Companies often do this in order to remove these assets
from their balance sheets and monetize an asset. Although these assets are
"removed" from the balance sheet and are supposed to be the responsibility of
the trust, that does not end the company's involvement. Often the company
maintains a special interest in the trust which is called an "interest only
strip" or "first loss piece". Any payments from the trust must be made to
regular investors in precedence to this interest. This protects investors from
a degree of risk, making the securitization more attractive. The aforementioned
brings into question whether the assets are truly off-balance-sheet given the
company's exposure to losses on this interest. Inflation and exchange rates. As
noted below, debt is normally denominated in a particular monetary currency,
and so changes in the valuation of that currency can change the effective size
of the debt. This can happen due to inflation or deflation, so it can happen
even though the borrower and the lender are using the same currency. Thus it is
important to agree on standards of deferred payment in advance, so that a
degree of fluctuation will also be agreed as acceptable. It is for instance
common to agree to "US dollar denominated" debt. The form of debt involved in
banking accounts for a large proportion of the money in most industrialized
nations (see money, broad money, and demand deposits for a discussion of this).
There is therefore a relationship between inflation, deflation, the money
supply, and debt. The store of value represented by the entire economy of the
industrialized nation, and the state's ability to levy tax on it, acts to the
foreign holder of debt as a guarantee of repayment, since industrial goods are
in high demand in many places worldwide. Inflation indexed debt. Borrowing and
repayment arrangements linked to inflation-indexed units of account are
possible and are used in some countries. For example, the US government issues
two types of inflation-indexed bonds, Treasury Inflation-Protected Securities
(TIPS) and I-bonds. These are one of the safest forms of investment available,
since the only major source of risk – that of inflation – is eliminated. A
number of other governments issue similar bonds, and some did so for many years
before the US government. In countries with consistently high inflation,
ordinary borrowings at banks may also be inflation indexed. Metrics and
functions. Risk free interest rates. Lendings to stable financial entities such
as large companies or governments are often termed "risk free" or "low risk"
and made at a so-called "risk-free interest rate". This is because the debt and
interest are highly unlikely to be defaulted. A good example of such risk-free
interest is a US Treasury security – it yields the minimum return available
in economics, but investors have the comfort of the (almost) certain
expectation that the US Treasury will not default on its debt instruments. A
risk-free rate is also commonly used in setting floating interest rates, which
are usually calculated as the risk-free interest rate plus a bonus to the
creditor based on the creditworthiness of the debtor (in other words, the risk
of him or her defaulting and the creditor losing the debt). In reality, no
lending is truly risk free, but borrowers at the "risk free" rate are
considered the least likely to default. However, if the real value of a
currency changes during the term of the debt, the purchasing power of the money
repaid may vary considerably from that which was expected at the commencement
of the loan. So from a practical investment point of view, there is still
considerable risk attached to "risk free" or "low risk" lendings. The real
value of the money may have changed due to inflation, or, in the case of a
foreign investment, due to exchange rate fluctuations. The Bank for
International Settlements is an organisation of central banks that sets rules
to define how much capital banks have to hold against the loans they give out.
Ratings and creditworthiness. Specific bond debts owed by both governments and
private corporations is rated by rating agencies, such as Moody's, Fitch
Ratings Inc., A. M. Best and Standard & Poor's. The government or company
itself will also be given its own separate rating. These agencies assess the
ability of the debtor to honor his obligations and accordingly give him or her
a credit rating. Moody's uses the letters "Aaa Aa A Baa Ba B Caa Ca C", where
ratings "Aa-Caa" are qualified by numbers 1-3. Munich Re, for example,
currently is rated "Aa3" (). S&P and other rating agencies have slightly
different systems using capital letters and +/- qualifiers. A change in ratings
can strongly affect a company, since its cost of refinancing depends on its
creditworthiness. Bonds below Baa/BBB (Moody's/S&P) are considered junk- or
high risk bonds. Their high risk of default (approximately 1.6% for Ba) is
compensated by higher interest payments. Bad Debt is a loan that can not
(partially or fully) be repaid by the debtor. The debtor is said to default on
his debt. These types of debt are frequently repackaged and sold below face
value. Buying junk bonds is seen as a risky but potentially profitable form of
investment. Consolidation. Debt consolidation involves taking out one loan to
pay off many others, i.e. combining multiple loans into a single loan. It is
often done to secure a lower interest rate, secure a fixed interest rate, or
for the convenience of servicing only one loan. Cancellation. Short of
bankruptcy, it is rare that debts are wholly or partially relinquished.
Traditions in some cultures demand that this be done on a regular (often
annual) basis, in order to prevent systemic inequities between groups in
society, or anyone becoming a specialist in holding debt and coercing
repayment. An example is the Biblical Jubilee year, described in the Book of
Leviticus. Under English law, when the creditor is deceived into relinquishing
the debt, this is a crime under the Theft Act 1978. International Third World
debt has reached the scale that many economists are convinced that debt
cancellation is the only way to restore global equity in relations with the
developing nations. Effects of debt. Debt allows people and organizations to do
things that they would otherwise not be able, or allowed, to do. Commonly,
people in industrialised nations use it to purchase houses, cars and many other
things too expensive to buy with cash on hand. Companies also use debt in many
ways to leverage the investment made in their assets, "leveraging" the return
on their equity. This leverage, the proportion of debt to equity, is considered
important in determining the riskiness of an investment; the more debt per
equity, the riskier. For both companies and individuals, this increased risk
can lead to poor results, as the cost of servicing the debt can grow beyond the
ability to pay due to either external events (income loss) or internal
difficulties (poor management of resources). Excesses in debt accumulation have
been blamed for exacerbating economic problems. For example, prior to the
beginning of the Great Depression debt/GDP ratio was very high. Economic agents
were heavily indebted. This excess of debt, equivalent to excessive
expectations on future returns, accompanied asset bubbles on the stock markets.
When expectations corrected, deflation and a credit crunch followed. Deflation
effectively made debt more expensive and, as Fisher explained, this reinforced
deflation again, because, in order to reduce their debt level, economic agents
reduced their consumption and investment. The reduction in demand reduced
business activity and caused further unemployment. In a more direct sense, more
bankruptcies also occurred due both to increased debt cost caused by deflation
and the reduced demand. It is possible for some organizations to enter into
alternative types of borrowing and repayment arrangements which will not result
in bankruptcy. For example, companies can sometimes convert debt that they owe
into equity in themselves. In this case, the creditor hopes to regain something
equivalent to the debt and interest in the form of dividends and capital gains
of the borrower. The "repayments" are therefore proportional to what the
borrower earns and so can not in themselves cause bankruptcy. Once debt is
converted in this way, it is no longer known as debt. Etymology. The word comes
from the French "dette" and ultimately Latin "debere" (to owe), from "de
habere" (to have). The letter "b" in the word "debt" was reintroduced in the
18th century, possibly by Samuel Johnson in his Dictionary of 1755 – several
other words that had existed without a "b" had them reinserted at around that
time. History of debt. Debt is as old as economy. The anthropologist David
Graeber argues in that trade starts with some sort of credit namely the promise
to pay later for already handed over goods. Therefore credit and debt existed
even before coins. Criticisms. Some argue against debt as an instrument and
institution, on a personal, family, social, corporate and governmental level.
Islam forbids lending with interest even today, while the Catholic Church
allowed it from 1822 onwards, and the Torah states that all debts should be
erased every 7 years and every 50 years (in the Jubilee year, as described in
the Book of Leviticus). Debt will increase through time if it is not repaid
faster than it grows through interest. This effect may be termed usury, while
the term "usury" in other contexts refers only to an excessive rate of
interest, in excess of a reasonable profit for the risk accepted. In
international legal thought, Odious debt is debt that is incurred by a regime
for purposes that do not serve the interest of the state. Such debts are thus
considered by this doctrine to be personal debts of the regime that incurred
them and not debts of the state. In an economy with high interest rates, debt
will be more costly to a business than more flexible dividends on equity
investment. It may be easier for a struggling business to be financed through
equity investment as it may be possible to avoid paying a dividend if times are
hard. At the household level, debts can also have detrimental effects. In
particular when households make spending decisions assuming income to increase,
or remain stable, for the years to come. When households take on credit based
on this assumption, life events can easily change indebtedness into over-
indebtedness. Such life events include unexpected unemployment, relationship
break-up, leaving the parental home, business failure, illness, or home
repairs. Over-indebtedness has severe social consequences, such as, financial
hardship, poor physical and mental health, family stress, stigma, difficulty
obtaining employment, exclusion from basic financial services (European
Commission, 2009), work accidents and industrial disease, a strain on social
relations (Carpentier and Van den Bosch, 2008), absenteeism at work and lack of
organisational commitment (Kim "et al.", 2003), feeling of insecurity, and
relational tensions. Levels and flows. Global debt underwriting grew 4.3% year-
over-year to $5.19 trillion during 2004. It is expected to rise in the coming
years if the spending habits of millions of people worldwide continue the way
they do.
