Decentralization __FORCETOC__Decentralization or decentralisation (see spelling
differences) is the process of dispersing decision-making governance closer to
the people and/or citizens. It includes the dispersal of administration or
governance in sectors or areas like engineering, management science, political
science, political economy, sociology, and economics. Decentralization is also
possible in the dispersal of population and employment. Law, science and
technological advancements lead to highly decentralized human endeavours.
"While frequently left undefined (Pollitt, 2005), decentralization has also
been assigned many different meanings (Reichard & Borgonovi, 2007), varying
across countries (Steffensen & Trollegaard, 2000; Pollitt, 2005), languages
(Ouedraogo, 2003), general contexts (Conyers, 1984), fields of research, and
specific scholars and studies." (Dubois and Fattore 2009) A central theme in
decentralization is the difference between: The more decentralized a system is,
the more it relies on lateral relationships, and the less it can rely on
command or force. In most branches of engineering and economics,
decentralization is narrowly defined as the study of markets and interfaces
between parts of a system. This is most highly developed as general systems
theory and neoclassical political economy. Organizational Theory.
Decentralization is the policy of delegating decision-making authority down to
the lower levels in an organization, relatively away from and lower in a
central authority. A decentralized organization shows fewer tiers in the
organizational structure, wider span of control, and a bottom-to-top flow of
decision-making and flow of ideas. In a centralized organization, the decisions
are made by top executives or on the basis of pre-set policies. These decisions
or policies are then enforced through several tiers of the organization after
gradually broadening the span of control until it reaches the bottom tier. In a
more decentralized organization, the top executives delegate much of their
decision-making authority to lower tiers of the organizational structure. As a
correlation, the organization is likely to run on less rigid policies and wider
spans of control among each officer of the organization. The wider spans of
control also reduces the number of tiers within the organization, giving its
structure a flat appearance. One advantage of this structure, if the correct
controls are in place, will be the bottom-to-top flow of information, allowing
decisions by officials of the organization to be well informed about lower tier
operations. For example, if an experienced technician at the lowest tier of an
organization knows how to increase the efficiency of the production, the
bottom-to-top flow of information can allow this knowledge to pass up to the
executive officers.. Political theory. Some political theorists believe that
there are limits to decentralization as a strategy. They assert that any
relaxation of direct control or authority introduces the possibility of dissent
or division at critical moments, especially if what is being decentralized is
decision-making among human beings. Friedrich Engels famously responded to
Bakunin, refuting the argument of total decentralization, or anarchism, by
scoffing "how these people propose to run a factory, operate a railway or steer
a ship without having in the last resort one deciding will, without single
management, they of course do not tell us". However, some anarchists have, in
turn, responded to his argument, by explaining that they "do" support a (very
limited) amount of centralization, in the form of freely elected and recallable
delegates. More to the point from the majority of anarchist perspectives are
the real-world successes of anarchist communities, which for the majority only
ended when they were defeated by the overwhelming military might of the State
or neighboring States. All in all, we do not know what a truly decentralized
society would look like over a long period of time since it has never been
permitted to exist, however the Zapatistas of Mexico are proving to be quite
resilient. In ""On Authority"", Engels also wrote of democratic workplaces that
"particular questions arise in each room and at every moment concerning the
mode of production, distribution of material, etc., which must be settled by
decision of a delegate placed at the head of each branch of labour or, if
possible, by a majority vote." Modern trade unions and management scientists
tend to side strongly with Engels in this debate, and generally agree that
decentralization is very closely related to standardisation and subordination,
e.g. the standard commodity contracts traded on the commodity markets, in which
disputes are resolved all according to a jurisdiction and common regulatory
system, within the frame of a larger democratic electoral system which can
restore any imbalances of power, and which generally retains the support of the
population for its authority. Notable exceptions among trade unions are the
Wobblies, and the strong anarcho-syndicalist movement of Spain. However, a
strategy of decentralization is not always so obviously political, even if it
relies implicitly on authority delegated via a political system. For example,
engineering standards are a means by which decentralization of supply
inspection and testing can be achieved‚Äîa manufacturer adhering to the
standard can participate in decentralised systems of bidding, e.g. in a parts
market. A building standard, for instance, permits the building trades to train
labour and building supply corporations to provide parts, which enables rapid
construction of buildings at remote sites. Decentralization of training and
inspection, through the standards themselves, and related schedules of
standardized testing and random spot inspection, achieves a very high
statistical reliability of service, i.e. automobiles which rarely stall, cars
which rarely leak, and the like. In most cases, an effective decentralization
strategy and correspondingly robust systems of professional education,
vocational education, and trade certification are critical to creating a modern
industrial base. Such robust systems, and commodity markets to accompany them,
are a necessary but not sufficient feature of any developed nation. A major
goal of the industrial strategy of any developing nation is to safely
decentralise decision-making so that central controls are unnecessary to
achieving standards and safety. It seems that a very high degree of social
capital is required to achieve trust in such standards and systems, and that
ethical codes play some significant roles in building up trust in the
professions and in the trades. The consumer product markets, industrial product
markets, and service markets that emerge in a mature industrial economy,
however, still ultimately rely, like the simpler commodity markets, on complex
systems of standardization, regulation, jurisdiction, transport, materials and
energy supply. The specification and comparison of these is a major focus of
the study of political economy. Political or other decision-making units
typically must be large and leveraged enough for economy of scale, but also
small enough that centralised authority does not become unaccountable to those
performing trades or transactions at its perimeter. Large states, as Benjamin
Franklin observed, were prone to becoming tyrannies, while small states,
correspondingly, tended to become corrupt. Finding the appropriate size of
political states or other decision-making units, determining their optimal
relationship to social capital and to infrastructural capital, is a major focus
of political science. In management science there are studies of the ideal size
of corporations, and some in anthropology and sociology study the ideal size of
villages. Dennis Fox, a retired professor of legal studies and psychology,
proposed an ideal village size of approximately 150 people in his 1985 paper
about the relationship of anarchism to the tragedy of the commons. All these
fields recognize some factors that encourage centralised authority and other
factors that encourage decentralised "democracy"‚Äîbalances between which are
the major focus of group dynamics. However, decentralization is not only a
feature of human society. It is also a feature of ecology. Another objection or
limit to political decentralization, similar in structure to that of Engels, is
that terrestrial ecoregions impose a certain fiat by their natural water-
circulation, soil, and plant and animal biodiversity which constitutes a form
of (what the United Nations calls) "natural capital". Since these natural
living systems can be neither changed nor replaced by man, some argue that an
ecoregional democracy which follows their borders strictly is the only form of
decentralization of larger political units that will not lead to endless
conflict, e.g. gerrymandering, in struggle between social groups.
Decentralization in European history. Decentralization and centralization have
played major roles in the history of many societies. An excellent example is
the gradual political and organizational changes that have occurred in European
history. During the rise and fall of the Roman Empire, Europe went through
major centralization and decentralization. Although the leaders of the Roman
Empire created a European infrastructure, the fall of the Empire left Europe
without a strong political system or military protection. Viking and other
barbarian attacks further led rich Romans to build up their latifundia, or
large estates, in a way that would protect their families and create a self-
sufficient living place. This development led to the growth of the manorial
system in Europe. This system was greatly decentralized, as the lords of the
manor had power to defend and control the small agricultural environment that
was their manor. The manors of the early Middle Ages slowly came together as
lords took oaths of fealty to other lords in order to have even stronger
defense against other manors and barbarian groups. This feudal system was also
greatly decentralized, and the kings of weak "countries" held little power over
the nobility. Although some view the Roman Catholic Church of the Middle Ages
as a centralizing factor, it played a strong role in weakening the power of the
secular kings, which gave the nobility more power. As the Middle Ages wore on,
corruption in the church, foreign trade, and new political ideas slowly
strengthened the secular powers and brought together the decentralized society.
This centralization continued through the Renaissance and has been changed and
reformed until the present centralized system which is thought to have a
balance between central government and decentralized power. Decentralised
governance. Decentralization‚Äîthe transfer of authority and responsibility for
public functions from the central government to subordinate or quasi-
independent government organizations and/or the private sector‚Äîis a complex
and multifaceted concept. It embraces a variety of concepts. Different types of
decentralization shows different characteristics, policy implications, and
conditions for success. Typologies of decentralization have flourished (Dubois
& Fattore 2009). For example, political, administrative, fiscal, and market
decentralization are the types of decentralization. Drawing distinctions
between these various concepts is useful for highlighting the many dimensions
of successful decentralization and the need for coordination among them.
Nevertheless, there is clearly overlap in defining these terms and the precise
definitions are not as important as the need for a comprehensive approach (see
Sharma, 2006). Political, administrative, fiscal and market decentralization
can also appear in different forms and combinations across countries, within
countries and even within sectors. Political decentralization. Political
decentralization aims to give citizens or their elected representatives more
power in public decision-making. It is often associated with pluralistic
politics and representative government, but it can also support democratization
by giving citizens, or their representatives, more influence in the formulation
and implementation of policies. Advocates of political decentralization assume
that decisions made with greater participation will be better informed and more
relevant to diverse interests in society than those made only by national
political authorities. The concept implies that the selection of
representatives from local electoral constituency allows citizens to know
better their political representatives and allows elected officials to know
better the needs and desires of their constituents. Political decentralization
often requires constitutional or statutory reforms, creation of local political
units, and the encouragement of effective public interest groups.
Administrative decentralization. Administrative decentralization seeks to
redistribute authority, responsibility and financial resources for providing
public services among different levels of governance. It is the transfer of
responsibility for the planning, financing and management of public functions
from the central government or regional governments and its agencies to local
governments, semi-autonomous public authorities or corporations, or area-wide,
regional or functional authorities. The three major forms of administrative
decentralization‚Äîdeconcentration, delegation, and devolution‚Äîeach have
different characteristics. Deconcentration. Deconcentration is the weakest form
of decentralization and is used most frequently in unitary
states‚Äîredistributes decision making authority and financial and management
responsibilities among different levels of the national government. It can
merely shift responsibilities from central government officials in the capital
city to those working in regions, provinces or districts, or it can create
strong field administration or local administrative capacity under the
supervision of central government ministries. Delegation. Delegation is a more
extensive form of decentralization. Through delegation central governments
transfer responsibility for decision-making and administration of public
functions to semi-autonomous organizations not wholly controlled by the central
government, but ultimately accountable to it. Governments delegate
responsibilities when they create public enterprises or corporations, housing
authorities, transportation authorities, special service districts, semi-
autonomous school districts, regional development corporations, or special
project implementation units. Usually these organizations have a great deal of
discretion in decision-making. They may be exempted from constraints on regular
civil service personnel and may be able to charge users directly for services.
Devolution. Devolution is an administrative type of decentralisation. When
governments devolve functions, they transfer authority for decision-making,
finance, and management to quasi-autonomous units of local government with
corporate status. Devolution usually transfers responsibilities for services to
local governments that elect their own elected functionaries and councils,
raise their own revenues, and have independent authority to make investment
decisions. In a devolved system, local governments have clear and legally
recognized geographical boundaries over which they exercise authority and
within which they perform public functions. Administrative decentralization
always underlies most cases of political decentralization. Fiscal
decentralization. In many developing and emerging market economies local
governments or administrative units possess the legal authority to impose
taxes, but the tax base is so weak and the dependence on central government
subsidies so ingrained that no attempt is made to exercise that authority (see
Aristovnik, 2012). Fiscal decentralization and fiscal federalism. The concept
of fiscal federalism is not to be associated with fiscal decentralization in
officially declared federations only; it is applicable even to non-federal
states (having no formal federal constitutional arrangement) in the sense that
they encompass different levels of government which have defacto decision
making authority ( Sharma, 2005a: 44). This however does not mean that all
forms of governments are 'fiscally' federal; it only means that 'fiscal
federalism' is a set of principles, that can be applied to all countries
attempting 'fiscal decentralization'. In fact, fiscal federalism is a general
normative framework for assignment of functions to the different levels of
government and appropriate fiscal instruments for carrying out these functions
(Oates, 1999: 1120-1). These questions arise: (a) How federal and non-federal
countries are different with respect to 'fiscal federalism' or 'fiscal
decentralization' and (b): How fiscal federalism and fiscal decentralization
are related (similar or different)? Chanchal Kumar Sharma (2005a, 2005b)
clarifies: While fiscal federalism constitutes a set of guiding principles, a
guiding concept, that helps in designing financial relations between the
national and subnational levels of the government, fiscal decentralization on
the other hand is a process of applying such principles (Sharma, 2005b: 178).
Federal and non-federal countries differ in the manner in which such principles
are applied. Application differs because unitary and federal governments differ
in their political & legislative context and thus provide different
opportunities for fiscal decentralization (Sharma, 2005a:44). Fiscal
federalism: the federal approach to governance. In common parlance political
and constitutional aspects (e.g. giving citizens or their elected
representatives more power in political decision-making, establishment of
subnational political entities for decision making and making them politically
accountable to local electorate which often entails constitutional or statutory
reforms like providing for representation of the member states, the
strengthening of legislatures, creation of local political units along with the
encouragement of effective public interest groups and pluralistic political
parties) are considered crucial for federalism. Chanchal Kumar Sharma (2005b),
however, argues that it is the fiscal side of the federalism (fiscal
federalism) that is crucial for federal dynamism. This is because Federalism is
not a fixed allocation of spheres of central and provincial autonomy (as
assumed in federal finance models) or a particular set of distribution of
authority between governments, it is a process, structured by a set of
institutions, through which authority is distributed and redistributed. A
federalised system is a "balanced approach between the contrasting forces of
centralisation and decentralisation for combining the political and economic
advantages of unity while preserving the valued identity of the sub national
units" (Sharma, 2005). Fiscal federal principles guide how boundaries,
assignments, the level and nature of transfers should be revised from time to
time to ensure efficiency and perhaps equity. Thus fiscal federalism provides
the tools for "application of the federal approach to governance which lies in
its ability to balance the contrasting forces of centralization and
decentralization" (Sharma, 2005b: 177). In the age of globalization, when
fiscal decentralization is in vogue, all countries (federal or not) are
applying what may be called, in Sharma's (2005b) words "the federal approach to
governance". The only difference is that in federal countries the subnational
governments may be involved in decision making process through some appropriate
political or constitutional forum while the central government may dominate
quite heavily in a unitary country. Its no surprise then argues Sharma (2005b:
177; 2008) that fiscal federalism literature is far away from Centralization Vs
Decentralization focus. Final aim is not to decentralize just for sake of it
but to ensure good governance. Thus, in fiscal federalism, states Sharma
(2008), "decentralization is not seen as an alternative to centralization. Both
are needed. The complementary roles of national and subnational actors are
determined by analyzing the most effective ways and means of achieving a
desired objective". Economic decentralization. Privatization and deregulation
shift responsibility for functions from the public to the private sector and is
another type of decentralization. Privatization and deregulation are usually,
but not always, accompanied by economic liberalization and market development
policies. They allow functions that had been primarily or exclusively the
responsibility of government to be carried out by businesses, community groups,
cooperatives, private voluntary associations, and other non-government
organizations. Democratization however involves either state or private
enterprises being transferred to employee-ownership and democratic control in
the form of worker self-management, usually in the form of cooperatives and
mutual businesses. Privatization. Privatization cannot in the real sense be
considered equivalent to decentralisation. Deregulation. Deregulation reduces
the legal constraints on private participation in service provision or allows
competition among private suppliers for services that in the past had been
provided by the government or by regulated monopolies. In recent years
privatization and deregulation have become more attractive alternatives to
governments in developing countries. Local governments are also privatizing by
contracting out service provision or administration. Democratization.
Democratization typically involves either state-owned or privately-owned
enterprises being placed in the hands of their employees who then become part-
owners of the enterprises by participating in them. This can apply both to
commercial cooperatives run for profit and to public services; which could be
either employee-owned or under municipal ownership. Advocates see turning over
economic institutions to those who run them as counteracting the negative
effects of both state and private (particularly corporate) monopolies such as
concentration of power and decision-making ability and negative externalities.
Another benefit is seen as the increased efficiency gained through enabling
those with immediate knowledge concerning the work environment to be made
responsible for decisions. Silent Decentralization. An often ignored dimension
of decentralization is whether it emerged explicitly by policies, or not.
Decentralization in the absence of reforms is also referred to as ‚Äúsilent
decentralization.‚Äù Consequently, it distinguishes itself mainly by its
potential origins: network changes, initiative shifts, policy emphasis
developments, or resource availability alterations. (Dubois and Fattore 2009)
Measuring Decentralization. While diversity in degree of decentralization
across the world is a fact yet there is no consensus in the empirical
literature over the questions like ‚Äòwhich country is more decentralized?‚Äô
This is because decentralization is defined and measured differently in
different studies (Sharma, 2006). "On the basis of ‚Äòdecentralization
instrument‚Äô there are two strands in the literature that argue for two
different approaches to measure fiscal autonomy. One gives more weightage to
devolution of tax authority as an instrument of decentralization and hold it
crucial for subnational autonomy, the other gives more weight to the nature of
intergovernmental transfers (discretionary or not) as an instrument impacting
upon the subnational behaviour and affecting their autonomy and accountability.
Thus former choose to focus on fiscal policy i.e., the relationship between
expenditures and allocated revenues (vertical imbalance) while latter pay
attention to regulatory or financial mechanisms i.e. the nature of
intergovernmental transfers". Out of these two approaches, observes Sharma
(2006), "when it comes to the measurement of fiscal decentralization ‚Äòthe
share of subnational expenditures and revenues‚Äô is considered the best
indicator. This is because fiscal instruments are easier to measure while
regulatory and financial instruments are extremely complex and difficult to
measure statistically because nowhere transfers remain strictly confined to the
technical objectives. Transfers pursue a mix of objectives and politically
motivated transfers remain key part of the intergovernmental relations across
the globe" (Sharma, 2006: 54). Arjan H. Schakel (2008) notes that various
experts such as Akai and Sakata 2002; Breuss and Eller 2004; Ebel and Yilmaz
2002; Fisman and Gatti 2002; Panizza 1999; Sharma 2006, have found the fiscal
indicators on the expenditure side to be quite problematic for capturing
decision-making decentralization. This is because argues Schakel (2008) "it is
difficult to tell whether the expenditure is coming from conditional or
unconditional grants, whether the central government is determining how the
money should be spent, whether it is setting the framework legislation within
which subnational governments implement, or whether ‚àíindeed‚àí subnational
governments are spending the money autonomously". Chanchal Kumar Sharma (2006:
49) states, "...a true assessment of the degree of decentralization in a
country can be made only if a comprehensive approach is adopted and rather than
trying to simplify the syndrome of characteristics into the single dimension of
autonomy, interrelationships of various dimensions of decentralization are
taken into account." Decentralisation of Environmental Management.
Decentralisation has also moved into the environmental management sphere. Since
neo-liberalism in the 1970/1980s and the emergence of the climate change
crises, there has been abrupt evidence that the State is failing to effectively
manage our environmental resources. Hardin‚Äôs Tragedy of the commons (1986)
shows people cannot be left to do as they wish with land. Decentralisation
offers an alternative solution as theory states, it: ‚Äúaims to increase
popular participation to promote more equitable and efficient forms of local
management and development... key to effective decentralisation is increase
broad-based participation in local public decision making. Theorists believe
that downwardly accountable or representative authorities with meaningful
discretionary powers are the basic institutional elements of decentralisation
that should lead to local efficiency, equity and development.‚Äù Ribot, 2003;
53 Therefore, with the right opportunities to share knowledge and gain the
appropriate powers local communities have a greater chance of success than the
State. This leads from the assumption that people are excluded (Ribot, 2007) by
the state in decision-making, causing them to appear to not care, when in fact
they do but can do little about it. Hence, environmental governance should be
at the lowest possible level. One, in many cases the environmental is central
to local communities, especially in developing nations. Secondly, it creates a
sense of citizenship and democracy (Ribot, 2002). Depending on the type of
decentralisation used (see above and Oyono, 2004; 92), in many circumstance
local people are represented by others; these could be elected or local
authorities chosen by the government. Either way, they must be accountable and
have the power to do what they promise; if not people will not support them.
Yet, this can also be affected by the decentralisation of fiscal power which
can create limitations as many environmental management strategies require some
degree of fiscal input. Within environmental management the most effective form
of decentralisation is devolution. As state releases all control to the lowest
possible level ( Larson, 2003). However, there are still factors that can limit
its success: Political infrastructure, history, territory, culture and society.
In any given community there will be multiple environmental issues that need to
be managed alongside diversity in opinion and people. Subsequently,
decentralisation is more effective in communities where achieving consensus is
relatively straightforward. As processes will move smoother with fewer
objections. This was put to practice in the Aga Khan Rural Support Programme
(AKRSP)http://www.akdn.org/AKF in the Gujarat province of India. Shah, 1994
found that non-governmental organisations, within decentralisation acted as a
catalyst to aid villagers in a community water management programme which was
deemed a success as there was no State involvement. Thus, decentralisation
opens up opportunities for local people to make a difference by coming together
and giving them the resources to effect the local governments ( Larson, 2002).
Unfortunately, this is not always the case in reality. The theory of
environmental governance by decentralisation relies on assumptions and in
practice, these may not deem true. Until discourse advocates decentralisation
as a priority in policy, the ‚Äúpotential benefits of decentralisation (will)
remain unrealized‚Äù ( Ribbot, 2002; 2). References. Aristovnik, Aleksander
(2012), 'Fiscal Decentralization in Eastern Europe: A Twenty-Year Perspective.'
MPRA Paper No. 39316. [http://mpra.ub.uni-muenchen.de/39316/1/
MPRA_paper_39316.pdf] Frischmann, Eva (2010), 'Decentralization and Corruption.
A Cross-Country Analysis.' Grin Verlag, 978-3640710959. Akai, Nobuo and Masayo
Sakata (2002), ‚ÄòFiscal Decentralization Contributes to Economic Growth:
Evidence from State-Level Cross-Section Data for the United States‚Äô, Journal
of Urban Economics, Vol.52, No.1, pp.¬ 93‚Äì108. Breuss, Fritz and Markus Eller
(2004), ‚ÄòFiscal Decentralisation and Economic Growth: Is There Really a
Link?‚Äô, CESifo DICE Report, Journal of Institutional Comparisons, Vol.2,
No.1, pp.¬ 3‚Äì9. Dubois, H.F.W. & Fattore, G. (2009), 'Definitions and
typologies in public administration research: the case of decentralization',
International Journal of Public Administration, 32(8): pp.¬ 704‚Äì727. Ebel,
Robert D. and Serdar Yilmaz (2002), ‚ÄòOn the Measurement and Impact of Fiscal
Decentralization‚Äô, Policy Research Working Paper, 2809, Washington: World
Bank. Fisman, Raymond and Roberta Gatti (2002), ‚ÄòDecentralization and
Corruption: Evidence Across Countries‚Äô, Journal of Public Economics, Vol.83,
No.3, pp.¬ 325‚Äì45. Oates, Wallace E (1999), ‚ÄòAn Essay on Fiscal
Federalism.‚Äô Journal of Economic Literature 37(3): 1120-49. Panizza, Ugo
(1999), ‚ÄòOn the Determinants of Fiscal Centralization: Theory, and
Evidence‚Äô, Journal of Public Economics, Vol.74, No.1, pp.¬ 97‚Äì139. Schakel,
Arjan H. (2008), 'Validation of the Regional Authority Index', Regional and
Federal Studies, Routeledge, Vol. 18 (2). Sharma, Chanchal kumar.2005a 'When
Does decentralization deliver? The Dilemma of Design', South Asian Journal of
Socio-Political Studies6(1):38-45. Sharma, Chanchal Kumar.2005b. 'The Federal
Approach to Fiscal Decentralization: Conceptual Contours for Policy Makers',
Loyola Journal of Social Sciences, XIX(2):169-88 (Listed :International
Bibliography of Social Sciences, London School of Economics and Political
Science) Sharma, Chanchal Kumar (2006), ‚ÄòDecentralization Dilemma: Measuring
the Degree and Evaluating the Outcomes, The Indian Journal of Political
Science, Vol.67, No.1, pp.49-64.[http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/
papers.cfm?abstract_id=955113] Sharma, Chanchal Kumar (2008), ‚ÄòEMERGING
DIMENSIONS OF DECENTRALIZATION DEBATE IN THE AGE OF GLOCALIZATION‚Äô, MPRA
Paper 6734, University Library of Munich, Germany. REPRINTED (MPRA
prepublication version) IN : "Glocalization - Thinking Global, Acting Local "
Gopalakrishnan P S ( ed.) ICFAI University Press, 2008. pp.¬ 23‚Äì44. [http://
www.books.iupindia.org/overview.asp?bookid=IB1101979] Revised version Published
as "Emerging Dimensions of Decentralization Debate in the Age of Globalization"
in Indian Journal of Federal Studies Vol. 19 No.1 pp 47‚Äì65( year 2009).
[http://www.cfsindia.org.in/vol10no1.htm]
