Declassification Declassification is the process of documents that formerly
were classified as secret ceasing to be so restricted, often under the
principle of freedom of information. Procedures for declassification vary by
country. Papers may be withheld without being classified as secret, and
eventually made available. United Kingdom. Classified information has been
governed by various Official Secrets Acts, the latest being the Official
Secrets Act 1989. Until 1989 requested information was routinely kept secret
invoking the public interest defence; this was largely removed by the 1989 Act.
The Freedom of Information Act 2000 largely requires information to be
disclosed unless there are good reasons for secrecy. Confidential government
papers such as the yearly cabinet papers used routinely to be withheld
formally, although not necessarily classified as secret, for 30 years under the
thirty year rule, and released usually on a New Year's Day; freedom of
information legislation has relaxed this rigid approach. See also. Freedom of
information in the United Kingdom United States. Automatic declassification. In
accordance with Executive Order 13526, published January 5, 2010 (which
superseded Executive Order 12958, as amended), an executive agency must
declassify its documents after 25 years unless they fall under one of the nine
exemptions outline by [http://edocket.access.gpo.gov/2010/pdf/E9-31418.pdf] of
the Order. Classified documents 25 years or older must be reviewed by any and
all agencies that possess an interest in the sensitive information found in the
document. Systematic declassification. The Order also requires that agencies
establish and conduct a program for systematic declassification review. This
only applies to records that are of permanent historical value and less than 25
years old. Section 3.4 The Executive Order 13526, clearly specifies that
agencies shall prioritize the systematic review of records based upon the
degree of researcher interest and the likelihood of declassification upon
review. After declassification, the documents from many agencies are
accessioned at the National Archives and Records Administration and put on the
open shelves for the public. Mandatory Declassification Review. A Mandatory
Declassification Review, or MDR, is requested by an individual in an attempt to
declassify a document for release to the public. These challenges are presented
to the agency whose equity, or "ownership", is invested in the document. Once
an MDR request has been submitted to an agency for the review of a particular
document, the agency must respond either with an approval, a denial, or the
inability to confirm or deny the existence or nonexistence of the requested
document. After the initial request, an appeal can be filed with the agency by
the requester. If the agency refuses to declassify that document, then a
decision from a higher authority can be provided by the appellate panel, the
Interagency Security Classification Appeals Panel (ISCAP). Freedom of
Information Act. The U.S. Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) is the
implementation of freedom of information legislation in the United States. It
was signed into law by President Lyndon B. Johnson on July 4, 1966 (Amended
2002), and went into effect the following year. This act allows for the full or
partial disclosure of previously unreleased information and documents
controlled by the U.S. government. Any member of the public may ask for a
classified document to be declassified and made available to him/her for any
reason. The requestor is required to specify with reasonable certainty the
documents he is interested in. If the agency refuses to declassify, the
decision can be taken to the courts for a review. The U.S. Freedom of
Information Act does not guarantee that such documents will be released. Such
documents usually fall under one of the nine of the declassification exemptions
that protect highly sensitive information. History and the National Archives
and Records Administration. The National Archives and Records Administration
(NARA) plays a leading role in the Executive branch’s declassification
efforts. The inextricable connection between NARA’s overall mission and
declassification of records having permanent historical value is
institutionalized in the governing Executive Order 13526, which superseded
Executive Order 12958, effective January 5, 2010, in a number of areas. Over
the years, NARA has achieved great success with respect to declassification of
records having permanent historical value and early on established its
leadership role. NARA first established a formal declassification program for
records in 1972, and between 1973 and 1996 reviewed nearly 650 million pages of
historically valuable federal records related to World War II, the Korean War,
and American foreign policy in the 1950s as part of its systematic
declassification review program. From 1996 to 2006, NARA had processed and
released close to 460 million pages of federal records, working in partnership
with the agencies that originated the records. Over the years, NARA has
processed more than 1.1 billion pages of national security classified federal
records, resulting in the declassification and release of ninety-one percent of
the records. NARA has also provided significant support to several special
projects to review and release federal records on topics of extraordinary
public interest such as POW/MIAs or Nazi War Crimes. Additionally, NARA works
closely with reference archivists to ensure that the federal records most in
demand by researchers receive priority for declassification review and performs
review on demand for individuals who need records that do not fall into a
priority category. NARA has improved or developed electronic systems to support
declassification, automating some processes that used to be done by hand
ensuring a more complete record of declassification actions. Finally, with
assistance from the Air Force, NARA established the Interagency Referral Center
(IRC) in order to support agencies as they seek access their equities in
federal records at the National Archives at College Park and to ensure that
high demand records are processed first. Presidential libraries. In addition to
the successes with federal records, NARA has achieved noteworthy success with
respect to the classified holdings of the Presidential Libraries, which hold in
excess of 30 million classified pages, including approximately 8 million pages
from the administrations of President Hoover through Carter that are subject to
automatic declassification on December 31, 2006. The foreign policy materials
in Presidential collections are among the highest-level foreign policy
documents in the Federal government and are of significant historical value.
Regardless of the challenges posed by the nature of the information and the
complexity of equity issues in Presidential materials, the Presidential
Libraries have a long tradition of safeguarding these materials while staying
on the cutting age of declassification. From 1995 to 2006, the national
Presidential Library system reviewed, declassified, and released 1,603,429
pages of Presidential materials using systematic guidelines delegated to the
Archivist of the United States. NARA has also hosted on-site agency review
teams at the Eisenhower, Kennedy, and Ford Presidential Libraries to manage
classified equities and all Presidential Libraries have robust mandatory
declassification review programs to support requests of individual researchers.
National Declassification Initiative (NDI). Moreover, the NDI can minimize the
possibility of the inadvertent but unauthorized disclosure of information in
declassified and released permanent records at NARA.
