Defective by Design Defective by Design is an anti-DRM initiative by the Free
Software Foundation. DRM technology, dubbed "digital "restrictions" management"
by opponents, restricts users’ ability to freely use their purchased movies,
music, literature, software, and hardware in ways they are accustomed to with
ordinary non-restricted media (such as books and audio Compact Discs). The
philosophy of the initiative is that DRM is designed to be deliberately
defective, to restrict the use of the product. This, they claim, cripples the
future of digital freedom. The group aims to target "Big Media, unhelpful
manufacturers, and DRM distributors" and to bring public awareness of the issue
and increase participation in the initiative. It represents one of the first
efforts of the Free Software Foundation to find common cause with mainstream
social activists, and to encourage free software advocates to become socially
involved. As of late 2006, the campaign was claiming over 12,000 registered
members. View on the impact of DRM. DRM is used to encrypt various multimedia
products (including audio, video, and console games) and is intended to
restrict the uses of a product to those the rightsholders intend. Examples of
DRM functionality include: limiting or prohibiting duplication of media to
hopefully prevent copyright infringement or lawful archiving, sharing, of media
and encrypting or blocking access to a system's input or output to prevent
consumers from using non-licensed products, such as a competitor's hardware or
media. DRM can prevent users from duplicating a CD or a DVD, prevent someone
watching a DVD from skipping an advertisement, or create problems with
interoperability between competing products. Although tech-savvy users are
often able to find a way around DRM, this can be difficult and may require use
of the analog hole. For others DRM might prevent them from using media in legal
ways. In addition to restricting copying of DRM-protected media, DRM can allow
a computer to systematically disobey its owner. History. Defective By Design is
a joint effort by the Free Software Foundation and CivicActions, a company that
develops online advocacy campaigns. The chief organizers are Gregory Heller of
CivicActions, Peter T. Brown, executive director of the Free Software
Foundation, and Henry Poole, a CivicActions member who is also a director of
the Free Software Foundation. The campaign was launched in May 2006 with an
anti-DRM protest at WinHEC. The protest featured Free Software Foundation (FSF)
members in yellow hazmat suits "handing out pamphlets explaining that Microsoft
products are — in the words of the key slogan for the campaign — 'defective
by design' because of the DRM technologies included in them." Since then, the
campaign has launched a number of actions with varying degrees of success. The
campaign claims that its phone-in campaign against the Recording Industry
Association of America and related organizations around the world resulted in
thousands of calls from people questioning the industry's position on DRM. On
the other hand, efforts to meet with Bono of U2, a prominent supporter of
Apple's DRM-regulated iTunes, has so far met with no success. However, four
major record labels dropped their pending lawsuits and joined with Apple and
Microsoft to eliminate Digital Rights Management from music sales.
DefectiveByDesign.org proclaimed October 3, 2006 to be a "Day Against DRM", and
organized several events outside key Apple stores in the US and the UK. Again
hazmat suits were worn by protesters and leaflets were handed out to the public
explaining Apple's use of DRM in their iTunes music store and on their iPod
media players. The campaign organized along with the BadVista campaign on
January 30, 2007 at the Times Square. Protesters in hazmat suits handed
literature to attendants about the dangers of Windows Vista's Digital Rights
Management and Trusted Computing features, as well as handed over CDs with free
software for users to install an alternative to Vista. Tagging campaign. The
Defective by Design site encourages users to use the tagging feature of
Amazon.com to mark certain products with the 'defectivebydesign' tag. Items
targeted include DVD players, DRM-restricted DVD titles, HD DVD and Blu-ray
Disc titles, Windows Vista, the Zune, and the iPod. The tag has shown up on
other sites that allow tagging. On Slashdot the tag is seen on stories dealing
with DRM and Windows Vista.
