Demarchy Demarchy (or lottocracy) is a form of government in which the state is
governed by randomly selected decision makers who have been selected by
sortition (lot) from a broadly inclusive pool of eligible citizens. These
groups, sometimes termed "policy juries", "citizens' juries", or "consensus
conferences", deliberately make decisions about public policies in much the
same way that juries decide criminal cases. Demarchy, in theory, could overcome
some of the functional problems of conventional representative democracy, which
is widely subject to manipulation by special interests and a division between
professional policymakers (politicians and lobbyists) vs. a largely passive,
uninvolved and often uninformed electorate. According to Australian philosopher
John Burnheim, random selection of policymakers would make it easier for
everyday citizens to meaningfully participate, and harder for special interests
to corrupt the process. More generally, random selection of decision makers
from a larger group is known as sortition (from the Latin base for lottery).
The Athenian democracy made much use of sortition, with nearly all government
offices filled by lottery (of full citizens) rather than by election.
Candidates were almost always male, Greek, educated citizens holding a minimum
of wealth and status. In the Canadian provinces of British Columbia and
Ontario, a group of citizens was randomly selected to create a Citizens'
Assembly on Electoral Reform to investigate and recommend changes to the
provinces' electoral systems. A similar system happened with the Dutch
Burgerforum Kiesstelsel. The Old Order Amish use a combination of election and
sortition to select church leaders; men receiving two or three nominations to
fill a vacancy (the number varies by district) are then asked to select a psalm
book containing a slip of paper, one of those slips being marked to indicate
who will take on the burden of the position. In history. Greece. Greek
democracy involved comprehensive use of citizens to form policy, choose leaders
and make rulings on laws and implementation of laws. There were various levels
of government of which at times positions were held for long term or taken by
force, however most often there was a large scale and scope of citizen
participation. The assembly consisted of up to all citizens (perhaps a quarter
of the population being male local citizens completing military service and
perhaps other requirements). Administrators and some decision makers in various
levels or functions were chosen by lot. At some point most Athenians in their
demarchy had to fulfill some role, whether heading a daily meeting or taking
part in administration. Those who did not participate were considered selfish
and were derisively referred to as idiots (ἰδιώτης). Some of these
roles were not voluntary. Foreigners, women and most certainly slaves did not
participate. Demarchy was practiced in some form in most areas, including many
villages, for nearly a millennium. Contemporary commentators remarked on the
efficacy of the system, and foreigners were amazed that participative democracy
could not only exist, but also function. This form of democracy occurred in a
historic setting markedly different from modern democratic societies. Citizens
were male, had performed military service, and were intimately and directly
linked to the state. The territory and population were relatively small by
modern standards (no more than 250,000), and the citizens were of a single
culture. The extension of demarchy to large, diverse democratic societies would
open questions of the scope of demarchic powers, the level of implementation,
and the scope of the pool of eligible citizens. Venice. The Venetian Republic
was well known for the demarchical aspects of its long standing and stable
government. While other Maritime Republics withered under the strain of
factionalism, Venice was renowned for its unity under the Doge. This unity
allowed Venice to prosper as an economic city state superpower for several
centuries while other nations came and went. The demarchical mechanism that
Venice employed involved the iterative process of electing a large council
which was then reduced by lot. This was followed by that smaller council
electing another large council which was again reduced by lot; the process
continuing several more iterations. By this means, the ruling families were
able to diffuse the influence of competing special interests and reduce the
possibility that a rival family would obtain a vice like grip on power.
Ironically, this leveling of the playing field within the commune provided
Venice with the opportunity to obtain its own monopolies in trade due to its
stability and indivisibility. This immunity to factionalism gave it a
resilience in defeat that would in the long run cause other cities, such as
Genoa, to crumble. Modern electioneering and theoretical modern application.
Most modern democracies are made up of republics or parliaments. In both cases,
citizens participate in the direct election of individuals to represent them.
While ideally most citizens would spend the time to adequately study party
platforms, history and de-construct their campaigns to see if what they say
represents what they will do and if it represents the important elements of
their agendas, many citizens do not invest the time nor have the inclination to
do so (see rational ignorance). As a result, much time and money is devoted to
political canvassing and advertising — where politicians promote themselves
in much the same way as a commercial product. The result of this is that people
vote according to their impressions of the politician and party based upon
political advertising, plus any other form of media that has influenced them.
The problem with this is that people may not necessarily vote for the best
candidate since they have not taken the time to examine whom to vote for.
Demarchy eliminates an election process, saving time and money involved in
self-promotion. In theory power would be given to a person who has not
attempted to promote themselves in this manner and hopefully apply their
experience, reason, ideals to represent citizens in the forming policy more
fairly than in democracy. As a theory, it has not been proven as it has yet to
be acted out at any level, fully, openly, and democratically in known history.
In contemporary society, burgeoning movements are taking shape with the aim of
bringing demarchy to modern governments. In the UK, these include Newid and
Demarchy in the UK. Institutional corruption in political parties. An
attractive feature of demarchy is that if political leaders were replaced on a
regular basis with randomly selected citizens, it would reduce
institutionalised corruption, party apathy and complacency as well as a history
of party led entitlement, lack of choice and variety in political ideas in
platforms. It could be argued that replacing politicians in this way would
solve such problems. As people would be randomly selected to act as
representatives it would be less likely that the person involved would be part
of a "party political machine". The theory says that a randomly selected person
as a representative would not have to compromise their own beliefs in order to
make political alliances and gain support, nor fear political reprisals in
implementing tough or controversial legislation. However, as theory goes, there
is no inherent guarantee, nor anything "a priori" in demarchy which guarantees
this. There is no proven link that long term political representation equals a
larger amount of monetary loss through political corruption nor could it be
proven that random citizens in office would end or limit corruption nor that
corruption would increase. Making decisions based upon political expediency.
Politicians are often forced to make decisions which compromise their own
beliefs and what they may think is best through the pressures of future
elections, fitting into their party apparatus, pleasing those who funded their
campaigns and vote sharing and voting compromise. The time lost in the voting
process, image forming and maintenance and focusing on approval would be better
suited to forming good law and policy. Demarchy would eliminate some of these
pressures, however these pressures are likely to exist in any political office
and there is no guarantee that a randomly selected citizen would adhere to his/
her belief system or that he/she would have the political history, knowledge or
courage to do so. Demarchy, because it is based upon random selection, does not
make a person's career dependent upon popularity, and, because a demarchy is
likely to remove the direct influence of political parties, there is no "party
line" that the individual must adhere to. This is not to say that political
alliances could not be formed after a person's selection—but that the
structure of demarchy is less suited to decision-making based upon politics.
One benefit of demarchy is that it is more suited to non-party politics which
is less prone to consensus building and compromise. Areas of thinking and
debate. Although this theory of political representation has yet to be
popularized, rigorously examined or critiqued, there are three broad areas of
concern. Scope. The first area of demarchic theory concerns whether it should
supplement or completely replace conventional representative democracy. To
supplement popular voting would imply that randomly selected people would serve
only in limited levels or types of representation, or make up only a portion of
political representatives. For example, all city councils would be made up
entirely of randomly selected citizens though the mayor, through popular vote
would remain, or one-tenth of a parliament would be formed through sortition
while the remaining would be voted for by ballot. Other examples would include
a person being selected to make decisions and or offer advice about education
or the environment. Complete replacement would entail individuals from a group
of randomly selected people being directly appointed into all areas of
government, cabinets, parliaments and other forms of leadership. Level of
implementation. The second area of thinking concerns the range and extent of
decision-making and focuses upon macro- vs. micro-government. Should demarchy
be practiced at a federal/national level only, at a local/community level only,
or should it be practiced at every level of government? For example, all city
councils would be appointed by sortition, however at the national level, normal
elections would continue. Allowing sortition in one area of government but not
another would imply that sortition is beneficial either for only one level of
governance, for instance local implementation of national policy made by
elected officials or its opposite, the formation of policy implemented locally
by national officials. Other consequences of implementing sortition only at one
level include scale of powers, trust and efficacy. Candidates. The third area
of thinking concerns whether those randomly selected should first meet some
form of minimum criteria (such as level of education, lack of criminal record,
age, and so forth) in order to be selected, or whether anyone should be allowed
to be represented. In the former case, some form of meritocracy would apply.
One of the very few cases of sortition practiced at a political level occurred
in Greece where the criteria for being a candidate varied in different times.
Examples include only allowing a mixture of the following: local citizens,
educated citizens, those who had and or were serving in the military, wealth,
land, religious status and level education. They were always male. Reasons for
allowing only certain citizens to apply for or automatically be candidates for
sortition include concerns over stability and well-rounded leadership as well
as the maintenance of wealth, status and power. Burnheim. Burnheim's model of
demarchy involves the partial or complete dissolution of government departments
and bureaucracies, which are replaced by citizen's juries. Demarchy as a
concept does not necessitate such a radical step as integral to its purpose.
When one considers how much time and effort politicians and bureaucracies
expend in gaining or supporting political strength, the practice of demarchy
may be quite efficient. Politicians in western governments spend a good deal of
their time either influencing others or being influenced by others. The purpose
of this influence is that politicians and lobbyists can achieve their political
goals. Because demarchy selects decision-makers randomly, the time and effort
spent on politician machinations and manipulation is limited. In theory,
therefore, demarchy could be a more efficient system of democracy than having
elected officials. Oliver Dowlen. In his review of the history of sortition
implemented in various degrees in Greece, Florence and during the French
revolution in "The Political Potential of Sortition", Dowlen argues that any
use of sortition, whether to elect leaders, or to form the body that elects
leaders, has helped develop and strengthen inclusion and stability in
democratic systems. Criticisms. No modern nation has attempted to use demarchy
as a primary system for political decision making, so it is difficult to assess
problems of transition or shortcomings of the system. (The Sortition article
includes a more extensive discussion of the advantages and disadvantages of
sortition in a wider range of applications.) Courts. An example of demarchy is
the use of a jury of peers in criminal cases. The jury is normally a body of
randomly selected citizens who decide the guilty or not guilty verdict, which
is a prime example of demarchy. In fiction. The concept of demarchy played an
important role in Frederik Pohl's science fiction novel "The Years of the
City", which is set in a near-future New York City. In the novel, all
government offices, including the President, Congress, and the Supreme Court,
are filled by average citizens chosen using a form of selective service.
Appointees are aided in their duties by android-like Digital Colleagues,
extensive computer databases, and an overall goal of "reducing" bureaucracy and
legislation rather than creating more. The last of the book's five sections
("Gwenanda and the Supremes") focuses on the story of a Supreme Court Justice.
In Alastair Reynolds' "Revelation Space" series of novels the concept of
demarchy has been used to flatten hierarchies. Here, in one of the human
factions—the demarchists—everyone is theoretically equal in the realm of
government and all major political related issues are voted upon by everyone
via neural implant. The "demarchy" in this society is actually more of a direct
democracy. Joan D. Vinge also uses demarchy in the sense of electronic direct
democracy in her 1978 novel "The Outcasts of Heaven Belt" (later incorporated
into "The Heaven Chronicles"), perhaps the earliest use of the term. In "Blue
Mars", the conclusion of Kim Stanley Robinson's Mars Trilogy, the Martian
government's lower house is selected by sortition. In "Songs of Distant Earth"
by Arthur C. Clarke, the futuristic society on Thalassa is ruled by demarchy.
In "Dark Light" (the middle of the Engines of Light trilogy) by Ken MacLeod, a
character says: Quote. In Book 4 of Aristotle's "The Politics", Lottocracy. The
concept of demarchy is similar to but slightly different from L. León's
concept of lottocracy. "Burnheim ... insists that the random selection be made
only from volunteers." In the chapter "A Concept for Government", León states:
"... that first of all, the job must not be liked". A detailed protocol for
lottocracy is described in the same chapter. Christopher Frey uses the German
term 'Lottokratie' and recommends to test lottocracy at least in town councils.
Lottocracy according to Frey will improve the direct involvement of each
citizen and minimize the systematical errors caused by political parties in
Europe.
