Demand management Demand management is a planning methodology used to manage
and forecast the demand of products and services. Demand management in
economics. In economics, "demand management" is the art or science of
controlling economic demand to avoid a recession. In natural resources
management and environmental policy more generally, it refers to policies to
control consumer demand for environmentally sensitive or harmful goods such as
water and energy. Within manufacturing firms the term is used to describe the
activities of demand forecasting, planning, and order fulfillment. In economics
the term is also used to refer to management of the distribution of, and access
to goods and services on the basis of needs. An example is social security and
welfare services. Rather than increasing budgets for these things, governments
may develop policies that allocate existing resources according to a hierarchy
of needs. It is inspired by Keynesian macroeconomics, though today elements of
it are part of the economic mainstream. The underlying idea is for the
government to use tools like interest rates, taxation, and public expenditure
to change key economic decisions like consumption, investment, the balance of
trade, and public sector borrowing resulting in an 'evening out' of the
business cycle. Demand management was widely adopted in the 1950s to 1970s, and
was for a time successful. However, it is widely regarded as a force behind the
stagflation of the 1970s, though the supply shock caused by the 1973 oil crisis
could have also caused that. Theoretical criticisms of demand management are
that it relies on a long-run Phillips Curve for which there is no evidence, and
that it produces dynamic inconsistency and can therefore be non-credible.
Today, most governments relatively limit interventions in demand management to
tackling short-term crises, and rely on policies like independent central banks
and fiscal policy rules to prevent long-run economic disruption. In the
environmental context demand management is increasingly taken seriously to
reduce the economy's throughput of scarce resources for which market pricing
does not reflect true costs. Examples include metering of municipal water, and
carbon taxes on gasoline. Demand management in business. In business, the term
is used to describe the proactive management of work initiatives (demand) with
business constraints (supply).
