Democratic structuring The principles of democratic structuring were defined by
Jo Freeman in "The Tyranny of Structurelessness", first delivered as a talk in
1970, later published in the "Berkeley Journal of Sociology" in 1972. They were
influential in power network theories, especially those challenging a single
command hierarchy. She was a major influence in the theory of participatory
democracy, consensus decision-making and collective intelligence, though her
own work focused mostly on problems of elite formation in the American women's
movement of the 1960s. Elites. "The characteristic prerequisite for
participating in all the informal elites of the movement, and thus for
exercising power, concern one's background, personality or allocation of time.
They do not include one's competence, dedication to feminism, talents or
potential contribution to the movement. The former are the criteria one usually
uses in determining one's friends. The latter are what any movement or
organization has to use if it is going to be politically effective." She
defines, by default, politics as usual: to form power networks one must avoid
working with one's friends and work specifically with those who are talented,
competent, dedicated, and willing to make contributions - not simply those that
one likes or would choose, if one were not actually seeking to re/gain power.
Domination and effectiveness. The dialectic between formal and informal power
is critical: "If the movement continues deliberately not to select who shall
exercise power, it does not thereby abolish power. All it does is abdicate the
right to demand that those who do exercise power and influence be responsible
for it. If the movement continues to keep power as diffuse as possible because
it knows it cannot demand responsibility from those who have it, it does
prevent any group or person from totally dominating. But it simultaneously
ensures that the movement is as ineffective as possible. Some middle ground
between domination and ineffectiveness can and must be found."
Structurelessness. Freeman advocated a power structure and claimed that "once
the movement no longer clings tenaciously to the ideology of structurelessness,
it will be free to develop those forms of organisation best suited to its
healthy functioning. This does not mean that we should go to the other extreme
and blindly imitate the traditional forms of organisation. But neither should
we blindly reject them all. Some traditional techniques will prove useful,
albeit not perfect; some will give us insights into what we should not do to
obtain certain ends with minimal costs to the individuals in the movement.
Mostly, we will have to experiment with different kinds of structuring and
develop a variety of techniques to use for different situations. The 'lot
system' is one such idea which has emerged from the movement. It is not
applicable to all situations, but it is useful in some. Other ideas for
structuring are needed. But before we can proceed to experiment intelligently,
we must accept the idea that there is nothing inherently bad about structure
itself - only its excessive use." Politically effective principles. Freeman
claimed that "when these principles are applied, they ensure that whatever
structures are developed by different movement groups will be controlled by and
be responsible to the group. The group of people in positions of authority will
be organized in structures that are diffuse, flexible, open and temporary. They
will not be in such an easy position to institutionalize their power because
ultimate decisions will be made by the group at large. The group will have the
power to determine who shall exercise authority within it."
