Demonstration (people) A demonstration or street protest is action by a mass
group or collection of groups of people in favor of a political or other cause;
it normally consists of walking in a mass march formation and either beginning
with or meeting at a designated endpoint, or rally, to hear speakers. Actions
such as blockades and sit-ins may also be referred to as demonstrations.
Demonstrations can be nonviolent or violent (usually referred to by
participants as "militant"), or can begin as nonviolent and turn violent
dependent on circumstances. Sometimes riot police or other forms of law
enforcement become involved. In some cases this may be in order to try to
prevent the protest from taking place at all. In other cases it may be to
prevent clashes between rival groups, or to prevent a demonstration from
spreading and turning into a riot. The term has been in use since the mid-19th
century, as was the term 'monster meeting', which was coined initially with
reference to the huge assemblies of protesters inspired by Daniel O'Connell in
Ireland. Demonstrations are a form of activism, usually taking the form of a
public gathering of people in a rally or walking in a march. Thus, the opinion
is "demonstrated" to be significant by gathering in a crowd associated with
that opinion. Demonstrations can be used to show a viewpoint (either positive
or negative) regarding a public issue, especially relating to a perceived
grievance or social injustice. A demonstration is usually considered more
successful if more people participate. Topics of demonstrations often deal with
political, economic, and social issues. Forms. Demonstrations are sometimes
spontaneous gatherings, but are also utilized as a tactical choice by
movements. They often form part of a larger campaign of nonviolent resistance,
often also called civil resistance. Demonstrations are generally staged in
public, but private demonstrations are certainly possible, especially if the
demonstrators wish to influence the opinions of a small or very specific group
of people. Demonstrations are usually physical gatherings, but virtual or
online demonstrations are certainly possible. Sometimes, particularly with
controversial issues, groups of people opposed to the aims of a demonstration
may themselves launch a counter-demonstration with the aim of opposing the
demonstrators and presenting their view. Clashes between demonstrators and
counter-demonstrators may turn violent. Government-organized demonstrations are
demonstrations which are organized by a government. The Islamic Republic of
Iran, the People's Republic of China, Republic of Cuba, the Soviet Union and
Argentina, among other nations, have had government-organized demonstrations.
Times and locations. Sometimes the date or location chosen for the
demonstration is of historical or cultural significance, such as the
anniversary of some event that is relevant to the topic of the demonstration.
Locations are also frequently chosen because of some relevance to the issue at
hand. For example, if a demonstration is targeted at issues relating to foreign
nation, the demonstration may take place at a location associated with that
nation, such as an embassy of the nation in question. Nonviolence or violence.
Protest marches and demonstrations are a common nonviolent tactic. They are
thus one tactic available to proponents of strategic nonviolence. However, the
reasons for avoiding the use of violence may also derive, not from a general
doctrine of nonviolence or pacifism, but from considerations relating to the
particular situation that is faced, including its legal, cultural and power-
political dimensions: this has been the case in many campaigns of civil
resistance. Some demonstrations and protests can turn, at least partially, into
riots or mob violence against objects such as automobiles and businesses,
bystanders and the police. Police and military authorities often use non-lethal
force or less-lethal weapons, such as tasers, rubber bullets, pepper spray, and
tear gas against demonstrators in these situations. Sometimes violent
situations are caused by the preemptive or offensive use of these weapons which
can provoke, destabilize, or escalate a conflict. As a known tool to prevent
the infiltration by agents provocateurs, the organizers of large or
controversial assemblies may deploy and coordinate demonstration marshals, also
called stewards. Law by country. Russia. Freedom of assembly in the Russian
Federation is granted by Art. 31 of the Constitution adopted in 1993: Chapter 2
of the Constitution of the Russian Federation Demonstrations and protests are
further regulated by the Federal Law of the Russian Federation No.54-FZ ""On
Meetings, Rallies, Demonstrations, Marches and Pickets"". If the assembly in
public is expected to involve more than one participant, its organisers are
obliged to notify executive or local self-government authorities of the
upcoming event few days in advance in writing. However, legislation does not
foresee an authorisation procedure, hence the authorities have no right to
prohibit an assembly or change its place unless it threatens the security of
participants or is planned to take place near hazardous facilities, important
railways, viaducts, pipelines, high voltage electric power lines, prisons,
courts, presidential residences or in the border control zone. The right to
gather can also be restricted in close proximity of cultural and historical
monuments. United Kingdom. Under the Serious Organised Crime and Police Act
2005 and the Terrorism Act 2006, there are areas designated as 'protected
sites' where people are not allowed to go. Previously, these were military
bases and nuclear power stations, but the law is changing to include other,
generally political areas, such as Downing Street, the Palace of Westminster,
and the headquarters of MI5 and MI6. Previously, trespassers to these areas
could not be arrested if they had not committed another crime and agreed to be
escorted out, but this will change following amendments to the law. Human
rights groups fear the powers could hinder peaceful protest. Nick Clegg, the
then Liberal Democrat home affairs spokesman, said: "I am not aware of vast
troops of trespassers wanting to invade MI5 or MI6, still less running the
gauntlet of security checks in Whitehall and Westminster to make a point. It's
a sledgehammer to crack a nut." Liberty, the civil liberties pressure group,
said the measure was "excessive". United States. The First Amendment of the
United States Constitution specifically allows peaceful demonstrations and the
freedom of assembly as part of a measure to facilitate the redress of such
grievances. "Amendment I: Congress shall make no law ... abridging ... the
right of the people peaceably to assemble, and to petition the Government for a
redress of grievances." A growing trend in the United States has been the
implementation of "free speech zones," or fenced-in areas which are often far-
removed from the event which is being protested; critics of free-speech zones
argue that they go against the First Amendment of the United States
Constitution by their very nature, and that they lessen the impact the
demonstration might otherwise have had. In many areas it is required to get
permission from the government to hold a demonstration.
