Democratic World Federalists Democratic World Federalists, a civil society
organization based in San Francisco with supporters worldwide, advocates a
"democratic federal system of world government" in order to end war and crimes
against humanity and to promote “a just world community and the preservation
of a livable and healthful global environment” through the development of
enforceable world law. It is affiliated with the Coalition for Democratic World
Government, the Community of World Citizens, and the World Federalist Movement.
Antecedents of a democratic, federal system of world government. Although the
organization was incorporated as an independent public-benefit educational
organization in California on 28 January 2004, its origins go back in history.
Far from world federation being a phenomenon of the 20th Century, among
intellectuals around the world Dante, Penn, Paine, Kant, and K’ang emphasized
the necessity of unity and peace of humankind. Democracy, as the principle for
legitimizing the government of the people, began to flourish in ancient Athens.
It developed further in the city-states of the Swiss confederation and the town
meetings in colonial New England. By the 1780s a democratic federation was
created in the United States following the American Revolution, with Tom Paine,
Thomas Jefferson, James Madison, and James Wilson as leading proponents through
the Declaration of Independence and the Federal Constitution. Soon afterwards,
the French Revolution produced the French Republic and the Declaration of the
Rights of Man and of the Citizen, as it, too, attempted to end rule by
monarchy, landed aristocracy, and clergy but unified competing interests into a
unitary state. During the 1930s and 1940s numerous attempts were made locally,
nationally, and regionally by courageous pioneers to prevent the outbreak and
spread of war and to mobilize initiatives and forces favoring a World
Federation. In 1938—1939 Federal Union was launched in the United Kingdom and
the U.S.A. In April 1942 high-school student Harris Wofford Jr., formed the
Student Federalists. It rapidly grew into a national organization with
thousands of members from secondary and university students, later including
young veterans returning from World War-II. (Several were among the founders of
Democratic World Federalists sixty years later.) In 1945-46 a Hungarian news
agency head, Emery Reves, published the seminal "The Anatomy of Peace", which
declared that sovereignty lay with the citizens, who could delegate powers to
governments at all levels, including the global level. This turned on thousands
to the idea of a world federation. In February 1947 a number of world
federalist and world government representatives met in Asheville, North
Carolina, and formed the United World Federalists. In 1946-47 representatives
of early world federalist groups met first in Luxembourg, then in Montreux,
Switzerland, formed the World Movement for World Federal Government, and issued
the "Montreux Declaration", which declared the need for world federal
government if wars were ever to be ended. Activism by Northern California World
Federalists and Democratic World Federalists. In 1949, a team including the
President of the United World Federalists of California Alan Cranston and its
Executive Director Robert Walker convinced the State Legislature to pass the
"California Resolution", the first of several post-war state resolutions
calling for the United States to participate in a world constitutional
convention. In 1965, during the 20th anniversary of the drafting of the U.N.
Charter in San Francisco, the World Congress of the World Association of World
Federalists (successor to W.M.W.F.G.) was held in San Francisco. In 1983 the
World Federalist Association was organized from the chapters and members of the
old United World Federalists, and the Northern California region became active
again with a staffed office first in Oakland, then in San Francisco. In 1989
and throughout the 1990s activists in Northern California supported
Philadelphia-II and its sister organization, One World, a movement for direct
democracy leading to a world constitutional convention through the citizens’
initiative. Since 1992 D.W.F. has published the quarterly "Toward Democratic
World Federation", which provides articles from leading world federalist
scholars, activist citizens and like-minded organizations on World Government
and related current topics. (To access T.D.W.F. articles in D.W.F.’s e-
archives click here.) In 1993 when the World Federalist Association was
promoting United Nations Reform, its Northern California branch played a major
role in organizing a hearing in San Francisco of Congressman Jim Leach’s U.S.
Commission on Improving the Effectiveness of the United Nations. This took
place in the Green Room of the War Memorial Building, where the Charter of the
U.N. had been negotiated in 1945. In 1995 W.F.A.’s Northern California branch
hosted the XXIInd World Congress of the World Federalist Movement (successor to
WAWF), and organized an all-day forum on “Restructuring the United Nations:
Achieving Democratic Global Governance for the 21st Century” with speakers
from fourteen countries. During the 1990s a committee of W.F.M. Councillors
from 11 countries on four continents headed by one from Northern California
produced a pamphlet of democratic world federalist principles, which D.W.F.
published as "Federalism and the Right of People to Self-Government". In 2004-
05 activists of the former W.F.A./N.Ca. incorporated as a civil society
educational body (coming under Section 501(c)(3) of the I.R.S. code) and, with
citizens from a dozen countries active in its office and/or governance, it took
the name Democratic World Federalists, as it attracted supporters of world
federation from throughout the United States and on five continents. In 2005
D.W.F. helped promote the launching of "One World Democracy", written by two of
its supporters. Today, over sixty years after its foundation, D.W.F. promotes a
democratic world federation and addresses contemporary global problems by e-
mail, a quarterly publication, and outreach to media, politicians, educational
institutions and libraries, and other civil society organizations. Principles &
Objectives. The goal of D.W.F. is to end war and maintain peace, guarantee
human rights, promote a just world community, and cope with environmental
degradation and the squandering of natural resources. This can best be achieved
through establishing a democratic federal world government. (For D.W.F.’s
purposes and objectives, click here.) Rather than using force to solve
international conflicts, political and judicial structures and procedures would
be used. Although democratically-elected national governments would still be in
charge of domestic affairs at the country level, world courts with enforceable
judgments would be able to try perpetrators of international and world-level
crimes. Since its beginning, D.W.F. has been promoting a better understanding
of good government at all levels, up to the global level in the form of a
democratic world federation. References. See Democratic World Federalists
website, http://www.dwfed.org/. Emery Reves, "The Anatomy Peace" (New York and
London: Harper & Brothers Publishers, 1945–46) Barbara M. Walker, "On the
Bicentennial of the United States Constitution" (Washington DC: World
Federalist Association, 1987/1991) Ronald J. Glossop, "World Federation? A
Critical Analysis of Federal World Government" (Jefferson, NC: McFarland &
Company, 1993) Barbara M. Walker, "Uniting the Peoples and Nations; Readings in
World Federalism" (1993) Gilbert Jonas, "One Shining Moment: A Short History of
the American Student World Federalist Movement 1942-1953" (Lincoln, NE:
iUniverse.com, 2001) Joseph P. Baratta, "The Politics of World Federation"
(Westport, CT: Praeger, 2004). Jerry Tetalman and Byron Belitos, "One World
Democracy; A Progressive Vision for Enforceable Global Law" (San Rafael, CA:
Origin Press, 2005)
