Demos (U.S. think tank) Demos is a United States-based research and policy
center founded in 2000 that presents a left wing viewpoint on economic issues.
Based on its widely cited work in the media and growing impact on national and
state policy, Demos continues to influence the national debate on election
reform and economic security, with a particular emphasis on the development of
a broad, stable future middle class in the United States. More recently, it has
branched into issues of sustainability and alternative measures of economic
progress. According to their website, Demos maintains a non-partisan role in
their policy change and reform work to revitalize American democracy. These
efforts include opening up the electoral process to encourage high voter
turnout, addressing financial instability in American households, engaging a
public dialogue on ethics and values related to democracy and the economy,
developing a shared national vision of effective government, and promoting the
sustainable consumption of our natural resources. Mission. A multi-issue
national organization, Demos combines research, policy development and advocacy
to influence public debate and catalyze progressive change. The name "Demos" is
derived from the Greek word meaning “the people” and is the root for the
word “Democracy." History. In the late 1990s, Demos was conceptualized by
Charles Halpern, President of the Nathan Cummings Foundation (1989–2000).
Halpern wanted to create a counter-argument to the growing influence of the
many right-wing think tanks and establish a multi-issue organization that would
focus on progressive policy development and advocacy. David Callahan, a Fellow
at the Century Foundation, and Stephen Heintz, Vice-President of the EastWest
Institute, joined Halpern in helping to found Demos. Founding Board members
included Arnie Miller, of Isaccson Miller, an executive search firm; David
Skaggs, a Colorado Congressman; and Barack Obama, then an Illinois State
Senator. In March 2000, Demos opened its first office in New York with Stephen
Heintz as President. In this first year, Demos’ work focused on two issues:
(1) economic inequities in America and the growing prosperity gap and (2)
increasing civic participation and developing a more inclusive democracy. These
two areas continue to be a large part of Demos’ core work. Demos’ work
became especially relevant after the 2000 Presidential Election’s voter
complications increased concern about the efficacy America’s election
systems. In 2001, Stephen Heintz stepped down and was replaced by Miles
Rapoport, Connecticut legislator (1985–94) and Secretary of State (1995–98)
with a background in social-change advocacy and community-building. Programs.
According to their website, Demos currently has four programs: Democracy,
Economic Opportunity, Public Works, and Fellows. Demos also recently launched
an additional research program through its Sustainable Progress Initiative.
Democracy Program. The Democracy Program is Demos’ oldest. It works to
strengthen democracy in America through research focused on encouraging civic
participation and reducing barriers for voter participation. The program builds
on Demos’ core belief that inclusive and active citizen participation is
necessary for a strong democracy. Much of their work is focused on securing
full implementation of Section 7 of the National Voting Rights Act (NVRA),
which mandates that public assistance agencies provide voter registration
services, as well as support for state-based campaigns to establish Election
Day Registration policies. Economic Opportunity Program. The Economic
Opportunity Program focuses on research and policy ideas to provide new
opportunities for low-income families, people of color, and young adults to
achieve economic security. The program’s work includes reports on household
debt and credit checks, the economic security of young Americans and the
elderly, and policies aimed to help community college students complete their
degrees. Sustainable Progress Initiative. Demos’ Sustainable Progress
Initiative facilitates creative new research, policy development, and strategic
planning to promote a new economy where the priority is to sustain human and
natural communities. Recent reports include "Beyond GDP: New Measures for a New
Economy," which questions the pervasive narrative linking GDP and market growth
to social progress. Fellows Program. The Demos Fellows Program develop and
sustains more than 25 fellows from diverse backgrounds, who produce books,
research and commentary to shape a more vibrant and informed public
conversation about policy. The Emerging Voices Initiative nurtures the careers
of exciting young thought leaders, particularly those of color, to help address
the profound lack of diversity among public commentators and to bring urgently
needed new ideas into the debate. PolicyShop Blog. PolicyShop is the official
Demos blog, which "strives to offer timely commentary and analysis on a range
of national and state policy issues." Frequent topics of commentary include
jobs, middle class economic security, the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau,
Voter ID laws, campaign finance reform, and energy and sustainability. Major
Successes. Credit Card Regulation. For many years, the Economic Opportunity
Program has worked on the issue of credit card debt among low-income households
and is considered a pioneer in this field of research. The Federal Credit Card
Accountability, Responsibility and Disclosure Act of 2009 (CARD) was signed
into law May 22, 2009, partly as a result of their efforts. Voter Registration
of Low-Income Citizens. The Democracy Program has worked to improve States'
compliance with the National Voter Registration Act (NVRA), focusing mainly on
expanding voter registration opportunities at social service agencies for low
income voters. Recently, Demos was part of a settlement in a lawsuit, filed in
2005, alleging Ohio Secretary of State J. Kenneth Blackwell, Governor Bob Taft,
and their predecessors failed to protect the fundamental rights of eligible
Ohio voters to cast a meaningful ballot, as required by the Equal Protection
and Due Process Clauses of the Fourteenth Amendment to the United States
Constitution. This settlement is binding and requires the State to provide for
uniformity and consistency in Ohio election procedures so that the opportunity
to vote can be enjoyed equally by all Ohio citizens.
