Democracy in Marxism Marxism holds that "democracy is the road to socialism,"
as Karl Marx believed (although no one can find this line in his complete
works), democracy being Greek for "rules of the masses." The Marxist view is
fundamentally opposed to what capitalists call liberal democracy, believing
that the capitalist state cannot be democratic by its nature, as it represents
the dictatorship of the bourgeoisie. "Democracy for an insignificant minority,
democracy for the rich – that is the democracy of capitalist society. If we
look more closely into the machinery of capitalist democracy, we see
everywhere, in the “petty” – supposedly petty – details of the suffrage
(residential qualifications, exclusion of women, etc.), in the technique of the
representative institutions, in the actual obstacles to the right of assembly
(public buildings are not for “paupers"!), in the purely capitalist
organization of the daily press, etc., etc., – we see restriction after
restriction upon democracy. These restrictions, exceptions, exclusions,
obstacles for the poor seem slight, especially in the eyes of one who has never
known want himself and has never been in close contact with the oppressed
classes in their mass life (and nine out of 10, if not 99 out of 100, bourgeois
publicists and politicians come under this category); but in their sum total
these restrictions exclude and squeeze out the poor from politics, from active
participation in democracy.” (Lenin, State and Revolution, Chapter 5) Most of
these restrictions no longer apply in the Western world; women have the vote
and there is no property requirement. However, Marxists generally agree that
the modern political landscape is dominated by corporate interest, due to the
widespread practice of lobbying politicians, and the connections between
corporations, and elected officials. Moreover, even if representatives of the
proletariat class are elected in a capitalist country, Marxists claim they have
limited power over the country's affairs as the economic sphere is largely
controlled by private capital and therefore the representative's power to act
is curtailed. Essentially, minarchists (only a small minority of those
supporting liberal democracy) claim that in the ideal liberal state the
functions of the elected government should be reduced to the minimum (i.e. the
court system and security). Hence Marxists-Leninists see a socialist revolution
necessary to bring power into hands of oppressed classes.
