Denialism Denialism is choosing to deny reality as a way to avoid an
uncomfortable truth. Author Paul O'Shea remarks, "is the refusal to accept an
empirically verifiable reality. It is an essentially irrational action that
withholds validation of a historical experience or event". In science,
denialism has been defined as the rejection of basic concepts that are
undisputed and well-supported parts of the scientific consensus on a topic in
favor of ideas that are both radical and controversial. It has been proposed
that the various forms of denialism have the common feature of the rejection of
overwhelming evidence and the generation of a controversy through attempts to
deny that a consensus exists. The terms "Holocaust denialism" and "AIDS
denialism" have been used, and the term "climate change denialists" has been
applied to those who argue against the scientific consensus that global warming
is occurring and that human activity is its primary cause. Use of the word
"denialism" has been criticised, for example as a polemical propaganda tool to
suppress non-mainstream views. Similarly, in an essay discussing the general
importance of skepticism, Clive James objected to the use of the word denialist
to describe climate change skeptics, stating that it "calls up the spectacle of
a fanatic denying the Holocaust." Celia Farber has objected to the term "AIDS
denialists" arguing that it is unjustifiable to place this belief on the same
moral level with the Nazi crimes against humanity. However, Robert Gallo "et
al." defended this latter comparison, stating that AIDS denialism is similar to
Holocaust denial as it is a form of pseudoscience that "contradicts an immense
body of research." Several motivations for denialism have been proposed,
including religious beliefs and self-interest, or as a psychological defense
mechanism against disturbing ideas. Orthodoxy and heterodoxy. Anthropologist
Didier Fassin distinguishes between "denial", defined as "the empirical
observation that reality and truth are being denied", and "denialism", which he
defines as "an ideological position whereby one systematically reacts by
refusing reality and truth". In a newspaper article in 2003 Edwin Cameron, a
senior South African judge who had AIDS, described the tactics used by those
who deny the Holocaust and those who deny that the AIDS pandemic is
predominantly due to infection with HIV. He states that "For denialists, the
facts are unacceptable. They engage in radical controversion, for ideological
purposes, of facts that, by and large, are accepted by almost all experts and
lay persons as having been established on the basis of overwhelming evidence".
To do this they employ "distortions, half-truths, misrepresentation of their
opponents' positions and expedient shifts of premises and logic." Edwin Cameron
notes that a common tactic used by denialists is to "make great play of the
inescapable indeterminacy of figures and statistics", as scientific studies of
many areas rely on probability analysis of sets of data, and in historical
studies the precise numbers of victims and other facts may not be available in
the primary sources. Tara Smith of the University of Iowa also stated that
moving goalposts, conspiracy theories and cherry-picking evidence are general
characteristics of denialist arguments, but went on to note that these groups
spend the "majority of their efforts critiquing the mainstream theory" in an
apparent belief that if they manage to discredit the mainstream view, their own
"unproven ideas will fill the void". Prescriptive and polemic. If one party to
a debate accuses the other of "denialism" they are framing the debate, because
denialism is prescriptive: it carries implications that there is a truth that
the other side denies, and polemic because the accuser usually goes on to
explain how the other party is denying the asserted truth and as such the other
party is in the wrong, which leads to an implied accusation that if the accused
party persist with the denial despite the evidence their motives must be base.
Edward Skidelsky, a lecturer in philosophy at Exeter University, has suggested
that this is a new use for the word denial and it may have its origins in an
old sense of "deny", akin to "disown", (as in the Apostle Peter denying
Christ), but that its more immediate antecedence is from the Freudian sense of
deny as a refusal to accept a painful or humiliating truth. He writes that "An
accusation of 'denial' is serious, suggesting either deliberate dishonesty or
self-deception. The thing being denied is, by implication, so obviously true
that the denier must be driven by perversity, malice or wilful blindness." He
suggests that, by the introduction of the "denier" tag into further areas of
historical and scientific debate, "One of the great achievements of the
Enlightenment—the liberation of historical and scientific enquiry from
dogma—is quietly being reversed", and that this should worry liberal-minded
people. Examples of use. AIDS denialism. AIDS denialism is the denial that the
human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) is the cause of acquired immune deficiency
syndrome (AIDS). AIDS denialism has been described as being "among the most
vocal anti-science denial movements". Some denialists reject the existence of
HIV, while others accept that the virus exists but say that it is a harmless
passenger virus and not the cause of AIDS. Insofar as denialists acknowledge
AIDS as a real disease, they attribute it to some combination of recreational
drug use, malnutrition, poor sanitation, and side effects of antiretroviral
medication, rather than infection with HIV. However, the evidence that HIV
causes AIDS is scientifically conclusive and the scientific community rejects
and ignores AIDS-denialist claims as based on faulty reasoning, cherry picking,
and misrepresentation of mainly outdated scientific data. With the rejection of
these arguments by the scientific community, AIDS-denialist material is now
spread mainly through the Internet. Corporate denialism. International
corporations such as ExxonMobil have been criticized for contributing to
scientists and scientific experimentation questioning the scientific consensus
on global climate change. ExxonMobil did not deny making the financial
contributions, but its spokesman stated that the company's financial support
for scientific reports did not mean it influenced the outcome of those studies.
"The recycling of this type of discredited conspiracy theory diverts attention
from the real challenge at hand: how to provide the energy needed to improve
global living standards while also reducing greenhouse gas emissions."
"Newsweek" and "Mother Jones" have published articles stating corporations are
funding the "denial industry". In the context of consumer protection, denialism
has been defined as "the use of rhetorical techniques and predictable tactics
to erect barriers to debate and consideration of any type of reform, regardless
of the facts." Holocaust denialism. The term has been used with "Holocaust
denialism" as "the refusal to accept an empirically verifiable reality. It is
an essentially irrational action that withholds validation of a historical
experience or event." Political denialism. The Bush Administration's
replacement of previous science advisers with industry experts or scientists
tied to industry, and its refusal to submit the Kyoto Protocol for ratification
due to uncertainties they asserted were present in the climate change issue,
have been cited by the press as examples of politically motivated denialism.
The general class of genocide denial, of which holocaust denial is a subset, is
another form of political denialism.
