Dependent territory A dependent territory, dependent area or dependency is a
territory that does not possess full political independence or sovereignty as a
sovereign state yet remains politically outside of the controlling state's
integral area. A dependency is commonly distinguished from other subnational
entities in that they are not considered to be part of the integral territory
of the governing State. A subnational entity typically represents a division of
the State "proper", while a dependent territory often maintains a great degree
of autonomy from the controlling State. Historically, most colonies were
considered to be dependencies of their controlling State. Most of these have
either become independent, by joining neighbouring independent countries, or
assimilated into the conquering state. The dependencies that remain generally
maintain a very high degree of political autonomy. Although dependencies retain
a degree of autonomy, not all autonomous entities are considered to be
dependencies. Many political entities have a special position recognized by
international treaty or agreement resulting in a certain level of autonomy or
differences in immigration rules. These are sometimes considered dependencies,
but are officially considered by their controlling states to be integral parts
of the state. Examples are Åland (Finland), Svalbard (Norway), Azores
(Portugal), Madeira (Portugal), Hong Kong (China), and Macau (China). Lists of
dependent territories. Dependency claims without general international
recognition, including all claims in Antarctica, are listed in "italics". The
list includes several territories that are not included in the list of non-
self-governing territories listed by the General Assembly of the United
Nations. This list includes territories that have not been legally incorporated
into their governing state. Lists of other entities. The following entities
have been legally included as a full part of their governing country, but are
often described as dependencies. All have their own country codes. Australia.
Although all territories of Australia are considered to be fully integrated in
its federative system, and the official status of an external territory does
not differ largely from that of a mainland territory (except in regards to
immigration law), debate remains as to whether the external territories are
integral parts of Australia, due to their not being part of Australia in 1901,
when its constituent states federated. They are often listed separately for
statistical purposes. Description. Three Crown dependencies are in a form of
association with the UK. They are independently administrated jurisdictions,
although the British Government is solely responsible for defence and
international representation, and has ultimate responsibility for ensuring good
government. They do not have diplomatic recognition as independent states, but
they are not an integrated part of the UK, nor do they form part of the
European Union. The UK Parliament retains the ability to legislate for the
Crown dependencies even without the agreement of the insular legislatures. None
of the Crown dependencies has representatives in the UK Parliament. Bermuda and
Gibraltar have similar relationships to the UK as the Crown dependencies. While
Britain is officially responsible for defence and international representation,
these jurisdictions maintain their own militaries and have been granted limited
diplomatic powers, in addition to having internal self-government.
Nevertheless, they are British overseas territories. New Zealand and
dependencies share the same Governor-General and constitute one realm. The Cook
Islands and Niue are officially termed associated states. Puerto Rico (since
1952) and the Northern Mariana Islands (since 1986) are non-independent states
freely associated with the United States. The mutually negotiated Covenant to
Establish a Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands (CNMI) in Political
Union with the United States was approved in 1976. The Covenant was fully
implemented November 3, 1986, pursuant to Presidential Proclamation no. 5564,
which conferred United States citizenship on legally qualified CNMI residents.
Under the Constitution of Puerto Rico, Puerto Rico is described as a
Commonwealth and Puerto Ricans have a degree of administrative autonomy similar
to citizens of a U.S. state. Puerto Ricans "were collectively made U.S.
citizens" in 1917 as a result of the Jones-Shafroth Act. The commonly used name
in Spanish of the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, "Estado Libre Asociado de Puerto
Rico", literally "Associated Free State of Puerto Rico", which sounds similar
to "free association" particularly when loosely used in Spanish, is sometimes
erroneously interpreted to mean that Puerto Rico's relationship with United
States is based on a Compact of Free Association and at other times erroneously
held to mean that Puerto Rico's relationship with United States is based on an
Interstate compact. This is a constant source of ambiguity and confusion when
trying to define, understand and explain Puerto Rico's political relationship
with the United States. For various reasons Puerto Rico's political status
differs from that of the Pacific Islands that entered into Compacts of Free
Association with the United States. As sovereign states, these islands have
full right to conduct their own foreign relations, while the Commonwealth of
Puerto Rico has territorial status subject to United States congressional
authority under the Constitution's Territory Clause, “to dispose of and make
all needful Rules and Regulations respecting the Territory… belonging to the
United States.”. Puerto Rico does not have the right to unilaterally declare
independence, and at the last referendum (1998) the narrow majority voted for
"none of the above", which was a formally undefined alternative used by
commonwealth supporters to express their desire for an "enhanced commonwealth"
option. This kind of relationship also can be found in the Kingdom of the
Netherlands, which is a federacy. The continental part is organized like a
unitary state but the status of its territories (Aruba, since 1986, and the
Netherlands Antilles, since 1954 until 2010) can be considered dependencies or
"associated non-independent states". After the split-up of the Netherlands
Antilles, Curaçao and Saint Maarten are separate associated states like Aruba.
Additionally, Denmark operates in a similar manner to a federacy. The Faroes
and Greenland are two self-governing territories, or regions within the
Kingdom. The relationship between Denmark proper and the two territories is
semi-officially termed the "Rigsfællesskabet".
