Depression (economics) In economics, a depression is a sustained, long-term
downturn in economic activity in one or more economies. It is a more severe
downturn than a recession, which is seen by some economists as part of the
modern business cycle. Considered by some economists to be a rare and extreme
form of recession, a depression is characterized by its length; by abnormally
large increases in unemployment; falls in the availability of credit, often due
to some kind of banking or financial crisis; shrinking output as buyers dry up
and suppliers cut back on production and investment; large number of
bankruptcies including sovereign debt defaults; significantly reduced amounts
of trade and commerce, especially international; as well as highly volatile
relative currency value fluctuations, most often due to devaluations. Price
deflation, financial crises and bank failures are also common elements of a
depression that are not normally a part of a recession. Definitions. There are
also differences in the duration of depression across definitions. Some
economists refer only to the period when economic activity is declining. The
more common use, however, also encompasses the time until economic activity has
returned close to normal levels. A recession is briefly defined as a period of
declining economic activity spread across the economy (according to NBER).
Under the first definition, each depression will always coincide with a
recession, since the difference between a depression and a recession is the
severity of the fall in economic activity. In other words, each depression is
always a recession, sharing the same starting and ending dates and having the
same duration. Under the second definition, depressions and recessions will
always be distinct events however, having the same starting dates. This
definition of depression implies that a recession and a depression will have
different ending dates and thus distinct durations. Under this definition, the
length of a depression will always be longer than that of the recession
starting the same date. A useful example is the difference in the chronology of
the Great Depression in the U.S. under the view of alternative definitions.
Using the second definition of depression, most economists refer to the Great
Depression, as the period between 1929 and 1941. On the other hand, using the
first definition, the depression that started in August 1929 lasted until March
1933. Note that NBER, which publishes the recession (instead of depression)
dates for the U.S. economy, has identified two recessions during that period.
The first between August 1929 and March 1933 and the second starting in May
1937 and ending in June 1938. Terminology. Today the term "depression" is most
often associated with the Great Depression of the 1930s, but the term had been
in use long before then. Indeed, an early major American economic crisis, the
Panic of 1819, was described by then-president James Monroe as "a depression",
and the economic crisis immediately preceding the 1930s depression, the
Depression of 1920–21, was referred to as a "depression" by president Calvin
Coolidge. However, in the 19th and early 20th centuries, "financial" crises
were traditionally referred to as "panics", e.g., the 'major' Panic of 1907,
and the 'minor' Panic of 1910–1911, though the 1929 crisis was more commonly
called "The Crash", and the term "panic" has since fallen out of use. At the
time of the Great Depression (of the 1930s), the phrase "The Great Depression"
had already been used to refer to the period 1873–96 (in the United Kingdom),
or more narrowly 1873–79 (in the United States), which has since been renamed
the Long Depression. Common use of the phrase "The Great Depression" for the
1930s crisis is most frequently attributed to British economist Lionel Robbins,
whose 1934 book "The Great Depression" is credited with 'formalizing' the
phrase, though US president Herbert Hoover is widely credited with having
'popularized' the term/phrase, informally referring to the downturn as a
"depression", with such uses as "Economic depression cannot be cured by
legislative action or executive pronouncement", (December 1930, Message to
Congress) and "I need not recount to you that the world is passing through a
great depression" (1931). Occurrence. Due to the lack of an agreed definition
and the strong negative associations, the characterization of any period as a
"depression" is contentious. The term was frequently used for regional crises
from the early 19th century until the 1930s, and for the more widespread crises
of the 1870s and 1930s, but economic crises since 1945 have generally been
referred to as "recessions", with the 1970s global crisis referred to as
"stagflation", but not a depression. The only two eras commonly referred to at
the current time as "depressions" are the 1870s and 1930s. To some degree this
is simply a stylistic change, similar to the decline in the use of "panic" to
refer to financial crises, but it does also reflect that the economic cycle –
both in the United States and in most OECD countries – though not in all –
has been more moderate since 1945. There "have" been many periods of prolonged
economic underperformance in particular countries/regions since 1945, detailed
below, but terming these as "depressions" is controversial. The late-2000s
recession, which is the most significant global crisis since the Great
Depression, has at times been termed a depression, but this terminology is not
widely used, with the episode instead being referred to by other terms, such as
the "Great Recession". Notable Depressions. Great Depression. The best-known
depression was the Great Depression, which affected most national economies in
the world throughout the 1930s. This depression is generally considered to have
begun with the Wall Street Crash of 1929, and the crisis quickly spread to
other national economies. Between 1929 and 1933, the gross national product of
the United States decreased by 33% while the rate of unemployment increased to
25% (with industrial unemployment alone rising to approximately 35% – U.S.
employment was still over 25% agricultural). The probable causes of the Great
Depression include the loose money policies of the Federal Reserve during the
latter 1920s and the consequent misallocation of capital based on easy and
inexpensive credit, although this is still hotly debated. A long-term effect of
the Great Depression was the departure of every major currency from the gold
standard, although the initial impetus for this was World War II. See: Bretton
Woods Accord In any case, the world economy has simply outgrown the capacity of
additions to the world gold supply to accommodate the increase in world
population and increased trade without periodic, painful revaluations of any
currencies tied to gold. Long Depression. Starting with the adoption of the
gold standard in Britain and the United States, the Long Depression
(1873–1896) was indeed longer than what is now referred to as the Great
Depression, but shallower. However, it was known as "the Great Depression"
until the 1930s. Panic of 1837. The Panic of 1837 was an American financial
crisis, built on a speculative real estate market. The bubble burst on May 10,
1837 in New York City, when every bank stopped payment in gold and silver
coinage. The Panic was followed by a five-year depression, with the failure of
banks and record high unemployment levels. Regional Depressions Between 1973
and 2002. Several Latin American countries had severe downturns in the 1980s:
by the Kehoe and Prescott definition of a great depression as at least one year
with output 20% below trend, Argentina, Brazil, Chile, and Mexico experienced
great depressions in the 1980s, and Argentina experienced another in
1998–2002. This definition also includes the economic performance of New
Zealand from 1974–1992 and Switzerland from 1973 to the present, although
this designation for Switzerland has been controversial. Over the period
1980–2000, Sub-Saharan Africa broadly suffered a fall in absolute income
levels. Post-Communism. The economic crisis in the 1990s that struck former
members of the Soviet Union was almost twice as intense as the Great Depression
in the countries of Western Europe and the United States in the 1930s. Average
standards of living registered a catastrophic fall in the early 1990s in many
parts of the former Eastern Bloc - most notably, in post-Soviet states. Even
before Russia's financial crisis of 1998, Russia's GDP was half of what it had
been in the early 1990s. Some populations are still poorer today than they were
in 1989 (e.g. Ukraine, Moldova, Serbia, Central Asia, Caucasus). The collapse
of the Soviet planned economy and the transition to market economy resulted in
catastrophic declines in GDP of about 45% during the 1990–1996 period and
poverty in the region had increased more than tenfold. Finnish economists refer
to the Finnish economic decline around the breakup of the Soviet Union
(1989–1994) as a great depression; this is partly attributed to the breakup
of the Soviet Union, and partly to the Scandinavian banking crisis, which was
also suffered, to a lesser degree, by Sweden and Norway.
