Détournement A détournement is a technique developed in the 1950s by the
Letterist International, and consist in "turning expressions of the capitalist
system and its media culture against itself," like turning slogans and logos
against the advertisers or the political status quo. "Détournement" was
prominently used to set up subversive political pranks, an influential tactic
called situationist prank that was reprised by the punk movement in the late
1970s and inspired the culture jamming movement in the late 1980s. Definition.
In general it can be defined as a variation on a previous media work, in which
the newly created one has a meaning that is antagonistic or antithetical to the
original. The original media work that is "détourned" must be somewhat
familiar to the target audience, so that it can appreciate the opposition of
the new message. The artist or commentator making the variation can reuse only
some of the characteristic elements of the originating work. The term
"détournement" is borrowed from the French, the original language of the
Situationist International publications. A similar term more familiar to
English speakers would be "turnabout" or "derailment". Détournement is similar
to satirical parody, but employs more direct reuse or faithful mimicry of the
original works rather than constructing a new work which merely alludes
strongly to the original. It may be contrasted with recuperation, in which
originally subversive works and ideas are themselves appropriated by mainstream
media. One could view detournement as forming the opposite side of the coin to
'recuperation' (where radical ideas and images become safe and commodified), in
that images produced by the spectacle get altered and subverted so that rather
than supporting the "status quo", their meaning becomes changed in order to put
across a more radical or oppositional message. Guy Debord and Gil J Wolman
categorized détourned elements into two types: "minor détournements" and
"deceptive détournements". Minor détournements are détournements of elements
that in themselves are of no real importance such as a snapshot, a press
clipping, an everyday object which draw all their meaning from being placed in
a new context. Deceptive détournements are when already significant elements
such as a major political or philosophical text, great artwork or work of
literature take on new meanings or scope by being placed in a new context.
Détournement is the integration of past or present artistic production into a
superior construction of a milieu. In this sense there can be no situationist
painting or music, but only a situationist use of these means. In a more
primitive sense, détournement with the old cultural spheres is a method of
propaganda, a method that testifies to the wearing out and loss of importance
of those spheres. Examples after the Situationist International. In the United
States, Frank Discussion is widely known for his use of detournement in his
works dating from the late 70s through the present, particularly with the
Feederz. The use of détournement by Barbara Kruger familiarised many with the
technique, and it was extensively and effectively used as part of the early
HIV/AIDS activism of the late 1980s and early 1990s. Examples of contemporary
detournement include Adbusters' "subvertisements" and other instances of
culture jamming, as well as poems composed collaboratively by Marlene Mountain,
Paul Conneally, and others, in which quotations from such famous sources as the
Ten Commandments and quotations by United States President George W. Bush are
combined with haiku-like phrases to produce a larger work intended to subvert
the original source. The comic artist Brad Neely's reinterpretation of Harry
Potter, "Wizard People," took Warner Brother's first Harry Potter film, "The
Sorcerer's Stone," and substituted the original soundtrack with a narration
that casts the hero as a Nietzschean superman. The concept of détournement has
had a popular influence amongst contemporary radicals, and the technique can be
seen in action in the present day when looking at the work of Culture Jammers
including the Cacophony Society, Billboard Liberation Front, Occupy Movements
and Adbusters, whose 'subvertisements' 'detourn' Nike adverts, for example. In
this case, the original advertisement's imagery is altered in order to draw
attention to said company's policy of shifting their production base to cheap-
labour third-world 'free trade zones'. However, the line between 'recuperation'
and 'détournement' can become thin (or at least very fuzzy) at times, as Naomi
Klein points out in her book "No Logo". Here she details how corporations such
as Nike, Pepsi or Diesel have approached Culture Jammers and Adbusters and
offered them lucrative contracts in return for partaking in 'ironic'
promotional campaigns. She points out further irony by drawing attention to
merchandising produced in order to promote Adbusters' Buy Nothing Day, an
example of the recuperation of détournement if ever there was one. Klein's
arguments about irony rather than breaking down power structures are echoed by
Slavoj Žižek. Žižek argues that the kind of distance opened up by
detournement is the condition of possibility for ideology to operate: by
attacking and distancing oneself from the sign-systems of capital, the subject
creates a fantasy of transgression that "covers up" his/her actual complicity
with capitalism as an overarching system. In contrast, scholars are very fond
of pointing out the differences between hypergraphics, 'detournement', the
postmodern idea of appropriation and the Neoist use of plagiarism as the use of
different and similar techniques used for different and similar means, effects
and causes. The Neue Slowenische Kunst has a long history of aggressive
détournement of extreme political ideologies, as do several industrial music
groups, such as Die Krupps, Nitzer Ebb, KMFDM, and Front 242. Chris Morris uses
détournement and culture jamming extensively in his work, particularly in the
British television series "The Day Today" and "Brass Eye".
