Devaluation Devaluation in modern monetary policy is a reduction in the value
of a currency with respect to those goods, services or other monetary units
with which that currency can be exchanged. ‘Devaluation’ means official
lowering of the value of a country's currency within a fixed exchange rate
system, by which the monetary authority formally sets a new fixed rate with
respect to a foreign reference currency. In contrast, "depreciation" is used to
describe a decrease in a currency's value (relative to other major currency
benchmarks) due to "market forces", not government or central bank policy
actions. Under the second system central banks maintain the rates up or down by
buying or selling foreign currency, usually USD. In common modern usage, it
specifically implies an official lowering of the value of a country's currency
within a fixed exchange rate system, by which the monetary authority formally
sets a new fixed rate with respect to a foreign reference currency. In
contrast, depreciation is used for the unofficial increase in the exchange rate
in a floating exchange rate system. The opposite of devaluation is called
revaluation. "Depreciation" and "devaluation" are sometimes incorrectly used
interchangeably, but they always refer to values in terms of other currencies.
Inflation, on the other hand, refers to the value of the currency in goods and
services (related to its purchasing power). Altering the face value of a
currency without reducing its exchange rate is a redenomination, not a
devaluation or revaluation. Historical usage. Later, paper currencies were
issued, and governments decreed them to be redeemable for gold or silver (a
gold standard). Again, a government short on gold or silver might devalue by
abruptly decreeing a reduction in the currency's redemption value, reducing the
value of everyone's holdings. Devaluation in modern economies. Present day
currencies are usually fiat currencies with insignificant inherent value. Some
countries hold floating exchange rates while others maintain fixed exchange
rate policies against the United States dollar or other major currencies. These
fixed rates are usually maintained by a combination of legally enforced capital
controls or through government trading of foreign currency reserves to
manipulate the money supply. Under fixed exchange rates, persistent capital
outflows or trade deficits may lead countries to lower or abandon their fixed
rate policy, resulting in a devaluation (as persistent surpluses and capital
inflows may lead them towards revaluation). In an open market, the perception
that a devaluation is imminent may lead speculators to sell the currency in
exchange for the country's foreign reserves, increasing pressure on the issuing
country to make an actual devaluation. When speculators buy out all of the
foreign reserves, a balance of payments crisis occurs. Economists Paul Krugman
and Maurice Obstfeld present a theoretical model in which they state that the
balance of payments crisis occurs when the real exchange rate (exchange rate
adjusted for relative price differences between countries) is equal to the
nominal exchange rate (the stated rate). In practice, the onset of crisis has
typically occurred after the real exchange rate has depreciated below the
nominal rate. The reason for this is that speculators do not have perfect
information; they sometimes find out that a country is low on foreign reserves
well after the real exchange rate has fallen. In these circumstances, the
currency value will fall very far very rapidly. This is what occurred during
the 1994 economic crisis in Mexico. Generally, a steady process of inflation is
not considered a devaluation, although if a currency has a high level of
inflation, its value will naturally fall against gold or foreign currencies.
Especially where a country deliberately prints money (often a cause of
hyperinflation) to cover a persistent budget deficit without borrowing, this
may be considered a devaluation. In some cases, a country may revalue its
currency higher (the opposite of devaluation) in response to positive economic
conditions, to lower inflation, or to please investors and trading partners.
This would imply that existing currency increased in value, as opposed to the
case with redenomination where a country issues a new currency to replace an
old currency that had declined excessively in value (such as Turkey and Romania
in 2005, Argentina in 2002, Russia in 1998, Germany in 1923, or Bizone/Trizone
in 1948).
