Development economics Development economics is a branch of economics which
deals with economic aspects of the development process in low-income countries.
Its focus is not only on methods of promoting economic growth and structural
change but also on improving the potential for the mass of the population, for
example, through health and education and workplace conditions, whether through
public or private channels. Development economics involves the creation of
theories and methods that aid in the determination of policies and practices
and can be implemented at either the domestic or international level. This may
involve restructuring market incentives or using mathematical methods like
inter-temporal optimization for project analysis, or it may involve a mixture
of quantitative and qualitative methods. Unlike in many other fields of
economics, approaches in development economics may incorporate social and
political factors to devise particular plans. Also unlike many other fields of
economics, there is "no consensus" on what students should know. Different
approaches may consider the factors that contribute to economic convergence or
non-convergence across households, regions, and countries. Theories of
development economics. Mercantilism. The earliest Western theory of development
economics was mercantilism, which developed in the 17th century, paralleling
the rise of the nation state. Earlier theories had given little attention to
development. For example, Scholasticism the dominant school of thought during
medieval feudalism, emphasized reconciliation with Christian theology and
ethics, rather than development. The 16th- and 17th-century School of
Salamanca, credited as the earliest modern school of economics, likewise did
not address development specifically. Major European nations in the 17th and
18th century all adopted mercantilist ideals to varying degrees, the influence
only ebbing with the 18th-century development of physiocrats in France and
classical economics in Britain. Mercantilism held that a nation's prosperity
depended on its supply of capital, represented by bullion (gold, silver, and
trade value) held by the state. It emphasised the maintenance of a high
positive trade balance (maximising exports and minimising imports) as a means
of accumulating this bullion. To achieve a positive trade balance,
protectionist measures such as tariffs and subsidies to home industries were
advocated. Mercantilist development theory also advocated colonialism.
Theorists most associated with mercantilism include Philipp Wilhelm von
Hornick, who in his "Austria Over All, If She Only Will" of 1684 gave the only
comprehensive statement of mercantilist theory, emphasizing production and an
export-led economy. In France, mercantilist policy is most associated with
17th-century finance minister Jean-Baptiste Colbert, whose policies proved
influential in later American development. Mercantilist ideas continue in the
theories of economic nationalism and neomercantilism. Economic nationalism.
Following mercantilism was the related theory of economic nationalism,
promulgated in the 19th century related to the development and
industrialization of the United States and Germany, notably in the policies of
the American System in America and the Zollverein (customs union) in Germany. A
significant difference from mercantilism was the de-emphasis on colonies, in
favor of a focus on domestic production. The names most associated with 19th-
century economic nationalism are the American Alexander Hamilton, the German-
American Friedrich List, and the American Henry Clay. Hamilton's 1791 "Report
on Manufactures," his magnum opus, is the founding text of the American System,
and drew from the mercantilist economies of Britain under Elizabeth I and
France under Colbert. List's 1841 "Das Nationale System der Politischen
Ökonomie" (translated into English as The National System of Political
Economy), which emphasized stages of growth, proved influential in the US and
Germany, and nationalist policies were pursued by politician Henry Clay, and
later by Abraham Lincoln, under the influence of economist Henry Charles Carey.
Forms of economic nationalism and neomercantilism have also been key in Japan's
development in the 19th and 20th centuries, and the more recent development of
the Four Asian Tigers (Hong Kong, South Korea, Taiwan, and Singapore), and,
most significantly, China. Post-WWII theories. The origins of modern
development economics are often traced to the need for, and likely problems
with the industrialization of eastern Europe in the aftermath of World War II.
The key authors are Paul Rosenstein-Rodan, Kurt Mandelbaum, Ragnar Nurkse, and
Sir Hans Wolfgang Singer. Only after the war did economists turn their concerns
towards Asia, Africa and Latin America. At the heart of these studies, by
authors such as Simon Kuznets and W. Arthur Lewis was an analysis of not only
economic growth but also structural transformation. Linear-stages-of-growth
model. An early theory of development economics, the linear-stages-of-growth
model was first formulated in the 1950s by W. W. Rostow in "The Stages of
Growth: A Non-Communist Manifesto," following work of Marx and List. This
theory modifies Marx's stages theory of development and focuses on the
accelerated accumulation of capital, through the utilization of both domestic
and international savings as a means of spurring investment, as the primary
means of promoting economic growth and, thus, development. The linear-stages-
of-growth model posits that there are a series of five consecutive stages of
development which all countries must go through during the process of
development. These stages are "the traditional society, the pre-conditions for
take-off, the take-off, the drive to maturity, and the age of high mass-
consumption" Simple versions of the Harrod–Domar model provide a mathematical
illustration of the argument that improved capital investment leads to greater
economic growth. Such theories have been criticized for not recognizing that,
while necessary, capital accumulation is not a sufficient condition for
development. That is to say that this early and simplistic theory failed to
account for political, social and institutional obstacles to development.
Furthermore, this theory was developed in the early years of the Cold War and
was largely derived from the successes of the Marshall Plan. This has led to
the major criticism that the theory assumes that the conditions found in
developing countries are the same as those found in post-WWII Europe.
Structural-change theory. Structural-change theory deals with policies focused
on changing the economic structures of developing countries from being composed
primarily of subsistence agricultural practices to being a "more modern, more
urbanized, and more industrially diverse manufacturing and service economy."
There are two major forms of structural-change theory; W. Lewis' "two-sector
surplus model", which views agrarian societies as consisting of large amounts
of surplus labor which can be utilized to spur the development of an urbanized
industrial sector, and Hollis Chenery's "patterns of development" approach,
which holds that different countries become wealthy via different trajectories.
The "pattern" that a particular country will follow, in this framework, depends
on its size and resources, and potentially other factors including its current
income level and comparative advantages relative to other nations. Empirical
analysis in this framework studies the "sequential process through which the
economic, industrial and institutional structure of an underdeveloped economy
is transformed over time to permit new industries to replace traditional
agriculture as the engine of economic growth." Structural-change approaches to
development economics have faced criticism for their emphasis on urban
development at the expense of rural development which can lead to a substantial
rise in inequality between internal regions of a country. The two-sector
surplus model, which was developed in the 1950s, has been further criticized
for its underlying assumption that predominantly agrarian societies suffer from
a surplus of labor. Actual empirical studies have shown that such labor
surpluses are only seasonal and drawing such labor to urban areas can result in
a collapse of the agricultural sector. The patterns of development approach has
been criticized for lacking a theoretical framework. International dependence
theory. International dependence theories gained prominence in the 1970s as a
reaction to the failure of earlier theories to lead to widespread successes in
international development. Unlike earlier theories, international dependence
theories have their origins in developing countries and view obstacles to
development as being primarily external in nature, rather than internal. These
theories view developing countries as being economically and politically
dependent on more powerful, developed countries which have an interest in
maintaining their dominant position. There are three different, major
formulations of international dependence theory: neocolonial dependence theory,
the false-paradigm model, and the dualistic-dependence model. The first
formulation of international dependence theory, neocolonial dependence theory,
has its origins in Marxism and views the failure of many developing nations to
undergo successful development as being the result of the historical
development of the international capitalist system. Neoclassical theory. First
gaining prominence with the rise of several conservative governments in the
developed world during the 1980s, neoclassical theories represent a radical
shift away from International Dependence Theories. Neoclassical theories argue
that governments should not intervene in the economy; in other words, these
theories are claiming that an unobstructed free market is the best means of
inducing rapid and successful development. Competitive free markets
unrestrained by excessive government regulation are seen as being able to
naturally ensure that the allocation of resources occurs with the greatest
efficiency possible and the economic growth is raised and stabilized. It is
important to note that there are several different approaches within the realm
of neoclassical theory, each with subtle, but important, differences in their
views regarding the extent to which the market should be left unregulated.
These different takes on neoclassical theory are the "free market approach",
"public-choice theory", and the "market-friendly approach". Of the three, both
the free-market approach and public-choice theory contend that the market
should be totally free, meaning that any intervention by the government is
necessarily bad. Public-choice theory is arguably the more radical of the two
with its view, closely associated with libertarianism, that governments
themselves are rarely good and therefore should be as minimal as possible.
Academic economists have given varied policy advice to governments of
developing countries. See for example, Economy of Chile (Arnold Harberger),
Economic history of Taiwan (Sho-Chieh Tsiang). Anne Krueger noted in 1996 that
success and failure of policy recommendations worldwide had not consistently
been incorporated into prevailing academic writings on trade and development.
The market-friendly approach, unlike the other two, is a more recent
development and is often associated with the World Bank. This approach still
advocates free markets but recognizes that there are many imperfections in the
markets of many developing nations and thus argues that some government
intervention is an effective means of fixing such imperfections Topics of
research. Development economics also includes topics such as Third world debt,
and the functions of such organisations as the International Monetary Fund and
World Bank. In fact, the majority of development economists are employed by, do
consulting with, or receive funding from institutions like the IMF and the
World Bank. Many such economists are interested in ways of promoting stable and
sustainable growth in poor countries and areas, by promoting domestic self-
reliance and education in some of the lowest income countries in the world.
Where economic issues merge with social and political ones, it is referred to
as development studies. Growth indicator controversy. Per capita Gross Domestic
Product (GDP per head) is used by many developmental economists as an
approximation of general national well-being. However, these measures are
criticized as not measuring economic growth well enough, especially in
countries where there is much economic activity that is not part of measured
financial transactions (such as housekeeping and self-homebuilding), or where
funding is not available for accurate measurements to be made publicly
available for other economists to use in their studies (including private and
institutional fraud, in some countries). Even though per-capita GDP as measured
can make economic well-being appear smaller than it really is in some
developing countries, the discrepancy could be still bigger in a developed
country where people may perform outside of financial transactions an even
higher-value service than housekeeping or homebuilding as gifts or in their own
households, such as counseling, lifestyle coaching, a more valuable home décor
service, and time management. Even free choice can be considered to add value
to lifestyles without necessarily increasing the financial transaction amounts.
More recent theories of Human Development have begun to see beyond purely
financial measures of development, for example with measures such as medical
care available, education, equality, and political freedom. One measure used is
the Genuine Progress Indicator, which relates strongly to theories of
distributive justice. Actual knowledge about what creates growth is largely
unproven; however recent advances in econometrics and more accurate
measurements in many countries is creating new knowledge by compensating for
the effects of variables to determine probable causes out of merely
correlational statistics. Recent developments. The most prominent contemporary
development economist is perhaps the Nobel laureate, Amartya Sen. Recent
theories revolve around questions about what variables or inputs correlate or
affect economic growth the most: elementary, secondary, or higher education,
government policy stability, tariffs and subsidies, fair court systems,
available infrastructure, availability of medical care, prenatal care and clean
water, ease of entry and exit into trade, and equality of income distribution
(for example, as indicated by the Gini coefficient), and how to advise
governments about macroeconomic policies, which include all policies that
affect the economy. Education enables countries to adapt the latest technology
and creates an environment for new innovations. The cause of limited growth and
divergence in economic growth lies in the high rate of acceleration of
technological change by a small number of developed countries. These countries'
acceleration of technology was due to increased incentive structures for mass
education which in turn created a framework for the population to create and
adapt new innovations and methods. Furthermore, the content of their education
was composed of secular schooling that resulted in higher productivity levels
and modern economic growth. Researchers at the ODI thus emphasise the need to
ensure social protection is extended to allow universal access and that active
policy measures are introduced to encourage the private sector to create new
jobs as the economy grows (as opposed to jobless growth) and seek to employ
people from disadvantaged groups.
