Diplomacy Diplomacy (from Latin "diploma", meaning an official document, which
in turn derives from the Greek , meaning a folded paper/document) is the art
and practice of conducting negotiations between representatives of groups or
states. It usually refers to international diplomacy, the conduct of
international relations through the intercession of professional diplomats with
regard to issues of peace-making, trade, war, economics, culture, environment
and human rights. International treaties are usually negotiated by diplomats
prior to endorsement by national politicians. In an informal or social sense,
diplomacy is the employment of tact to gain strategic advantage or to find
mutually acceptable solutions to a common challenge, one set of tools being the
phrasing of statements in a non-confrontational, or polite manner. The
scholarly discipline of diplomatics, dealing with the study of old documents,
derives its name from the same source, but its modern meaning is quite distinct
from the activity of diplomacy. History. Asia. Ancient China. One of the
earliest realists in international relations theory was the 6th century BC
military strategist Sun Tzu (d. 496 BC), author of "The Art of War". He lived
during a time in which rival states were starting to pay less attention to
traditional respects of tutelage to the Zhou Dynasty (c. 1050–256 BC)
figurehead monarchs while each vied for power and total conquest. However, a
great deal of diplomacy in establishing allies, bartering land, and signing
peace treaties was necessary for each warring state, and the idealized role of
the "persuader/diplomat" developed. From the Battle of Baideng (200 BC) to the
Battle of Mayi (133 BC), the Han Dynasty was forced to uphold a marriage
alliance and pay an exorbitant amount of tribute (in silk, cloth, grain, and
other foodstuffs) to the powerful northern nomadic Xiongnu that had been
consolidated by Modu Shanyu. After the Xiongnu sent word to Emperor Wen of Han
(r. 180–157) that they controlled areas stretching from Manchuria to the
Tarim Basin oasis city-states, a treaty was drafted in 162 BC proclaiming that
everything north of the Great Wall belong to nomads' lands, while everything
south of it would be reserved for Han Chinese. The treaty was renewed no less
than nine times, but did not restrain some Xiongnu "tuqi" from raiding Han
borders. That was until the far-flung campaigns of Emperor Wu of Han (r.
141–87 BC) which shattered the unity of the Xiongnu and allowed Han to
conquer the Western Regions; under Wu, in 104 BC the Han armies ventured as far
Fergana in Central Asia to battle the Yuezhi who had conquered Hellenistic
Greek areas. The Koreans and Japanese during the Chinese Tang Dynasty
(618–907 AD) looked to the Chinese capital of Chang'an as the hub of
civilization and emulated its central bureaucracy as the model of governance.
The Japanese sent frequent embassies to China in this period, although they
halted these trips in 894 when the Tang seemed on the brink of collapse. After
the devastating An Shi Rebellion from 755 to 763, the Tang Dynasty was in no
position to reconquer Central Asia and the Tarim Basin. After several conflicts
with the Tibetan Empire spanning several different decades, the Tang finally
made a truce and signed a peace treaty with them in 841. In the 11th century
during the Song Dynasty (960–1279), there were cunning ambassadors such as
Shen Kuo and Su Song who achieved diplomatic success with the Liao Dynasty, the
often hostile Khitan neighbor to the north. Both diplomats secured the rightful
borders of the Song Dynasty through knowledge of cartography and dredging up
old court archives. There was also a triad of warfare and diplomacy between
these two states and the Tangut Western Xia Dynasty to the northwest of Song
China (centered in modern-day Shaanxi). After warring with the Lý Dynasty of
Vietnam from 1075 to 1077, Song and Lý made a peace agreement in 1082 to
exchange the respective lands they had captured from each other during the war.
Long before the Tang and Song dynasties, the Chinese had sent envoys into
Central Asia, India, and Persia, starting with Zhang Qian in the 2nd century
BC. Another notable event in Chinese diplomacy was the Chinese embassy mission
of Zhou Daguan to the Khmer Empire of Cambodia in the 13th century. Chinese
diplomacy was a necessity in the distinctive period of Chinese exploration.
Since the Tang Dynasty (618–907 AD), the Chinese also became heavily invested
in sending diplomatic envoys abroad on maritime missions into the Indian Ocean,
to India, Persia, Arabia, East Africa, and Egypt. Chinese maritime activity was
increased dramatically during the commercialized period of the Song Dynasty,
with new nautical technologies, many more private ship owners, and an
increasing amount of economic investors in overseas ventures. During the Mongol
Empire (1206–1294) the Mongols created something similar to today's
diplomatic passport called paiza. The paiza were in three different types
(golden, silver, and copper) depending on the envoy's level of importance. With
the paiza, there came authority that the envoy can ask for food, transport,
place to stay from any city, village, or clan within the empire with no
difficulties. From the 17th century the Qing Dynasty concluded a series of
treaties with Czarist Russia, beginning with the Treaty of Nerchinsk in the
year 1689. This was followed up by the Aigun Treaty and the Convention of
Peking in the mid-19th century. As European power spread around the world in
the 18th and 19th centuries so too did its diplomatic model, and Asian
countries adopted European diplomatic systems. Ancient India. Ancient India,
with its kingdoms and dynasties, had a long tradition of diplomacy. The oldest
treatise on statecraft and diplomacy, "Arthashastra", is attributed to Kautilya
(also known as Chanakya), who was the principal adviser to Chandragupta Maurya,
the founder of the Maurya dynasty who ruled in the 3rd century BC, (whose
capital was Patliputra, today's Patna, the chief city of Bihar state).
"Arthashastra" is a complete work on the art of kingship, with long chapters on
taxation and on the raising and maintenance of armies. It also incorporates a
theory of diplomacy, of how in a situation of mutually contesting kingdoms, the
wise king build alliances and tries to checkmate his adversaries. The envoys
sent at the time to the courts of other kingdoms tended to reside for extended
periods of time, and "Arthashastra" contains advice on the deportment of the
envoy, including the trenchant suggestion that 'he should sleep alone'. The
highest morality for the king is that his kingdom should prosper. It is also
good to note that Lord Krishna, in the epic Mahabharata, acted as a divine
diplomat and statesman between the Kuru and Pandava dynasties. Modern Asia.
Diplomatic relations within the Early Modern era of Asia were depicted as an
environment of prestige and Status. It was maintained that one must be of noble
ancestry in order to represent an autonomous state within the international
arena. Therefore the position of diplomat was often revered as an element of
the elitist class within Asia. A state's ability to practice diplomacy has been
one of the underlying defining characteristics of an autonomous state. It is
this practice that has been employed since the conception of the first city-
states within the international spectrum. Diplomats in Asia were originally
sent only for the purpose of negotiation. They would be required to immediately
return after their task was completed. The majority of diplomats initially
constituted the relatives of the ruling family. A high rank was bestowed upon
them in order to present a sense of legitimacy with regards to their presence.
Italy, the Ottoman Empire, and China were the first real states that
perpetuated environments of diplomacy. During the early modern era diplomacy
evolved to become a crucial element of international relations within the
Mediterranean and Asia. Europe. Ancient roots. The ability to practice
diplomacy is one of the defining elements of a state, diplomacy has been
practiced since the inception of civilization. In Europe, diplomacy begins with
the first city-states formed in ancient Greece. Diplomats were sent only for
specific negotiations, and would return immediately after their mission
concluded. Diplomats were usually relatives of the ruling family or of very
high rank in order to give them legitimacy when they sought to negotiate with
the other state. The origins of diplomacy are in the strategic and competitive
exchange of impressive gifts, which may be traced to the Bronze Age and
recognized as an aspect of Homeric guest-friendship. Thus diplomacy and trade
have been inexorably linked from the outset. "In the framework of diplomatic
relations it was customary for Byzantine emperors and Muslim rulers, especially
the 'Abbāsids and the Fātimids, as well as for Muslim rulers between
themselves, to exchange precious gifts, with which they attempted to impress or
surpass their counterparts," remarks David Jacoby, in the context of the
economics of silk in cultural exchange among Byzantium, Islam and the Latin
West: merchants accompanied emissaries, who often traveled on commercial ships.
At a later date, it will be recalled that the English adventurer and trader
Anthony Sherley convinced the Persian ruler to send the first Persian embassy
to Europe (1599–1602). Ancient Greece. The Greek City States on some
occasions sent envoys to each other in order to negotiate specific issues, such
as war and peace or commercial relations, but did not have diplomatic
representatives regularly posted in each other's territory. However, some of
the functions given to modern diplomatic representatives were in Classical
Greece filled by a proxenos, who was a citizen of the host city having a
particular relations of friendship with another city – a relationship often
hereditary in a particular family. Modern Europe. In Europe, early modern
diplomacy's origins are often traced to the states of Northern Italy in the
early Renaissance, with the first embassies being established in the 13th
century. Milan played a leading role, especially under Francesco Sforza who
established permanent embassies to the other city states of Northern Italy.
Tuscany and Venice were also flourishing centres of diplomacy from the 14th
century onwards. It was in the Italian Peninsula that many of the traditions of
modern diplomacy began, such as the presentation of an ambassador's credentials
to the head of state. From Italy the practice was spread to other European
regions. Milan was the first to send a representative to the court of France in
1455. However, Milan refused to host French representatives fearing espionage
and that the French representatives would intervene in its internal affairs. As
foreign powers such as France and Spain became increasingly involved in Italian
politics the need to accept emissaries was recognized. Soon the major European
powers were exchanging representatives. Spain was the first to send a permanent
representative; it appointed an ambassador to the Court of England in 1487. By
the late 16th century, permanent missions became customary. The Holy Roman
Emperor, however, did not regularly send permanent legates, as they could not
represent the interests of all the German princes (who were in theory all
subordinate to the Emperor, but in practice each independent). During that
period the rules of modern diplomacy were further developed. The top rank of
representatives was an ambassador. At that time an ambassador was a nobleman,
the rank of the noble assigned varying with the prestige of the country he was
delegated to. Strict standards developed for ambassadors, requiring they have
large residences, host lavish parties, and play an important role in the court
life of their host nation. In Rome, the most prized posting for a Catholic
ambassador, the French and Spanish representatives would have a retinue of up
to a hundred. Even in smaller posts, ambassadors were very expensive. Smaller
states would send and receive envoys, who were a rung below ambassador.
Somewhere between the two was the position of minister plenipotentiary.
Diplomacy was a complex affair, even more so than now. The ambassadors from
each state were ranked by complex levels of precedence that were much disputed.
States were normally ranked by the title of the sovereign; for Catholic nations
the emissary from the Vatican was paramount, then those from the kingdoms, then
those from duchies and principalities. Representatives from republics were
ranked the lowest (which often angered the leaders of the numerous German,
Scandinavian and Italian republics). Determining precedence between two
kingdoms depended on a number of factors that often fluctuated, leading to
near-constant squabbling. Ambassadors, nobles with little foreign experience
and no expectation of a career in diplomacy, needed to be supported by large
embassy staff. These professionals would be sent on longer assignments and
would be far more knowledgeable than the higher-ranking officials about the
host country. Embassy staff would include a wide range of employees, including
some dedicated to espionage. The need for skilled individuals to staff
embassies was met by the graduates of universities, and this led to a great
increase in the study of international law, modern languages, and history at
universities throughout Europe. At the same time, permanent foreign ministries
began to be established in almost all European states to coordinate embassies
and their staffs. These ministries were still far from their modern form, and
many of them had extraneous internal responsibilities. Britain had two
departments with frequently overlapping powers until 1782. They were also far
smaller than they are currently. France, which boasted the largest foreign
affairs department, had only some 70 full-time employees in the 1780s. The
elements of modern diplomacy slowly spread to Eastern Europe and Russia,
arriving by the early 18th century. The entire edifice would be greatly
disrupted by the French Revolution and the subsequent years of warfare. The
revolution would see commoners take over the diplomacy of the French state, and
of those conquered by revolutionary armies. Ranks of precedence were abolished.
Napoleon also refused to acknowledge diplomatic immunity, imprisoning several
British diplomats accused of scheming against France. After the fall of
Napoleon, the Congress of Vienna of 1815 established an international system of
diplomatic rank. Disputes on precedence among nations (and therefore the
appropriate diplomatic ranks used) persisted for over a century until after
World War II, when the rank of ambassador became the norm. In between that
time, figures such as the German Chancellor Otto von Bismarck were renowned for
international diplomacy. Middle East. Ancient Egypt, Canaan, and Hittite
Empire. Some of the earliest known diplomatic records are the Amarna letters
written between the pharaohs of the Eighteenth dynasty of Egypt and the Amurru
rulers of Canaan during the 14th century BC. Following the Battle of Kadesh in
"c". 1274 BC during the Nineteenth dynasty, the pharaoh of Egypt and ruler of
the Hittite Empire created one of the first known international peace treaties
which survives in stone tablet fragments. Ottoman Empire. Relations with the
government of the Ottoman Empire (known to Italian states as the Sublime Porte)
were particularly important to Italian states. The maritime republics of Genoa
and Venice depended less and less upon their nautical capabilities, and more
and more upon the perpetuation of good relations with the Ottomans.
Interactions between various merchants, diplomats, and religious men between
the Italian and Ottoman empires helped inaugurate and create new forms of
diplomacy and statecraft. Eventually the primary purpose of a diplomat, which
was originally a negotiator, evolved into a persona that represented an
autonomous state in all aspects of political affairs. It became evident that
all other sovereigns felt the need to accommodate themselves diplomatically,
due to the emergence of the powerful political environment of the Ottoman
Empire. One could come to the conclusion that the atmosphere of diplomacy
within the early modern period revolved around a foundation of conformity to
Ottoman culture. Diplomatic immunity. The sanctity of diplomats has long been
observed. This sanctity has come to be known as diplomatic immunity. While
there have been a number of cases where diplomats have been killed, this is
normally viewed as a great breach of honour. Genghis Khan and the Mongols were
well known for strongly insisting on the rights of diplomats, and they would
often wreak horrific vengeance against any state that violated these rights.
Diplomatic rights were established in the mid-17th century in Europe and have
spread throughout the world. These rights were formalized by the 1961 Vienna
Convention on Diplomatic Relations, which protects diplomats from being
persecuted or prosecuted while on a diplomatic mission. If a diplomat does
commit a serious crime while in a host country he may be declared as persona
non grata (unwanted person). Such diplomats are then often tried for the crime
in their homeland. Diplomatic communications are also viewed as sacrosanct, and
diplomats have long been allowed to carry documents across borders without
being searched. The mechanism for this is the so-called "diplomatic bag" (or,
in some countries, the "diplomatic pouch"). While radio and digital
communication have become more standard for embassies, diplomatic pouches are
still quite common and some countries, including the United States, declare
entire shipping containers as diplomatic pouches to bring sensitive material
(often building supplies) into a country. In times of hostility, diplomats are
often withdrawn for reasons of personal safety, as well as in some cases when
the host country is friendly but there is a perceived threat from internal
dissidents. Ambassadors and other diplomats are sometimes recalled temporarily
by their home countries as a way to express displeasure with the host country.
In both cases, lower-level employees still remain to actually do the business
of diplomacy. Diplomacy and espionage. Diplomacy is closely linked to espionage
or gathering of intelligence. Embassies are bases for both diplomats and spies,
and some diplomats are essentially openly acknowledged spies. For instance, the
job of military attachés includes learning as much as possible about the
military of the nation to which they are assigned. They do not try to hide this
role and, as such, are only invited to events allowed by their hosts, such as
military parades or air shows. There are also deep-cover spies operating in
many embassies. These individuals are given fake positions at the embassy, but
their main task is to illegally gather intelligence, usually by coordinating
spy rings of locals or other spies. For the most part, spies operating out of
embassies gather little intelligence themselves and their identities tend to be
known by the opposition. If discovered, these diplomats can be expelled from an
embassy, but for the most part counter-intelligence agencies prefer to keep
these agents "in situ" and under close monitoring. The information gathered by
spies plays an increasingly important role in diplomacy. Arms-control treaties
would be impossible without the power of reconnaissance satellites and agents
to monitor compliance. Information gleaned from espionage is useful in almost
all forms of diplomacy, everything from trade agreements to border disputes.
Diplomatic resolution of problems. Various processes and procedures have
evolved over time for handling diplomatic issues and disputes. Arbitration and
mediations. Nations sometimes resort to international arbitration when faced
with a specific question or point of contention in need of resolution. For most
of history, there were no official or formal procedures for such proceedings.
They were generally accepted to abide by general principles and protocols
related to international law and justice. Sometimes these took the form of
formal arbitrations and mediations. In such cases a commission of diplomats
might be convened to hear all sides of an issue, and to come some sort of
ruling based on international law. In the modern era, much of this work is
often carried out by the International Court of Justice at The Hague, or other
formal commissions, agencies and tribunals, working under the United Nations.
Below are some examples. Conferences. Other times, resolutions were sought
through the convening of international conferences. In such cases, there are
fewer ground rules, and fewer formal applications of international law.
However, participants are expected to guide themselves through principles of
international fairness, logic, and protocol. Negotiations. Sometimes nations
convene official negotiation processes to settle an issue or dispute between
several nations which are parties to a dispute. These are similar to the
conferences mentioned above, as there are technically no established rules or
procedures. However, there are general principles and precedents which help
define a course for such proceedings. Some examples are Diplomatic recognition.
Diplomatic recognition is an important factor in determining whether a nation
is an independent state. Receiving recognition is often difficult, even for
countries which are fully sovereign. For many decades after its becoming
independent, even many of the closest allies of the Dutch Republic refused to
grant it full recognition. Today there are a number of independent entities
without widespread diplomatic recognition, most notably the Republic of China
(ROC)/Taiwan on Taiwan Island. Since the 1970s, most nations have stopped
officially recognizing the ROC's existence on Taiwan, at the insistence of the
People's Republic of China (PRC). Currently, the United States and other
nations maintain informal relations through "de facto" embassies, with names
such as the American Institute in Taiwan. Similarly, Taiwan's de facto
embassies abroad are known by names such as the Taipei Economic and Cultural
Representative Office. This was not always the case, with the US maintaining
official diplomatic ties with the ROC, recognizing it as the sole and
legitimate government of "all of China" until 1979, when these relations were
broken off as a condition for establishing official relations with PR China.
The Palestinian National Authority has its own diplomatic service, however
Palestinian representatives in most Western countries are not accorded
diplomatic immunity, and their missions are referred to as Delegations General.
Other unrecognized regions which claim independence include Abkhazia,
Transnistria, Somaliland, South Ossetia, Nagorno Karabakh, and the Turkish
Republic of Northern Cyprus. Lacking the economic and political importance of
Taiwan, these nations tend to be much more diplomatically isolated. Though used
as a factor in judging sovereignty, Article 3 of the Montevideo Convention
states, "The political existence of the state is independent of recognition by
other states." Informal diplomacy. Informal diplomacy (sometimes called Track
II diplomacy) has been used for centuries to communicate between powers. Most
diplomats work to recruit figures in other nations who might be able to give
informal access to a country's leadership. In some situations, such as between
the United States and the People's Republic of China a large amount of
diplomacy is done through semi-formal channels using interlocutors such as
academic members of thinktanks. This occurs in situations where governments
wish to express intentions or to suggest methods of resolving a diplomatic
situation, but do not wish to express a formal position. Track II diplomacy is
a specific kind of informal diplomacy, in which non-officials (academic
scholars, retired civil and military officials, public figures, social
activists) engage in dialogue, with the aim of conflict resolution, or
confidence-building. Sometimes governments may fund such Track II exchanges.
Sometimes the exchanges may have no connection at all with governments, or may
even act in defiance of governments; such exchanges are called Track III. On
some occasion a former holder of an official position continues to carry out an
informal diplomatic activity after retirement. In some cases, governments
welcome such activity, for example as a means of establishing an initial
contact with a hostile state of group without being formally committed. In
other cases, however, such informal diplomats seek to promote a political
agenda different from that of the government currently in power. Such informal
diplomacy is practiced by former US Presidents Jimmy Carter and (to a lesser
extent) Bill Clinton and by the former Israeli diplomat and minister Yossi
Beilin (see Geneva Initiative). Small state diplomacy. Small state diplomacy is
receiving increasing attention in diplomatic studies and international
relations. Small states are particularly affected by developments which are
determined beyond their borders such as climate change, water security and
shifts in the global economy. Diplomacy is the main vehicle by which small
states are able to ensure that their goals are addressed in the global arena.
These factors mean that small states have strong incentives to support
international cooperation. But with limited resources at their disposal,
conducting effective diplomacy poses unique challenges for small states.
