Direct rule Direct rule was the term given, during the late 20th and early 21st
centuries, to the administration of Northern Ireland directly from Westminster,
seat of United Kingdom government. The most recent period of direct rule came
to an end on 8 May 2007 when power was restored to the Northern Ireland
Assembly following April elections and a power-sharing agreement among major
parties. Although everyday matters under direct rule were handled by government
departments within Northern Ireland itself, major policy was determined by the
British Government's Northern Ireland Office, under the direction of the
Secretary of State for Northern Ireland; and legislation was introduced,
amended, or repealed by means of Order in Council (effectively, rule by
decree). Direct Rule did not mean that the people of Northern Ireland had no
democratic say in how they were governed; like other parts of the United
Kingdom they elected (and still elect) members of parliament to the Parliament
of the United Kingdom to which the Northern Ireland Office is responsible. But
it did result in the existence of an administration specific to Northern
Ireland which did not have a specifically Northern Irish mandate. The system of
Direct Rule was originally introduced on 28 March 1972 under the terms of the
UK's Northern Ireland (Temporary Provisions) Act 1972, which also suspended the
Parliament of Northern Ireland ("Stormont"). The British Government sought to
establish a Northern Ireland Assembly in 1973 (under the Sunningdale Agreement;
this was brought down by Unionist action), in 1982 (this time boycotted by
Nationalists), and more recently under the terms of the Good Friday Agreement
of 1998. Each time, the intention in principle was that the Assembly would take
over the political governance of Northern Ireland, and that direct rule would
thus come to an end. The results of the Good Friday Agreement were the most
successful at achieving this; however, the Assembly was nevertheless suspended
(and direct rule re-imposed) for over three months starting in February 2000,
twice briefly in August and September of 2001, and again from October 2002
until the spring of 2007. Both unionists and nationalists frequently objected
to direct rule, since the system gives the people of Northern Ireland
relatively little democratic say over their own governance. However, some
unionists accepted and were content to go along with the system since it seemed
to show the province as an integral part of the UK; while some nationalists
accepted direct rule if only because they believed that politicians in London
are less hostile to Northern Ireland's Catholic community than a government
elected by the local Protestant majority.
