Direct action Direct action occurs when a group of people take an action which
is intended to reveal an existing problem, highlight an alternative, or
demonstrate a possible solution to a social issue. This can include nonviolent
and less often violent activities which target persons, groups, or property
deemed offensive to the direct action participants. Examples of direct action
can include strikes, workplace occupations, political violence, nonviolent
resistance, sabotage, property destruction, blockades, etc. By contrast,
electoral politics, diplomacy, negotiation, and arbitration are not usually
described as direct action, as they are politically mediated. Non-violent
actions are sometimes a form of civil disobedience, and may involve a degree of
intentional law-breaking where persons place themselves in arrestable
situations in order to make a political statement but other actions (such as
strikes) may not violate criminal law. The aim is to either obstruct another
political agent or political organization from performing some practice to
which the activists object; or to solve perceived problems which traditional
societal institutions (governments, powerful churches or establishment trade
unions) are not addressing to the satisfaction of the direct action
participants. In general, direct action is often used by those seeking social
change, and non violent direct action in particular has historically been a
regular feature of the tactics employed by social change movements. History.
Direct action tactics have been around for as long as conflicts have existed
but it is not known when the term first appeared. The radical union the
Industrial Workers of the World first mentioned the term "direct action" in a
publication in reference to a Chicago strike conducted in 1910. Other noted
historical practitioners of direct action include the US Civil Rights Movement,
the Global Justice Movement, the Suffragettes, revolutionary Che Guevara, and
certain environmental advocacy groups. American anarchist Voltairine de Cleyre
wrote a famous essay called "Direct Action" in 1912 which is widely cited
today. In this essay, de Cleyre points to historical examples such as the
Boston Tea Party and the American anti-slavery movement, noting that "direct
action has always been used, and has the historical sanction of the very people
now reprobating it." Dr. Martin Luther King felt that non-violent direct
action's goal was to "create such a crisis and foster such a tension" as to
demand a response. The rhetoric of both Martin Luther King and Mohandas Gandhi
promoted non-violent revolutionary direct action as a means to social change.
By the middle of the 20th century, the sphere of direct action had undoubtedly
expanded, though the meaning of the term had perhaps contracted. Most campaigns
for social change—notably those seeking suffrage, improved working
conditions, civil rights, abortion rights or an end to abortion, an end to
gentrification, and environmental protection— claim to employ at least some
types of violent or nonviolent direct action. Some sections of the anti-nuclear
movement used direct action, particularly during the 1980s. Groups opposing the
introduction of cruise missiles into the United Kingdom employed tactics such
as breaking into and occupying United States air bases, and blocking roads to
prevent the movement of military convoys and disrupt military projects. In the
US, mass protests opposed nuclear energy, weapons, and military intervention
throughout the decade, resulting in thousands of arrests. Many groups also set
up semi-permanent "peace camps" outside air bases such as Molesworth and
Greenham Common, and at the Nevada Test Site. Anti-abortion groups in the
United States, particularly Operation Rescue, often used non-violent sit-ins at
the entrances of abortion clinics as a form of direct action in the late 1980s
and early 1990s. Anti-globalization activists made headlines around the world
in 1999, when they forced the Seattle WTO Ministerial Conference of 1999 to end
early with direct action tactics. The goal that they had, shutting down the
meetings, was directly accomplished by placing their bodies and other debris
between the WTO delegates and the building they were meant to meet in.
Activists also engaged in property destruction as a direct way of stating their
opposition to corporate culture—this can be viewed as a direct action if the
goal was to shut down those stores for a period of time, or an indirect action
if the goal was influencing corporate policy. One of the largest direct actions
in recent years took place in San Francisco the day after the Iraq War began in
2003. Twenty-thousand people occupied the streets and over 2,000 people were
arrested in affinity group actions throughout downtown San Francisco, home to
military-related corporations such as Bechtel. (See March 20, 2003 anti-war
protest). Direct action has also been used on a smaller scale. Refugee Salim
Rambo was saved from being deported from the UK back to the Democratic Republic
of the Congo when one person stood up on his flight and refused to sit down.
After a two-hour delay the man was arrested, but the pilot refused to fly with
Rambo on board. Salim Rambo was ultimately released from state custody and
remains free today. Nonviolent direct action. Nonviolent direct action seeks to
create such a crisis and foster such a tension that a community which has
constantly refused to negotiate is forced to confront the issue. It seeks so to
dramatize the issue that it can no longer be ignored. One major debate is
whether destruction of property can be included within the realm of
nonviolence. This debate can be illustrated by the response to groups like the
Earth Liberation Front and Animal Liberation Front, which use property
destruction and sabotage as direct action tactics. Although these types of
actions are prosecuted as violence, those groups justify their actions by
claiming that violence is harm directed towards living things and not property.
The issue of whether sabotage is a form of violence is difficult to resolve in
purely philosophical terms, but the use of sabotage as a methodology can be
contrasted with minor property damage that is a small but necessary part of a
non-violent campaign methodology such as breaking locks and fences to gain
entry to a site. In the United States, the term has largely come to signify
civil disobedience, and protest in general. In the 1980s, a California direct
action protest group called Livermore Action Group called its newspaper "Direct
Action". The paper ran for 25 issues, and covered hundreds of nonviolent
actions around the world. The book "Direct Action: An Historical Novel" took
its name from this paper, and records dozens of actions in the San Francisco
Bay Area. Human rights activists have used direct action in the ongoing
campaign to close the School of the Americas, renamed in 2001 the Western
Hemisphere Institute for Security Cooperation. As a result, 245 SOA Watch human
rights defenders have collectively spent almost 100 years in prison. More than
50 people have served probation sentences. "Direct Action" has also served as
the moniker of at least two groups: the French "Action Directe" as well as the
Canadian group more popularly known as the Squamish Five. "Direct Action" is
also the name of the magazine of the Australian Wobblies. The UK's Solidarity
Federation currently publishes a magazine called "Direct Action". Until 1990,
Australia's Socialist Workers Party published a party paper also named "Direct
Action", in honour of the Wobblies' history. One of the group's descendants,
the Revolutionary Socialist Party, has again started a publication of this
name. Food Not Bombs is often described as direct action because individuals
involved directly act to solve a social problem; people are hungry and yet
there is food available. Food Not Bombs is inherently dedicated to non-
violence. A museum that chronicles the history of direct action and grassroots
activism in the Lower East Side of New York City, the Museum of Reclaimed Urban
Space, opened in 2012. Violent direct action. Violent direct action is any
direct action which utilizes physical injurious force against persons or
property. While groups such as Animal Liberation Front and Sea Shepherd claim
that destruction of property is not violence, US and international law include
acts against property in the definition of violence. Examples of violent direct
action include: destruction of property, rioting, lynching, terrorism,
political assassination, graffiti, freeing political prisoners, fighting
against wartime occupation, interfering with police actions, self-defense, and
armed insurrection. However, under this definition Jesus, Muhammad and Nelson
Mandela are examples of individuals who have practised violent direct action.
The Christian pacifist group, the Plowshares Movement, and the women's right-
to-vote group, the Suffragettes, would have also used violent direct action to
advance their aims. Historically, the Boston Tea Party is an early example of
American violent direct action. An example group that promotes direct action
against property is the Sea Shepherd Conservation Society, which boasts of
having sunk several whaling or fisheries vessels, though intentionally without
loss of life. United Kingdom. The environmental direct action movement in the
United Kingdom started in 1990 with the forming of the first UK Earth First!
group. The movement rapidly grew from the 1992 Twyford Down protests,
culminating in 1997. For a fictional representation of this read Birds, Booze &
Bulldozers by Peter Styles. There are now several organisations in the United
Kingdom campaigning for action on climate change that use non-violent direct
action, including Camp for Climate Action, Plane Stupid and Greenpeace. This
has resulted in environmental campaigners being labelled as extremists by the
Ministry of Justice.
