Disability Determination Services Disability Determination Services, commonly
called DDS, are state agencies, funded by the United States Federal Government.
Their purpose is to make disability findings for the Social Security
Administration. Applicants for Social Security Disability Insurance (SSDI) or
Supplemental Security Income (SSI) file applications for disability benefits at
local Social Security field offices. If the application is accepted it is sent
to the DDS in the state where the applicant lives to have a person's claim of
disability assessed. The claim is either approved or denied at the DDS for
disability qualification. The claim is then returned to the originating SSA
office to finish processing. Methods used. Applicant's own statement. The
applicant is requested to provide his/her own information on his/her
disability. During the application process, it is requested that the applicant
list all conditions that contribute to his/her disability, and how they prevent
him/her from working. In addition to this information being requested during
the application process, the applicant is mailed a questionnaire. The
questionnaire contains questions pertaining to the applicant's activity before
and after s/he became disabled. The questions that are asked include what his/
her daily activities are and how the disability has affected his/her ability to
perform them. These include activities like dressing, bathing, grooming, food
shopping, meal preparation, housekeeping, laundry, and transportation. While an
applicant's own words alone are usually not sufficient to qualify him/her for
approval, they can play quite a high role in a decision to approve or deny.
Since the decision is based not on one's medical conditions alone, but on how
they impact his/her ability to earn an income, it is necessary to ascertain
such a relationship. An issue in the use of the applicant's own statement is
that the truthfulness can be questionable. While making a decision can be
difficult in the absence of these statements, an applicant with expertise in
the system, or who is able to obtain help from an expert may be able to
influence the decision by the use of particular words and phrases. Medical
records. The applicant's medical records are obtained from physicians involved
in the current treatment of the applicant. The physician(s) provide information
on the condition(s) for which the applicant is being treated, and how they
impede the applicant's ability to work. In many cases, DDS will send the
applicant to one or more physicians for a medical examination, paid by DDS.
This most often occurs in the absence of a physician with an existing treating
relationship with the applicant who can verify an impairment alleged by the
applicant. The examination will be used to verify the information provided by
other sources, and to provide a more up-to-date record in making a
determination. In many cases, a single sympathetic physician will "write off"
an applicant who is really able to work as being disabled. Additionally, many
physicians have an interest in providing this assistance to uninsured patients,
since the patient would then be able to receive Medicaid and provide the
physican with increased income. Thereafter, examiners are more likely to
approve an application if the applicant has seen more physicians. Study of
applicant's life. Staff of the DDS will often contact the applicant or other
people who know the applicant in order to obtain descriptions of "Activities of
Daily Living" (ADLs). These ADLs can be combined with the objective medical
opinion and the opinions of medical sources to build an assessment of what the
applicant can or can not do in a typical day. Rarely, and in only a limited
number of locations, an external investigation can be conducted by a DDS
referally to a "Cooperative Disability Investigations" (CDI) unit. Such a
referral is made only when fraud is suspected. The purpose is to corroborate
that the applicant's statements reflect his/her real life activities. For
example, there are cases when one will file for disability, falsely claiming to
be unable to engage in various forms of physical activity. The fraudulent
applicant is then observed performing tasks outside of a work setting that
require the same skills. Such information could be used to then deny benefits.
The examiner and his/her representatives may also call or otherwise obtain
statements from those known to the applicant. These persons may include
relatives, friends, acquaintances, neighbors, co-workers, and teachers. These
questions will be asked in a manner in which evidence may be corroborated. How
the decision is made. The decision is made based on whether or not the
applicant is able to perform work that s/he has done in the past or is trained
to do, and is likely to be able to perform and find employment in given his/her
disability. It is for this reason that two people with identical disabilities
could have very differing outcomes in their applications. The legal definition
of a disability that qualifies an applicant for benefits is: “inability to
engage in any substantial gainful activity by reason of any medically
determinable physical or mental impairment which can be expected to result in
death or which has lasted or can be expected to last for a continuous period of
not less than 12 months.” For adult applicants, Social Security
Administration regulations specify a five-step process for making the decision.
A modified process is used in the case of children for whom Supplemental
Security Income benefits are being claimed (as children are not expected to
work). Contrary to what many think, simply "being disabled" by any definition
does not alone qualify one to automatically be approved. While one who is able
to walk, talk, and manage one's own life may be considered disabled if there is
no suitable employment given his/her abilities, one with diminished mobility or
mental capacity may not qualify if there is plentiful employment available to
him/her with his/her abilities. One or more diagnosed medical conditions may
not automatically qualify an applicant, and the lack of one or more may not
disqualify the applicant. In some cases, an applicant may qualify based on
symptoms alone. In determining a physical disability, common factors are the
ability to sit, stand, lift, bend, and stoop. Mental disabilities are
determined based on the ability to communicate with others, understand oral
and/or written instructions from others, and to get along with others. One who
is able to sit for prolonged periods of time but not stand, lift, bend, or
stoop may be disqualified if s/he is able to perform some type of desk work,
whereas one may qualify if s/he lacks such an ability given his/her
intellectual capacity, education level, or previous work experience. Likewise,
a person with limited mental capacity who has the ability to perform physical
labor may not qualify as "disabled." These skills are also used for applicants
who have never worked and for whom the claim is they can never work.
