Disarmament Disarmament is the act of reducing, limiting, or abolishing
weapons. Disarmament generally refers to a country's military or specific type
of weaponry. Disarmament is often taken to mean total elimination of weapons of
mass destruction, such as nuclear arms. General and Complete Disarmament refers
to the removal of all weaponry, including conventional arms. Definitions of
disarmament. Philosophically, disarmament may be viewed as a form of
demilitarization; part of an economic, political, technical, and military
process to reduce and eliminate weapons systems. Thus, disarmament may be part
of a set of other strategies, like economic conversion, which aim to reduce the
power of war making institutions and associated constituencies. History. An
example on the feasibility of the elimination of weapons is the policy of
gradual reduction of guns in Japan during the Tokugawa shogunate. In two
centuries, Japan passed from being the country with more guns per capita to
producing (or importing) none. In the early 1930s, US President Franklin D.
Roosevelt sent this message to the World Disarmament Conference: "If all
nations will agree wholly to eliminate from possession and use the weapons
which make possible a successful attack, defences automatically will become
impregnable and the frontiers and independence of every nation will become
secure." Nuclear disarmament. Nuclear disarmament refers to both the act of
reducing or eliminating nuclear weapons and to the end state of a nuclear-free
world, in which nuclear weapons are completely eliminated. Proponents of
nuclear disarmament say that it would lessen the probability of nuclear war
occurring, especially accidentally. Critics of nuclear disarmament say that it
would undermine deterrence. Major nuclear disarmament groups include Campaign
for Nuclear Disarmament, Greenpeace and International Physicians for the
Prevention of Nuclear War. There have been many large anti-nuclear
demonstrations and protests. On June 12, 1982, one million people demonstrated
in New York City's Central Park against nuclear weapons and for an end to the
cold war arms race. It was the largest anti-nuclear protest and the largest
political demonstration in American history. Misconceptions about disarmament.
In his definition of "disarmament", David Carlton writes in the Oxford
University Press Political dictionary, "But confidence in such measures of arms
control, especially when unaccompanied by extensive means of verification, has
not been strengthened by the revelation that the Soviet Union in its last years
successfully concealed consistent and systematic cheating on its obligations
under the Biological Weapons Convention." He also notes, "Now a freeze or a
mutually agreed increase is not strictly speaking disarmament at all. And such
measures may not even be intended to be a first step towards any kind of
reduction or abolition. For the aim may simply be to promote stability in force
structures. Hence a new term to cover such cases has become fashionable since
the 1960s, namely, arms control." Disarmament by definition involves inspection
and verification procedures. Thus, the book by Seymour Melman, "Inspection for
Disarmament", addresses various problems related to the problem of inspection
for disarmament, evasion teams, and capabilities and limitations of aerial
inspection. Gradually, as the idea of arms control displaced the idea of
disarmament, the weaknesses of the present arms control paradigm have created
problems for the idea of disarmament itself.
