Disinflation Disinflation is a decrease in the rate of inflation – a slowdown
in the rate of increase of the general price level of goods and services in a
nation's gross domestic product over time. It is the opposite of reflation.
Disinflation occurs when the increase in the “consumer price level” slows
down from the previous period when the prices were rising. Disinflation is the
reduction in the general price level in the economy but for a very short period
of time. Disinflation takes place only when an economy is suffering from
recession. If the inflation rate is not very high to start with, disinflation
can lead to deflation – decreases in the general price level of goods and
services. For example if the annual inflation rate for the month of January is
5% and it is 4% in the month of February, the prices disinflated by 1% but are
still increasing at a 4% annual rate. Again if the current rate is 1% and it is
-2% for the following month, prices disinflated by 3% i.e.[1%-(-2)%] and are
decreasing at a 2% annual rate. Causes. There is widespread consensus among
economists that inflation is caused by increases in the supply of money
available for use in a nation's economy. Inflation can also occur when the
economy 'overheats' because of excess aggregate demand (this is called demand-
pull inflation). The causes of disinflation are the opposite, either a decrease
in the growth rate of the money supply, or a business cycle contraction
(recession).If the central bank of a country enacts tighter monetary policy,
that is to say,the government start selling its securities,this reduces the
supply of money in an economy.This contraction of the monetary policy is known
as quantitative tightening technique. When the government sell its securities
in the market, the supply of money reduces and money becomes more upscale and
the demand for money remains constant.During a recession, competition among
businesses for customers becomes more intense, and so retailers are no longer
able to pass on higher prices to their customers. The main reason being when
the central bank adopts contractionary monetary policy its becomes expensive to
annex money which leads to the fall in the demand for goods and services in the
economy. Even though the demand for commodities fall the supply of the
commodities still remains unaltered.Thus the prices would fall over a period of
time leading to disinflation. When the growth rate of unemployment is below the
natural rate of growth, this leads to an increase in the rate of inflation;
whereas when the growth rate of unemployment is above the natural rate of
growth it leads to a decrease in the rate of inflation also known as
disinflation. This happens because when people are jobless they have a very
small portion of money to spend which indirectly implies reduction in the
supply of money in an economy. Japan an example of disinflated economy. The
best example for an disflated economy is Japan.In 1990 Japan's output growth
rate was 5.2%, unemployment rate was 2.1% and inflation rate was 2.4%.But in
1992 the output growth rate fell to 3.4%, unemployment rate rose to 2.2% and
inflation rate decreased to 1.75.In the year 2000 the output growth rate was
2.8%, unemployment rate was 4.7% and inflation rate was -1.6%. ! Year !! Output
Growth Rate % !! Unemployment Rate % !! Inflation Rate % Disinflation
distinguished from deflation. If disinflation continues until the inflation
rate is zero, the economy enters a deflationary period, with decreasing general
prices on all goods and services produced. An example of this happened during
the month of October 2008, when U.S. consumer prices fell (deflation) by 1.01%
but the overall annual inflation rate simply decreased (disinflation) from an
annual rate of 4.94% to 3.66%. So the distinction between deflation and
disinflation at that point was simply one of which time period was being
referring to, the monthly basis or the annual basis. Over the year, prices were
up 3.66% while over the month prices were down 1.01%. Deflation is a sustained
decrease in the general price level (after Inflation drops below zero percent)
resulting in a sustained increase in the real value of money and other monetary
items. Money and other monetary items are worth more all the time during
deflation as opposed to being worth less all the time during inflation.
Deflation is negative inflation. Disinflation is lower inflation. Prices are
still rising during disinflation, but at a lower rate. The general price level
still rises, but, at a slower rate resulting in a continued, but, lower rate of
real value destruction in money and other monetary items. A lowering of
inflation is not deflation but disinflation. Deflation means the general price
level is not increasing at all, but, actually decreasing continuously and the
internal functional currency – money - and other monetary items are worth
more all the time. Deflation causes an increase in the real value of money and
other monetary items. Disinflation happens after a period of higher inflation
in what are normally considered low inflation economies and is initially
popularly confused with deflation. During disinflation many prominent prices,
for example, oil, fuel, commodity, property and food prices are falling, but,
the general price level is still actually rising, albeit at a much slower rate
than during normal low inflation. When the slowing annual inflation rate moves
lower and lower it eventually gets to a zero percent annual rate for maybe a
month or two. When the general price level then continues to decline even
further - below zero percent per annum - the economy moves from inflation to
deflation: not just a slower increase in the general increasing price level as
during disinflation but actually a sustained decrease in the general price
level below zero percent per annum which causes an increase in the real value
of money and other monetary items: the opposite of inflation or negative
inflation. Disinflation, the Phillips curve and sacrifice ratio. Phillips Curve
shows that there is a negative relationship between inflation and unemployment.
The relationship between Phillips curve and Disinflation can be written as Өt-
Өt-1=-ἀ(ut-un). Here Өt is the present year's rate of inflation, Өt-1 is
the previous year's rate of inflation, ut is the actual rate of unemployment
and un is the natural rate of unemployment. ἀ is the parameter which captures
the effect of unemployment on the wage. The L.H.S of the equation is the change
in the inflation rate. The above equation explains that the change in the rate
of inflation depends upon the difference between the actual rate of
unemployment and the natural rate of unemployment i.e., (ut-un). The rate of
inflation would decrease when the actual rate of unemployment is higher than
the natural rate of unemployment leading to Disinflation. The inflation rate
would increase when natural unemployment rate is higher than the actual
unemployment rate. In order to decrease the rate of inflation the left side of
equation should be negative and the term (ut-un) should be positive. Though
decrease in the rate of inflation and unemployment growth rate are related to
each other, the relationship does not depend on the speed at which disinflation
is achieved. Simply speaking, the rate of inflation can be slowed by increasing
the rate of unemployment at a smaller rate which is spread over many years or
disinflation can be achieved quickly by increasing the rate of unemployment at
a higher rate which is spread over few years. The point to be noted over here
is that when we sum the rate of unemployment over the years it will be same.
This phenomenon can be explaied with the help of point-year of excess
unemployment. It is the difference between the actual and the natural rate of
unemployment of one percentage point for one year. For example, the natural
rate of unemployment is 9%, an unemploment rate of 15% 5 years in a row
corresponds to five times (15-9)= 5*6= 30 point years of excess unemployment.
Suppose central bank wants to reduce inflation from 15% to 10% so that
inflation rate equals to 5% and that too within a period of 1 year. The
equation Өt-Өt-1=-ἀ(ut-un). tells that in order to reduce the inflation
rate to 5% what is required is 1 year of unemployment at 10% above the natural
rate. The R.H.S equals to -5% and the inflation rate decreases by 10% within a
year. Following this phenomenon in order to reduce inflation over 5 years what
is required is 5 years of unemployment at 1%i.e.(10/5) above the natural rate
and so on. We can note that in the above phenomenon the number of point-years
of excess unemployment required to decrease inflation is the same i.e. 5%.
There is always a cost involved in order to reduce inflation which is
expalained with the help of sacrifice ratio. Sacrifice ratio is the ratio which
measures the amount of cost required in order to reduce the rate of inflation
over a period of time. It is the ratio of the aggregate pecentage loss of GDP
to the decrease in inflation. For example, suppose the central bank wants to
reduce the inflation rate from 20% to 8% over a period of 4 years. In order to
achieve this rate suppose the economy has to bear cost of level of output that
are 12% below plausible in the first year, 9% below the plausible in the second
year, 6% below plausible in the third year and 5% below plausible in the fourth
year. Thus the total loss of GDP is 32% (12%+9%+6%+5%) and the decrease in
inflation rate is 8%. Thus the sacrifice ratio is 4 (32/8). Disinflation
strategies. In order to reduce inflation the policymakers have to choose
between cold-turkey and gradualist policies. Cold-Turkey policies are those
policies in which the inflation rate can be reduced as quickly as possible as
it tries to hit the target as soon as possible. Gradualist policies are those
in which the rate of inflation is reduced at a slow pace, that is to say these
policies move the economy slowly towards the target. Cold-turkey policies
create a shock-effect, which can be not good for the economy if the shock is
obstreperous but it can be good for the economy if opting for this policy adds
up policymakers trustworthiness. New information can be incorporated if the
gradualist policies are played out by the policymakers. Credibility and cost of
inflation. The Lucas critique states that it is improbable to assume that wage
setters would not consider changes in policy when forming their expectation. If
the wage setters believes that the policymakers would be committed in
decreasing the inflation rate, they would lower their expectations of inflation
and this will lead to the decline in the rate of actual inflation without the
need of prolonged recession. This can be explained with the help of the above
mentioned equation in which expected inflation is taken on the right: Өt=Өte-
ἀ(ut-un). If the wage-setters look at the previous year's inflation rate and
form their expectations accordingly, then inflation rate can be reduced only by
accepting a higher rate of unemployment for some period. If Өte=Өt-1, from
Өt-Өt-1=-ἀ(ut-un. Thus in order to achieve: Өt < Өt-1, it must be that ut
> un) But if the wage-setters convince themelves that the rate of inflation
will fall in the future from 9% to 5%, that is to say it was indeed going to be
lower than the past, thus forming their expectations accordingly, then
inflation would fall to 5% even if unemployment remains at natural rate of
unemployment. One of the most important constituents of successful disinflation
is the credibility of monetary policy according to Thomas J. Sargent. It states
that the beliefs of wage setters are affected if they feel that the central
bank are religiously committed in reducing the rate of inflation. The way the
wage-setters formed their expectations can only be changed with the help of
credibility. The credibility view is that fast disinflation is likely to be
more credible than slow disinflation. Credibility decreases the unemployment
cost of disinflation. Therefore, the central bank should go for fast
disinflation.
