Distribution (business) Product distribution (or place) is one of the four
elements of the marketing mix. Distribution is the process of making a product
or service available for use or consumption by a consumer or business user,
using direct means, or using indirect means with intermediaries. The other
three parts of the marketing mix are product, pricing, and promotion. Channels
and Intermediaries. Distribution of products takes place by means of channels.
Channels are sets of interdependent organisations (called intermediaries)
involved in making the product available for consumption. Merchants are
intermediaries that buy and resell products. Agents and brokers are
intermediaries that act on behalf of the producer but do not take title to the
products. Channel Design. A firm can design any number of channels. Channels
are classified by the number of intermediaries between producer and consumer. A
level zero channel has no intermediaries. This is typical of direct marketing.
A level one channel has a single intermediary. This flow is typically from
manufacturer to retailer to consumer. Channel Mix. In practice, many
organisations use a mix of different channels; in particular, they may
complement a direct sales-force, calling on the larger accounts, with agents,
covering the smaller customers and prospects. In addition, online retailing or
e-commerce is leading to disintermediation. Retailing via smartphone or m-
commerce is also a growing area. Managing Channels. The firm's marketing
department needs to design the most suitable channels for the firm's products,
then select appropriate channel members or intermediaries. The firm needs to
train staff of intermediaries and motivate the intermediary to sell the firm's
products. The firm should monitor the channel's performance over time and
modify the channel to enhance performance. Channel Motivation. To motivate
intermediaries the firm can use positive actions, such as offering higher
margins to the intermediary, special deals, premiums and allowances for
advertising or display. On the other hand, negative actions may be necessary,
such as threatening to cut back on margin, or hold back delivery of product.
Channel Conflict. Channel conflict can arise when one intermediary's actions
prevent another intermediary from achieving their objectives. Vertical channel
conflict occurs between the levels within a channel and horizontal channel
conflict occurs between intermediaries at the same level within a channel.
