Distributism Distributism (also known as distributionism or distributivism) is
an economic philosophy that developed in Europe in the late 19th and early 20th
century, based upon the principles of Catholic social teaching, especially the
teachings of Pope Leo XIII in his encyclical "Rerum Novarum" and Pope Pius XI
in "Quadragesimo Anno". According to distributists, property ownership is a
fundamental right and the means of production should be spread as widely as
possible among the general populace, rather than being centralized under the
control of the state (state socialism) or by accomplished individuals (laissez-
faire capitalism). Distributism therefore advocates a society marked by
widespread property ownership and, according to co-operative economist Race
Mathews, maintains that such a system is key to bringing about a just social
order. Distributism has often been described in opposition to both socialism
and capitalism, which distributists see as equally flawed and exploitive.
Thomas Storck argues that "both socialism and capitalism are products of the
European Enlightenment and are thus modernizing and anti-traditional forces. In
contrast, distributism seeks to subordinate economic activity to human life as
a whole, to our spiritual life, our intellectual life, our family life". Some
have seen it more as an aspiration, which has been successfully realised in the
short term by commitment to the principles of subsidiarity and solidarity
(these being built into financially independent local cooperatives and small
family businesses), though proponents also cite such periods as the Middle Ages
as examples of the historical long-term viability of distributism. Particularly
influential in the development of distributist theory were Catholic authors G.
K. Chesterton and Hilaire Belloc, two of distributism's earliest and strongest
proponents. Background. The mid-to-late 19th century witnessed the growth of
political Catholicism across Europe. According to historian Michael A. Riff, a
common feature of these movements was opposition not only to secularism, but
also to both capitalism and socialism. In 1891 Pope Leo XIII promulgated "Rerum
Novarum", in which he addressed the "misery and wretchedness pressing so
unjustly on the majority of the working class" and spoke of how "a small number
of very rich men" had been able to "lay upon the teeming masses of the laboring
poor a yoke little better than that of slavery itself.". Affirmed in the
encyclical was the right of all men to own property, the necessity of a system
that allowed "as many as possible of the people to become owners", the duty of
employers to provide safe working conditions and sufficient wages, and the
right of workers to unionise. Common and government property ownership was
expressly dismissed as a means of helping the poor. Around the start of the
20th century, G. K. Chesterton and Hillaire Belloc drew together the disparate
experiences of the various cooperatives and friendly societies in Northern
England, Ireland and Northern Europe into a coherent political ideology which
specifically advocated widespread private ownership of housing and control of
industry through owner-operated small businesses and worker-controlled
cooperatives. In the United States in the 1930s, distributism was treated in
numerous essays by Chesterton, Belloc and others in "The American Review",
published and edited by Seward Collins. Pivotal among Belloc's and Chesterton's
other works regarding distributism include "The Servile State", and "Outline of
Sanity". Although a majority of distributism's later supporters were not
Catholics and many were in fact former radical socialists who had become
disillusioned with socialism; distributist thought was adopted by the Catholic
Worker Movement, conjoining it with the thought of Dorothy Day and Peter Maurin
concerning localized and independent communities. It also influenced the
thought behind the Antigonish Movement, which implemented cooperatives and
other measures to aid the poor in the Canadian Maritimes. Its practical
implementation in the form of local cooperatives has recently been documented
by Race Mathews in his 1999 book "Jobs of Our Own: Building a Stakeholder
Society". Position within the political spectrum. The position of distributists
when compared to other political philosophies is somewhat paradoxical and
complicated (see Triangulation). Strongly entrenched in an organic but very
English Catholicism, advocating culturally traditionalist and agrarian values,
directly challenging the precepts of Whig history — Belloc was nonetheless an
MP for the Liberal Party and Chesterton once stated "As much as I ever did,
more than I ever did, I believe in Liberalism. But there was a rosy time of
innocence when I believed in Liberals." This liberalism is different from most
modern forms, taking influence from William Cobbett and John Ruskin, who
combined elements of radicalism, challenging the establishment position, but
from a perspective of renovation, not revolution; seeing themselves as trying
to restore the traditional liberties of England and her people which had been
taken away from them, amongst other things, since the Industrial Revolution.
While converging with certain elements of traditional Toryism, especially an
appreciation of the Middle Ages and organic society, there were several points
of significant contention. While many Tories were strongly opposed to reform,
the distributists in certain cases saw this not as conserving a legitimate
traditional concept of England, but in many cases, entrenching harmful errors
and innovations. Belloc was quite explicit in his opposition to Protestantism
as a concept and schism from the Catholic Church in general, considering the
division of Christendom in the 16th century, as one of the most harmful events
in the history of Europe. Elements of Toryism on the other hand were quite
intransigent when it came to the Church of England as the established church,
some even spurning their original legitimist ultra-royalist principles in
regards to James II to uphold it. Much of Dorothy L. Sayers' writings on social
and economic matters has affinity with distributism, although she nowhere
identifies herself as a distributist. She may have been influenced by them, or
have come to similar conclusions on her own; as an Anglican, the reasonings she
gave are rooted in the theologies of Creation and Incarnation, and thus are
slightly different from the Catholic Chesterton and Belloc. Economic theory.
Private property. Under such a system, most people would be able to earn a
living without having to rely on the use of the property of others to do so.
Examples of people earning a living in this way would be farmers who own their
own land and related machinery, plumbers who own their own tools, software
developers who own their own computer, etc. The "cooperative" approach advances
beyond this perspective to recognise that such property and equipment may be
"co-owned" by local communities larger than a family, e.g., partners in a
business. In "Rerum Novarum", Leo XIII states that people are likely to work
harder and with greater commitment if they themselves possess the land on which
they labour, which in turn will benefit them and their families as workers will
be able to provide for themselves and their household. He puts forward the idea
that when men have the opportunity to possess property and work on it, they
will “learn to love the very soil which yields in response to the labor of
their hands, not only food to eat, but an abundance of the good things for
themselves and those that are dear to them.” He states also that owning
property is not only beneficial for a person and their family, but is in fact a
right, due to God having “...given the earth for the use and enjoyment of the
whole human race”. Similar views are presented by G.K. Chesterton in his 1910
book "What’s Wrong with the World". Chesterton believes that whilst God has
limitless capabilities, man has limited abilities in terms of creation. As
such, man therefore is entitled to own property and to treat it as he sees fit.
He states “Property is merely the art of the democracy. It means that every
man should have something that he can shape in his own image, as he is shaped
in the image of heaven. But because he is not God, but only a graven image of
God, his self-expression must deal with limits; properly with limits that are
strict and even small.” Chesterton summed up his distributist views in the
phrase "Three acres and a cow". According to Belloc, the distributive state
(the state which has implemented distributism) contains "an agglomeration of
families of varying wealth, but by far the greater number of owners of the
means of production." This broader distribution does not extend to all
property, but only to productive property; that is, that property which
produces wealth, namely, the things needed for man to survive. It includes
land, tools, and so on. Guild system. The kind of economic order envisaged by
the early distributist thinkers would involve the return to some sort of guild
system. The present existence of labor unions does not constitute a realization
of this facet of distributist economic order, as labour unions are organized
along class lines to promote class interests and frequently class struggle,
whereas guilds are mixed class syndicates composed of both employers and
employees cooperating for mutual benefit, thereby promoting class
collaboration. Banks. Distributism favors the dissolution of the current
private bank system, or more specifically its profit-making basis in charging
interest. Dorothy Day, for example, suggested abolishing legal enforcement of
interest-rate contracts (usury). It would not entail nationalization but could
involve government involvement of some sort. Distributists look favorably on
credit unions as a preferable alternative to banks. Anti-trust legislation.
Distributism appears to have one of its greatest influences in anti-trust
legislation in America and Europe designed to break up monopolies and excessive
concentration of market power in one or only a few companies, trusts,
interests, or cartels. Embodying the philosophy explained by Chesterton, above,
that too much capitalism means too few capitalists, not too many, America's
extensive system of anti-trust legislation seeks to prevent the concentration
of market power in a given industry into too-few hands. Requiring that no
company gain too great a share of any market is an example of how distributism
has found its way into US government policy. The assumption behind this
legislation is the idea that having economic activity decentralized among many
different industry participants is better for the economy than having one or a
few large players in an industry. (Note that anti-trust regulation does take
into account cases when only large companies are viable because of the nature
of an industry, but favors many participants over few, whenever possible.)
Social theory. Human family. Distributism sees the family of two parents and
their child or children as the central and primary social unit of human
ordering and the principal unit of a functioning distributist society and
civilization. This unit is also the basis of a multi-generational extended
family, which is embedded in socially as well as genetically inter-related
communities, nations, etc., and ultimately in the whole human family past,
present and future. The economic system of a society should therefore be
focused primarily on the flourishing of the family unit, but not in isolation:
at the appropriate level of family context, as is intended in the principle of
subsidiarity. Distributism reflects this doctrine most evidently by promoting
the family, rather than the individual, as the basic type of owner; that is,
distributism seeks to ensure that most families, rather than most individuals,
will be owners of productive property. The family is, then, vitally important
to the very core of distributist thought. Subsidiarity. Distributism puts great
emphasis on the principle of subsidiarity. This principle holds that no larger
unit (whether social, economic, or political) should perform a function which
can be performed by a smaller unit. Pope Pius XI, in Quadragesimo Anno,
provided the classical statement of the principle: "Just as it is gravely wrong
to take from individuals what they can accomplish by their own initiative and
industry and give it to the community, so also it is an injustice and at the
same time a grave evil and disturbance of right order to assign to a greater
and higher association what lesser and subordinate organizations can do." Thus,
any activity of production (which distributism holds to be the most important
part of any economy) ought to be performed by the smallest possible unit. This
helps support distributism's argument that smaller units, families if possible,
ought to be in control of the means of production, rather than the large units
typical of modern economies. Pope Pius XI further stated, again in Quadragesimo
Anno, "every social activity ought of its very nature to furnish help to the
members of the body social, and never destroy and absorb them." To prevent
large private organizations from thus dominating the body politic, distributism
applies this principle of subsidiarity to economic as well as to social and
political action. The essence of subsidiarity is concisely inherent in the
Chinese maxim 'Give someone a fish and you feed him for a day; teach the person
to fish and you feed him for a lifetime'. Social security. Distributism favors
the elimination of social security on the basis that it further alienates man
by making him more dependent on the Servile State. Distributists such as
Dorothy Day did not favor social security when it was introduced by the United
States government. This rejection of this new program was due to the direct
influence of the ideas of Hilaire Belloc over American distributists. Society
of artisans. Distributism promotes a society of artisans and culture. This is
influenced by an emphasis on small business, promotion of local culture, and
favoring of small production over capitalistic mass production. A society of
artisans promotes the distributist ideal of the unification of capital,
ownership, and production rather than what distributism sees as an alienation
of man from work. This does not, however, suggest that distributism favors a
technological regression to a pre-Industrial Revolution lifestyle, but a more
local ownership of factories and other industrial centers. Products such as
food and clothing would be preferably returned to local producers and artisans
instead of being mass produced overseas. Geopolitical theory. Political order.
Distributism does not favor one political order over another (political
accidentalism). While some distributists, such as Dorothy Day, have been
anarchists, it should be remembered that most Chestertonian distributists are
opposed to the mere concept of anarchism. Chesterton thought that Distributism
would benefit from the discipline that theoretical analysis imposes, and that
distributism is best seen as a widely encompassing concept inside of which any
number of interpretations and perspectives can fit. This concept should fit in
a political system broadly characterized by widespread ownership of productive
property. Political parties. Distributism does not attach itself to one
national political party or another in any part of the world, but it has
influenced Christian Democratic parties in Continental Europe and the
Democratic Labor Party in Australia. War. Distributists usually use Just War
Theory in determining whether a war should be fought or not. Historical
positions of distributist thinkers provides insight into a distributist
position on war. Both Belloc and Chesterton opposed British imperialism in
general, as well as specifically opposing the Second Boer War, but supported
British involvement in World War I. On the other hand, prominent distributists
such as Dorothy Day and those involved in the Catholic Worker movement were/are
strict pacifists even to the point of condemning involvement in the Second
World War at much personal cost. Influence. E. F. Schumacher. Distributism is
known to have had an influence on the economist E. F. Schumacher, a convert to
Catholicism. Mondragon Corporation. The Mondragon Corporation based out of the
Basque Country in the region of Spain and France, was founded by a Catholic
priest, Father José María Arizmendiarrieta, who seems to have been influenced
by the same Catholic social and economic teachings that inspired Belloc,
Chesterton, McNabb and the other founders of distributism. Critics argue that
the Mondragon Corporation is not truly distributist because it denies both the
importance of the family ownership of the means of production, and localism.
The Guild of St Joseph and St Dominic. Distributist ideas were put into
practice by The Guild of St Joseph and St Dominic, a group of artists and
craftsmen who established a community in Ditchling, Sussex, England, in 1920,
with the motto 'Men rich in virtue studying beautifulness living in peace in
their houses'. The Guild sought to recreate an idealised medieval lifestyle in
the manner of the Arts and Crafts Movement; it survived almost 70 years, until
1989. Big Society. The Big Society was the flagship policy idea of the 2010 UK
Conservative Party general election manifesto. Some Distributists claim that
the rhetorical marketing of this policy was influenced by aphorisms of the
Distributist ideology and promotes Distributism. It now forms part of the
legislative programme of the Conservative – Liberal Democrat Coalition
Agreement. The stated aim is "to create a climate that empowers local people
and communities, building a big society that will 'take power away from
politicians and give it to people'.".
