Dividend imputation Dividend imputation is a corporate tax system in which some
or all of the tax paid by a company may be attributed, or imputed, to the
shareholders by way of a tax credit to reduce the income tax payable on a
distribution. In comparison to the classical system, it reduces or eliminates
the tax disadvantages of distributing dividends to shareholders by only
requiring them to pay the difference between the corporate rate and their
marginal rate. Australia and New Zealand have imputation systems. The United
Kingdom has a modified imputation system. France had a dividend imputation
system until 2004. Australia. The Australian tax system allows companies to
attach franking credits to dividends paid. A franking credit is a nominal unit
of tax paid by companies using dividend imputation. Franking credits are passed
on to shareholders along with dividends. Shareholders include in their
assessable income not the dividends received but the grossed-up amount back-
calculated from that dividend and the current tax rate, then have their income
tax payable calculated thereupon, then use franking credits to offset tax
payable at the rate of a dollar per credit. In Australia & New Zealand the end
result is the elimination of double taxation upon company profits. Franking
Credit Formula. Div * tc / (1 - tc) * fp "* tc = company tax rate." "* fp =
franking proportion." For a company that pays tax on all its income in
Australia, the franking proportion is usually 100% (or 1.0). However, some
companies (particularly those paying tax outside of Australia) have a lower
franking proportion. Some companies pay only unfranked dividends (i.e. fp=0).
History. Dividend imputation was introduced in 1987, one of a number of tax
reforms by the Hawke/Keating government. Prior to that a company would pay
company tax on its profits and if it then paid a dividend, that dividend was
taxed again as income for the shareholder, i.e. a part owner of the company, a
form of double taxation. In 1997 the eligibility rules (below) were introduced,
with a $2000 small shareholder exemption. In 1999 that exemption was raised to
the present $5000. In 2000 franking credits became fully refundable, not just
reducing tax liability to zero. In 2002 preferential dividend streaming was
banned. And in 2003 New Zealand companies could elect to join the system for
Australian tax they paid. Operation. The present operation of the system is as
follows. The actual law is complex, the core is in the Income Tax Assessment
Act 1936 and other elements are in the Income Tax Assessment Act 1997. When a
company makes $1.00 of profit (profit for tax purposes) and pays $0.30 as
income tax (30% rate for 2006) it records the $0.30 in a franking account. The
$0.30 is paid in cash to the tax office, the franking account is only a record
of what was paid. When the company pays a dividend, either in the same year or
later, it may attach a franking credit from its franking account, in proportion
to the tax rate. So each $0.70 of dividend may have $0.30 of franking credit
attached. The franking amount is again just a record, only $0.70 of cash is
paid. Such a dividend is called a "franked dividend". An eligible shareholder
receiving a franked dividend declares the cash amount plus the franking credit
as income, and is credited with the franking credit against their final tax
bill. The effect is as if the tax office reversed the company tax by giving
back the $0.30 to the shareholder and had them treat the original $1.00 of
profit as income, in the shareholder's hands, like the company was merely a
conduit. Thus company profits going to eligible shareholders are taxed just
once. Profits are either retained by the company and taxed there at the
corporate rate, or paid out later as dividends and instead they're taxed at the
shareholder's rate. Dividends may still be paid by a company when it has no
franking credits (perhaps because it has been making tax losses), this is
called an "unfranked dividend". Or it may pay a franked portion and an
unfranked portion, known as "partly franked". An unfranked dividend (or the
unfranked portion) is ordinary income in the hands of the shareholder. Refund.
Franking credits are (as of the 2000-2001 year, i.e. from 1.7.00) "refundable"
in the sense described in the tax credit article. This means that not only can
they reduce a taxpayer's total tax liability to zero, but any excess is
refunded. For example an individual with income below the tax-free threshold
($6000 in 2006) pays no tax at all and can get franking credits back in full as
cash, at the end of the year. Prior to 1 July 2000 franking credits were
"wasting", any excess over one's total tax payable was lost. For example an
individual at that time paying no tax could get nothing back, they merely kept
the cash part of the dividend received. Investors. The easiest way for an
investor to value a franked dividend is to think of the franking credit as part
of the income they receive. The investor doesn't get it in cash, only as a kind
of IOU from the tax office, but nonetheless it and the cash portion make up
pre-tax income. Thus a franked dividend of $0.70 plus $0.30 credit is exactly
equivalent to an unfranked dividend of $1.00, or to bank interest of $1.00, or
any other ordinary income of that amount. (It's exactly equivalent because
franking is fully refundable, as described above.) Franked dividends are often
described as a "tax effective" form of income. The basis for this is that the
cash $0.70 looks like it's taxed at a lower rate than other income. For
example, for an individual on the top rate of 48.5% (for 2006) the calculation
is $0.70 plus $0.30 credit is $1.00 on which $0.485 tax is payable, but less
the $0.30 credit makes $0.185 net tax, which is just 26.4% of the original
$0.70. Conversely, an individual on the 20% marginal tax rate actually gets a
$0.10 rebate. In this latter case, the rebate looks very much like negative
tax. There's nothing inherently wrong with the latter way of thinking about
franked dividends, and it is frequently made to demonstrate how franking
benefits the investor, but it can be argued a grossing-up like the former is
better when comparing yields across different investment opportunities.
Eligibility. There are restrictions on who can use franking credits. Those who
cannot must simply declare as income the cash dividend amount they receive. .
The restrictions are designed to prevent the trading of franking credits
between different taxpayers. An eligible shareholder is one who either Or who
Thus franking credits are not available to short-term traders, only to longer
term holders, but with small holders exempted provided it's for their own
benefit. The small shareholder exemption is not a "first $5000", but rather
once the $5000 threshold is passed the rule is inoperative and all one's shares
are under the holding period rule. For the holding period rule, parcels of
shares bought and sold at different times are reckoned on a "first in, last
out" basis. Each sale is taken to be of the most recently purchased shares.
This prevents a taxpayer buying just before a dividend, selling just after, and
asserting it was older shares sold (to try to fulfill the holding period). This
"first in, last out" reckoning may be contrasted with capital gains tax. For
capital gains the shareholder can nominate what parcel was sold from among
those bought at different times. Company Matters. If a company owns shares in
another company and receives franking credits on dividends, those franking
credits are added to the receiving company's accounts, and can be paid out in
the same way as franking credits generated from taxes. This transfer of credits
has made the previous "intercorporate rebates" allowances redundant. Those
rebates had avoided double taxation on dividends paid from companies to other
companies. Those rebates were part of the original 1936 taxation act (section
46), meaning that the principle of eliminating double taxation has been present
to some degree in Australian income tax law for a very long time. The company
tax rate has changed a few times through the life of dividend imputation. In
each case transitional rules have been made to maintain the principle of
reversing the original tax paid, even if the tax rate has changed. This has
been either by separate franking accounts for separate rates (e.g. class A 39%,
class B 33%), or making an adjusting recalculation of the credits (e.g. into
class C 30%). Trans-Tasman Imputation. New Zealand companies can apply to join
the Australian dividend imputation system (from 2003). Doing so allows them to
attach Australian franking credits to their dividends, for Australian tax they
have paid. Those credits can then be used by shareholders who are Australian
taxpayers, the same as dividends from an Australian company. There are certain
anti-tax-avoidance rules to prevent New Zealand companies deliberately
streaming Australian franking credits towards their Australian shareholders;
credits must be distributed on a pro-rata basis. Note that it is only
Australian franking credits which can be used by an Australian taxpayer. New
Zealand imputation credits on dividends paid to an Australian shareholder
cannot be used against that shareholder's Australian taxes. Abuses of the
system. A company is not obliged to attach franking credits to its dividends.
But it costs the company nothing to do so, and the credits will benefit
eligible shareholders, so it is usual to attach the maximum available. It's
actually possible for a company to attach more than it has, but doing so
attracts tax penalties that mean this is not worthwhile. In the past it was
permissible for corporations to direct the flow of franking credits
preferentially to one type of shareholder over another so that each may benefit
the most as fits their tax circumstances. For example foreign shareholders
cannot use franking credits (they can't be offset against withholding tax) but
Australian shareholders can. This practice, known as "dividend streaming",
became illegal in 2002, whereafter all dividends within a given time frame must
now be franked to a similar (but need not be identical) degree irrespective of
shareholder location or which class of shares held. Elimination of Tax
Incentives. It is also interesting to note that it was soon realised that the
system eliminated to a considerable extent the effectiveness of tax incentives
for corporations. If a corporation was given a tax break then its incomes thus
released from taxation would not generate franking credits precisely because no
tax was paid. In turn, this meant that the shareholders received fewer credits
along with their dividends, meaning in turn that they had to pay more tax. The
net result is that each tax break a corporation itself got was countered by a
matching increase in the tax burden of shareholders, leaving shareholders in
exactly the same position had no tax break been received by the corporation.
Thus, to the extent that corporate directors acted so as to increase
shareholder wealth, tax incentives would not influence corporate behaviour. It
could be argued, however, that a residual bias in favour of obtaining the
credits may exist because it is cheaper for the corporation to retain more
profits and pay less tax than to ignore the tax break and obtain the same funds
from shareholders at some future date. How significant such an inclination to
use corporate tax breaks for this purpose is debatable. Politics and economics.
Dividend imputation has been uncontroversial over most of its lifetime.
Investors and their advisors recognise the benefits and are supportive. In
October 2006, the Committee for Economic Development of Australia released a
report, "Tax Cuts to Compete", concluding that dividend imputation had proved
an inefficient means of reducing Australia's cost of capital. The report,
authored by prominent economist Dr Nicholas Gruen, argued that the elimination
of imputation would allow the funding of a substantial corporate tax cut. This
would attract foreign investment and thus increase economic growth, it said.
New Zealand. New Zealand introduced a dividend imputation system in 1989. It
operates on similar principles to the Australian system. A shareholder
receiving a dividend from a company is entitled to an "imputation credit",
which represents tax paid by the company, and is used to reduce or eliminate
the shareholder's income tax liability. United Kingdom. From 1973 to 1999, the
UK operated an imputation system, with shareholders able to claim a tax credit
reflecting advance corporation tax (ACT) paid by a company when a distribution
was made. A company could set off ACT against the company's annual corporation
tax liability, subject to limitations. In 1999 ACT was abolished. Shareholders
receiving a dividend are still entitled to a tax credit which offsets their tax
liability, but the tax credit no longer necessarily represents tax paid by the
company, and cannot be refunded to the shareholder.
