Dominant-party system A dominant-party system, or one-party dominant system, is
a system where there is "a category of parties/political organizations that
have successively won election victories and whose future defeat cannot be
envisaged or is unlikely for the foreseeable future." A wide range of parties
have been cited as being dominant at one time or another, including the
Kuomintang in the Republic of China, the African National Congress (ANC) in
South Africa, and the Indian National Congress in India. Such dominance has not
always been a matter of concern, with for example the dominance of the Indian
National Congress being seen by some as source of stability supportive of the
consolidation of democracy. Opponents of the "dominant party" system or theory
argue that it views the meaning of democracy as given, and that it assumes that
only a particular conception of representative democracy (in which different
parties alternate frequently in power) is valid. One author argues that "the
dominant party 'system' is deeply flawed as a mode of analysis and lacks
explanatory capacity. But it is also a very conservative approach to politics.
Its fundamental political assumptions are restricted to one form of democracy,
electoral politics and hostile to popular politics. This is manifest in the
obsession with the quality of electoral opposition and its sidelining or
ignoring of popular political activity organised in other ways. The assumption
in this approach is that other forms of organisation and opposition are of
limited importance or a separate matter from the consolidation of their version
of democracy." One of the dangers of dominant parties is "the tendency of
dominant parties to conflate party and state and to appoint party officials to
senior positions irrespective of their having the required qualities." However,
in some countries this is common practice even when there is no dominant party.
In contrast to single-party systems, dominant-party systems can occur within a
context of a democratic system. In a single-party system other parties are
banned, but in dominant-party systems other political parties are tolerated,
and (in democratic dominant-party systems) operate without overt legal
impediment, but do not have a realistic chance of winning; the dominant party
genuinely wins the votes of the vast majority of voters every time (or, in
authoritarian systems, claims to). Under authoritarian dominant-party systems,
which may be referred to as "electoralism" or "soft authoritarianism",
opposition parties are legally allowed to operate, but are too weak or
ineffective to seriously challenge power, perhaps through various forms of
corruption, constitutional quirks that intentionally undermine the ability for
an effective opposition to thrive, institutional and/or organizational
conventions that support the status quo, or inherent cultural values averse to
change. In some states opposition parties are subject to varying degrees of
official harassment and most often deal with restrictions on free speech (such
as press club), lawsuits against the opposition, rules or electoral systems
(such as gerrymandering of electoral districts) designed to put them at a
disadvantage. In some cases outright electoral fraud keeps the opposition from
power. On the other hand, some dominant-party systems occur, at least
temporarily, in countries that are widely seen, both by their citizens and
outside observers, to be textbook examples of democracy. The reasons why a
dominant-party system may form in such a country are often debated: Supporters
of the dominant party tend to argue that their party is simply doing a good job
in government and the opposition continuously proposes unrealistic or unpopular
changes, while supporters of the opposition tend to argue that the electoral
system disfavors them (for example because it is based on the principle of
first past the post), or that the dominant party receives a disproportionate
amount of funding from various sources and is therefore able to mount more
persuasive campaigns. In states with ethnic issues, one party may be seen as
being the party for an ethnicity or race with the party for the majority
ethnic, racial or religious group dominating, e.g., ANC in South Africa
(governing since 1994) has strong support amongst Black South Africans, the
Ulster Unionist Party governed Northern Ireland from its creation in 1921 until
1972 with the support of the Protestant majority. Sub-national entities are
often dominated by one party due the area's demographic being on one end of the
spectrum. For example the District of Columbia has been governed by Democrats
since its creation, Bavaria by the Christian Social Union since 1957, Alberta
by Progressive Conservatives since 1971. In contrast some sub-national entities
have comparatively more conservative or liberal forms of the parties in their
entity, for example an Oklahoma Democrat is likely to be at least as
conservative as a Minnesota Republican. During the 20th century, the Christian
Democracy in Italy governed for more over than 50 years; this party was
considered a party-state. Examples. Current dominant-party systems. The United
States. has been largely governed by a duopoly of the Democratic Party and the
Republican Party, since the mid-19th Century. Some states and cities have been
dominated by one of these parties for up to several decades.
