Drug policy reform Drug policy reform, also known as drug law reform, is any
proposed changes to the way governments respond to the socio-cultural influence
on perception of psychoactive substance use. Proponents of drug policy reform
believe that prohibition of drugs—such as cannabis, opioids, cocaine,
amphetamines and hallucinogens—has been ineffectual and counterproductive.
They argue that, rather than using laws and enforcement as the primary means to
responding to substance use, governments and citizens would be better served by
reducing harm and regulating the production, marketing, and distribution of
currently illegal drugs in a manner similar to (or some would say better than)
how alcohol and tobacco are regulated. Proponents of drug law reform argue that
relative harm should be taken into account in the scheduling of controlled
substances. Addictive drugs such as alcohol, tobacco and caffeine have been a
traditional part of Western culture for centuries and are legal, when in fact
the first two are more harmful than some substances scheduled under Schedule I.
The U.S. National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health, a branch of the
U.S. Centers for Disease Control, rated the hallucinogen psilocybin (Schedule
I) less toxic than Aspirin. The Dutch government found this also to be true.
The addictive properties of the drug nicotine in tobacco are often compared
with heroin or cocaine, but tobacco is legal, even though the World Health
Organization (WHO) in the 2002 World Health Report estimates that in developed
countries, 26% of male deaths and 9% of female deaths can be attributed to
tobacco smoking. According to the American Heart Association, "Nicotine
addiction has historically been one of the hardest addictions to break." The
pharmacologic and behavioral characteristics that determine tobacco addiction
are similar to those that determine addiction to drugs such as heroin and
cocaine. History of drug policy reform. Initial attempts to change the punitive
drug laws which were introduced all over the world from the late 1800s onwards
were primarily based around recreational use. Timothy Leary was one of the most
prominent campaigners for the legal and recreational use of LSD. In 1967, a
"Legalise pot" rally was held in Britain. However, as death toll from the drug
war rose, other organisations began to form to campaign on a more political and
humanitarian basis. The Drug Policy Foundation formed in America and Release, a
charity which gives free legal advice to drugs users and currently campaigns
for drug decriminalization, also incorporated in the 1970s. Today, the focus of
the world's drug policy reform organisations is on the promotion of harm
reduction in the Western World, and attempting to prevent the catastrophic loss
of human life in developing countries where much of the world's supply of
heroin, cocaine, and marijuana are produced. Drug policy reform advocates
points to efforts such as the Mexican Drug War, which has claimed some 36,000
lives, as signs that a new approach to drug policy is needed. Proposed
Alternatives. Harm reduction. Harm reduction refers to a range of public health
policies designed to reduce the harmful consequences associated with
recreational drug use and other high risk activities. Harm reduction is put
forward as a useful perspective alongside the more conventional approaches of
demand and supply reduction. Many advocates argue that prohibitionist laws
criminalize people for suffering from a disease and cause harm, for example by
obliging drug addicts to obtain drugs of unknown purity from unreliable
criminal sources at high prices, increasing the risk of overdose and death. Its
critics are concerned that tolerating risky or illegal behaviour sends a
message to the community that these behaviours are acceptable.
Decriminalization. Drug decriminalization calls for reduced control and
penalties compared to existing laws. Proponents of drug decriminalization
generally support the use of fines or other punishment to replace prison terms,
and often propose systems whereby illegal drug users who are caught would be
fined, but would not receive a permanent criminal record as a result. A central
feature of drug decriminalization is the concept of harm reduction. Drug
decriminalization is in some ways an intermediate between prohibition and
legalisation, and has been criticised as being "the worst of both worlds", in
that drug sales would still be illegal, thus perpetuating the problems
associated with leaving production and distribution of drugs to the criminal
underworld, while also failing to discourage illegal drug use by removing the
criminal penalties that might otherwise cause some people to choose not to use
drugs. Currently, Portugal is the only country in the world that has
decriminalized the use of all drugs, meaning anyone caught with any type of
drug, if its for consumption, will not be imprisoned. However, Mexico City has
decriminalized certain drugs and Greece has just announced that it is going to
do so. Legalization. The regulated legalization system would probably have a
range of restrictions for different drugs, depending on their perceived risk,
so while some drugs would be sold over the counter in pharmacies or other
licensed establishments, drugs with greater risks of harm might only be
available for sale on licensed premises where use could be monitored and
emergency medical care made available. Examples of drugs with different levels
of regulated distribution in most countries include: caffeine (coffee, tea),
nicotine (tobacco), ethyl alcohol (beer, wine, spirits), and antibiotics. Full
legalization is often proposed by groups such as libertarians who object to
drug laws on moral grounds, while regulated legalization is suggested by groups
such as Law Enforcement Against Prohibition who object to the drug laws on the
grounds that they fail to achieve their stated aims and instead greatly worsen
the problems associated with use of prohibited drugs, but who acknowledge that
there are harms associated with currently prohibited drugs which need to be
minimized. Not all proponents of drug re-legalization necessarily share a
common ethical framework, and people may adopt this viewpoint for a variety of
reasons. In particular, favoring drug re-legalization does not imply approval
of drug use. Groups advocating change. The Senlis Council, a European
development and policy thinktank, has, since it conception in 2002, advocated
that drug addiction should be viewed as a public health issue rather than a
purely criminal matter. The group does not support the decriminalisation of
illegal drugs. Since 2003, the Council has called for the licensing of poppy
cultivation in Afghanistan in order to manufacture poppy-based medicines, such
as morphine and codeine, and to combat poverty in rural communities, breaking
ties with the illicit drugs trade. The Senlis Council outlined proposals for
the implementation of a village based poppy for medicine project and calls for
a pilot project for Afghan morphine at the next planting season.
