Dual power Dual power is a concept that has taken on a broad meaning in the
hands of anarchists and libertarian socialists who use it to refer to the
concept of gradual revolution through the creation of alternative institutions
and counter institutions in place of and in opposition to state and corporate
power. History. Dual power is a term first used by Lenin, "The Dual Power,"
("dvoevlastie"), although conceptually first outlined by Proudhon, which
described a situation in the wake of the February Revolution in which two
powers, the workers councils (or Soviets, particularly the Petrograd Soviet)
and the official state apparatus of the Provisional Government coexisted with
each other and competed for legitimacy. Lenin argued that this essentially
unstable situation constituted a unique opportunity for the Soviets to seize
power by smashing the Provisional Government and establishing themselves as the
basis of a new form of state power. This notion has informed the strategies of
subsequent communist-led revolutions, including the Chinese Revolution led by
Mao. Libertarian socialists have more recently appropriated the term to refer
to the non-violent strategy of achieving a libertarian socialist economy and
polity by means of incrementally establishing and then networking institutions
of direct participatory democracy to contest the existing power structures of
state-capitalism. In this context, the strategy itself is sometimes also
referred to as "counterpower" to differentiate it from the term's Leninist
origins. The strategy of dual power is generally held to be in line with the
non-aggression principle as it does not involve the use of force or advocate
expropriation. Strategy. As the ideological monopoly of dominant institutions
is broken and people increasingly rely on AIs, those who benefited from
existing arrangements may seek to dismantle their upstart competitors. At the
same time, those who seek fundamental changes in society or who find the
alternative ways of organizing it valuable may seek to enlarge and strengthen
the alternative infrastructure. Counter institutions (XIs) are created both to
defend the AIs and to promote their growth. These work to challenge and attack
the status quo while creating, defending, and securing space for opposition and
alternative institutions. They do this with everything from political protests,
to direct appropriation (of plantations, government buildings, factories, etc.)
for the use of alternative institutions, to civil disobedience or armed
resistance. The line between AIs and XIs is seldom entirely clear as many
alternative institutions are also self-promoting or defending. Together the AIs
and XIs form an alternative source of power in society which is "necessarily
autonomous from, and competitive with, the dominant system, seeking to encroach
upon the latter's domain, and, eventually, to replace it." During the process
of building the alternative institutions and the ideology that supports them,
the advantage of dual power is the creation of real, and not merely political,
momentum towards the revolutionary transformation of society. Actual changes
are ongoing, rather than postponed to a revolutionary moment, so needs unmet by
the pre-existing order are being met during the struggle and no sector of
society is told that its concerns can only be dealt with after victory is
achieved. That is, creation of AIs and the political space for them has
intrinsic benefits, apart from the advancement of the revolutionary project.
Over the course of building AIs, the society at large is empowered, committed
to change, and skilled in running society. Simultaneously, the credibility of a
revolutionary vision is increased immensely by putting it into practice and by
refining and improving it over time. It is also conceivable that factional
splits between revolutionaries and reformers (and all the shades in between)
could be reduced by having a common project that both find useful. Those forces
that would be sent to suppress a revolutionary movement find themselves
confronting people who have taken control over their own lives, rather than
armed cadre attempting to impose a vision on the country, potentially obviating
military conflict or at least reducing its severity. Successful dual power
rebellions end with the acceptance of the new social forms by much of the
populace and the realization by the old rulers that they are no longer capable
of using their systems of force against the revolutionary movement. This can
occur because noncooperation has crippled the old structures of power, because
too few people remain loyal to the old rulers to enforce their will, or because
the rulers themselves undergo an ideological conversion. At this point, there
is not general confusion. The disappearance of old leaders and structures of
power is accommodated by the expansion of the alternative system. The alleged
"necessity" for a revolutionary vanguard to guide the revolutionary impulse is
shown to have no basis: because the people have already learned how to govern
their own affairs, they need no tutelage from above. The possibility of co-
option is minimized: "When the people recognize their true power, it cannot be
taken away by rhetoric or […] imposition." Dual power is a strategy, rather
than an ideology, and it could plausibly be used to advance a variety of forms
of social change. However, the advantages of the strategy make it most
compatible with perspectives that emphasize the exercise of power at the
community level, that seek to make the revolutionary movement accountable to
the people, that see the capability to revision and transform society as common
rather than rare, and that seek decentralized forms of power. Call this version
of the strategy grassroots dual power, the bottom-up transformation and
replacement of the mechanisms of society. Dual power and the Zapatista
movement. With the growth of the Zapatista movement, the system of local
governance has been elaborated somewhat. Among the officials selected from each
assembly, there are now commissioners for health and education, as well as a
representative to a Clandestine Revolutionary Indigenous Committee (CCRI). The
commissioners meet and coordinate with their peers on a regional basis, while
there are four CCRIs, one for each language group in the area. The EZLN is
subordinate to their decisions. This has fostered cooperation between community
members and the EZLN, since "when a decision is made by the CCRI, it’s a
decision based on consensus. It’s based on the agreement of dozens of
families." This local democracy has been extended by the creation of autonomous
local governments, systems of alternative institutions that effectively replace
local structures of power. On February 3, 1994, Manuel Camacho Solís, the
conciliator between the government and the Zapatistas, announced the creation
of two free zones in which the International Red Cross would operate and the
militaries would not, unwittingly providing the Zapatista communities with a
bit of national territory. On December 19, 1995, the EZLN broke the Mexican
Federal Army’s encirclement and carried out the political and military
seizure of dozens of towns, demonstrating that its influence went far beyond
the small existing conflict zone. In this expanded area, Zapatista communities
formed 38 autonomous municipalities covering more than a third of the state of
Chiapas. Autonomous municipalities are the Zapatistas’ implementation of the
16 February 1996 San Andrés Accords, which the government abandoned in
December 1996, after refusing to carry them out. The Accords guarantee the
right of indigenous peoples to form and govern traditionally their own
municipalities. In forming the municipalities, residents derecognize the
official authorities and elect their own. They refuse federal government
involvement and control. They name their "local health promoters indigenous
parliaments, and elaborate their own laws based on social, economic, political
and gender equality among the inhabitants of diverse ethnic communities."
Councils are constituted to plan the various areas of community action and are
joined by councils of elders and, increasingly, of women. These communities are
accomplishing long-ignored aspirations, like building bilingual (Spanish and
the local indigenous language) education systems, and providing to all what
once was only provided in accordance with political patronage. A report from
the Diocese of San Cristobal de las Casas finds: "At a local level municipal
presidents imposed by the PRI are left governing only themselves, without being
able to penetrate into the communities. Basically this means the slow
destruction of…false democracy…and its replacement by communities and
organizations that construct their own history first as autonomous
municipalities and eventually as autonomous zones." This eroding of the status
quo has proceeded despite the attacks by the Mexican Federal Army and their
paramilitary allies, providing a dramatic demonstration of the effectiveness of
grassroots dual power. Whatever its accomplishments, the EZLN sees itself as a
temporary formation: A "mirror image of the Mexican Army," it is "entirely
unqualified to replace it" since it includes the hierarchy and violence that it
would remove from society altogether. It will remain only "until the armed
struggle becomes an absurdity and an obstacle for the revolutionary
transformation of our country."
