Dual mandate A dual mandate is the practice in which elected officials serve in
more than one elected or other public position simultaneously. This practice is
known as double jobbing in Britain and distinguished from double dipping in the
United States, which refers to being employed and collecting retirement from
the same public authority at the same time. For example, suppose a candidate
wins a seat on a local authority at an election. If the same person then wins a
seat in the national legislature in a separate general election, this is a dual
mandate. Dual mandates are sometimes prohibited by law. For example, in federal
states, federal office holders are often not permitted to hold state office. In
states with separation of powers, members, whether elected or not, of the
executive, legislature, and judiciary are separate. In states with bicameral
legislatures, one cannot simultaneously be a member of both houses. The holder
of one office who wins election to another where a dual mandate is prohibited
must either resign the former office or refuse the new one. European
Parliament. A member of the European Parliament (MEP) may not be a member of
the legislature of a member state. This dates from a 2002 European Union
decision, which came into effect at the 2004 European elections in most member
states, at the 2007 national election in the Republic of Ireland, and at the
2009 European elections in the United Kingdom. Originally, MEPs were nominated
by national parliamentarians from among their own membership. Prior to the
first direct elections in 1979, the dual mandate was discussed. Some advocated
banning it, arguing that MEPs who were national MPs were often absent from one
assembly due to being at the other. The early death of Peter Michael Kirk was
blamed by his election agent on overwork resulting from his dual mandate.
Others countered that dual mandate members enhanced communication between
national and European assemblies. The Eurosceptic Danish Social Democrats
supported compulsory dual mandate, to ensure the state's MEPs expressed the
same views as the national legislature. The government of Denmark supported
compulsory dual mandate, while the other eight members supported optional dual
mandate. The 1976 law preparing for the 1979 elections expressly allowed the
dual mandate. In 1978, Willy Brandt suggested that one third of MEPs should be
national MPs. Australia. Dual mandates are rare in Australia. It is illegal to
be a member of any state parliament and the Australian parliament
simultaneously. A member of a state parliament seeking federal office must
resign before seeking election to the Federal Parliament. It is possible, but
unusual, to be a member of a local government and another parliament. Since
2004 Clover Moore has been both the independent member for Sydney in the NSW
Parliament and the Lord Mayor of Sydney. The issue of Moore holding both
positions has brought the issue to the forefront in Australia and has led the
premier of New South Wales in 2012 to propose a new law, dubbed in the media as
the "Get Clover bill", which would ban this dual office. If the law passes, it
will force Moore and a number of other local Councillors who also hold state
office to resign. Canada. In Canada, dual mandates are rare and frequently
barred by legislation; section 39 of the Constitution Act, 1867 prevents a
Senator from being elected as a Member of Parliament; similarly, s. 65(c) of
the Canada Elections Act makes members of provincial or territorial
legislatures ineligible to be candidates to the House of Commons. In other
circumstances, an elected official almost always resigns their first post when
elected to another. Dual representation has occurred occasionally when the
member was elected to a second office shortly before their other term of office
was due to expire anyway and whereby the short time frame would not merit the
cost of a special by-election. In 1996, for example, Jenny Kwan continued to be
a Vancouver city councillor after being elected to the provincial legislature.
The British Columbia legislature had debated a "Dual Office Prohibition Act"
which failed to pass second reading. In the first few years after Confederation
in 1867, however, double mandates were common. In the first House of Commons,
there were fifteen Members of Parliament from Quebec who simultaneously held
provincial seats, including the Premier Pierre-Joseph-Olivier Chauveau; there
were also four members of Parliament from Ontario who also held provincial
seats, including the first two Premiers, John Sandfield Macdonald and Edward
Blake. Other prominent federal politicians with double mandates included
George-Étienne Cartier, Christopher Dunkin, Hector Langevin, the second
Premier of British Columbia Amor de Cosmos, and two members from Manitoba,
Donald Smith and Pierre Delorme. Another famous example is that of the "de
facto" leader of the Liberals, George Brown, who ran for both federal and
provincial seats in 1867. Brown lost both elections, and soon thereafter began
campaigning for the prohibition of double mandates. The double mandate was
prohibited from the start in Nova Scotia and New Brunswick; it was abolished in
Ontario in 1872, in Manitoba in 1873, and in 1873 the federal parliament passed
a law against it; Quebec passed its own law abolishing it in 1874. However,
dual mandates within a province remained legal. From 1867 to 1985, 305 mayors
were also members of the Quebec legislative assembly (MLA). The two best-known
cases were those of S.N. Parent who was simultaneously mayor of Quebec City
(1894-1906), MLA and Premier of Quebec (1900-1905). Longtime Montreal Mayor
Camilien Houde (1928-32, 1938-40) was also simultaneously MLA for a total of 2
/1/2 years during his mandates as mayor. However that type of dual mandate had
virtually ceased when laws adopted in 1978 and 1980 prohibited MLAs from
holding any local mandate. Finland. It is common for the MPs of the Finnish
Parliament to hold a mandate as a member of their local municipal council as
well. 79 per cent of the MPs elected to the parliament in 2011 were also
municipal council members. France. The dual mandate is a common practice in the
French Fifth Republic (1958–present) and holding up to five offices at once
was at least theoretically possible until recently. Legislation was introduced
in 2000 to limit the practice, known as "cumul des mandats", but 85% of all
members of parliament (both chambers included) still held another mandate
(typically at the communal or departmental level) in 2008. No other Western
country comes close to France as regard the phenomenon of double or multiple
mandates. Despite routine talk about prohibiting multiple mandates, the
ubiquitous 'député-maire' (deputy and mayor) is still a familiar figure of
the French political scene. Currently, in the aftermath of the June 2012
legislative elections, fully 75% of all National Assembly members (438 deputies
out of 577) hold a double mandate (often as mayor of a mid- to large-size city)
and 33 are cumulating 4 mandates. Currently, out of 348 senators, 152 are also
mayors. Hong Kong. In Hong Kong, dual mandate is common for members of the
territory's Legislative Council, who serve concurrently as members of one of
the territory's eighteen district councils. Before the abolition of the two
municipal councils in the territory in 1999, it was common for politicians to
serve concurrently at all three levels. Ireland. In the Republic of Ireland,
the dual mandate of local councillors having Oireachtas seats was abolished by
the Local Government (No. 2) Act 2003, an amendment to the Local Government Act
2001. Attempts to include it in the 2001 Act failed after a rebellion by Fianna
Fáil backbenchers; the 2003 Act passed after a compensation package was agreed
for those losing out. The 2001 Act prohibited being a member of multiple
county/city councils, or multiple town councils, or both a town and city
council. Brian O'Shea was a member of both Waterford City Council and Waterford
County Council until 1993. County councillors are allowed to sit on a town
council, and many do so. The 2003 Act provides that a candidate elected
simultaneously to a forbidden combination of local councils has three days to
choose which seat to take up, with the others being considered vacant. Spain.
Per the Spanish Constitution, legislators in the regional assemblies of the
Autonomous Communities are barred from being elected to a seat in the Congress
of Deputies, the lower house of the Cortes Generales. More precisely, regional
legislators can run for the seat, but if elected they must choose between the
regional and national parliaments. Nevertheless, members of lower tiers of the
Spanish decentralized structure, such as provincial councillors or members of
local councils, including mayors, can and have held seats in the Congress of
Deputies. The rule barring regional legislators does not apply to the upper
house of the Cortes, the Senate: in fact, regional legislatures are entitled to
appoint a varying number of members from their ranks to the Senate, according
to the population of the region. Currently, the Autonomous Communities appoint
56 Senators, the other 208 being directly elected in general elections. United
Kingdom. In the United Kingdom, prior to the 2009 European Parliament
elections, there were a small number of members of the European Parliament who
were also members of the House of Lords As it is impossible to disclaim a life
peerage, it has been ruled that peers must take a "leave of absence" from the
Lords in order to be an MEP. There have also been members of the House of
Commons also holding seats in the devolved bodies in Scotland, Wales and
Northern Ireland. The November 2009 report by the Committee on Standards in
Public Life into the controversy surrounding MPs' expenses noted that "double
jobbing" was "unusually ingrained in the political culture" of Northern
Ireland, where 16 of 18 MPs were MLAs, compared to one Scottish MP being an MSP
(First Minister Alex Salmond), and no Welsh MPs being AMs. The Committee
recommended that Westminster ban multiple mandates from the 2011 assembly
elections. Parties in Northern Ireland agreed to a ban from the 2015 elections.
At a lower level, it is common for people to hold seats on both a district
ouncil and a county council. Several MPs have also retained their council seats
until the expiration of their term. United States. The practice is banned by
the constitutions of many U.S. states, but as of 1992 it was still legal in
Connecticut, Illinois, New Jersey and New York. Florida. In April 1984,
Governor of Florida Bob Graham received legislation that passed unanimously in
both houses of the Florida Legislature that would forbid public officials from
receiving retirement pay and regular pay simultaneously for the same position.
Illinois. In August 2008, Governor of Illinois Rod Blagojevich proposed
legislation that would prohibit dual-office holding as part of changes to the
state's ethics bill, stating that "dual government employment creates the
potential for a conflict of interest because a legislator's duties to his or
her constituents and his or her public employer are not always consistent."
Critics, such as Representative Susana Mendoza, called the actions "spite" on
the part of the governor. New Jersey. Fulfilling a campaign pledge that he had
made when first running for the New Jersey Legislature, Jack Sinagra sponsored
a bill passed by the New Jersey Senate in 1992 that would ban the practice. At
the time that the legislation first passed, there were some twenty elected
officials who served in the New Jersey Legislature and another elected office,
including Assemblyman Bill Pascrell, who was also mayor of Paterson, New
Jersey; State Senator Ronald Rice, who also served on the Newark City Council;
and Assemblyman John E. Rooney, who was also mayor of Northvale. These
officials protested the proposed ban as interfering with the will of voters to
elect officials as they see fit. A newspaper called former State senator Wayne
R. Bryant the "king of double dipping" because he was collecting salaries from
as many as four public jobs he held simultaneously. Governor of New Jersey Jon
Corzine signed legislation in September 2007 that banned the practice
statewide, but the 19 legislators holding multiple offices as of February 1,
2008, were grandfathered into the system and allowed to retain their positions.
As of October 2012, only four of the nineteen (listed in bold) continue to hold
a dual mandate. Ohio. In February 2001, Jean Schmidt introduced legislation in
the Ohio House of Representatives that would forbid public officials from
receiving a government pension while still serving in office.
