Duumvirate A duumvirate is an alliance between two equally powerful political
or military leaders. The term can also be used to describe a state with two
different military leaders who both declare themselves to be the sole leader of
the state. Examples. It has been suggested that Vladimir Putin and Dmitry
Medvedev represent a modern Russian duumvirate, sometimes referred as
"тандемократия", "tandemocracy", a portmanteau of "tandem" and
"democracy" (see Sovereign democracy). When they agreed to swap jobs in
November 2011, with Putin retaking his old position of president which Medvedev
had held for four years (because Putin was constitutionally barred from having
a third term in a row), many in Russia called this "castling"
("рокировка" - "rokirovka") - after the move in chess when the king
and a castle swap sides. This "castling" was followed by protests, seen by some
as "tandem malaise" - a feeling amongst sections of the population that they
were fed up with the tandem. For most of Medvedev's presidency, Putin and he
were seen as being roughly equal, but with the "castling" it has become clear
that Putin had the upper hand the whole time. The tiny European nation of
Andorra is nominally a duumvirate, as it is ruled by two co-princes, one of
whom is François Hollande, the President of France, the other of whom is Joan
Enric Vives i Sicília, Bishop of the Diocese of Urgell, although the Andorran
prime minister wields de facto power as the head of government. Duumvirates in
history include the city-states of Carthage, ruled by two mayors (Suffets), and
Ancient Rome, ruled by two Consuls. Sparta was also ruled by two kings, thus a
duumvirate. Some political parties have duumvirates, sometimes, such as is the
case of Lindsey German and John Rees in the Socialist Workers Party in Britain.
The First Whitlam Ministry in Australia is sometimes called the "Duumvirate"
because it consisted entirely of the Prime Minister, Gough Whitlam, and his
deputy, Lance Barnard, who between them split up all ministerial and quasi-
ministerial positions for two weeks in December 1972. In fiction. The port city
of Umbar in the works of J.R.R. Tolkien was ruled by a duumvirate.
