Dykes on Bikes Dykes on Bikes (DOB) is a chartered lesbian motorcycle club with
22 chapters and numerous affiliations. They are known for their participation
in gay pride events such as Pride parades, and significant LGBT events like the
international Gay Games. They most likely were originally put at the front of
the parade for logistical reasons and have remained there as a symbol of LGBT
pride, defiance, liberation and empowerment. The contingents are fiercely
independent and self-reliant in the DIY and feminist traditions and have been
studied as a social phenomenon as a "complex, multilayered form of consumption-
related cultural resistance that raises awareness of social injustice and
discursively informs social meanings in everyday life outside the festivals."
Along with drag queens, the DOB have been criticized for not portraying a more
acceptable image of LGBT culture but supporters counter that they are seen as
highly visible icons of gay pride who refuse to assimilate and conform to
mainstream society gender roles and indeed remind of the butches and queens who
helped lead the Stonewall riots launching the modern gay-rights movement. The
Dykes on Bikes have been criticized for using the term "dyke" in their name
rather than lesbian but the group has registered the mark in the United States,
after a battle to demonstrate that the terms "diesel-dyke," "bull-dyke," "bull-
dagger" and dyke all have historically negative connotations but have been re-
appropriated as self-referential terms of endearment and empowerment distinct
from "lesbian" and indeed awards and events utilizing those names are now used
by the LGBT community. In keeping with the tradition of motorcyclists'
rejection of the norms of middle-class, middle-America, the Dykes on Bikes
teach, by example, that women can be masculine and challenge the dominant
sexual and cultural expectations of what a woman is and what she can do and
achieve. History. Although the term specifically was coined by actual dykes on
bikes at the first gathering at the 1976 San Francisco Pride parade, it could
have been used prior to then, but came into formal use at that time. Dykes and
motorcycles have been regularly intertwined in lesbian fiction and the term is
sometimes used derogatorily against any woman rider who isn't with a man. In
many countries motorcycles are simply an economical and effective mode of
transportation. Cheaper to purchase, maintain and use than a four-wheeled
vehicle and more capable of handling narrow or poorly maintained roads,
motorcycles are a simply a better option. The United States with its car
friendly culture and its wide well-marked and extensive road system is an
exception rather than the rule but even in America the motorcycle is used not
only as transportation but as means of escapism. According to Harley-Davidson
historians female riders did everything men did from long distance riding to
enjoying lazy Sunday afternoon rides with friends. World War II creates
opportunities. As the US entered World War II in 1941, women were provided
opportunities to volunteer for their country and almost 250,000 women served in
the armed forces, mostly in the Women's Army Corps (WAC), two-thirds of whom
were single and under the age of twenty-five. Women were recruited with posters
showing muscular, short-haired women wearing tight-fitting tailored uniforms.
Bessie Stringfield joined a motorcycle dispatch unit of the army. Many lesbians
joined the WAC to meet other women and to do "men’s work." Few were rejected
for lesbianism, and found that being strong or having masculine appearance –
characteristics associated with being dykes – aided in the work as mechanics
and motor vehicle operators. A popular Fleischmann’s Yeast advertisement
showed a WAC riding a motorcycle with the heading "This is no time to be
frail." Some recruits appeared at their inductions wearing men’s clothing and
their hair slicked back in the classic butch style of out lesbians of the time.
Post-war many women including lesbians declined opportunities to return to
traditional gender roles and helped redefine societal expectations that fed the
women's, black and gay liberation movements. Dykes on Bikes first appearance.
The first formal appearance of the Dykes on Bikes was in 1976 at San
Francisco's Pride parade where the riders were placed first as motorcycles
don't always run reliably at the walking pace of the rest of the parade and as
first contingent they can move faster. Although the original group self-
identified as "Dykes on Bikes" and they were known as such, over the years they
used "the Women’s Motorcycle Contingent/ Dykes on Bikes" to encompass those
who identified as gay, lesbian, bisexual, transgender or any of the newer
gender-bending terms like femme, androgyne and boi. Worldwide phenomena. Dykes
on Bikes have been leading marches such as Gay pride parades, Gay Games events
and protests. "Dyke Marches" have become a popular Pride event nationwide with
the Dykes on Bikes often leading the marches. The Dyke March events are
generally non-commercial, often in sharp contrast to corporate-sponsored pride
events, and are usually inclusive of lesbian, bi, and trans women. Leading
pride parades around the world from San Francisco to Melbourne, Paris, London,
Tokyo, Toronto, Sydney, Zurich, Tel Aviv, and Greece. Legal battle to register
DOB as a trademark. On November 13, 2006, the Dykes on Bikes won the battle to
trademark the name, having struggled since 2003 to persuade the PTO that "dyke"
was not offensive to the lesbian community. In 2005, after a prolonged court
battle involving testimony on the word's changing role in the lesbian
community, the Trademark Trial and Appeal Board permitted the group to register
its name. In 2007, the club won a legal challenge from a male lawyer, Michael
McDermott, who sued after the USPTO granted approval calling the name
“disparaging to men” and “scandalous and immoral.” Normally the United
States Patent and Trademark Office (PTO), under Section 2(a) of the Lanham Act,
will not consider registration of a proposed trademark which contains a term
that is disparaging to a group of people. This presents a problem for the PTO
when an attempt is made by a group to register a mark containing a self-
disparaging term, as was done with DOB. "On February 20, 2004, the PTO refused
the registration of the mark 'Dykes on Bikes' under Trademark Act Section 2(a),
explaining that a reasonable person of ordinary sensibilities would recognize
that the term “dyke” is disparaging and objectionable to lesbian, gay,
bisexual and transgender communities." However, the defence noted that during
the time period from 2000-2005 the PTO had approved marks for “Crippled Old
Biker Bastards,” “Biker Bitch,” “Whore,” and “Evil Pussy” as well
as “TechnoDyke,” "Homo Depot," "Queer Shop," "Queer Eye for the Straight
Guy" and "Queer as Folk". The Brooke Oliver Law Office that represented the
SFWMC also pointed out the absurdity of the initial rejection ruling citing the
PTO's own regulations that "the perceptions of the general public are
irrelevant" and indeed the test of “whether a mark is disparaging and/or
offensive is the perceptions of the individuals referred to and/or identified
by that mark. In this particular case, it is women – or more specifically
lesbians, bisexuals and transgender women – who ride motorcycles in the Pride
Parades and who would be using the term.”
