Dyke March Dyke March is a mostly lesbian-led and inclusive gathering and
protest march much like the original gay pride parades and marches. They
usually occur the Friday or Saturday before LGBT pride parades and larger
metropolitan areas have related events (parties, benefits, dances) both before
and after the event to further develop community often targeting specific
community segments (older women, bar events, arts, parenting groups, etc.) The
purpose of a Dyke March is to increase lesbian visibility and activism and they
have grown to be more inclusive of all women-loving-women regardless of labels
as well as bisexuals, intersex and transgender persons. Beginnings. One of the
first documented lesbian pride marches in North America took place in May,
1981, in downtown Vancouver, B.C. Canada. The march, which attracted
approximately 200 lesbians, was part of the Bi-National Lesbian Conference. In
October, 1981, an organization called Lesbians Against the Right organized a
second march in Toronto, Ontario. The first nationwide Dyke March was held in
Washington, D.C. on April 24, 1993. This event was planned by the Lesbian
Avengers. Over 20,000 women marched. The large turnout can be attributed to the
fact that the Dyke March coincided with March on Washington for Lesbian, Gay
and Bi Equal Rights and Liberation. It was intended as a woman-only event,
organized by the direct action Lesbian Avengers who encouraged gay and bisexual
men, as well as other supporters, to cheer the marchers on, a tradition that
continues to this day. San Francisco. The first San Francisco Dyke March was
held a few months later, in June 1993, and is still celebrated every year on
the Saturday evening before the annual Pride Parade. The Dyke March is
informal, with marchers creating their own signs and most people showing up to
participate, rather than to just watch. The streets along the march route are
lined with thousands of enthusiastic spectators, mostly gay men in support of
the women. The march begins in Dolores Park with speeches, performances and
community networking and ends in the Castro District, at the Pink Saturday
party where the Dyke March sound-truck becomes a stage for more performances,
DJs and more speakers. The San Francisco Dyke March has high attendance numbers
yet remains a peaceful and well-organized event. While some have stated that
200,000 attend, the more common estimate for 2010 is around 50,000, as found on
the official website. Since its inception, the San Francisco Dyke March
Committee (a small group of volunteers) has never applied for nor received a
permit from the city, exercising the First Amendment right to gather without
permits and without blatant corporate sponsorships. New York. New York City's
Dyke March is another beloved tradition. In the 1970s, separate Lesbian Pride
marches were held, for several years, but they did not become a continuous
tradition. The Dyke March was renewed by the NY Chapter of the Lesbian Avengers
in June 1993 (after the success of the Dyke March in Washington). On the
Saturday before Pride, participants gather in Bryant Park as they prepare to
march down Fifth Avenue towards Washington Square Park. The Dyke March is open
to all self-identified women. Because of this, men have been asked to stand on
the sidewalks and cheer on the marchers. As with the San Francisco Dyke March,
the organizers do not seek out a permit, and put a high emphasis on the
political. Even though there are many club nights and parties after the March,
the event is not so much about entertainment as it is about highlighting the
presence of self-identified women within the LGBT community. Each year
approximately 15,000 women attend this monumental event. The reason for the
creation of the various Dyke Marches was to protest what many women saw as the
control of Gay Pride events by white gay men at the expense of lesbians in
general and women of color in particular. Many of the Lesbian Avengers were
also concerned that New York's Gay Pride March was losing its political edge as
it became more accepted by the city and courted by corporations. Seattle.
Seattle's Dyke March occurs the Saturday before Pride with a Rally with
speakers and performers who are women identified and queer identified from 5 to
7pm. The Rally is held outside at Seattle Central Community College. The Rally
is ASL interpreted. In addition to the speakers and performers, Northwest
Network, an LGBT domestic violence organization, sets up a clothesline project,
showcasing t-shirts made by survivors of domestic violence. The March goes
through Seattle's LGBT neighborhood, going around a block starting and ending
on Broadway, the center of the LGBT neighborhood. For the better part of the
last decade of Dyke March, organizers do seek a permit. Since about 2007, the
march audience has been about 1,000 women, and the permit ensures the streets
are clear for Marching. It also provides greater access an inclusion for the
bus that is rented every year to allow differently-abled/disabled people to
participate in the March. Chicago. The Chicago Dyke March occurs each year
around the anniversary of the Stonewall riots, June 28, 1969. The Chicago Dyke
March has been in operation since 1998 in the LGBTQ-friendly neighborhood of
Andersonville. However, in 2008 organizers announced that it will remain in
each new location for two consecutive years. The March was held in Pilsen in
2009 and 2010 and in South Shore in 2011 and 2012. According to the planners of
the Chicago Dyke March the reason behind the move was to "increase 'queer
visibility' throughout all neighborhoods in" Chicago. Journalist and
commentator Yasmin Nair has been critical of the Chicago Dyke March, saying, In
Chicago, for instance, we have an alternative Dyke March, but it became, over
the course of a decade, a predominantly white and middle-class event. Even
after it moved locations (first to the predominantly Latin@ west side, then to
the largely African-American South Shore) there’s a great deal of talk about
alternative politics, but not very much conscious conversation about what it
means to, essentially, stage Dyke March in these communities and not very much
explicit engagement with people, including queers, who live there. Instead, one
day a year, we "take over the streets," and then disappear. I’ve been to the
alternative Dyke three out of the four years so far, and I can see its value as
a kind of annual resting space/networking tool for queers with alternative
politics, but I wish we would drop the pretense that moving the location is
more than just marching in a different place. Dyke Marches are now held in
Toronto, Montreal, Calgary, Ottawa, and Vancouver, Canada as well as Seattle,
Philadelphia, Atlanta, Boston, Chicago, Washington, DC, Portland, ME, San
Diego, Oakland, Minneapolis and other cities around the United States.
