E-democracy E-democracy (a combination of the words "electronic" and
"democracy") is "the use of information and communications technologies and
strategies by 'democratic sectors' within the political processes of local
communities, states/regions, nations and on the global stage." Democratic
actors and sectors in this context include, in order of importance, citizens/
voters, political organizations, the media, elected officials, and governments.
E-democracy, like democracy in its ideal form, is a direct democracy. In
practical form it has been an instantiation of more limited forms of democracy.
In this more limited sense, e-democracy often refers to technological adjuncts
to a republic, i.e., the use of information technologies and communication
technologies and strategies in political and governance processes. In some
egregious cases, the word is used to refer to anything political that involves
the Internet. Ann Macintosh, in 2004, used the term to mean a technological
adjunct to a republic, stating: "E-democracy is concerned with the use of
information and communication technologies to engage citizens, support the
democratic decision- making processes and strengthen representative democracy."
Democratic actors and sectors in this context include governments, elected
officials, the media, political organizations, and citizens/voters. For those
who see "e-democracy" as an adjunct to a republic, it is said to aim for
broader and more active citizen participation enabled by the Internet, mobile
communications, and other technologies in today's representative democracy, as
well as through more participatory or direct forms of citizen involvement in
addressing public challenges. Tools and types. There has been a significant
growth in E-democracy in the last four years. Public- and private-sector
platforms provide an avenue to citizen engagement while offering access to
transparent information citizens have come to expect. To develop these public-
sector portals or platforms, governments have the choice to internally develop
and manage, outsource or sign a self-funding contract. The self-funding model
creates portals that pay for themselves through convenience fees for certain e-
government transactions. Early players in this space include govONE Solutions,
First Data Government Solutions and Nicusa.com, a company built on the self-
funded model. Social networking is an emerging area for e-democracy, as well as
related technological developments, such as argument maps and eventually, the
semantic web. Another related development consists in combining the open
communication of social networking with the structured communication of closed
panels including experts and/or policy-makers. Those are seen as important
stepping stones in the maturation of the concept of e-democracy. The social
networking entry point, for example, is within the citizens' environment, and
the engagement is on the citizens' terms. Proponents of e-government perceive
government use of social networks as a medium to help government act more like
the public it serves. Examples of state usage can be found at The Official
Commonwealth of Virginia Homepage, where citizens can find Google tools and
open social forums. Government and its agents also have the opportunity to
follow citizens to monitor satisfaction with services they receive. Through
ListServs, RSS feeds, mobile messaging, micro-blogging services and blogs,
government and its agencies can share information to citizens who share common
interests and concerns. Some government representatives are also beginning to
use Twitter which provides them with an easy medium to inform their followers.
In the state of Rhode Island, for instance, Treasurer Frank T. Caprio is
offering daily tweets of the state's cash flow. Practical issues. A number of
practical issues surround e-democracy. In the media, on the Internet, and in
popular consciousness, there is a strong and generally unchallenged view that
the Internet is the new electronic cradle of democracy. A speech given by
Hillary Clinton on January 21, 2010, addressed this issue of internet freedom
and the role that new technologies have played in shaping democratic practices.
The massive spread of free information through the internet has become a
central networking hub for our world, encouraging freedom and human progress
through social and economic development. In many democratic nations, the
internet is used as a tool for democracy in promoting basic human rights. The
right to free speech, to religion, to expression, to peacefully assemble, to
hold governments accountable for their actions, and the right of knowledge and
understanding, helps ensure the preservation of democracy. All of these basic
rights that Clinton describes are fostered through the use of technology. One
practical issue in which Clinton touched upon is that of the "freedom to
connect." Clinton, Hillary R. "Remarks on Internet Freedom." U.S. Department of
State. 21 Jan. 2010. Web. 15 Mar. 2011.
www.state.gov/secretary/rm/2010/01/135519.htm>. The free exchange of ideas
dates back to the birth of the United States. Technology itself does not create
these ideals, rather they give people the ability to seek, receive, and convey
information through whatever media channels they desire, in a more effective
manner. Political participation has become more involved as the internet
provides increasing access to knowledge, information, and opportunities where
none would normally exist. The Internet has several attributes that encourage
thinking about it as a democratic medium. Part of this can be traced to the
design principles that were established early in its evolution. The lack of
centralized control suggests to many people that censorship or other attempts
at control will be thwarted. Other attributes are a result of social design in
the early days, the strongly libertarian support for free speech, the sharing
culture that permeated nearly all aspects of Internet use, and the outright
prohibition on commercial use by the National Science Foundation, for example.
The Internet's most significant contribution was the idea of unmediated many-
to-many communication on a large scale, through newsgroups, chat rooms, MUDs,
and many other modes. This type of communication ignored the boundaries
established with broadcast media, such as newspapers or radio, and with one-to-
one media, such as letters or landline telephones. Finally, because Internet is
a massive digital network with open standards, universal and inexpensive access
to a wide variety of communication media and models could actually be attained.
Some practical issues involving e-democracy include: effective participation;
voting equality at decision stage; enlightened understanding; control of the
agenda; and inclusiveness. Systemic issues may include cyber-security concerns
and protection of sensitive data from third parties. Citizens' roles. The
Internet provides a distinctive structure of opportunities that has the
potential to renew interest in civic engagement and participation. Civic
engagement can be understood to include three distinct dimensions: political
knowledge (what people learn about public affairs), political trust (the
public's orientation of support for the political system), and political
participation (conventional activities designed to influence government and the
decision-making process). The information capacity available on the Internet
allows citizens to become more knowledgeable about government and political
issues, and the interactivity of the medium allows for new forms of
communication with government, i.e. elected officials and/or public servants.
The posting of contact information, legislation, agendas, and policies makes
government more transparent, potentially enabling more informed participation
both online and offline. For more information, visit transparent-gov. A new way
in which citizens can take a role in the government is with the OPEN Act. The
Online Protection and Enforcement Act is revolutionary in that it allows those
who can access the internet to go to their website Keep The Web Open view the
act, add comments, and make changes that can then be added to the act. One of
the main goals of E-democracy is to actively engage citizens through the use of
media and communication technologies. Given the definition of E-democracy this
act is seen as something that encourages citizens to get their own opinions in
and possibly help write new legislation. Civic participation in terms of E-
Democracy. In general, civic engagement can be thought of the consumption of
services provided by governmental institutions. The Internet provides a
connection to these institutions; it can be used as a tool to be used for the
process of interaction with said institutions. According to Roas
Tsagarousianou, e-democracy has three sub-fields: "information provision,
deliberation, and participation in decision-making." In terms of E-Democracy,
civic engagement takes the form of social networking, organization, and online
forums. According to Matt Leighninger, the internet impacts government in two
main ways. The first way is the empowerment of individuals. People who have an
interest in current political issues and the capacity to learn about them now
have access to the information they need to be equipped to make an impact on
public policy. Using online tools to organize, people can more easily be
involved in the policy-making process of government. The first impact has also
lead to a greater amount of public engagement efforts. Government officials are
pressured by more highly informed, opinionated, and potentially effective
citizens to make more of an effort to address the public's concerns. The second
way the Internet impacts government is that the Internet empowers groups of
people. Social media sites support networks of people; online networks are
currently significantly affecting the political process. Pressures from these
networks are causing an increase in politicians' efforts to appeal to the
public in campaigns. The combination of face-to-face relationships and social
networking is a potentially powerful force for the future of politics and e-
democracy. Online citizen participation in local democracies depends on the
opportunities provided by the government. For e-democracy to prove effective,
the democracy first must provide or facilitate the forum for public discussion.
An e-government process improves cooperation with the local populace and helps
the government focus in upon key issues the community wants addressed. The
theory is that every citizen has the opportunity to have a voice in their local
government. E-democracy works in tandem with local communities and gives every
citizen who wants to contribute the chance. What makes an effective e-democracy
is that the citizens not only contribute to the government, but they
communicate and work together to improve their own local communities. Internet
as a campaign tool. The lower cost of information exchange on the Internet, as
well as the high level of reach that the content potentially has, makes the
Internet an attractive medium for political information, particularly amongst
social interest groups and parties with lower budgets. For example,
environmental or social issue groups may find the Internet an easier mechanism
to increase awareness of their issues, as compared to traditional media
outlets, such as television or newspapers, which require heavy financial
investment. Due to all these factors, the Internet has the potential to take
over certain traditional media of political communication, such as the
telephone, the television, newspapers and the radio. The civil society has
gradually moved into the online world. Another example is openforum.com.au, an
Australian non-profit eDemocracy project that invites politicians, senior
public servants, academics, business people and other key stakeholders to
engage in high-level policy debate. Novel tools are being developed that are
aimed at empowering bloggers, webmasters and owners of other social media, with
the effect of moving from a "strictly informational" use of the Internet to
using the Internet "as a means of social organization" not requiring top-down
action. Action triggers, for instance, are a novel concept designed to allow
webmasters to mobilize their viewers into action without the need for
leadership. These tools are also utilized worldwide: for example, India is
developing an effective blogosphere that allows internet users to state their
thoughts and opinions. Internet as a mogul for change. Recent events, such as
the Egyptian Revolution in 2011, show us how this idea of e-democracy has
effectively been used in the political arena. Last January, mass protests,
marches, and rallies flooded the streets of Cairo, Egypt by the thousands.
Citizens were protesting the long reign of their President, Hosni Mubarak, as
well as the high unemployment rate, government corruption, poverty, and
oppression within society. This 18-day revolution did not begin with guns,
violence, or protests, but rather with the creation of a single Facebook page
which quickly gained the attention of thousands, and soon millions, of
Egyptians, spreading into a global phenomenon. The internet empowered
protesters and allowed for anyone with access to the internet be involved in
the democratization process of their government. In order to have a democratic,
free nation, all information that can be shared, should be shared. Protestors
communicated, organized, and collaborated through the use of this technology
with real time, real impacts. It would be hard to discount the enormous role
these technologies played on the world stage during this time. Even when the
regime eliminated all access to the internet in a failed attempt to halt
further political online forums, Google and Twitter teamed up, making a system
that would get information out to the public without having access to the
internet. The interactivity of media during this revolution boosted civic
participation and played a monumental role in the political outcome of the
revolution and the democratization of an entire nation. The Internet works
toward an "informationalization" of society and everyday life through
increasing democratic demands. The Internet, specifically social media sites
provide information, facilitate communication and interactions, and allow for
intellectual and physical transactions to be made. The Internet is currently an
emerging realm of media, which aims to make E-Democracy possible through its
role in relevancy of participation, social construction of inclusiveness,
sensitivity to the individual, and flexibility in participation; through each
of these E-Democracy is accomplished. The Internet provides a sense of
relevancy in participation through allowing everyone's voice to be heard and
expressed. A structure of social inclusion is also provided through a wide
variety of Internet sites, groups, and social networks, all representing
different viewpoints and ideas. Sensitivity to the individual's needs is
accomplished through the ability to express individual opinions publicly and
rapidly. Finally, the Internet is an extremely flexible area of participation;
it is low in cost and widely available to the public. Through these four
directions, E-Democracy and the implementation of the Internet are able to play
an active role in societal change. The social media sites of Facebook and
Twitter were a key element in the success of the 2010 Egyptian Revolt. Western
societies, along with Egypt are transforming from a system based on group
control to one of "networked individualism". These networked societies are
constructed post -"triple revolution" of technology, which involves a three
step process. Step one in the "triple revolution" is "the turn to social
networks", step two: "the proliferation of the far-flung, instantaneous
internet", and step three: "the even wider proliferation of always-available
mobile phones". These elements play a key role in change through the Internet.
Such technologies provide an alternative sphere that is unregulated by the
government, and where construction of ideas and protests can foster without
regulation. For example, In Egypt the "April 6 Youth Movement" established
their political group on Facebook where they called for a national strike to
occur on April 6. This event was ultimately suppressed however; the Facebook
group remained, spurring growth of other activist parties to take an online
media route. Internet in Egypt was used also to form connections with networks
of people outside of their own country. The connections provided through
Internet media sources, such as Twitter allowed rapid spread of the revolt to
be known around the world. Specifically, more than 3 million tweets contained
six popular hashtags alluring to the revolt, for example #Egypt and
#sidibouzid; further enabling the spread of knowledge and change in Egypt.
Internet also plays a central role in deliberative democracy, where
deliberation and access to multiple viewpoints is central in decision-making.
Internet is able to provide an opportunity for interaction, and serves as a
prerequisite in the deliberative process as a research tool. On the Internet
the exchange of ideas is widely encouraged through a vast number of websites,
blogs, and social networking outlets, such as Twitter; all of which encourage
freedom of expression. Through the Internet information is easily accessible,
and in a cost effective manner, providing access and means for change. Another
fundamental feature of the Internet is its uncontrolled nature, and ability to
provide all viewpoints no matter the accuracy. The freedom the Internet
provides is able foster and advocate change, crucial in E-Democracy. Another
recent example of a way in which the internet has been used as a mogul for
change is the release of Invisible Children's Kony 2012 video. The video, which
was released in the afternoon of March 5, 2012, is a powerfully inspirational
campaign video that calls for the search for and arrest of Joseph Kony.
Invisible Children, the non-profit organization responsible for this video
campaign, was founded on the mission to bring awareness to the vile actions of
the Lord's Resistance Army (LRA), located in Central Africa, and the arrest of
its leader, Joseph Kony. In the video, Jason Russell, one of the founders of
Invisible Children, says that "the problem is that 99% of the planet doesn't
know who is" and the only way to stop him is by having enough support from the
people to convince the government continue the hunt for him. So, Invisible
Children's purpose for the video was to raise awareness by making Kony famous
through the ever expanding market of social media, and to use the technology we
have today to bring his crimes to light. Sure enough, in only a span of 6 days,
the Kony 2012 video went viral with over 100 million views, making it the
fastest growing viral campaign video in history. The popularity of the video
quickly made its way to Congress. On March 21, 2012, a group of 33 Senators
introduced a resolution condemning "the crimes against humanity" committed by
Joseph Kony and the LRA. The resolution supports the continued efforts by the
US government to "strengthen the capabilities of regional military forces
deployed to protect civilians and pursue commanders of the LRA, and calls for
cross-border efforts to increase civilian protection and provide assistance to
populations affected by the LRA." Senator Lindsay Graham, a co-sponsor of the
resolution stated that, "When you get 100 million Americans looking at
something, you will get our attention. This YouTube sensation is gonna help the
Congress be more aggressive and will do more to lead to his demise than all
other action combined". Without a doubt, the Kony 2012 video is evidence of how
internet sensations are becoming moguls of change. Active Participation of
Adults on the Internet. The majority of governments have a long way to go to
actively engage their citizens to participate in e-democracy; however, e-
democracy relies upon citizens to take their own initiative to influence
decisions that will effect them. Indeed, many adults are now moving online to
find political information. In the past few decades, the internet has become
increasingly important to the decisions made by adult voters: between 1996 and
2002, the number of adults who reported that the internet was significant in
their choices increased from about 14 to 20 percent. In 2002, nearly a quarter
of the population reported having visited a website to research specific public
policy issues. In addition, people aren't just going to sites that reflect
their own views, but are in fact doing the complete opposite: studies have
shown that more people visit websites that challenge their point of view than
visit websites that mirror their own opinions. It has also become apparent that
as online participation increases, the number of people reading newspapers
decreases: since 1996, the number of those who read the news in print has
dropped from 50 percent to 39 percent, while 41 percent of the population
reports having consumed news online. In addition, a good number of people are
beginning to participate in online activism. Sixteen percent of the population
has participated in online political culture by interacting with political
websites through joining campaigns, volunteering time, donating money, or
participating in polls. According to a survey conducted by Philip N. Howard,
almost two-thirds of the adult population in the United States has had some
online experience with political news, information, or other content over the
past four election cycles. They tend to reference the websites of special
interest groups more than the websites of specific elected leaders, political
candidates, political parties, nonpartisan groups, and local community groups.
Electronic support for local democratic groups. Citizens' associations play an
important role in the democratic process, providing a place for individuals to
learn about public affairs and a source of power outside that of the state,
according to theorists like Alexis de Tocqueville. Public-policy researcher
Hans Klein at the Georgia Institute of Technology notes that participation in
such forums has a number of barriers, such as the need to meet in one place at
one time. In a study of a civic association in the northeastern United States,
Klein found that electronic communications greatly enhanced the ability of the
organization to fulfill its mission. There are many forms of association in
civic society. The term "interest group" conventionally refers to more formal
organizations that either focus on particular social groups and economic
sectors, such as trade unions and business and professional associations, or on
more specific issues, such as abortion, gun control, or the environment. Other
traditional interest groups have well-established organizational structures and
formal membership rules, and their primary orientation is toward influencing
government and the policy process. Transnational advocacy networks bring
together loose coalitions of these organizations under common umbrella
organizations that cross national borders. The Internet may serve multiple
functions for all of these organizations, including lobbying elected
representatives, public officials, and policy elites; networking with related
associations and organizations; mobilizing organizers, activists, and members
using action alerts, newsletters, and emails; raising funds and recruiting
supporters; and communicating their message to the public via the traditional
news media. Benefits, disadvantages and challenges. Information and
communications technologies are neither democratic nor undemocratic; they are
merely means to an end and not normative by their nature. They are tools that
may be deployed to achieve certain goals. And these goals may even be
contradictory (e.g. both coercive control and participation can be fostered by
digital technology). While many celebrate the Internet as a tool for democracy,
it should not be forgotten that the earlier visions of an Informatization-State
were rather frightening, such as the one told by George Orwell in his Nineteen
Eighty-Four. While technologies can be used for the good and bad, certain
institutional framework conditions may either support or hamper the use of
electronic means for the benefit of democratic processes. Risks and
opportunities of the digitization of democratic processes depends therefore to
a large extent upon the particular institutional framework conditions of the
chosen democratic model (which is mainly set out in the Constitution, including
the type of the underlying social contract, specific aspects of the rule of
law, representative democracy or direct democracy, etc.). The benefits of
online democratic options are that it allows for participation which is
specialized for individuals. The democratic values of freedom of speech are
promoted through forums in which citizens can sway ideas and viewpoints. Their
participation in elections and their government can be tailored for them, in
that it is flexible, easily accessed, and inclusive to all, regardless of area
or access to resources. Ari- Veikko Anttiroiko describes the actions of e-
democracy as aiding the social construction of inclusiveness, tailored
participation and sensitivity to individual preferences and life-cycles,
efficiency and flexibility of participation, and relevance of participation and
scales and levels of influence. However, he also notes that "its development is
conditioned by such pervasive changes as increased interdependency,
technological multimediation, partnership governance, and individualism." All
these factors present the challenges that e-democracy presents, while trying to
obtain a greater democratic participation and awareness. Although e-democracy
is important due to its ability to transform to accommodate today's society,
they also need to meet the needs of a postmodern culture, an information
society, developmentalism, and a network society which will emerge from the
abilities that online democratic measures allow. Benefits. Contemporary
technologies, such as electronic mailing lists, peer-to-peer networks,
collaborative software, wikis, Internet forums and blogs, are clues to and
early potential solutions for some aspects of e-democracy. A number of non-
governmental sites have developed cross-jurisdiction, customer-focused
applications that extract information from thousands of governmental
organizations into a system that brings consistency to data across many
dissimilar providers. It is convenient and cost-effective for businesses, and
the public benefits by getting easy access to the most current information
available without having to expend tax dollars to get it. One example of this
is transparent.gov.com, a free resource for citizens to quickly identify the
various open government initiatives taking place in their community or in
communities across the country. Another valuable source is USA.gov — the
official site of the United States government. The website is directly linked
to every federal and state agency. The information provided by the website is
valuable to all citizens, and non-citizens, of the current news and regulations
of the U.S. government. These are just some examples of e-government's
influence in the Internet. E-democracy leads to a more simplified process and
access to government information for public-sector agencies and citizens. For
example, the Indiana Bureau of Motor Vehicles simplified the process of
certifying driver records to be admitted in county court proceedings. Indiana
became the first state to allow government records to be digitally signed,
legally certified and delivered electronically by using Electronic Postmark
technology. In addition to its simplicity, e-democracy services can reduce
costs. The Alabama Department of Conservation & Natural Resources, Wal-Mart and
NIC developed an online hunting and fishing license service utilizing an
existing computer to automate the licensing process. More than 140,000 licenses
were purchased at Wal-Mart stores during the first hunting season, and the
agency estimates it will save $200,000 annually from service. Electronic
democracy can also carry the benefit of reaching out to youth as a mechanism to
increase youth voter turnout in elections and raising awareness amongst youth.
With the consistent decline of voter turnout, e-democracy and electronic voting
mechanisms can help revert that trend. Youth, in particular, have seen a
significant drop in turnout in most industrialized nations, including Canada,
the United States and the United Kingdom. The use of electronic political
participation mechanisms may appear more familiar to youth and, as a result,
garner more participation by youths who would otherwise find it inconvenient to
vote using the more traditional methods. Electronic democracy can help improve
democratic participation, reduce civic illiteracy and voter apathy and become a
useful asset for political discussion, education, debate and participation.
Disadvantages. Equally, these technologies are bellwethers of some of the
issues associated with the territory, such as the inability to sustain new
initiatives or protect against identity theft, information overload and
vandalism. Some traditional objections to direct democracy are argued to apply
to e-democracy, such as the potential for direct governance to tend towards the
polarization of opinions, populism, and demagoguery. More practical objections
exist, not least in terms of the digital divide between those with access to
the media of e-democracy (mobile phones and Internet connections) and those
without, as well as the opportunity cost of expenditure on e-democracy
innovations. Furthermore, there are still those who are skeptical to the amount
of impact that they can make through online participation. Although the
government projects supply information, IT illiteracy and the digital divide
are grounds to discourage participation. The political advances on the Internet
can potentially dishearten non-users to adapt the new technologies. There is a
digital divide between active participants and those who do not participate in
electronic communities. This digital divide exists in multiple aspects and
hinders governmental e-democracy practices. Just like there is not one
homogenous group in a society, there is no way that an e-democracy can
comprehensively fulfill its role without appealing to different demographics
and groups in a community. Therefore it is important for e-government
initiatives to take into consideration the electronic preferences and
capabilities of the targeted audience. There are improvements to be made in e-
government initiatives. Right now much e-government effort is spent on
supplying services to the people. Governmental institutions simply need to
enact a robust system that is open to addressing as many concerns the public
has as possible. Challenges. Inclusive access to the Internet and other
communication channels. This is a fundamental edemocracy issue. If the Internet
is to become a new democratic tool, through which people can participate in and
influence the democratic process, it is vital that everyone who wants
irrespective of age, gender, profession or geographical location – has the
physical access to it and the skills and confidence to use it. Security and the
protection of privacy. The government must be in a position to guarantee, where
appropriate, that online communications are secure and that they do not violate
peoples' privacy. This is, of course, especially important when considering
electronic voting, when integrity and fairness are fundamental. An electoral
voting system is more complex than other electronic transaction systems and the
authentication mechanisms employed must be able to prevent ballot rigging or
the threat of rigging. This may include the use of smart cards that allow a
voter's identity to be verified whilst at the same time ensuring the privacy of
the vote cast. Electronic voting in Estonia is one example of a method to
conquer the privacy-identity problem inherent in internet voting systems.
However, the objective should be to provide equivalence with the security and
privacy of current manual systems. Responsive government. In order to attract
people to get involved in online consultations and discussions, government must
respond to people and actively demonstrate that there is a relationship between
the citizen's engagement and policy outcome. It is also important that people
are able to become involved in the process, at a time and place that is
convenient to them but when their opinions will count. Government will need to
ensure that the structures are in place to deal with increased participation.
Effective public deliberation and moderation. In order to ensure that issues
are debated in a democratic, inclusive, tolerant and productive way. The role
that intermediaries and representative organisations may play should be
considered. Electronic provision of official information that is electronically
stored. In order to strengthen the effectiveness of the existing legal rights
of access to information held by public authorities, citizens should have the
right Peer-To-Patent. The peer-to-patent project allows the public to do
research and present the patent examiner with 'prior art' publications which
will inform them of the novelty of the invention so that they can determine
whether the invention is worthy of a patent. The community elects ten prior art
pieces to be sent to the patent examiner for review. This is revolutionary
because it enables the public to directly communicate with the patent examiner.
The peer-to-patent project has many implications for e-democracy. It proves
that e-democracy can be effective when there is a structured environment which
demands certain information from participants that aid in the decision making
process. As a culture, we have accepted that our information and our governance
come from professionals or experts, not directly from the citizens. With this
kind of, "civic software," the decision making process is made more effective;
it forms groups and communities of both experts and civilians who work together
to find solutions. The peer to patent project extends beyond the simplest form
of e-democracy, tallying poll votes. Citizens do not have to check a box that
reduces their opinion to a few given words; they can actually participate and
share ideas. Electronic direct democracy. Electronic direct democracy (EDD) is
the strongest form of direct democracy, in which people are involved in the
legislative function. Many advocates think that also important to this notion
are technological enhancements to the deliberative process. Electronic direct
democracy is sometimes referred to by many other names, such as open source
governance and collaborative governance. EDD requires electronic voting or some
way to register votes on issues electronically. As in any direct democracy, in
an EDD, citizens would have the right to vote on legislation, author new
legislation, and recall representatives (if any representatives are preserved).
Technology for supporting EDD has been researched and developed at the Florida
Institute of Technology, where the technology is used with student
organizations. Numerous other software development projects are underway, along
with many supporting and related projects. Several of these projects are now
collaborating on a cross-platform architecture, under the umbrella of the
Metagovernment project. EDD as a system is not fully implemented in a political
government anywhere in the world, although several initiatives are currently
forming. Ross Perot was a prominent advocate of EDD when he advocated
"electronic town halls" during his 1992 and 1996 Presidential campaigns in the
United States. Switzerland, already partially governed by direct democracy, is
making progress towards such a system. Senator On-Line, an Australian political
party running for the Senate in the 2007 federal elections, proposed to
institute an EDD system so that Australians can decide which way the senators
vote on each and every bill. A similar initiative was formed 2002 in Sweden
where the party Aktivdemokrati, running for the Swedish parliament, offers its
members the power to decide the actions of the party over all or some areas of
decision, or alternatively to use a proxy with immediate recall for one or
several areas. The first mainstream direct democracy party to be registered
with any country's electoral commission against each country's register is the
UK's People's Administration Direct Democracy party. The People's
Administration have developed and published the complete architecture for a
legitimate reform to EDD the required Parliamentary reform process. Established
by musicians Alex Romane and political activists, the People's Administration
advocates using the web and telephone to enable the majority electorate to
create, propose and vote upon all policy implementation. The People's
Administration's blueprint has been published in various forms since 1998 and
the People's Administration is the first direct democracy party to be
registered in a vote-able format anywhere in the world - making transition
possible through evolution via election with legitimate majority support,
instead of potentially through revolution via violence. Liquid democracy, or
direct democracy with delegable proxy, would allow citizens to choose a proxy
to vote on their behalf while retaining the right to cast their own vote on
legislation. The voting and the appointment of proxies could be done
electronically. The proxies could even form proxy chains, in which if A
appoints B and B appoints C, and neither A nor B vote on a proposed bill but C
does, C's vote will count for all three of them. Citizens could also rank their
proxies in order of preference, so that if their first choice proxy fails to
vote, their vote can be cast by their second-choice proxy. ICTs and political
participation. E-democracy has become a term that is used widely but also has
widely different instantiations. We take as our definition of e-democracy, the
use of ICT to support the democratic decision-making processes. Information and
communication technologies (ICTs) play a major role in organizing and informing
citizens in various forms of civic engagement. ICTs are used to enhance active
participation of citizens and to support the collaboration between actors for
policy-making purposes within the political processes of all stages of
governance. Macintoch, Ann (2006). To support governments take advantage of the
innovative e-participation pilots taking place at the national, regional and
local level there is a need to know and understand more precisely what is
happening elsewhere.The OECD (Organisation for Economic Co-operation and
Development) work Promise and Problems of E-Democracy explains how there are
three main factors when it comes to ICTs promoting civic engagement. The first
of these is timing; most of the civil engagement occurs during the agenda-
setting in a cycle. The second key factor is tailor; this refers to the idea of
how ICTs are changing in order to allow for more civic engagement. The last of
these factors is integrations; integration is how new ICTs are combining the
new technological ways with the traditional ways in order to gain more civic
engagement. Although some governments and research centers have already
undertaken a number of surveys in this area there is no standard way to
describe the approach and detail the outcomes. Overall, there are many things
that come into factor when dealing with ICTs and e-participation. ICT creates
the opportunity for a government that is simultaneously more democratic and
more expert. Information Communication and Technology creates open, online
collaboration. This improves governmental decision-making in a number of ways.
We must not rely solely on professionals, but we cannot only rely on the
direct, popular decision either. The idea of collaborative governance is that
the responsibility of gathering information and making decisions is shared
between those with technological expertise and those who are professionally
considered the decision-makers. If there is greater public participation in the
collaboration of ideas and policies, though not necessarily participation in
the same values, then decision-making is substantially more democratic. ICT
also promotes the idea of pluralism within a democracy. With increasing access
to the internet, spreading ideas is easier and faster than ever. In addition,
pluralism prevents any one source from monopolizing information channels. Thus,
new issues and perspectives can be brought to attention that weren't considered
before. Another key idea pertinent to ICTs and the political sphere online is
that regular citizens become potential producers of political value and
commentary. Citizens are able to create their own blogs and websites to express
their own views individually. But when the online political sphere works
together, like ABCNews did with their Campaign Watchdog effort, citizens by the
polls reported any rule violations perpetrated by any candidate's party. Civic
involvement is encouraged and made more effective through the use of
information channels. However, involvement doesn't stop there. In 2000,
Candidate's for the United States presidential race frequently used their
websites to encourage their voters to not only vote, but to encourage their
friends to vote as well. This two-step process, encouraging an individual to
vote and to tell his or her friends to vote, was just emerging at that time.
Now, political involvement from a variety of social media is commonplace and
civic engagement through online forums frequent. Through the use of ICTs,
politically minded individuals have the opportunity to become more involved.
Civic engagement of youth through the Internet. There has been much speculation
about the Internet's potential to facilitate the engagement of younger citizens
in politics. This group of young people, under the age of 35, frequently
labelled Generations X and Y, have been noted for their lack of political
interest and activity for the last two decades. The younger generation is less
likely to have established long-standing habits of media use, and is willing to
experiment with new technologies and formats. Dr. Michael Macpherson, a
"vigorous advocate of e-democracy...acknowledges widespread apathy about
politics, particularly among the young, and believes that this would be reduced
if it could be seen that individual political activity was effective in a
fairly short-term." Young adults view the benefits of new technologies as a
means of gaining advantage in education, employment, and in the political
realm. Younger people have ease with Internet technology and are more likely
than older citizens to use web-based platforms to research and access political
information. However, there is no clear consensus about the capacity of new
media, including the Internet and social networking websites, to engage young
people in the democratic process. There have been numerous studies and
experiments conducted to evaluate the best way to encourage the involvement of
youth in politics. The notion of youth e-citizenship seems to be caught between
two distinct approaches: management and autonomy. The policy of "targeting"
young people so that they can "play their part" can be read either as an
encouragement of youth activism or an attempt to manage it. It would seem at
first that defining the status of youth would be fairly easy. John Freeland,
for example, constructs youth as a "stage of life between childhood and
adulthood." But the implications of such a transitional stage are hard to
measure. It is difficult to determine the proper amount of power or freedom
youth should employ in the newly developed e-democratic process. Advocates of
autonomous e-citizenship and proponents of managed e-citizenship have varying
opinions on a wide range of ideas. For instance, autonomous e-citizens argue
that despite their limited experience, youth deserve to speak for themselves on
agendas of their own making. On the contrary, managed e-citizens regard young
people as apprentice citizens who are in a process of transition from the
immaturity of childhood to the self-possession of adulthood, and are thus
incapable of contributing to politics without regulation. The Internet is
another important issue, with managed e-citizens believing young people are
highly vulnerable to misinformation and misdirection. The conflict between the
two faces of e-citizenship is between a view of democracy as an established and
reasonably just system, with which young people should be encouraged to engage,
and democracy as a political as well as cultural aspiration, most likely to be
realized through networks in which young people engage with one another.
Ultimately, strategies of accessing and influencing power are at the heart of
what might first appear to be mere differences of communication styles.
Diffusion of Youth Involvement and E-Democracy in Scotland. The Highland Youth
Voice demonstrated the attempt to increase democratic involvement, especially
through online measures, in Scotland. The youth population is increasingly more
prominent in governmental policy and issues in the UK. However, involvement and
interest has been decreasing. In 2001 elections in the United Kingdom to
Westminister, the turnout of 18- to 24-year-olds was estimated at only 40%,
which can be compared to the more than 80% of 16- to 24-year-olds who have
accessed the internet at some time in their life. The United Nations Convention
on the Rights of the Child have promoted and stressed the need to educate the
younger population as citizens of the nation in which they live in, and promote
the participation and active politics which they can shape though debate and
communication. The Highland Youth Voice aims to increase the involvement of the
younger generation through understanding their needs and wishes for their
government, through an understanding of their views, experiences, and
aspirations. Highland Youth Voice gives young Scots a chance to influence the
decision makers in the Highlands. The members age from 14 to 18, and the
parliament as a whole is an elected body of around 100 members. They are
elected directly through schools and youth forums. Through the website, those
involved are able to discuss the issues important to them. The final prominent
democratic aspect of the website is the elections for members, which occur
every other year. These three contents of the website allow for an online forum
in which members may educate themselves through Youth Voice, partake in online
policy debates, or experience a model of e-democracy in the ease of online
voting. Digital & Media Democracy. In the era of globalization democracy has
changed drastically because of the use of technology. The idea of digital or
media democracy refers to the idea that everyone should have access to
electronic communications and other devices, public funds should be for the
public use of media centers, and give people access to all forms of electronic
and digital media. Digital Democracy and the impact of technology on governance
and politics: New Globalized Practice. Political pluralism and dialogue, are
new meanings of democracy which have been forged by the emergence of new public
decision-making policies in the internet. The evolution of modern technology
has changed classic understandings such as political dialogue and political
accountability. Americans are drastically moving to their mobile devices for
updates on the news. A survey that was released with this years report finds
that nearly half of all Americans (47%) now get some form of local news on a
mobile device or cell phone. Americans are now turning to mobile devices mostly
to access news that serves immediate needs such as weather, movie times,
information on local businesses and traffic in their area. Today the web news
is beginning to increase. Cable news and news platforms are starting to shrink
and decline. More people are saying that they get their news from the web than
newspapers. The internet now follows only television among American adults as a
destinations for news. Local mobile ad revenue is growing fast, stations in
2009 made 29 million from mobile devices. "I expect that figure to skyrocket
into the billions within two years as the transition from desktops and laptops
to hand-held devices takes off," said Gordon Borrell. With the recent SOPA and
PIPA bills, many Americans have shown their support for an open, free, and
easily accessible internet. SOPA and PIPA were bills that were trying to
restrict internet use and many websites, including Google and Wikipedia, found
this as a threat to Digital Democracy and protested these bills. A new
alternative too these two bills is the OPEN Act which is much less threatening
to democracy, and is actually supported by major internet corporations (Google
and Facebook). The OPEN Act is one a great example of what media democracy can
become. The OPEN Act website Keep The Web Open states that the bill includes
user-generated improvements and provides full access to the bill. GOOD Magazine
argues that this bill is revolutionary because of its Wikipedia-like input.
Over 150 changes have been made to this bill by users; it may not seem like a
lot, but the idea of random people getting their own input into legislation is
pretty radical. This new bills shows the ability of how people can have a
positive effect of politics through the use of digital and electronic media.
Diffusion of E-Democracy. In a nation with heavy government censorship, e-
democracy could not be utilized to its full extent. Austria has the components
of an advanced internet system not unlike China's, but they do not have the
political and social norms calling for citizens' opinions to be heard. In a
study conducted that interviewed elected officials in Austria's parliament,
opinions were widely and strongly against e-democracy. They believed that the
citizens were "uninformed" and that their only way of expressing their opinions
should be to vote; sharing opinions and ideas was strictly the job of the
elected. Austria's officials have a contrasting idea of their roles than those
in the US, where the citizens' opinions are respected and called for, and their
power is up to the citizens. Citizens' opinions in the U.S. do not take away
from politicians' influence. In Austria, on the other hand, the elected
officials have no tolerance for their powers to be diminished in the slightest,
including by allowing citizens to openly express ideas and opinions about
politics, because it makes the people in power vulnerable to the citizens.
Austria's blatant negative opinion on e-democracy shows that it is necessary
for a nation to have openness in political thought from citizens for e-
democracy to thrive. Aside from hostile political environments, another great
hurdle in implementing e-democracy is the matter of ensuring security in
internet voting systems. Viruses and malware could be used to block or redirect
citizens' votes on matters of great importance; as long as that threat remains,
e-democracy will not be able to diffuse throughout society. Kevin Curran and
Eric Nichols of the Internet Technologies Research Group noted in 2005 that "a
secure internet voting system is theoretically possible, but it would be the
first secure networked application ever created in the history of computers."
Were a system of government to overcome these political and technological
hurdles, it might see faster diffusion of effective e-democracy. The radical
shift from representative government to internet-mediated direct democracy is
not likely. However, a "hybrid model" that uses the internet to allow for
greater government transparency and community participation in decision-making
is on the horizon. Committee selection, local town and city decisions, and
otherwise people-centric decisions would be more easily facilitated. The
principles of democracy are not changing so much as the tools used to uphold
them. E-democracy would not be a means to implement direct democracy, but
rather a tool to enable more participatory democracy as it exists now. E-
democracy is a theory that is being fast-spread at a high rate among the world
especially in the United States. What is so appealing about e-democracy is that
"E-democracy offers greater electronic community access to political processes
and policy choices. E-democracy development is connected to complex internal
factors, such as political norms and citizen pressures". People seem to love
this new form of participating in government, because it seems to be the
easiest way citizens can interact with their government officials. "e-democracy
seems to be highly influenced by internal factors to a country and not by the
external factors of standard innovation and diffusion theory"(chung). People
are pressuring their public officials to adopt more policies that other states
or countries have regarding information and news about their government online.
"government leaders are reacting more to demands from internal users and to the
values of their political culture"(Chung). People have all governmental
information at their fingertips and easy access to contact their government
officials. In this new generation where internet and networking rules
everyone's daily lives, it is more convenient that people can be informed of
the government and policies through this form of communication. In Jane
Fountain's (2001) "Building the Virtual State", she describes how this
widespread e-democracy is able to connect with so many people and correlates it
to the government we had before. "Fountain's framework provides a subtle and
nuanced appreciation of the interplay of preexisting norms, procedures, and
rules within bureaucracies and how these affect the introduction of new
technological forms...In its most radical guise, this form of e- government
would entail a radical overhaul of the modern administrative state as regular
electronic consultations involving elected politicians, civil servants,
pressure groups, and other affected interests become standard practice in all
stages of the policy process"(Sage). This new form of government reaching out
to citizens is a generational breach that it taking off. It is the same
policies and norms it is just displayed in a less traditional practice than
before. This thought of all government information and attention online is what
excites people about the form of E-democracy. Statistics easily display the
supply and demand effect of citizens wanting more government accessibility to
news, policies, and contacts: "In 2000 only two percent of government sites
offered three or more services online; in 2007 that figure was 58 percent. In
2000, 78 percent of the states offered no on-line services; in 2007 only 14
percent were without these services (West, 2007)"(Issuu). Even though
networking might not seem very personal, people are also demanding that their
government officials contact and communicate with them; "In 2007, 89 percent of
government sites allowed the public e-mail a public official directly rather
than simply e-mailing the webmaster (West, 2007)"(Issuu). The government is
noticing the rapid demand for governmental information citizens want to be
supplied with online and the government is following their requests. E-
democracy is a practical and convenient way for people to connect, learn, and
participate in their government by online sources, which is why this practice
is growing at such a fast rate. Over the years, there is an increasing
disparity in national e-governance and e-democracy. These trends seem to be a
predominantly Western phenomenon. There are significant differences between
access to digital technology in developed and developing worlds. Countries in
south and central Asia, Africa, and other developing regions fall behind due to
inequalities in access to information and in government efficiency and
infrastructure. This is referred to as the "global digital divide." Cities in
states with Republican-controlled legislatures, high legislative
professionalization, and more active professional networks were more likely to
embrace e-government and e-democracy. The diffusion of E-Democracy is mostly
influenced by internal factors to a country and not by the external factors of
standard innovation and diffusion theory. Anti E-Democracy. It has,
unfortunately, become a reoccurring theme for governments to implement internet
crackdowns during times of widespread political protests. In the middle-east in
2011, for example, the multiple cases of internet blackouts were dubbed the
"Arab Net Crackdown". The list of countries that have been reported to have
initiated internet lockdowns is a long one. Libya, Egypt, Bahrain, Syria, Iran,
and Yemen are all countries whose leaders implemented complete censorship of
the internet in response to the plethora of pro-democracy demonstrations in
their respective nations. These lockdowns were primarily put in place in order
to prevent the leakage of cell phone videos that contained images of the
violent government crackdown on protesters. A successful E-democracy policy. A
successful E-democracy policy should embrace the following Create new public
spaces for political interaction and deliberation. There is a shortage of such
space in the offline environment; online offers significant advantages for the
cultivation of effective public discussion and deliberation areas. Provide for
a multi-directional, interactive communications flow, designed to connect
citizens, representatives and the executive with one another. It is important
to differentiate between the layers of C2R (parliamentary, devolved assembly,
regional or local assembly, community, European); the various, not always
connected aspects of C2G; and the democratic necessity of enabling C2C.
Integrate e-democratic processes within broader constitutional structures and
developments. Ensure that interaction between citizens, their elected
representatives and government is meaningful. If public input is being invited
into the policy or legislative process, ensure that it is effectively
facilitated and summarised and that response mechanisms exist so that
representatives and government can listen and learn. Ensure that there is a
sufficiency of high-quality online information so that citizens can consider
policy options on the basis of trusted knowledge, as well as their own
subjective experiences. Such information needs to be accessible, intelligible
and not overwhelming. If the public voice is to be heard more clearly and more
often, this must involve efforts to recruit the widest range of public voices
to the democratic conversation, including those who are traditionally
marginalised, disadvantaged or unheard. Reflect the realities of geography and
social structure within online environments, with a view to providing equal
access to the democratic process for all areas and all communities. Democracy's
Reliance on the Internet. Democracy in America has evolved and will continue to
evolve to be reliant on the Internet. This is because the Internet is and will
continue to be the primary source of information for most Americans. It is
likely that in the future it will be the primary source of information for all
Americans. The Internet educates people on Democracy and the Democratic culture
with its vast collection of information regarding democracy. The Internet is
also constantly being updated with news on America's elections and politics,
helping people stay up to date with what is happening in their government.
Online advertising is becoming more popular for political candidates and
group's opinions on propositions. The Internet contains almost all available
information on these topics and if a person sees information regarding these
topics on the Internet, then chances are that that person will research them on
the Internet. Just glancing over an advertisement can be enough to provoke the
initial interest in the topic, which can lead to further research. Being able
to get all of the information needed about a candidate around the clock as well
as being able to vote over the Internet is more appealing to younger voters who
have become eligible to vote within the last few years. Having the luxury and
convenience of the Internet for shopping, researching, etc. has made younger
voters who were raised using a computer less excited about going to vote. Some
new voters make it seem like they would rather live in a dictatorship then go
to a voting booth. The Internet is the first place that most people look for
information and often the only place that they look. The reason for this, and
especially for younger voters, is that it is easy and reliable when used
correctly, thus lowering an individual's workload. This gives the user a sense
of instant gratification that, in the era of multitasking on computers, is
crucial. If the information is not easy to find then most people will not look
for it. Because the Internet is so user friendly, people are more likely to
research and get involved in politics. The Internet allows people to express
their opinions about the government through an alias, anonymously and judgment
free. Since a person can express themselves anonymously and from the comfort of
their own home, the Internet gives incentive for people to participate in the
government. Also, because of the large number of people who use the Internet, a
person who puts their ideas on a high-traffic website is capable of having
influence over a large number of people. The Internet is a two way street. It
enables citizens to get and post information about politicians and it allows
those politicians to get advice from the people in larger numbers. This
collective decision making and problem solving gives more power to the citizens
and helps politicians make decisions faster. This creates a more productive
society that can handle problems faster and more efficiently. Getting feedback
and advice from the American population is a large part of a politician's job
and the Internet allows them to function effectively with larger numbers of
people's opinions. With this heightened ability to communicate with the public
the American government is able to function more capably and effectively as a
Democracy. Wikidemocracy. One proposed form of e-democracy has been called
"wikidemocracy." The name would seem to imply a government with a legislature
whose codex of laws was an editable wiki, like wikipedia. But, the term is also
often used to mean more limited instantiations of e-democracy, such as in
Argentina in August of 2011, where the polling records of the presidential
election were made available to the public in online form, for vetting. The
term has also been used in a more general way to refer to the democratic values
and environments offered by wikis. Some in Finland recently undertook an
experiment in wikidemocracy by creating a "shadow government program" on the
Internet, essentially a compilation of the political views and aspirations of
various groups in Finland, on a wiki.
