E. J. Josey E. J. Josey (January 20, 1924 ‚Äì July 3, 2009) was an American
activist and librarian. Professional background. Elonnie Junius Josey was born
in Norfolk, Virginia, son of Willie and Frances Bailey Josey. He graduated from
Howard University in 1949 and received his master's in History from Columbia
University in 1950 and a master's in librarianship from the University at
Albany, SUNY in 1953. From 1955 to 1959, he was Director of the Library of
Delaware State College, Dover, Delaware, and from 1959‚Äì1966, he was Chief
Librarian and Associate Professor at Savannah State College in Savannah,
Georgia. He also served on the staff of Columbia University Library, Free
Library of Philadelphia, the New York Public Library, and prior to his position
at Delaware State College, he served as Instructor of Social Sciences and
History from 1954‚Äì1955 at Savannah State College. Josey was Professor
Emeritus, Department of Library and Information Science, School of Library and
Information Sciences, University of Pittsburgh. Prior to his University of
Pittsburgh appointment, he had been with the New York State Education
Department since 1966, in its Division of Library Development, when he was
first appointed Associate in the Bureau of Academic and Research Libraries and
he was promoted to Chief, Bureau of Academic and Research Libraries in 1968,
and held that position until 1976 when he was appointed Chief, Bureau of
Specialist Library Services, New York State Library. Prior to coming to New
York State, he served as Director of two college libraries. Memberships. Active
in the field of human rights, he was a life member of the National Association
for the Advancement of Colored People (NAACP), and served as President of
Albany, New York Branch from 1982‚Äì86. He also served as President of the
Albany Branch of the Association for the Study of Afro-American Life and
History. Active in community affairs, he also served as a member of the Board
of Directors of the Albany County Opportunity, Inc., the local anti-poverty
agency for four years. "Much to my chagrin, the Mississippi Library Association
was honored there for its National Library Week Activities. I exploded! I was
seething with anger, for I remembered that three civil rights workers-Andrew
Goodman, James Chaney, and Micheal Schwerner had been murdered and lay dead and
buried somewhere in Mississippi, their bodies not yet discovered. I also
remembered that the Mississippi Library Association had withdrawn from ALA
rather than give membership to Negro Librarians." He was first elected to the
ALA Council, the policy making body of the Association in 1970 and served until
the summer of 2000, a period of 29 years. In 1979, he was elected to a four-
year term on the ALA Executive Board. From 1980‚Äì82, he served as Chair of the
Cultural Minorities Task Force of the National Commission on Libraries and
Information Science. Having served on numerous ALA Committees, he chaired the
ALA Committee on Pay Equity, the ALA Committee on Legislation, and the ALA
International Relations Committee several times. Josey was the President of ALA
in 1984‚Äì85. At his inaugural address in 1984, Josey made this forward-
thinking comment still applicable to libraries today: ‚ÄúThe information
industry has the technology to control information, but its price tag on
information distribution and its profit goal create a bias in what information
is made available and how it is dispensed. Only the nonprofit organization, the
library, dedicated to a total community service goal with trained experts,
librarians, running the operation can provide the full scope of information for
the total population in a fair and objective manner.‚Äù In the spring of 1987,
he was elected to a 4-year term on the Board of Directors of the Freedom to
Read Foundation and chaired the ALA International Relations Committee from 1987
to 1990. From 1990 to 1994 he served as the Chair of the ALA Legislation
Committee. He returned to chair the ALA International Relations Committee for
the next two years. In May and June, 1987, Professor Josey lectured in three
African countries, Ethiopia, Zimbabwe, and Zambia under the auspices of the
United States Information Agency. Civil Rights activities. During the early
1960s, he participated in the Civil Rights struggle in Savannah (see "The Black
Librarian in America", pp.¬ 308‚Äì11). He served on the Executive Board of the
Savannah Branch of the NAACP as well as the Executive Board of the Albany, NY
Branch of the NAACP. In 1964 he carried the Civil Rights struggle into the
American Library Association. In spite of the 1954 United States Supreme Court
decision, which encouraged desegregation of libraries and ALA chapters, the ALA
was slow in implementing integration of all of its southern chapters until
Josey offered his resolution at the 1964 Conference which prevented ALA
officers and staff members from attending segregated state chapter meetings.
The four remaining segregated chapters that denied membership to African-
American librarians at that time were Alabama, Georgia, Louisiana, and
Mississippi; and they integrated immediately. He is well known for his
uncompromising opposition to any form of discrimination whether it is racial,
gender, age or sexual orientation. Scholarships. The Black Caucus of the
American Library Association established its first independent scholarship fund
in his honor. The E. J. Josey Scholarship Award is given annually to African-
American citizen of the United States or Canada pursuing a degree in an ALA
accredited Library and Information Science program in the U.S. or Canada. Upon
his retirement from the University of Pittsburgh's School of Information
Science in 1995, he was named Professor Emeritus and a scholarship was named in
his behalf: E. J. Josey Endowment Scholarship for Minorities. This scholarship
is awarded annually to an enrolled African-American graduate student in the
Department of Library & Information Science who demonstrates potential for
academic excellence and leadership in the profession. Publications. He served
as Editor of "The Bookmark" from 1976‚Äì86. In the fall of 1986 he relinquished
the editorship of "The Bookmark" and served as its co-editor for the next five
years. Currently, he is contributing editor, "Afro-Americans in New York Life
and History" and serves on the Educational Advisory Committee of the
"Multicultural Review".
