Early voting Early voting (also known as advance polling or voting) is the
process by which electors can vote on a single or series of days prior to an
election. Early voting can take place remotely, such as by mail, or in person,
usually in designated early voting polling stations. The availability and time
periods for early voting vary based on jurisdiction and type of election. The
goal of early voting is usually to increase participation and relieve
congestion of polling stations on the election day. An advance poll is held in
some elections to allow participation by voters who may not be able to vote on
the set election day(s). This may include people who will be out of the polling
area during the election period, poll workers, campaign workers, people with
medical procedures scheduled for that time, among others. In individual
jurisdictions. Australia. In Australia, early voting is known as pre-poll
voting. However, to cast an early vote a voter must already be registered.
Canada. In Canada, early voting is known as advance polling. It is offered to
all voters in all federal, provincial, and most municipal elections. In federal
elections, voters do not need to be registered in order to vote at an advance
poll provided they are carrying proof of identity and address, or bring a
registered voter who will swear an oath of identification at the polling
station on their behalf. Finland. Finland and Sweden have similar early voting
systems. The only distinction is that Finland uses post offices as early voting
stations. Germany. In Germany, most eligible voters are required to register
their place of residence and receive a "Wahlbenachrichtigung" (notification of
election) by 3 weeks before an election to the Bundestag, which also contains a
postal vote application form. It is possible to cast one's vote directly at the
office that handles the application, i.e. the municipal government. The
requirement for an excuse has been removed in 2008, but it was just an abstract
assurance before that never has been validated. 19% of all voters voted early
in 2005. Rules for the elections in the states of Germany and on county and
municipal level are very similar. Germans living abroad may register and vote
through mail for Bundestag elections and European Parliament elections, but not
for state and local elections. Ireland. It is common for voters on the remote
coastal islands to vote in the few days prior to the election, in case bad
weather impeded voting on the official day. New Zealand. In New Zealand, early
voting is a form of special voting, which allows voters who will be outside
their electorate or incapacitated on election day to vote in advance or at
another polling place. Norway. In Norway early voting is known as
"forhåndsstemming". At the general election of 2009, 707,489 Norwegians voted
in advance. This was 200 000 more than the previous record, set in 2001.
Sweden. Sweden has traditionally a high participation in elections and tries to
make it as easy as possible to vote. No registration is needed since everyone
is generally registered with a home address. Normally, a voter should vote on
the election day in their specified polling station. But everyone can vote
during the last week at an early polling station, anywhere in the country.
These places are usually municipality owned places like libraries. Also on the
election day, some of them are open even though the election day always is a
Sunday. In hospitals and homes for the elderly, there are special voting
opportunities. In elections until 1998, post offices were used for several
decades as early voting stations (post offices now belong to a commercial
company, earlier on a national administration). Swedes living abroad must
register their address and can vote at embassies or through mail. The early
votes are transported to the voter's polling station in double envelopes. On
election day, a voter can vote at his or her polling station on election day.
Before the early vote is counted, officials check if the voter has voted at the
polling station. If that is the case, the vote is destroyed with the inner
envelope unopened. Early votes that don't reach the polling station in time are
transported to the County Administrative Board and counted if the voter hasn't
already voted. Switzerland. Swiss federal law allows postal voting in all
federal elections and referenda, and all cantons also allow it for cantonal
ballot issues. All voters receive their personal ballot by mail a few weeks
before the election or referendum. They may either cast it at a polling station
on election day or mail it back at any prior time. Thailand. In Thailand, early
voting is known as "เลือกตั้งล่วงหน้า"
(advance voting). It is available since 1997 Constitution of Thailand and
offered both inside and outside constituency, especially for migrant workers
and students, to all voters at central polling places, mostly at the registered
district offices, for MP elections and Thai constitutional referendum, 2007.
Eligible voters are required to register at district offices (which they are
closest to) and receive a reply notification. For advance voting outside
constituency, voters must register before election day not less than 30 days.
No need to register if voter has registered for latest election. But if voters
would like to go back and vote at original constituency (according to house
registration), they must apply for register cancellation. Thais living abroad
may also register at embassies or consulates and vote through mail or at the
embassies or consulates prior to election day. Early voting day is same as
election day, voters must carrying proof of identity, even expired is valid.
Election Commission uses post offices send constituency ballots from other
constituencies and abroad to original constiuencies. They will be counted with
election day constiuency ballots. Early voting in 2011 general election was
arranged on Sunday (26 June 2011) only while prior elections arranged on
Saturday and Sunday. Around 2.6 million people including 1.07 million in
Bangkok turned up to vote; however, many potential voters were unable to vote
due to large crowds. Voters who did not vote on early voting day still can vote
at their original constituencies on election day. United States. Early voting
is similar to ""no-excuse"" absentee voting. In many U.S. states the period
varies between four and fifty days prior to Election Day. Early voting in
person is allowed with no excuse required in 32 U.S. states and in D.C.
Absentee voting by mail with no excuse is allowed in 27 states and D.C., with
an excuse in 21. No-excuse permanent absentee voting is allowed in 7 states and
in D.C. D.C.. The District of Columbia required an excuse for early voting and
absentee voting, until its primary election on September 14, 2010. Early voting
for the D.C. primary began August 30, 2010. Florida. Florida officially began
early voting in 2004 as part of post-2000 election reform. Turnout for early
voting exceeded one million in 2004. There were some problems: 1st-day computer
failures in Orange County and Broward County; accidentally-erased votes in
Volusia County; and a lack of early voting sites in Jacksonville. Reforms are
being discussed to address the known issues, as well as possibly eliminating
the standard poll in favor of modified early voting. Georgia. In Georgia,
"early voting" and "advance voting" have two different meanings. Voting a week
early is called "advance" voting, and is typically available at several
locations in urban and suburban counties. Voting well in advance, up to 45 days
before election day, is called "early" voting, and is normally available only
at the 159 county election offices (where "advance" voting is also available).
There is no weekend voting when most people are off work, and there is no
voting the day before election day. Calls to extend voting through the three
days prior to the election cannot be honored by the Georgia secretary of state,
each county must request permission from the U.S. Department of Justice, due to
the history of voting rights violations in the American South decades ago.
Maryland. In August 2006, a judge ruled in favor of several plaintiffs that the
state constitution only permitted voting on the day of the election. The
plaintiffs were challenging a new early-voting law on the probability of fraud.
Absentee ballots appear to remain acceptable for the time being. Voters
approved a constitutional amendment in November 2008 to allow early voting
starting with the primary elections in 2010. Maryland now offers both early
voting in person and absentee voting by mail. Other states. The National
Conference of State Legislatures provides up-to-date tables of summary and
detailed outlines of each state's laws, as well as links to the relevant Codes
and Statutes.
