Ecodefense Ecodefense: A Field Guide To Monkeywrenching is a book edited by
Dave Foreman, with a foreword by Edward Abbey. Background. Ned Ludd Books
published the first two editions, with Abbzug Press publishing a third edition.
The book was first published in 1985. Much of the inspiration for the book, as
well as the term "monkeywrenching", came from Edward Abbey's 1975 novel "The
Monkey Wrench Gang". Other inspiration for the book likely came from the 1972
book "Ecotage!", which was published by the group Environmental Action and was
in turn inspired by the actions of an activist in the Chicago, Illinois area
who called himself "The Fox", and engaged in such vigilante actions to protect
the environment as plugging smokestacks. Much of the actual content for
"Ecodefense" came from the "Dear Ned Ludd" column in the newsletter of the
group Earth First! during the 1980s. Monkeywrenching is a form of ecodefense.
So are temporary restraining orders and tree sitting, as well as non-violent
blockade and civil disobedience. Other forms include tree spiking, and
billboarding. These are more controversial because they involve destruction,
vandalism, and/or the potential for injury. “Tentatively called "Ecodefense:
A Handbook on the Militant Defense of the Earth", the publication was to be a
radical environmental version of William Powell's "Anarchist Cookbook". In its
final form, brought out by Foreman's own Ned Ludd Books (suitably named after
the nineteenth-century British worker who destroyed supposedly labor-saving
machinery), "Ecodefense: A Field Guide To Monkeywrenching" gave practical ,
detailed instructions on how to decommission bulldozers, pull out survey
stakes, spike trees, and generally harass and delay resource industry plans. It
was an immediate success; dog eared copies of it could be found in the
backpacks of young environmental militants literally throughout the world. This
kind of popularity led Oregon's Willamette National Forest supervisor Michael
Kerrick to denounce the book in a white paper presented at a congressional
hearing, in which he peevishly threatened to 'close the entire forest logging
area to unauthorized entry' if the ecotage described in the book took place. As
good as his word, Kerrick soon thereafter introduced the controversial and
legally questionable policy of closing national forests to the public whenever
environmental protests were expected. It is no exaggeration to say, therefore,
that Ecodefense changed forever the way public lands policy was made in this
country and perhaps even abroad. Ecotage was, as Getty learned, a new factor in
making environmental policy.”
