Ecological economics File:Nested_sustainability-v2.gif|right|The three nested
systems of sustainability - the economy wholly contained by society, wholly
contained by the biophysical environment. Clickable.|275px|thumb poly 123 35
134 30 171 41 196 65 194 98 167 119 121 123 79 101 73 64 101 40Economic poly 67
52 41 70 41 111 71 150 123 167 169 163 207 147 234 113 239 83 218 49 190 32 204
77 194 111 167 125 115 126 83 110 62 78 64 60 Social poly 243 58 258 83 255 133
230 168 202 185 158 195 114 195 63 181 27 153 10 115 13 78 31 54 46 39 38 71 36
116 66 148 118 169 163 169 209 153 237 118 242 81 Environment  Ecological
economics is referred to as both a transdisciplinary and interdisciplinary
field of academic research that aims to address the interdependence and
coevolution of human economies and natural ecosystems over time and space. It
is distinguished from environmental economics, which is the mainstream economic
analysis of the environment, by its treatment of the economy as a subsystem of
the ecosystem and its emphasis upon preserving natural capital. One survey of
German economists found that ecological and environmental economics are
different schools of economic thought, with ecological economists emphasizing
"strong" sustainability and rejecting the proposition that natural capital can
be substituted by human-made capital. Ecological economics was founded as a
modern movement in the works of and interactions between various European and
American academics (see the section on history and development below). The
related field of green economics is, in general, a more politically applied
form of the subject. According to ecological economist Malte Faber, ecological
economics is defined by its focus on nature, justice, and time. Issues of
intergenerational equity, irreversibility of environmental change, uncertainty
of long-term outcomes, and sustainable development guide ecological economic
analysis and valuation. Ecological economists have questioned fundamental
mainstream economic approaches such as cost-benefit analysis, and the
separability of economic values from scientific research, contending that
economics is unavoidably normative rather than positive (empirical). Positional
analysis, which attempts to incorporate time and justice issues, is proposed as
an alternative. Nature and ecology. A simple circular flow of income diagram is
replaced in ecological economics by a more complex flow diagram reflecting the
input of solar energy, which sustains natural inputs and environmental services
which are then used as units of production. Once consumed, natural inputs pass
out of the economy as pollution and waste. The potential of an environment to
provide services and materials is referred to as an "environment's source
function", and this function is depleted as resources are consumed or pollution
contaminates the resources. The "sink function" describes an environment's
ability to absorb and render harmless waste and pollution: when waste output
exceeds the limit of the sink function, long-term damage occurs. Some
persistent pollutants, such as some organic pollutants and nuclear waste are
absorbed very slowly or not at all; ecological economists emphasize minimizing
"cumulative pollutants". Pollutants affect human health and the health of the
climate. The economic value of natural capital and ecosystem services is
accepted by mainstream environmental economics, but is emphasized as especially
important in ecological economics. Ecological economists may begin by
estimating how to maintain a stable environment before assessing the cost in
dollar terms. Ecological economist Robert Costanza led an attempted valuation
of the global ecosystem in 1997. Initially published in "Nature", the article
concluded on $33 trillion with a range from $16 trillion to $54 trillion (in
1997, total global GDP was $27 trillion). Half of the value went to nutrient
cycling. The open oceans, continental shelves, and estuaries had the highest
total value, and the highest per-hectare values went to estuaries, swamps/
floodplains, and seagrass/algae beds. The work was criticized by articles in
"Ecological Economics" Volume 25, Issue 1, but the critics acknowledged the
positive potential for economic valuation of the global ecosystem. The Earth's
carrying capacity is a central issue in ecological economics. Early economists
such as Thomas Malthus pointed out the finite carrying capacity of the earth,
which was also central to the MIT study "Limits to Growth". Diminishing returns
suggest that productivity increases will slow if major technological progress
is not made. Food production may become a problem, as erosion, an impending
water crisis, and soil salinity (from irrigation) reduce the productivity of
agriculture. Ecological economists argue that industrial agriculture, which
exacerbates these problems, is not sustainable agriculture, and are generally
inclined favorably to organic farming, which also reduces the output of carbon.
Global wild fisheries are believed to have peaked and begun a decline, with
valuable habitat such as estuaries in critical condition. The aquaculture or
farming of piscivorous fish, like salmon, does not help solve the problem
because they need to be fed products from other fish. Studies have shown that
salmon farming has major negative impacts on wild salmon, as well as the forage
fish that need to be caught to feed them. Since animals are higher on the
trophic level, they are less efficient sources of food energy. Reduced
consumption of meat would reduce the demand for food, but as nations develop,
they tend to adopt high-meat diets similar to that of the United States.
Genetically modified food (GMF) a conventional solution to the problem,
presents numerous problems – Bt corn produces its own Bacillus thuringiensis,
but the pest resistance is believed to be only a matter of time. The overall
effect of GMF on yields is contentious, with the USDA and FAO acknowledging
that GMFs do not necessarily have higher yields and may even have reduced
yields. Global warming is now widely acknowledged as a major issue, with all
national scientific academies expressing agreement on the importance of the
issue. As the population growth intensifies and energy demand increases, the
world faces an energy crisis. Some economists and scientists forecast a global
ecological crisis if energy use is not contained – the Stern report is an
example. The disagreement has sparked a vigorous debate on issue of discounting
and intergenerational equity. Ethics. Mainstream economics has attempted to
become a value-free 'hard science', but ecological economists argue that value-
free economics is generally not realistic. Ecological economics is more willing
to entertain alternative conceptions of utility, efficiency, and cost-benefits
such as positional analysis or multi-criteria analysis. Ecological economics is
typically viewed as economics for sustainable development, and may have goals
similar to green politics. Schools of thought. Various competing schools of
thought exist in the field. Some are close to resource and environmental
economics while others are far more heterodox in outlook. An example of the
latter is the "European Society for Ecological Economics". An example of the
former is the Swedish "Beijer International Institute of Ecological Economics."
Differentiation from mainstream schools. In ecological economics, natural
capital is added to the typical capital asset analysis of land, labor, and
financial capital. Ecological economics uses tools from mathematical economics,
but may apply them more closely to the natural world. Whereas mainstream
economists tend to be technological optimists, ecological economists are
inclined to be technological pessimists. They reason that the natural world has
a limited carrying capacity and that its resources may run out. Since
destruction of important environmental resources could be practically
irreversible and catastrophic, ecological economists are inclined to justify
cautionary measures based on the precautionary principle. The most cogent
example of how the different theories treat similar assets is tropical
rainforest ecosystems, most obviously the Yasuni region of Ecuador. While this
area has substantial deposits of bitumen it is also one of the most diverse
ecosystems on Earth and some estimates establish it has over 200 undiscovered
medical substances in its genomes - most of which would be destroyed by logging
the forest or mining the bitumen. Effectively, the instructional capital of the
genomes is undervalued by analyses which view the rainforest primarily as a
source of wood, oil/tar and perhaps food. Increasingly the carbon credit for
leaving the extremely carbon-intensive ("dirty") bitumen in the ground is also
valued - the government of Ecuador set a price of US$350M for an oil lease with
the intent of selling it to someone committed to never exercising it at all and
instead preserving the rainforest. History and development. Early interest in
ecology and economics dates back to the 1960s and the work by Kenneth Boulding
and Herman Daly, but the first meetings occurred in the 1980s. It began with a
1982 symposium in Sweden which was attended by people who would later be
instrumental in the field, including Robert Costanza, Herman Daly, Charles
Hall, Ann-Mari Jansson, Bruce Hannon, H.T. Odum, and David Pimentel. Most were
ecosystem ecologists or mainstream environmental economists, with the exception
of Daly. In 1987, Daly and Costanza edited an issue of "Ecological Modeling" to
test the waters. A book entitled "Ecological Economics", by Juan Martinez-
Alier, was published later that year. 1989 saw the foundation of the
International Society for Ecological Economics and publication of its journal,
"Ecological Economics", by Elsevier. Robert Costanza was the first president of
the society and first editor of the journal, currently edited by Richard
Howarth. European conceptual founders include Nicholas Georgescu-Roegen (1971),
K. William Kapp (1950) and Karl Polanyi (1944). Some key concepts of what is
now ecological economics are evident in the writings of E.F. Schumacher, whose
book "Small Is Beautiful – A Study of Economics as if People Mattered" (1973)
was published just a few years before the first edition of Herman Daly's
comprehensive and persuasive "Steady-State Economics" (1977). Other figures
include ecologists C.S. Holling, H.T. Odum and Robert Costanza, biologist
Gretchen Daily and physicist Robert Ayres. CUNY geography professor David
Harvey explicitly added ecological concerns to political economic literature.
This parallel development in political economy has been continued by analysts
such as sociologist John Bellamy Foster. The antecedents can be traced back to
the Romantics of the 19th century as well as some Enlightenment political
economists of that era. Concerns over population were expressed by Thomas
Malthus, while John Stuart Mill hypothesized that the "stationary state" of an
economy was desirable, anticipating later insights of modern ecological
economists, without having had their experience of the social and ecological
costs of the dramatic post-World War II industrial expansion. As Martinez-Alier
explores in his book the debate on energy in economic systems can also be
traced into the 19th century e.g. Nobel prize-winning chemist, Frederick Soddy
(1877–1956). Soddy criticized the prevailing belief of the economy as a
perpetual motion machine, capable of generating infinite wealth — a criticism
echoed by his intellectual heirs in the now emergent field of ecological
economics. The Romanian economist Nicholas Georgescu-Roegen (1906–1994), who
was among Daly's teachers at Vanderbilt University, provided ecological
economics with a modern conceptual framework based on the material and energy
flows of economic production and consumption. His "magnum opus", "The Entropy
Law and the Economic Process" (1971), has been highly influential. Articles by
Inge Ropke (2004, 2005) and Clive Spash (1999) cover the development and modern
history of ecological economics and explain its differentiation from resource
and environmental economics, as well as some of the controversy between
American and European schools of thought. An article by Robert Costanza, David
Stern, Lining He, and Chunbo Ma responded to a call by Mick Common to determine
the foundational literature of ecological economics by using citation analysis
to examine which books and articles have had the most influence on the
development of the field. Topics. Methodology. A primary objective of
ecological economics (EE) is to ground economic thinking and practice in
physical reality, especially in the laws of physics (particularly the laws of
thermodynamics) and in knowledge of biological systems. It accepts as a goal
the improvement of human well-being through development, and seeks to ensure
achievement of this through planning for the sustainable development of
ecosystems and societies. Of course the terms development and sustainable
development are far from lacking controversy. Richard Norgaard argues
traditional economics has hi-jacked the development terminology in his book
"Development Betrayed". Well-being in ecological economics is also
differentiated from welfare as found in mainstream economics and the 'new
welfare economics' from the 1930s which informs resource and environmental
economics. This entails a limited preference utilitarian conception of value
i.e., Nature is valuable to our economies, that is because people will pay for
its services such as clean air, clean water, encounters with wilderness, etc.
Ecological economics is distinguishable from neoclassical economics primarily
by its assertion that the economy is embedded within an environmental system.
Ecology deals with the energy and matter transactions of life and the Earth,
and the human economy is by definition contained within this system. Ecological
economists argue that neoclassical economics has ignored the environment, at
best considering it to be a subset of the human economy. The neoclassical view
ignores much of what the natural sciences have taught us about the
contributions of nature to the creation of wealth e.g., the planetary endowment
of scarce matter and energy, along with the complex and biologically diverse
ecosystems that provide goods and ecosystem services directly to human
communities: micro- and macro-climate regulation, water recycling, water
purification, storm water regulation, waste absorption, food and medicine
production, pollination, protection from solar and cosmic radiation, the view
of a starry night sky, etc. There has then been a move to regard such things as
natural capital and ecosystems functions as goods and services. However, this
is far from uncontroversial within ecology or ecological economics due to the
potential for narrowing down values to those found in mainstream economics and
the danger of merely regarding Nature as a commodity. This has been referred to
as ecologists 'selling out on Nature'. There is then a concern that ecological
economics has failed to learn from the extensive literature in environmental
ethics about how to structure a plural value system. Allocation of resources.
Resource and neoclassical economics focus primarily on the efficient allocation
of resources, and less on two other fundamental economic problems which are
central to ecological economics: distribution (equity) and the scale of the
economy relative to the ecosystems upon which it is reliant. Ecological
Economics also makes a clear distinction between growth (quantitative increase
in economic output) and development (qualitative improvement of the quality of
life) while arguing that neoclassical economics confuses the two. Ecological
economists point out that, beyond modest levels, increased per-capita
consumption (the typical economic measure of "standard of living") does not
necessarily lead to improvement in human well-being, while this same
consumption can have harmful effects on the environment and broader societal
well-being. Strong versus weak sustainability. Ecological economics challenges
the conventional approach towards natural resources, claiming that it
undervalues natural capital by considering it as interchangeable with human-
made capital—labor and technology. The potential for the substitution of man-
made capital for natural capital is an important debate in ecological economics
and the economics of sustainability. There is a continuum of views among
economists between the strongly neoclassical positions of Robert Solow and
Martin Weitzman, at one extreme and the ‘entropy pessimists’, notably
Nicholas Georgescu-Roegen and Herman Daly, at the other. Neoclassical
economists tend to maintain that man-made capital can, in principle, replace
all types of natural capital. This is known as the "weak sustainability" view,
essentially that every technology can be improved upon or replaced by
innovation, and that there is a substitute for any and all scarce materials. At
the other extreme, the "strong sustainability" view argues that the stock of
natural resources and ecological functions are irreplaceable. From the premises
of strong sustainability, it follows that economic policy has a fiduciary
responsibility to the greater ecological world, and that sustainable
development must therefore take a different approach to valuing natural
resources and ecological functions. Energy economics. A key concept of energy
economics is net energy gain, which recognizes that all energy requires energy
to produce. To be useful the energy return on energy invested ("EROEI") has to
be greater than one. The net energy gain from production coal, oil and gas has
declined over time as the easiest to produce sources have been most heavily
depleted. Ecological economics generally rejects the view of energy economics
that growth in the energy supply is related directly to well being, focusing
instead on biodiversity and creativity - or natural capital and individual
capital, in the terminology sometimes adopted to describe these economically.
In practice, ecological economics focuses primarily on the key issues of
uneconomic growth and quality of life. Ecological economists are inclined to
acknowledge that much of what is important in human well-being is not
analyzable from a strictly economic standpoint and suggests an
interdisciplinary approach combining social and natural sciences as a means to
address this. Thermoeconomics is based on the proposition that the role of
energy in biological evolution should be defined and understood through the
second law of thermodynamics, but also in terms of such economic criteria as
productivity, efficiency, and especially the costs and benefits (or
profitability) of the various mechanisms for capturing and utilizing available
energy to build biomass and do work. As a result, thermoeconomics are often
discussed in the field of ecological economics, which itself is related to the
fields of sustainability and sustainable development. Exergy analysis is
performed in the field of industrial ecology to use energy more efficiently.
The term "exergy", was coined by Zoran Rant in 1956, but the concept was
developed by J. Willard Gibbs. In recent decades, utilization of exergy has
spread outside of physics and engineering to the fields of industrial ecology,
ecological economics, systems ecology, and energetics. Energy accounting and
balance. An energy balance can be used to track energy through a system, and is
a very useful tool for determining resource use and environmental impacts,
using the First and Second laws of thermodynamics, to determine how much energy
is needed at each point in a system, and in what form that energy is a cost in
various environmental issues. --> The energy accounting system keeps track of
energy in, energy out, and non-useful energy versus work done, and
transformations within the system. Scientists have written and speculated on
different aspects of energy accounting. Environmental services. A study was
carried out by Costanza and colleagues to determine the 'price' of the services
provided by the environment. This was determined by averaging values obtained
from a range of studies conducted in very specific context and then
transferring these without regard to that context. Dollar figures were averaged
to a per hectare number for different types of ecosystem e.g. wetlands, oceans.
A total was then produced which came out at 33 trillion US dollars (1997
values), more than twice the total GDP of the world at the time of the study.
This study was criticized by pre-ecological and even some environmental
economists - for being inconsistent with assumptions of financial capital
valuation - and ecological economists - for being inconsistent with an
ecological economics focus on biological and physical indicators. "See also
ecosystem valuation and price of life." The whole idea of treating ecosystems
as goods and services to be valued in monetary terms remains controversial to
some. A common objection is that life is precious or priceless, but this
demonstrably degrades to it being worthless under the assumptions of any branch
of economics. Reducing human bodies to financial values is a necessary part of
every branch of economics and not always in the direct terms of insurance or
wages. Economics, in principle, assumes that conflict is reduced by agreeing on
voluntary contractual relations and prices instead of simply fighting or
coercing or tricking others into providing goods or services. In doing so, a
provider agrees to surrender time and take bodily risks and other (reputation,
financial) risks. Ecosystems are no different than other bodies economically
except insofar as they are far less replaceable than typical labour or
commodities. Despite these issues, many ecologists and conservation biologists
are pursuing ecosystem valuation. Biodiversity measures in particular appear to
be the most promising way to reconcile financial and ecological values, and
there are many active efforts in this regard. The growing field of biodiversity
finance began to emerge in 2008 in response to many specific proposals such as
the Ecuadoran Yasuni proposal or similar ones in the Congo. US news outlets
treated the stories as a "threat" to "drill a park" reflecting a previously
dominant view that NGOs and governments had the primary responsibility to
protect ecosystems. However Peter Barnes and other commentators have recently
argued that a guardianship/trustee/commons model is far more effective and
takes the decisions out of the political realm. Commodification of other
ecological relations as in carbon credit and direct payments to farmers to
preserve ecosystem services are likewise examples that enable private parties
to play more direct roles protecting biodiversity. The United Nations Food and
Agriculture Organization achieved near-universal agreement in 2008 that such
payments directly valuing ecosystem preservation and encouraging permaculture
were the only practical way out of a food crisis. The holdouts were all
English-speaking countries that export GMOs and promote "free trade" agreements
that facilitate their own control of the world transport network: The US, UK,
Canada and Australia. Externalities. Ecological economics is founded upon the
view that the neoclassical economics (NCE) assumption that environmental and
community costs and benefits are mutually canceling ""externalities"" is not
warranted. Juan Martinez Alier, for instance shows that the bulk of consumers
are automatically excluded from having an impact upon the prices of
commodities, as these consumers are future generations who have not been born
yet. The assumptions behind future discounting, which assume that future goods
will be cheaper than present goods, has been criticized by Fred Pearce and by
the recent Stern Report (although the Stern report itself does employ
discounting and has been criticized for this and other reasons by ecological
economists such as Clive Spash). Concerning these externalities, Paul Hawken
argues that the only reason why goods produced unsustainably are usually
cheaper than goods produced sustainably is due to a hidden subsidy, paid by the
non-monetized human environment, community or future generations. These
arguments are developed further by Hawken, Amory and Hunter Lovins in "Natural
Capitalism: Creating the Next Industrial Revolution". Ecological-economic
modeling. Mathematical modeling is a powerful tool that is used in ecological
economic analysis. Various approaches and techniques include: evolutionary,
input-output, neo-Austrian modeling, entropy and thermodynamic models, multi-
criteria, and agent-based modeling, the environmental Kuznets curve. Systems
Dynamics and GIS are techniques applied, among other, to spatial dynamic
landscape simulation modeling.
