Economic policy Economic policy refers to the actions that governments take in
the economic field. It covers the systems for setting interest rates and
government budget as well as the labor market, national ownership, and many
other areas of government interventions into the economy. Such policies are
often influenced by international institutions like the International Monetary
Fund or World Bank as well as political beliefs and the consequent policies of
parties. Macroeconomic stabilization policy. Stabilization policy attempts to
stimulate an economy out of recession or constrain the money supply to prevent
excessive inflation. Tools and goals. Policy is generally directed to achieve
particular objectives, like targets for inflation, unemployment, or economic
growth. Sometimes other objectives, like military spending or nationalization
are important. These are referred to as the policy goals: the outcomes which
the economic policy aims to achieve. To achieve these goals, governments use
policy tools which are under the control of the government. These generally
include the interest rate and money supply, tax and government spending,
tariffs, exchange rates, labor market regulations, and many other aspects of
government. Selecting tools and goals. Government and central banks are limited
in the number of goals they can achieve in the short term. For instance, there
may be pressure on the government to reduce inflation, reduce unemployment, and
reduce interest rates while maintaining currency stability. If all of these are
selected as goals for the short term, then policy is likely to be incoherent,
because a normal consequence of reducing inflation and maintaining currency
stability is increasing unemployment and increasing interest rates. Demand-side
vs. supply-side tools. This dilemma can in part be resolved by using
microeconomics, supply-side policy to help adjust markets. For instance,
unemployment could potentially be reduced by altering laws relating to trade
unions or unemployment insurance, as well as by macroeconomic (demand-side)
factors like interest rates. Discretionary policy vs policy rules. For much of
the 20th century, governments adopted discretionary policies like demand
management designed to correct the business cycle. These typically used fiscal
and monetary policy to adjust inflation, output and unemployment. However,
following the stagflation of the 1970s, policymakers began to be attracted to
policy rules. A discretionary policy is supported because it allows
policymakers to respond quickly to events. However, discretionary policy can be
subject to dynamic inconsistency: a government may say it intends to raise
interest rates indefinitely to bring inflation under control, but then relax
its stance later. This makes policy non-credible and ultimately ineffective. A
rule-based policy can be more credible, because it is more transparent and
easier to anticipate. Examples of rule-based policies are fixed exchange rates,
interest rate rules, the stability and growth pact and the Golden Rule. Some
policy rules can be imposed by external bodies, for instance the Exchange Rate
Mechanism for currency. A compromise between strict discretionary and strict
rule-based policy is to grant discretionary power to an independent body. For
instance, the Federal Reserve Bank, European Central Bank, Bank of England and
Reserve Bank of Australia all set interest rates without government
interference, but do not adopt rules. Another type of non-discretionary policy
is a set of policies which are imposed by an international body. This can occur
(for example) as a result of intervention by the International Monetary Fund.
Economic policy through history. The first economic problem was how to gain the
resources it needed to be able to perform the functions of an early government:
the military, roads and other projects like building the Pyramids. Early
governments generally relied on tax in kind and forced labor for their economic
resources. However, with the development of money came the first policy choice.
A government could raise money through taxing its citizens. However, it could
now also debase the coinage and so increase the money supply. Early
civilizations also made decisions about whether to permit and how to tax trade.
Some early civilizations, such as Ptolemaic Egypt adopted a closed currency
policy whereby foreign merchants had to exchange their coin for local money.
This effectively levied a very high tariff on foreign trade. By the early
modern age, more policy choices had been developed. There was considerable
debate about mercantilism and other restrictive trade practices like the
Navigation Acts, as trade policy became associated with both national wealth
and with foreign and colonial policy. Throughout the 19th Century, monetary
standards became an important issue. Gold and silver were in supply in
different proportions. Which metal was adopted influenced the wealth of
different groups in society. The first fiscal policy. With the accumulation of
private capital in the Renaissance, states developed methods of financing
deficits without debasing their coin. The development of capital markets meant
that a government could borrow money to finance war or expansion while causing
less economic hardship. This was the beginning of modern fiscal policy. The
same markets made it easy for private entities to raise bonds or sell shares to
fund private initiatives. Business cycles. The business cycle became a
predominant issue in the 19th century, as it became clear that industrial
output, employment, and profit behaved in a cyclical manner. One of the first
proposed policy solutions to the problem came with the work of Keynes, who
proposed that fiscal policy could be used actively to ward off depressions,
recessions and slumps. The Austrian school argues that central banks create the
business cycle.
