Economic base analysis Economic base analysis was developed by Robert Murray
Haig in his work on the Regional Plan of New York in 1928. Briefly, activities
in an area divide into two categories – basic and non-basic. Basic industries
are those exporting from the region and bringing wealth from outside; non-basic
(or service) industries support basic industries. Because of data problems, it
is not practical to study industry output and trade flows to and from a region.
As an alternative, basic and non-basic concepts are operationalized using
employment data. The basic industries of the region are identified by comparing
employment in the region to national norms. If the national norm for employment
in, e.g. Egyptian woodwind manufacturing is five percent and the region’s
employment is eight percent, then three percent of the region’s woodwind
employment is basic. Once basic employment is identified, the outlook for basic
employment is investigated sector by sector and projections made sector by
sector. In turn, this permits the projection of total employment in the region.
Typically the basic/non-basic employment ratio is about 1:1. Extending by
manipulation of data and comparisons, conjectures may be made about population
and income. This is a rough, serviceable procedure and it continues in use
today. It has the advantage of being readily operationalized, fiddled with, and
understandable. formula_1 formula_2Local employment in industry i
formula_3Total local employment formula_4Reference area employment in industry
i formula_5Total reference area employment It is assumed that the base year is
identical in all of the above variables. The figure showing location quotients
uses data from "Compare Minnesota: Profiles of Minnesota’s Economy and
Population, 2002-2003". It uses the term location quotient, a number derived by
comparing percent employment in a place (Minnesota) with percent employment
nationwide. Minnesota has about the same percentage of high technology
employment as does the nation. It has more medical devices employment than the
national average (due to companies such as Medtronic). Economic base ideas are
easy to understand as are measures made of employment. For instance, it's
common knowledge that the economy of Seattle, Washington is tied to aircraft
manufacturing, Detroit, Michigan to automobiles, and Silicon Valley to high
tech manufacturing. When the newspapers discuss the closing of military bases,
they will say something like: "5,000 jobs at the base will be lost. That’s
going to hit the economy hard because it means a loss of 10,000 jobs in the
community." To forecast, what’s mainly done is to compare the region with the
nation and national trends. If the economic base of a region is in industries
that are declining nationwide, then we have a problem. If our economic base is
concentrated in sectors that are growing, then we are in good shape.
Methodologically, economic base analysis views the region as if it were a small
nation and uses notions of relative and comparative advantage from
international trade theory (Charles Tiebout 1963). In a sense the activity is
macroeconomics “written small” (and it has not been of much interest to
urban economists in recent years because it does not get at within-city
relationships.) The analysis usually takes US growth patterns as a given. The
fates of regions are determined by trends in the national economy. Critique of
the economic base concept. The economic base concept emerged in the 1920s, when
economics focused on different industrial strengths and economic techniques
were not as nuanced. The exporting (basic) activities were manufacturing and
trade activities and they could be readily identified in the data series. One
could think of changes in those activities as causing growth or decline. Today,
export activities purchase many services, and the comparative advantage of an
area may well lie in the services it produces. Peter Drucker (1986) imagines a
world dominated by trade in ideas and designs. There is little merchandise
trade because technology permits small-scale manufacturing. Such a world would
change our ideas of what’s basic. The concept is that of a trading region.
But in practice economic base concepts are often applied to areas that fit the
concept. The Minnesota study, cited before, compared the Minnesota to the US.
One can speak of the economic base of Saint Paul, Minneapolis, or Duluth, but
to go on and compare such areas using economic base techniques isn’t very
meaningful. Forecasting is a precursor to actions, and there is no explicit way
to get from the economic base to the kinds of actions most communities are
interested in. That is, the economic base study doesn’t say what to do.
Leaders say they want desirable economic activities, such as high tech ones.
Indeed, we have seen studies of the transport needs of high tech industries,
studies done prior to investments to attract such industries (for example in
Pennsylvania). Again, the economic base study doesn’t say what to do. Even if
we could make what-to-do linkages, the calculus of “desirable” is not
simple. We suppose that high pay, little environmental insult, upward mobility
for workers, and stability or growth are among the attributes desired of new
activities. The table below gives information on the pay attribute. Clearly,
that attribute has to be traded off against other attributes. Assumptions.
Finally, as H. Craig Davis points out, there are a number of assumptions on
which economic base analysis is conducted. These include: (1) that exports are
the sole source of economic growth (investment, government spending, and
household consumption are ignored); (2) that the export industry is homogeneous
(that an increase of decrease of one export does not affect another); (3) the
constancy of the export / service ratio; (4) that there is no inter-regional
feedback; and (5) that there is a pool of underutilized resources. References.
Quintero, James. 2007. Regional Economic Development: An Economic Base Study
and Shift and Shares Analysis of Hays County, Texas. Applied Research Project.
Texas State University. http://ecommons.txstate.edu/arp/259/
