Economics terminology that differs from common usage In any technical subject,
words commonly used in everyday life acquire very specific technical meanings,
and confusion can arise when someone is uncertain of the intended meaning of a
word. This article explains the differences in meaning between some technical
terms used in economics and the corresponding terms in everyday usage.
"Recession". Economists commonly use the term "recession" to mean either a
period of two successive calendar quarters each having negative growth of real
gross domestic product—that is, of the total amount of goods and services
produced within a country—or that provided by the National Bureau of Economic
Research (NBER): "...a significant decline in economic activity spread across
the country, lasting more than a few months, normally visible in real GDP
growth, real personal income, employment (non-farm payrolls), industrial
production, and wholesale-retail sales." Almost all economists and policymakers
defer to the NBER's determination for the precise dates of a U.S. recession's
beginning and end. In contrast, in non-expert, everyday usage, "recession" may
refer to a period in which the unemployment rate is substantially higher than
normal. "Unemployed". Labor economists categorize people into three groups:
"employed" - actually working at a job, even if part-time; "unemployed" - not
working, but looking for work or awaiting a scheduled recall from a temporary
layoff; and "not in the labor force" - neither working nor looking for work.
People not in the labor force, even if they have given up looking for a job
despite wanting one, are not considered unemployed. For this reason it is often
thought, especially when a recession has persisted for a sustained period, that
the unemployment rate understates the true amount of unemployment because some
unemployment is disguised by discouraged workers having left the labor force.
The everyday usage of the word "unemployed" is usually broad enough to include
disguised unemployment, and may include people with no intention of finding a
job. For example, a dictionary definition is: "not engaged in a gainful
occupation", which is broader than the economic definition. "Money". Economists
use the word "money" to mean very liquid assets which are held at any moment in
time. The units of measurement are dollars or another currency, with no time
dimension, so this is a stock variable. There are several technical definitions
of what is included in "money", depending on how liquid a particular type of
asset has to be in order to be included. Common measures include M1, M2, and
M3. In everyday usage, "money" can refer to the very liquid assets included in
the technical definition, but it usually refers to something much broader. When
someone says "She has a lot of money," the intended meaning is almost certainly
that she has a lot of what economists would call financial wealth, which
includes not only the most liquid assets (which tend to pay low or zero
returns), but also stocks, bonds and other financial investments not included
in the technical definition. Non-financial assets, such as land and buildings,
may also be included. For example, dictionary definitions of money include
"wealth reckoned in terms of money" and "persons or interests possessing or
controlling great wealth", neither of which correspond to the economic
definition. A related but different everyday usage occurs in the sentence "He
makes a lot of money." This refers to a variable that economists call income.
Unlike the usages mentioned above, this one has the units "dollars, or another
currency, per unit of time", where the unit of time might be a week, month, or
year, making it a flow variable. "Investment" and "capital". While financial
economists use the word "investment" to refer to the acquisition and holding of
potentially income-generating forms of wealth such as stocks and bonds,
macroeconomists usually use the word for the sum of fixed investment—the
purchasing of a certain amount of newly produced productive equipment,
buildings or other productive physical assets per unit of time—and inventory
investment—the accumulation of inventories over time. This is one of the
major types of expenditure in an economy, the others being consumption
expenditure, government expenditure, and expenditure on a country's export
goods by people outside the country. The everyday usage of "investment"
coincides with the one used by financial economists—the acquisition and
holding of potentially income-generating forms of wealth such as stocks and
bonds. Similarly, while financial economists use the word "capital" to refer to
funds used by entrepreneurs and businesses to buy what they need to make their
products or to provide their services, macroeconomists and microeconomists use
the term capital to mean productive equipment, buildings or other productive
physical assets. As with the term "investment", the everyday usage of "capital"
coincides with its use by financial economists. "Government spending".
Economists distinguish between government spending on newly produced goods and
services, such as paying a company to build a new highway, and government
spending on transfer payments, which are payments such as welfare payments
intended to redistribute income. In economic models, transfer payments are
normally treated as a negative component of "taxes net of transfers", leaving
"government spending on (newly produced) goods and services" as a separate
category, often referred to simply as "government spending". In everyday usage,
"government spending" refers to the broader concept of government spending on
goods and services plus transfer payments. "Welfare economics". Welfare
economics is a branch of economics that uses microeconomic techniques to
evaluate economic well-being, especially relative to competitive general
equilibrium, with a focus on economic efficiency and income distribution. In
general usage, including by economists outside the above context, welfare
refers to a form of transfer payment. "Efficient". All of these definitions
involve the idea that nothing more can be achieved given the resources
available. In popular usage, efficient often has the similar but less precise
meaning "functioning effectively". "Cost". The economics term cost, also known
as economic cost or opportunity cost, refers to the potential gain that is lost
by foregoing one opportunity in order to take advantage of another. The lost
potential gain is the cost of the opportunity that is accepted. Sometimes this
cost is explicit: for example, if a firm pays $100 for a machine, its cost is
$100. Other times, however, the cost is implicit: for example, if a firm
diverts resources from producing output worth $200 into producing a different
kind of output, then regardless of how much or how little of the latter output
is produced, the opportunity cost of doing so is $200. In accounting, there is
a different technical concept of cost, which excludes implicit opportunity
costs. In common usage, as in accounting usage, "cost" typically does not refer
to implicit costs and instead only refers to direct monetary costs. "Demand".
In economics, demand refers to the strength of one or many consumers'
willingness to purchase a good or goods at any in a range of prices. If, for
example, a rise in income causes a consumer to be willing to purchase more of a
good than before contingent on each possible price, economists say that the
income rise has caused the consumer's demand for the good to rise. In contrast,
if a change in market conditions leads to a decline in the price of a good
resulting in a consumer's being willing to buy more of it, economists say that
the consumer's quantity demanded of the good has risen. A change in "quantity
demanded" is represented by a movement "along" the demand curve, while a change
in "demand" is represented by a "shift" of the demand curve. In popular usage a
change in "demand" can refer to either what economists call a change in demand
or what economists call a change in quantity demanded. "Marginal". While
"marginal" in common usage tends to mean "tangential", implying limited
importance, in economics "marginal" means "incremental". For example, the
marginal propensity to consume refers to the incremental tendency to spend
income on consumer goods: the fraction of any additional income which is spent
on additional consumption (or conversely, the fraction of any decrease in
income which becomes a decrease in consumption). Likewise, the marginal product
of capital refers to the additional production of output that results from
using an additional unit of physical capital (machinery, etc.). If very small
increments are being considered, so that calculus is used, then this ratio of
incremental amounts is a derivative (for example, the marginal propensity to
consume becomes the derivative of consumption with respect to income).
"Significant". In common usage, "significant" usually means "noteworthy" or "of
substantial importance". In econometrics — the use of statistical techniques
in economics — "significant" means "unlikely to have occurred by chance". For
example, suppose one wishes to find if the minimum wage rate affects firms'
decisions on how much labor to hire. If the data show, on the basis of
statistical techniques, an effect of a particular non-zero magnitude, one wants
to know whether that non-zero magnitude could have arisen in the data by chance
when in fact the true effect is zero. If a statistical test shows that there is
less than, say, a 5% chance that one would have found this particular value if
the true value were zero, then it is said that the estimate is "significant at
the 5% level". If not, then it is said that the estimate is "insignificant at
the 5% level". Note, however, that the less precise phrase "economically
significant" is sometimes used by economists to mean something very similar to
the common usage of "significant". If the effect of the minimum wage on hiring
decisions were found to be very small and yet the numerical result is very
unlikely to have occurred only by chance, then the estimated effect is said to
be statistically significant but not significant economically. "Biased". In
common usage "biased" generally means "prejudiced". In econometrics, the
estimate of the effect of one thing on another (say, the estimate of the effect
of the minimum wage upon employment decisions) is said to be "biased" if the
technique that was used to obtain the estimate has the effect that, "a priori",
the expected value of the estimated effect differs from the true effect,
whatever the latter may be. In this case the technique, as well as the estimate
obtained with the technique, is called "biased". Researchers are likely to view
a biased estimate with suspicion. "Elasticity". In general usage "elasticity"
refers to flexibility. In economics it refers to a quantitative measurement of
the degree of flexibility of something in response to something else. For
example, the "elasticity of demand with respect to income" or the "income
elasticity of demand" for a product refers to the percentage change in the
quantity of the product demanded in response to a 1% change in consumers'
income, or more generally to the ratio of the percentage change in quantity
demanded to the percentage change in income. The change in the denominator
always causes the change in the numerator, so the elasticity can be said to be
the ratio of a percentage change that is caused to the percentage change of
something that is causative. "Rational". In general usage, one is said to be
rational if one is sane or lucid. In economics, rationality means that an
economic agent specifies, or acts as if he implicitly specifies, a way to
characterize his or someone's well-being, and then takes into account all
relevant information in making choices so as to optimize that well-being. For
example, an individual consumer is assumed to be rational in the sense that he
maximizes a utility function, which expresses his subjective sense of well-
being as a function of the amounts of various goods he consumes; firms are
assumed to maximize profit or some related goal. Economists assume that in the
presence of uncertainty, an agent is rational in the sense of specifying a way
of evaluating sets of possible outcomes (and associated probabilities) with
some function: A consumer is assumed to choose his consumption levels of
various goods so as to pick the set of possible outcomes, and associated
probabilities, that maximizes this function, which is often assumed to be the
expected value of a von Neumann-Morgenstern utility function; a firm is often
assumed to maximize the expected value of profit.
