Economies of agglomeration The term economies of agglomeration is used in urban
economics to describe the benefits that firms obtain when locating near each
other ('agglomerating'). This concept relates to the idea of economies of scale
and network effects. Simply put, as more firms in related industries cluster
together, costs of production may decline significantly (firms have competing
multiple suppliers, greater specialization and division of labor result). Even
when multiple firms in the same sector (competitors) cluster, there may be
advantages because that cluster attracts more suppliers and customers than a
single firm could alone. Cities form and grow to exploit economies of
agglomeration. Diseconomies of agglomeration refers to the opposite case.
Additional competition drives down pricing power. Growth with automobile-
oriented development patterns may create problems of crowding and traffic
congestion. It is this tension between economies and diseconomies that allows
cities to grow, but keeps them from becoming too large. Agglomeration economies
are most closely associated with economies of scale and these network effects
as stated above. It is important to understand the possible ultimate outcome of
agglomeration economies, only if the benefits outweigh the disadvantages. The
ultimate end to agglomeration economies is the formation and growth of a city.
However, there are processes involved and factors that must contribute to the
formation and growth of cities. These are considered here in the types of
economies that are formed, their sources that are the contributing factor,
network linkages, and the advantages and disadvantages that may or may not
occur in the growth and formation of cities. In simple terms, the basic concept
of Agglomeration Economies is that production is facilitated when there is a
clustering of economic activity. Although this may be true, the reality of it
is that the existence of agglomeration economies is central to the explanation
of how cities increase in size and population; which places this phenomenon on
a larger scale. This concentration of economic activity in cities is the reason
for the existence of them and they can persist and grow throughout time, only
if their advantages outweigh the disadvantages. It is significant to understand
why these advantages allow for the persistence of cities. Advantages. When
firms form clusters of economic activity, there are particular development
strategies that flow in and throughout this area of economic activity. This
helps to accumulate information and the flow of new and innovative ideas among
firms for the achievement of what economists call increasing returns to scale.
With the establishment of a firm, there is always a fixed or average cost of
production for the firm based on supplies needed (labor, capital, rent etc.)
for the production of the firm. When this average cost of production falls as
the result of the increased total output of a product, that indicates the
presence of economies of scale; the terms "increasing returns to scale" and
"economies of scale" may be used interchangeably. Increasing returns to scale,
or economies of scale, are internal to a firm and may allow for the
establishment of more of the same firm outside the area or region. Economies of
scale external to a firm are the result of spatial proximity and are referred
to as agglomeration economies of scale. Agglomeration economies may be external
to a firm but internal to a region. It is important to note that these
increasing returns to scale are a major contributing factor to the growth of
cities. Agglomeration economies exist when production is cheaper because of
this clustering of economic activity. As a result of this clustering it becomes
possible to establish other businesses which take advantage of these economies
without joining any big organization. This process may help to urbanize areas
as well. Disadvantages. Referring back to the growth of cities and that the
existence of them can only persist if the advantages outweigh the
disadvantages, it is important to know that agglomeration economies may also
lead to traffic congestion, pollution and other negative externalities caused
by the clustering of a population of firms and people and that this may lead to
diseconomies of scale. As stated above, these factors are what decrease the
pricing power of firms because of the many competitors in the area as well as a
shortage of labor and lack of flexibility among firms toe their laborers
around. Large cities experience these problems, and it is this tension between
agglomeration economies and agglomeration diseconomies that may contribute to
the growth of the area, control the growth of the area, or cause the area to
experience a lack of growth. The ways of maintaining a stable outcome for
agglomeration economies is for clustering to create "knowledge spillovers" that
prevail over these negative externalities. Types of economies. There are two
types of economies that are considered large-scale and external economies of
scale; localization and urbanization economies. Localization economies arise
from many firms in the same industry located close to each other. There are
three sources of localization economies: the first is the benefit of labor
pooling which is the accessibility that firms have to a variety of skilled
laborers, which in turn provides employment opportunity for the laborers. The
second benefit is the development of industries due to the increasing returns
to scale in intermediate inputs for a product and the third source is the
relative ease of communication and exchange of supplies, laborers and
innovative ideas due to the proximity among firms. Core-periphery model. Whilst
localization and urbanization economies as well as their sources are crucial to
sustaining agglomeration economies and cities, it is important to understand
the long-term result of the function of agglomeration economies which relates
to the core-periphery model. The core-periphery model basically features an
amount of economic activity in one main area surrounded by a remote area of
less dense activity. The concentration of this economic activity in one area
(usually a city center) allows for the growth and expansion of activity into
other and surrounding areas because of the cost-minimizing location decisions
of firms within these agglomeration economies sustaining high productivity and
advantages which therefore allow them to grow outside of the city (core) and
into the periphery. A small decrease in the fixed cost of production can
increase the range of locations for further establishment of firms leading to
loss of concentration in the city and possibly the development of a new city
outside the original city where agglomeration and increasing returns to scale
existed. In a nutshell, if localization economies were the main factor
contributing to why cities exist with the exclusion of urbanization economies,
then it would make sense for each firm in the same industry to form their own
city. However, in a more realistic sense cities are more complex than that;
which is the reason for the combination of localization and urbanization
economies to form large cities. Source of economies. From the localization of
firms emerges labor market pooling. Large populations of skilled laborers enter
the area and are able to exchange knowledge, ideas, and information. The more
firms there are in this area, the greater the competition is to obtain workers
and therefore results in higher wages for the workers. However, the fewer firms
there are and the more workers there are at a location the lower the wage
becomes for those workers. The second contribution towards localization
economies is the access to specialized goods and services provided for the
clustering firms. This access to specialized goods and services are known as
intermediate inputs and provides increasing returns to scale for each of the
firms located within that area because of the proximity to available sources
needed for production. If intermediate inputs are tradable, there forms a core-
periphery notion that will have many firms locate near each other to be closer
to their needed sources. If there are tradable resources and services nearby
but no related industries in the same area, there are no networking linkages
and therefore makes it difficult for all firms in the area to obtain resources
and increase production. The decreased transportation costs associated with
clustering of firms leads to the increase in likelihood to a core-periphery
pattern; where the result of this will be more intermediate inputs will be
focused at the core and therefore will attract more firms in related
industries. The third source relating to localization economies is
technological spillovers. One final advantage of this source is that clustering
in specific fields leads to quicker diffusion of ideas or adoption of ideas. In
order for production to be at its maximum and sell their products, firms
require some sort of feasible access to capital markets. New forms of
technology can create problems and involve risk; the clustering of firms
creates an advantage to reduce the amount of uncertainty and complications
involved with the use of new technology through information flow. The industry
of capital flow and technology are concentrated within specific areas and
therefore it is to the advantage of the firm to locate near these areas. This
technological impact specifically in the communications field will provide and
dismiss the barrier between firms in the same industry located further away as
well as nearby which would lead to a greater concentration of information flow
and economic production and activity. Furthermore, technological spillovers may
be more beneficial to smaller cities in their growth than larger cities because
of the existing informational networks in larger cities that already helped
them to form and grow. Basis for state redistribution from suburbs to cities.
Economies of agglomeration is the reason many U.S. state governments
redistribute income from its affluent suburbs to poorer urban localities. This
is often achieved through grants to local governments according to a criteria
that favor low-income communities. Suburbanites benefit from this
redistribution because many work and enjoy visiting city centers that would not
be sustainable on their own tax revenues. Cities that can't afford to provide
adequate fire and police protection or schools are not places where businesses
will want to locate and thus cannot maximize the agglomeration effect.
