Economic problem The economic problem, sometimes called the basic, central or
fundamental economic problem, is one of the fundamental economic theories in
the operation of any economy. It asserts that there is scarcity, or that the
finite resources available are insufficient to satisfy all human wants and
needs. The problem then becomes how to determine what is to be produced and how
the factors of production (such as capital and labor) are to be allocated.
Economics revolves around methods and possibilities of solving the economic
problem. In short, the economic problem is the choice one must make, arising
out of limited means and unlimited wants. Overview. The economic problem is
most simply explained by the question "how do we satisfy unlimited wants with
limited resources?" The premise of the economic problem model is that wants are
constant and infinite due to constantly changing demands (often closely related
to changing demographics of the population). However, resources in the world to
satisfy human wants are always limited to the amount of natural or human
resources available. The economic problem, and methods to curb it, revolve
around the idea of choice in prioritizing which wants can be fulfilled.. and
how do we know what to produce for the economy. Needs. Needs are material items
people need for survival, such as food, clothing, housing and ware. Until the
Industrial Revolution, the vast majority of the worlds population struggled for
access to basic human needs. Wants. While the basic needs of survival are
important in the function of the economy, wants are the driving force which
stimulates demand for goods and services. In order to curb the economic
problem, economists must classify the nature and different wants of consumers,
as well as prioritize wants and organize production to satisfy as many wants as
possible. One assumption often made in mainstream neoclassical economics (and
the methods which attempt to solve the economic problem) is that humans
inherently pursue their self-interest and the market mechanism best satisfies
the various wants different individuals might have. These wants are often
classified into "individual wants", which depend on the individual's
preferences and purchasing power parity, and "collective wants", those of
entire groups of people. Things such as food and clothing can be classified as
either wants or needs, depending on what type and how often a good is asked
for. Wants are effective desires for a particular product, or something which
can only be obtained by working for it. Choice. The economic problem
fundamentally revolves around the idea of choice, which ultimately must answer
the problem. Due to the limited resources available, businesses must determine
what to produce first to satisfy demand. Consumers are considered the biggest
influences of this choice, and the goods which they want must also fit within
their budgets and purchasing power parity. Different economic models place
choice in different hands.
