Economic liberalism Economic liberalism is the ideological belief in organizing
the economy on individualist lines, such that the greatest possible number of
economic decisions are made by private individuals and not by collective
institutions. It includes a spectrum of different economic policies, but it is
always based on strong support for a market economy and private property in the
means of production. Although economic liberalism can also be supportive of
government regulation to a certain degree, it tends to oppose government
intervention in the free market when it inhibits free trade and open
competition. However, economic liberalism may accept government intervention in
order to remove private monopoly, as this is considered to limit the decision
power of some individuals (most often the poor). Economic liberalism emphasizes
that individuals should make their own choices with their money, so long as it
does not infringe on the liberty of others. Economic liberalism opposes
economic planning as an alternative to the market mechanism, and also generally
opposes mixed economies. Economic liberalism contrasts with social liberalism
as well as other economic orders such as socialism, market socialism, the
social market economy, mercantilism and state capitalism Economic liberalism
opposes government intervention on the grounds that the state often serves
dominant business interests, distorting the market to their favor and thus
leading to inefficient outcomes. Ordoliberalism and various schools of social
liberalism based on classical liberalism include a broader role for the state,
but do not seek to replace private enterprise and the free-market with public
enterprise and economic planning. For example, a social market economy is a
largely free-market economy based on a free price system and private property,
and includes government regulation to promote competitive markets and social
welfare programs to address social inequalities that result from free-market
outcomes. Economic liberalism also includes support for equality of opportunity
(also known as social mobility), due to the belief that a lack of equality of
opportunity will lead to an increase in private monopoly and therefore
infringed liberty of individuals. Theories in support of economic liberalism
were developed in the Enlightenment, and believed to be first fully formulated
by Adam Smith, who advocated minimal interference of government in a market
economy, though it does not necessarily oppose the state's provision of a few
basic public goods with what constitutes public goods originally being seen as
very limited in scope. Smith claimed that if everyone is left to their own
economic devices instead of being controlled by the state, then the result
would be a harmonious and more equal society of ever-increasing prosperity.
This underpinned the move towards a capitalist economic system in the late 18th
century, and the subsequent demise of the mercantilist system. Private property
and individual contracts form the basis of classical economic liberalism. The
early theory was based on the assumption that the economic actions of
individuals are largely based on self-interest (invisible hand), and that
allowing them to act without any restrictions will produce the best results
(spontaneous order), provided that at least minimum standards of public
information and justice exist, e.g., no-one should be allowed to coerce or
steal. While economic liberalism favors markets unfettered by the government,
it maintains that the state has a legitimate role in providing public goods.
For instance, Adam Smith argued that the state has a role in providing roads,
canals, schools and bridges that cannot be efficiently implemented by private
entities. However, he preferred that these goods should be paid proportionally
to their consumption (e.g. putting a toll). In addition, he advocated
retaliatory tariffs to bring about free trade, and copyrights and patents to
encourage innovation. Robert Cox's further research highlighted the importance
of innovation and its deeper implications on the free market. Initially, the
economic liberalism had to contend with the supporters of feudal privileges for
the wealthy, aristocratic traditions and the rights of kings to run national
economies in their own personal interests. By the end of the 19th century and
the beginning of the 20th, these were largely defeated. Today, economic
liberalism is associated with social liberalism, classical liberalism,
"neoliberalism", "propertarian" libertarianism, and some schools of
conservatism.
