Economic interventionism Economic interventionism (sometimes state
interventionism) is an economic position favoring interventions in the market
in the public interest on behalf of the government. An economic intervention is
any action taken by a government or an international institution in a market
economy or market-based mixed economy in an effort to impact the economy beyond
the basic regulation of fraud and enforcement of contracts and provision of
public goods. Economic intervention can be aimed at a variety of political or
economic objectives, such as promoting economic growth, increasing employment,
raising wages, raising or reducing prices, promoting equality, managing the
money supply and interest rates, increasing profits, or addressing market
failures. The term "intervention" assumes, on a philosophical level, that the
state and economy are separate spheres of activity from each other; therefore
the terminology applies to capitalist market-based economies where government
action interrupts the market forces at play through regulations, economic
policies or subsidies in order to change market outcomes (although intervention
does not apply to state-owned enterprises that operate in the market). Economic
planning in market economies is sometimes considered to be a form of
intervention when it intervenes in the setting of prices and the distribution
of goods determined by the market. Types of interventions. Economic
interventions common in contemporary market-based economies targeted taxes,
targeted tax credits, minimum wage legislation, union shop rules, contracting
preferences, direct subsidies to certain classes of producers, price supports,
price caps, production quotas, import quotas, and tariffs. Demand management
and Keynesian economics (helicopter money) are sometimes cited as mild forms of
economic planning, designed to overcome cyclical instability inherent in market
economies, or to make market economies function properly in a desired fashion.
Government regulation over markets and/or firms can also be a type of
intervention when it inhibits, corrects or distorts the market mechanism in
setting the price of a good or service. Effects. The effects of government
economic interventionism are widely disputed. Libertarians and other advocates
of free market or laissez-faire economics generally view government
interventions as harmful, due to the fallacy of central planning, the law of
unintended consequences, and other considerations. Government officials tend to
be naturally disposed to seek more power and authority, and the money that
usually goes with those things, and this quest often takes the form of economic
interventionism which they then seek to justify. Many on the political left are
inclined to support this agenda, seeing state economic interventionism as an
important means of achieving wealth redistribution or other social engineering
goals. A minority of Marxists and those on the far left, meanwhile, feel that
government welfare programs in the context of a mixed economy might interfere
with the ultimate overthrow of capitalism. Political conservatives of the
nationalist variety also frequently support economic interventionism as a means
of protecting the power and wealth of a country or its people, particularly via
advantages granted to industries seen as nationally vital. Regulatory
authorities do not consistently close markets, yet as seen in economic
liberalization efforts by states and various institutions (International
Monetary Fund and World Bank) in Latin America, "...financial liberalization
and privatization coincided with democratization". One study suggests that
after the lost decade an increasing "diffusion of regulatory authorities"
emerged, these actors engaged in restructuring the economies within Latin
America. Latin America through the 1980s had undergone a debt crisis and
"hyperinflation" (during 1989 and 1990). These international stakeholders
restricted the state's economic leverage, and bound it in contract to co-
operate. Multiple projects and years of failed attempts, for the Argentine
state to comply, the renewal and intervention seemed stalled. Two key
intervention factors that instigated economic progress in Argentina, were
substantially increasing privatization and the establishment of a currency
board. As one can see this exemplifies global institutions including the
International Monetary Fund and the World Bankinstigate and propagate openness
to increase foreign investments and economic development within places
including Latin America. (Within a Western Liberal Democracy) government
officials theoretically weigh the cost benefit for an intervention for the
population or they succumb beneath coercion by a third private party and must
take action. Also intervention for economic development is at the discretion
and self-interest of the stake holders, the multifarious interpretations of
"progress" and development theory could mean. To illustrate this during the
2008 debt crisis; the government and international institutions did not prop
Lehman Brothers up therefore allowing them to file bankruptcy. Days later when
AIG waned towards collapsing, the state spent public money to keep it from
falling. These corporations have interconnected interests with the state.
Therefore their incentive is to influence the government to designate
regulatory policies that will not inhibit their accumulation of assets. See
also. References
