Economic system An economic system is the combination of the various
institutions, agencies, consumers, entities (or even sectors as described by
some authors) that comprise the economic structure of a given society or
community. It also includes how these various agencies and institutions are
linked to one another, how information flows between them, and the social
relations within the system (including property rights and the structure of
management). A related concept is the mode of production. The economic system
involves production, allocation of economic inputs, distribution of economic
outputs, land availability, households (earnings and expenditure consumption of
goods and services in an economy), financial institutions and government
policies. It involves a set of institutions and their various social relations.
Alternatively, it is the set of principles by which problems of economics are
addressed, such as the economic problem of scarcity through allocation of
finite productive resources. An economic system is composed of people,
institutions, rules, and relationships. For example, the convention of
property, the institution of government, or the employee-employer relationship.
Examples of contemporary economic systems include capitalist systems, socialist
systems, and mixed economies. Today the world largely operates under a global
economic system based on the capitalist mode of production. "Economic systems"
is the that includes the study of such systems. It includes comparative
economic systems as a subfield. Types. There are several basic questions that
must be answered in order for an economy to run satisfactorily. The scarcity
problem, for example, requires answers to basic questions, such as: "what" to
produce, "how" to produce it, and "who" gets what is produced. An economic
system is a way of answering these basic questions, and different economic
systems answer them differently. Many different objectives may be seen as
desirable for an economy, like efficiency, growth, liberty, and equality.
Economic systems can be divided by the way they allocate economic inputs (the
means of production) and how they make decisions regarding the use of inputs. A
common distinction of great importance is that between capitalism (a market
economy) and socialism (economic planning). In a capitalist economic system,
production is carried out to maximize private profit, decisions regarding
investment and the use of the means of production are determined by competing
business owners in the marketplace; production takes place within the process
of capital accumulation. The means of production are owned primarily by private
enterprises and decisions regarding production and investment determined by
private owners in capital markets. Capitalist systems range from laissez-faire,
with minimal government regulation and state enterprise, to regulated and
social market systems, with the stated aim of ensuring social justice and a
more equitable distribution of wealth (see welfare state) or ameliorating
market failures (see economic intervention). In a socialist economic system,
production is carried out to directly satisfy economic demand by producing
goods and services for use; decisions regarding the use of the means of
production are adjusted to satisfy economic demand, investment (control over
the surplus value) is carried out through a mechanism of inclusive collective
decision-making. The means of production are either publicly owned, or are
owned by the workers cooperatively. A socialist economic system that is based
on the process of capital accumulation, but seeks to control or direct that
process through state ownership or cooperative control to ensure stability,
equality or expand decision-making power, are market socialist systems. Types
of socialist systems. Economic systems can be subdivided by their coordinating
mechanism (planning and markets) into planned socialist market socialist
systems. Additionally, socialism can be divided based on the ownership of the
means of production into those that are based on public ownership, worker or
consumer cooperatives and common ownership (i.e., non-ownership). Communism is
a hypothetical stage of Socialist development articulated by Marx as "second
stage Socialism" in Critique of the Gotha Program, whereby economic output is
distributed based on need and not simply on the basis of labor contribution.
The primary concern for socialist planned economies is to coordinate production
to directly satisfy human needs/economic demand (as opposed to generate profit
and satisfy needs as a byproduct of pursuing profit), to advance the productive
forces of the economy while being immune to the systemic inefficiencies
(cyclical processes) and crisis of overproduction that plagues capitalism so
that production would be subject to the needs of society as opposed to being
ordered around capital accumulation. In orthodox Marxism, the mode of
production is tantamount to the subject of this article, determining with a
superstructure of relations the entirety of a given culture or stage of human
development. Types of mixed economies. Economic systems that contain
substantial state, private and sometimes cooperative ownership and operated in
mixed economies - i.e., ones that contain substantial amounts of both market
activity and economic planning. Evolutionary economics. Karl Marx's theory of
economic development was based on the premise of evolving economic systems;
specifically, over the course of history superior economic systems would
replace inferior ones. Inferior systems were beset by internal contradictions
and inefficiencies that make them impossible to survive over the long term. In
Marx's scheme, feudalism was replaced by capitalism, which would eventually be
superseded by socialism. Joseph Schumpeter had an evolutionary conception of
economic development, but unlike Marx, he de-emphasized the role of class
struggle in contributing to qualitative change in the economic mode of
production. In subsequent world history, Communist states run according to
Marxist-Leninist ideologies have either collapsed or gradually reformed their
centrally-planned economies toward market-based economies, for example with
perestroika and the dissolution of the Soviet Union, Chinese economic reform,
and Đổi Mới in Vietnam. Mainstream evolutionary economics continues to
study economic change in modern times. There has also been renewed interest in
understanding economic systems as evolutionary systems in the emerging field of
Complexity economics. Context in society. An economic system can be considered
a part of the social system and hierarchically equal to the law system,
political system, cultural, etc. There is often a strong correlation between
certain ideologies, political systems and certain economic systems (for
example, consider the meanings of the term "communism"). Many economic systems
overlap each other in various areas (for example, the term "mixed economy" can
be argued to include elements from various systems). There are also various
mutually exclusive hierarchical categorizations. List of economic systems. This
list attempts to sort all possible economic systems in alphabetical order,
without any division or hierarchization. See also. Holmes System
