Economic indicator An economic indicator (or business indicator) is a statistic
about the economy. Economic indicators allow analysis of economic performance
and predictions of future performance. One application of economic indicators
is the study of business cycles. Economic indicators include various indices,
earnings reports, and economic summaries. Examples: unemployment rate, quits
rate, housing starts, Consumer Price Index (a measure for inflation), Consumer
Leverage Ratio, industrial production, bankruptcies, Gross Domestic Product,
broadband internet penetration, retail sales, stock market prices, money supply
changes. The leading business cycle dating committee in the United States of
America is the National Bureau of Economic Research (private). The Bureau of
Labor Statistics is the principal fact-finding agency for the U.S. government
in the field of labor economics and statistics. Other producers of economic
indicators includes the United States Census Bureau and United States Bureau of
Economic Analysis. Classification by timing. Economic indicators can be
classified into three categories according to their usual timing in relation to
the business cycle: leading indicators, lagging indicators, and coincident
indicators. Leading indicators. Leading indicators are indicators that usually
change before the economy as a whole changes. They are therefore useful as
short-term predictors of the economy. Stock market returns are a leading
indicator: the stock market usually begins to decline before the economy as a
whole declines and usually begins to improve before the general economy begins
to recover from a slump. Other leading indicators include the index of consumer
expectations, building permits, and the money supply. The Conference Board
publishes a composite Leading Economic Index consisting of ten indicators
designed to predict activity in the U. S. economy six to nine months in future.
The 10 Components of Leading Indicators Lagging indicators. Lagging indicators
are indicators that usually change after the economy as a whole does. Typically
the lag is a few quarters of a year. The unemployment rate is a lagging
indicator: employment tends to increase two or three quarters after an upturn
in the general economy. In finance, Bollinger bands are one of various lagging
indicators in frequent use. In a performance measuring system, profit earned by
a business is a lagging indicator as it reflects a historical performance;
similarly, improved customer satisfaction is the result of initiatives taken in
the past. The Index of Lagging Indicators is published monthly by The
Conference Board, a non-governmental organization, which determines the value
of the index from seven economic variables. These components tend to follow
changes in the overall economy. Coincident indicators. Coincident indicators
change at approximately the same time as the whole economy, thereby providing
information about the current state of the economy. There are many coincident
economic indicators, such as Gross Domestic Product, industrial production,
personal income and retail sales. A coincident index may be used to identify,
after the fact, the dates of peaks and troughs in the business cycle. Local
indicators. Local governments often need to project future tax revenues. The
city of San Francisco, for example, uses the price of a one-bedroom apartment
on Craigslist, weekend subway ridership numbers, parking garage usage, and
monthly reports on passenger landings at the city's airport.
