Economic geography Economic geography is the study of the location,
distribution and spatial organization of economic activities across the world.
Historically and generally, Economic Geography is regarded as a subfield of the
discipline of geography, although during the last decades many economists have
pursued interests that can be considered part of economic geography. Due to
this fact, many believe that Economic Geography is part of the discipline of
Economics, instead of Geography. Given the variety of approaches, Economic
Geography has taken to many different subject matters, including: the location
of industries, economies of agglomeration (also known as "linkages"),
transportation, international trade, economic development, real estate,
gentrification, ethnic economies, gendered economies, core-periphery theory,
the economics of urban form, the relationship between the environment and the
economy (tying into a long history of geographers studying culture-environment
interaction), and globalization. This list is by no means exhaustive.
Theoretical background and influences. The subject matter investigated is
strongly influenced by the researcher's methodological approach. Neoclassical
location theorists, following in the tradition of Alfred Weber, tend to focus
on industrial location and use quantitative methods. Since the 1970s, two broad
reactions against neoclassical approaches have significantly changed the
discipline: Marxist political economy, growing out of the work of David Harvey;
and the new economic geography which takes into account social, cultural, and
institutional factors in the spatial economy. Economists such as Paul Krugman
and Jeffrey Sachs have also analyzed many traits related to economic geography.
Krugman has gone so far as to call his application of spatial thinking to
international trade theory the "new economic geography", which directly
competes with an approach within the discipline of geography that is also
called "new economic geography". The name geographical economics has been
suggested as an alternative. Approaches to study. Economic geography is a
branch of anthropo-geography that focuses on regional systems of human economic
activity. An alternative description of different approaches to the study of
human economic activity can be organized around spatiotemporal analysis,
analysis of production/consumption of economic items, and analysis of economic
flow. Spatiotemporal systems of analysis include economic activities of region,
mixed social spaces, and development. Alternatively, analysis can focus on
production, exchange, distribution and consumption of items of economic
activity. Allowing parameters of space-time and item to vary, a geographer may
also examine material flow, commodity flow, population flow and information
flow from different parts of the economic activity system. Through analysis of
flow and production, industrial areas, rural and urban residential areas,
transportation site, commercial service facilities and finance and other
economic centers are linked together in an economic activity system. Branches.
However, their areas of study may overlap with other geographical sciences or
may be considered on their own. History of economic geography. The history of
economic geography was influenced by many theories arising, mainly, from
economics and geographical sciences. First traces of the study of spatial
aspects of economic activities can be found in seven Chinese maps of the State
of Qin dating to the 4th century BC. Ancient writings can be attributed to the
Greek geographer Strabo's "Geographika" compiled almost 2000 years ago. As the
science of cartography developed, geographers illuminated many aspects used
today in the field; maps created by different European powers described the
resources likely to be found in American, African, and Asian territories. The
earliest travel journals included descriptions of the native peoples, the
climate, the landscape, and the productivity of various locations. These early
accounts encouraged the development of transcontinental trade patterns and
ushered in the era of mercantilism. The second world war to the popularization
of geographical knowledge plays a significant positive effect. The post-war
world economic recovery and development, promote the development of economic
geography. During the period known in geography as environmental determinism
notable (though later much criticized) influence came from Ellsworth Huntington
and his theory of climatic determinism. Valuable contributions came from
location theorists such as Johann Heinrich von Thünen or Alfred Weber. Other
influential theories were Walter Christaller's Central place theory, the theory
of core and periphery. Fred K. Schaefer's article "Exceptionalism in geography:
A Methodological Examination" published in American journal Annals (Association
of American Geographers) and his critique of regionalism had a big impact on
economic geography. The article became a rallying point for the younger
generation of economic geographers who were intent on reinventing the
discipline as a science. Quantitative methods became prevailing in research.
Well-known economic geographers of this period are William Garrison, Brian
Berry, Waldo Tobler, Peter Haggett, William Bunge and others. Contemporary
economic geographers tend to specialize in areas such as location theory and
spatial analysis (with the help of geographic information systems), market
research, geography of transportation, land or real estate price evaluation,
regional and global development, planning, Internet geography, innovation,
social networks and others. Economists and economic geographers. Economists and
economic geographers differ in their methods in approaching similar economic
problems in several ways. To generalize, an economic geographer will take a
more holistic approach in the analysis of economic phenomena, which is to
conceptualize a problem in terms of space, place and scale as well as the overt
economic problem that is being examined. The economist approach, according to
economic geographers, has four main drawbacks or manifestations of “economic
orthodoxy that tends to homogenize the economic world in way that economic
geographers try to avoid (Coe "et al". p.10)”.
