Economic impact of immigration to Canada The economic impact of immigration is
an important topic in Canada. While the immigration rate has declined sharply
from its peak early in the 20th century, Canada still holds the title of
accepting more immigrants per capita than any other country. The per capita
immigration rate to Canada has been relatively constant since the 1950s, and
recent years have seen a steady increase in the education and skill level of
immigrants to Canada. However, over the last 25 years the economic position of
newcomers to Canada relative to the native population has steadily declined. A
2007 Statistics Canada study shows that the income profile of recent immigrants
deteriorated by a significant amount from 2000 to 2004. Recent immigrants
themselves are far more likely than native born Canadians to initially have low
incomes, with income and employment rates increasing towards the national
average with more time spent in Canada. Overview. Immigration to Canada.
According to "Canada's Immigration Program" (October 2004), Canada has the
highest per capita immigration rate in the world, although statistics in the
CIA World Factbook shows that a number of city states and small island nations,
as well as some larger countries in regions with refugee movements, have higher
per capita rates. In 2004, Canada received 235,824 immigrants. Canada is also
unusual among western nations in the widespread popular support for high rates
of immigration, and in recent years support for immigration has increased in
Canada. All of Canada's major political parties support either sustaining or
increasing the current level of immigration. While its predecessor the Reform
Party expressed concern about immigration the current Conservative government
has no plans to reduce immigrations levels. Prime Minister Stephen Harper, on
announcing changes to the immigration act assured Canadians that "on
immigration generally I want to be clear that this government favours an
aggressive immigration policy. We are bringing in more immigrants than any
previous government." The previous Liberal government was even more strongly in
favour of a high immigration rate, proposing increasing immigration by some
20,000 people per year. The high immigration policy is most often justified
through economic arguments. Former Prime Minister Paul Martin, for instance,
argued that immigration rates should be increased to make up for the shortage
of skilled workers and to compensate for an aging population. Economic
rationale for immigration. There is no agreed view on the net impact of
immigration in current times. Historically, Canada's unusually high immigration
rates can be traced to the nation's unique economy. One factor is that Canada
has one of the world's largest supplies of natural resources such as oil,
metals, and lumber. It also has a sparse population spread over a vast
landscape. Canada has thus faced acute labour shortages and has responded by
actively searching for immigrants. In the late 19th century this included
bringing Chinese migrants to build the Canadian Pacific Railway and actively
advertising in Europe to find farmers with the Last Best West campaign. Today
similar recruitment efforts are needed to staff the oil sands projects in
Alberta. Another factor that may lead Canadians to support high immigration
levels is Canada's low birth rate (see List of countries by birth rate). The
theory is that new residents can assist in meeting future government
obligations relating to pay-as-you-go liabilities. The economic dangers of
population decline are not universally accepted. Organizations like the Fraser
Institute, a conservative think tank, question whether a declining population
would reduce or increase per capita income, noting that in the short term, with
a stable economy, fewer people would increase the per capita income simply
because you divide the income among fewer people. The study's authors conducted
a series of studies using large amounts of census data (844,476 individuals)
and conclude that immigrants who arrived from 1987-2004 paid only 57% of the
taxes paid by average Canadian in 2006, with the effect that taxes from
immigrants do not exceed the government expenses relating to them (a gap of $23
billion annually according to their numbers). A study by the C. D. Howe
Institute, another conservative think tank, suggests that immigration cannot
keep Canada's population young and could possibly contribute to population
ageing in the near term. Employment statistics also bring into question whether
skilled worker immigrants, with a 34% unemployment rate, are successfully
meeting existing labour market needs in Canada. Many developed nations have
much lower fertility rates than Canada but have not embraced immigration. A
wide array of scholars and organizations have supported Canada's immigration
policy. In 1995 economic research firm DRI-McGraw Hill Inc. react with alarm to
proposed reductions in immigration levels. They acknowledged that immigration
comes with short term costs, but argued that in the long run immigration boosts
employment and economic output. One of the most ringing endorsements of a high
immigration rate came from the 1991 report by the Economic Council of Canada,
the first detailed analysis of Canadian policy. It called for immigration to be
increased to eventually bring Canada's population to 100 million. While it
found that the economic benefits to Canada of immigration were fairly small,
the benefits to the newcomers themselves were extremely large. The report
concluded that "it would be hard not to recommend an increase when immigrants
can gain so much and Canadians not only do not lose but actually make slight
economic gains." In 2005 a report by the Royal Bank of Canada called for
boosting Canada's immigration rate by 30% to 400,000 per year to ensure
continued economic growth. On the other side of the debate, there is a movement
to reduce immigration to Canada. The Centre for Immigration Policy Reform,
composed of a number of high profile individuals including a former Director
General of the Canadian Immigration Service, argues that most Canadians are
unaware of the high cost of immigration, the small number which actually
qualify under skilled immigration rules, and the extremely high refugee
acceptance levels. Immigrant well being. Education levels. The Canadian system
puts great emphasis on finding skilled immigrants, however this system does not
always work. Immigrants to Canada are more skilled than immigrants to the
United States. George J. Borjas compared immigrants to Canada and the United
States finding those to Canada being better educated and receiving higher wages
once settled. He accredits this to Canada's points based immigration system,
and argues for the United States to more closely emulate the Canadian method.
Within the Canadian economy, immigrants are most found at the highest education
levels. In Canada, 38% of male workers with a post-graduate degree are
immigrants to the country. 23% of Canadians are foreign born, but 49% of
doctorate holders and 40% of those with a masters degree were born outside
Canada. A persistent problem for skilled immigrants is the recognition of
foreign credentials. While Canada recruits people to come based on their
degrees, many newcomers arrive to find employers and professional organizations
not recognizing their foreign education. As the percentage of skilled newcomers
as a share of total migrants has increased, so has this problem. From 2001 to
2006 56% of immigrants who arrived in Canada held a university degree, a sharp
increase over the 28% who arrived prior to 2001. In other nations immigrants
also find difficulties getting their credentials recognized. An international
study by the Migrant Integration Policy Index, sponsored by the research
division of the British Council and 100 other signatories, assigned its highest
score (3 out of 3) to Canada for the ""State facilitation of recognition of
skills and qualifications"" indicator in their 2006 study of 27 European
countries and Canada. The sheer number of skilled migrants to Canada does make
the problem a more significant one in that country and politicians of all
parties have called for change in this area. The setting of standards for, or
recognition of, almost all professional credentials does not fall within the
federal government's control and are therefore not determined by either federal
laws or Citizenship and Immigration Canada policies, but Citizenship and
Immigration Canada established the Foreign Credentials Referral Office to
provide something like a directory assistance service for immigrants. The
Government of Ontario enacted the "Fair Access to Regulated Professions Act,
2006" to help immigrants qualify for 34 provincially regulated professions. The
Act also established the position of Fairness Commissioner (Ontario). In 2007,
the Government of Alberta signed an agreement with federal government that will
accelerate the process of foreign credential recognition for new immigrants by
licensing bodies in that province. Other provinces have made similar
commitments. Wages. One important effect of this steady influx of highly
skilled immigrants is the reduction of income inequality in Canada. A steady
stream of doctors and engineers into the economy reduces wages for these
professions. In the United States immigration patterns are reversed, and income
inequality is much higher as a partial result. In terms of the impact of
immigration to economy-wide wage levels, Statistics Canada estimates that for
every 10% increase in the population from immigration, wages in Canada are now
reduced by 4% on average (with the greatest impact to more skilled workers,
such as workers with post-graduate degrees whose wages are reduced by 7%). In
part because of the credential issue, many immigrants are forced to find work
below their education level and at lower wages. However, even for doing work of
the same skill level, immigrants are much less well compensate than their
native born counterparts. Immigration scholar Jeffrey Reitz calculated that in
2001 native Canadians were benefiting from, and immigrants were losing out on,
between $2 and 3 billion per year due to this imbalance. There are a number of
possible explanations for why newcomers earn less than native Canadians in the
same jobs with the same skills. Lower hourly wages might be an indication that
the labour productivity of immigrants is lower, and employers thus have reason
to pay them less. New workers are also less familiar with the Canadian labour
market and will thus not be able to maximize their salaries. Employers will
also be less familiar with an immigrant's background and thus less willing to
offer the same salary as to a native. Immigrants, especially visible minorities
have different values than native-born Canadians as they tend to favour living
in Toronto, Montreal and Vancouver as opposed to other places much more than
native-born Canadians. Due to lower mobility, they do not access better paying
jobs, such as in Alberta and Saskatchewan. This has been changing with Calgary
already surpassing Montreal in terms of percentage of visible minorities.
Visible minorities in Saskatchewan earn higher wages than native-born
Canadians. Employment. In recent years the unemployment rate for newcomers has
also increased. In 1981 those who had just arrived had a high rate of
unemployment, but those who had been in the country five years were more likely
than average to be employed. By 2001 the transition period had expanded, and
now it takes ten years before newcomers reach the same employment rate as those
born in Canada. In 2006, the unemployment rate of recently arrived immigrants
year was 11.5%, considerably above the native Canadian average of 4.9%. For
more established immigrants who had been in Canada between 5 and 10 years the
rate fell to 7.3% One of the most important studies of the economic impact of
immigration to Canada is Morton Beiser's "Strangers at the Gate." This study
looked at the arrival of the Vietnamese boat people who began to arrive in
Canada in 1979 to much controversy. The total number of refugees was 60,000,
the largest single group of refugees to ever arrive in Canada. Beiser first
studied the boat people upon their arrival, finding that few spoke English or
French, that most were farmers with few skills useful in Canada, and that they
had arrived with no assets with which to establish themselves. Beiser then
followed the progress of the boat people to see what effect they would have on
Canada. Within ten years of arrival the boat people had an unemployment rate
2.3% lower than the Canadian average. One in five had started a business, 99%
had successfully applied to become Canadian citizens, and they were
considerably less likely than average to receive some form of social
assistance. Income. Higher rates of unemployment and lower wages combine to
give newcomers less income than the Canadian average. Analysis of census data
as of 2000 shows that immigrant incomes were at 80% of the national average
after 10 years of residing in Canada. In previous decades, immigrant income
levels did rise to the national average after 10 years, but in recent years the
situation has deteriorated. A 2003 study published by Statistics Canada noted
that "in 1980 recent immigrants had low-income rates 1.4 times that of Canadian
born, by 2000 they were 2.5 times higher, at 35.8%." The study noted that the
deterioration was widespread and affected most types of immigrants. The 2003
study explains that the low-income rate among non-immigrants declined in the
1990s, but this was more than offset by the income profile of new immigrants,
resulting in a net rise in Canada's total low-income rate. An updated January
2007 study by Statistics Canada, explains that the deterioration continued into
the next decade, with the low-income rate of recent immigrants reaching rates
of 3.5 times that of Canadian born in 2002 and 2003, before edging back to 3.2
times in 2004. The 2007 study explains that this deterioration has occurred
even though Canada implemented changes in 1993 to encourage more highly
educated immigrants, with 45% of new immigrants having university degrees as of
2004. In 1991 the Economic Council of Canada found that periods of immigration
were not directly linked to periods of high growth. They noted that "a
historical perspective gives little or no support to the view that immigration
is needed for economic prosperity. In the 19th and early 20th centuries, the
fastest growth in per capita real incomes occurred at times when net
immigration was nil or negative. Later in the 20th century, the opposite
linkage is seen but, clearly, there is no long-term correlation." However, the
same report found that a high rate of immigration was good for Canada's future,
and recommended expanding immigration rates to bring Canada's population to 100
million. A University of Montreal study published in 2002 by professor Marc
Termote used different methods and studied different countries and concluded
that immigration has no statistically significant impact to the per capita
income of a country. Decline in economic well being. Over the last 25 years the
economic position of newcomers to Canada relative to the native population has
steadily declined. A number of hypotheses have been advanced to explain these
issues. A January 2007 study by Statistics Canada analyzed the drop in income
of economic immigrants from several perspectives. Economic immigrants are now
more likely to begin their stay in Canada with a "low-income" (less than 50% of
the median income) than an immigrant in any of the other immigration classes
(see Table 16 in the study). This drop occurred during the 1990s and early
2000s despite the percentage of immigrants arriving with degrees in the
economic class (including principal applicants, spouses, and dependents) rising
from 29% in 1992 to 56% in 2003. Stating an intention to reduce a backlog of
immigration applicants of all classes, and to better target the required skills
needed in Canada, the federal government passed a law in 2008 that gave the
immigration minister new powers to alter immigrant selection. Many expected
that these powers would be used to favour workers in skilled trades over
immigrants selected on the basis of education through the points system. While
the well being of immigrants has declined in recent years, this has not
affected second generation immigrants, or those who came to Canada as a child.
This group is one of the most successful in Canada, with education and earning
levels well above that of their parents and also above the Canadian average.
Wider effects. Government assistance. The government has a large department and
a number of programs to try to ensure the well being of immigrants to Canada,
and ameliorate their economic condition. The Citizenship and Immigration Canada
department employs 5,000 staff, which on a per capita basis is 3 times more
than the 15,000 U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Services employees.
Citizenship and Immigration Canada recoups some of its department costs through
landing fees. In 2006, the Canadian government reduced the landing fee per
immigrant by 50%. New immigrants are also entitled to settlement assistance
such as free language training under provincial government administered
programs usually called Language Instruction for Newcomers to Canada (LINC),
for which the federal government budgeted about $350 million to give to the
provinces for the fiscal year 2006-2007. The majority of the $350 million was
allocated to Quebec under the Canada-Quebec Accord, at $196 million per year,
even though immigration to Quebec represented only 16.5% of all immigration to
Canada in 2005. The $350 million is budgeted to increase by an additional $90
million by 2009. Provincial governments in Canada have established citizenship
and immigration departments, such as the Ministry of Citizenship and
Immigration (Ontario). Support for immigrants was also one of the key issues
that formed the basis of the New Deal for Cities between Toronto (and other
urban centres), the Province of Ontario, and the Government of Canada, because
43% of new immigrants settle in the Greater Toronto Area resulting in certain
challenges for that region. A paper published by Statistics Canada noted that
"Over the 1990s (1990 to 2000) the city's low-income rate rose 1.9 percentage
points. All of this increase was associated with deteriorating outcomes among
immigrants, which tended to increase the city's low-income rate by 2.8
percentage points." In other words, the low-income rate among non-immigrants
fell, but the income profile of new immigrants resulted in a net widening of
the income inequality gap in Toronto during the 1990s. The needs of immigrants
prompted the United Way of Greater Toronto, the largest United Way charity in
Canada, to identify immigration services in Toronto as a top priority for their
$100 million 2006 campaign to combat poverty and social exclusion. In 2006, the
"Daily Bread Food Bank" in Toronto reported that over 40% of its clients are
foreign-born, and that almost half of that group had been in the country for
less than 4 years. While the less than 4 year group shows far above average
need, the over 40% figure is in line with the general population as 44% of
Torontonians are foreign-born. Government finances. There is no consensus on
the net impact of immigration to government finances. A 1990 study found that
an average immigrant household paid $22,528 in all forms of taxes and on
average each household directly consumed $10,558 in government services. By
contrast an average native Canadian household paid $20,259 in tax and consumed
$10,102 dollars in services. Across the country this means that immigrant
households contributed $2.6 billion more than their share to the public purse.
A 1996 study found that over a lifetime a typical immigrant family will pay
some forty thousand dollars more to the treasury than they will consume in
services. Explanations for this include that immigrant households tend to be
larger, and have more wage earners, increasing taxes. Newcomers are also less
likely to make use of many social services. Immigrants are less likely than
native Canadians to receive employment insurance, social assistance, and
subsidized housing. Immigrants are also much less likely to become homeless or
suffer from mental illness. Recent immigrants are also less likely to make use
of subsidized housing than native Canadians of the same income level. In 2004
22.5% of low-income native Canadians lived in subsidized housing, but only
20.4% of low income recent immigrants did so, though this number was
considerably higher among more established immigrants. The right-wing think
tank Fraser Institute has also studied this issue claims that the immigrants
who arrived between 1987 and 2004 cost governments $23 billion per annum (as of
2006) in excess of taxes raised from those immigrants, relating to universal
social services (e.g., welfare, medicare, public education). International
trade. The presence within Canada of people representative of many different
cultures and nations has also been an important boost to Canada's international
trade. Immigrants will often have expertise, linguistic skills, personal
connections with their country of origin that can help forge international
trade ties. Studies have found that Canada does have greater trade relations
with those nations that have provided large numbers of immigrants. Canada's
economy is heavily centered on international trade, which accounted for 36% of
GDP in 2006. 86.9% of Canadian exports go to the United States.
