Econometrics Econometrics is the application of mathematics and statistical
methods to economic data and described as the branch of economics that aims to
give empirical content to economic relations. More precisely, it is "the
quantitative analysis of actual economic phenomena based on the concurrent
development of theory and observation, related by appropriate methods of
inference." An influential introductory economics textbook describes
econometrics as allowing economists "to sift through mountains of data to
extract simple relationships." The first known use of the term "econometrics"
(in cognate form) was by Pawe≈Ç Ciompa in 1910. Ragnar Frisch is credited with
coining the term in the sense that it is used today.¬ ¬  ‚Ä¢ Aris Spanos
(2008), "statistics and economics," "The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics",
2nd Edition. Abstract. Econometrics is the unification of economics,
mathematics, and statistics. This unification produces more than the sum of its
parts. Econometrics adds empirical content to economic theory allowing theories
to be tested and used for forecasting and policy evaluation. Basic econometric
models: linear regression. The basic tool for econometrics is the linear
regression model. In modern econometrics, other statistical tools are
frequently used, but linear regression is still the most frequently used
starting point for an analysis. Estimating a linear regression on two variables
can be visualized as fitting a line through data points representing paired
values of the independent and dependent variables. The unknown parameters
formula_2 and formula_3 can be estimated. Here formula_3 is estimated to be -
1.77 and formula_2 is estimated to be 0.83. This means that if GNP grew one
point faster, the unemployment rate would be predicted to drop by .94 points (-
1.77*1+0.83). The model could then be tested for statistical significance as to
whether an increase in growth is associated with a decrease in the
unemployment, as hypothesized. If the estimate of formula_3 were not
significantly different from 0, we would fail to find evidence that changes in
the growth rate and unemployment rate were related. Theory. Econometric theory
uses statistical theory to evaluate and develop econometric methods.
Econometricians try to find estimators that have desirable statistical
properties including unbiasedness, efficiency, and consistency. An estimator is
unbiased if its expected value is the true value of the parameter; It is
consistent if it converges to the true value as sample size gets larger, and it
is efficient if the estimator has lower standard error than other unbiased
estimators for a given sample size. Ordinary least squares (OLS) is often used
for estimation since it provides the BLUE or "best linear unbiased estimator"
(where "best" means most efficient, unbiased estimator) given the Gauss-Markov
assumptions. When these assumptions are violated or other statistical
properties are desired, other estimation techniques such as maximum likelihood
estimation, generalized method of moments, or generalized least squares are
used. Estimators that incorporate prior beliefs are advocated by those who
favor Bayesian statistics over traditional, classical or "frequentist"
approaches. Gauss-Markov theorem. The Gauss-Markov theorem shows that the OLS
estimator is the best (minimum variance), unbiased estimator assuming the model
is linear, the expected value of the error term is zero, errors are
homoskedastic and not autocorrelated, and there is no perfect
multicollinearity. Linearity. The dependent variable is assumed to be a linear
function of the variables specified in the model. The specification must be
linear in its parameters. This does not mean that there must be a linear
relationship between the independent and dependent variables. The independent
variables can take non-linear forms as long as the parameters are linear. The
equation formula_11 qualifies as linear while formula_12, does not. formula_14
This assumption also covers specification issues: assuming that the proper
functional form has been selected and there are no omitted variables. Expected
error is zero. The expected value of the error term is assumed to be zero. This
assumption can be violated if the measurement of the dependent variable is
consistently positive or negative. The miss-measurement will bias the
estimation of the intercept parameter, but the slope parameters will remain
unbiased. The intercept may also be biased if there is a logarithmic
transformation. See the Cobb-Douglas equation above. The multiplicative error
term will not have a mean of 0, so this assumption will be violated. This
assumption can also be violated in limited dependent variable models. In such
cases, both the intercept and slope parameters may be biased. Spherical errors.
Error terms are assumed to be spherical otherwise the OLS estimator is
inefficient. The OLS estimator remains unbiased, however. Spherical errors
occur when errors have both uniform variance (homoscedasticity) and are
uncorrelated with each other. The term "spherical errors" will describe the
multivariate normal distribution: if formula_17 in the multivariate normal
density, then the equation f(x)=c is the formula for a ‚Äúball‚Äù centered at
Œº with radius œÉ in n-dimensional space. Heteroskedacity occurs when the
amount of error is correlated with an independent variable. For example, in a
regression on food expenditure and income, the error is correlated with income.
Low income people generally spend a similar amount on food, while high income
people may spend a very large amount or as little as low income people spend.
Heteroskedacity can also be caused by changes in measurement practices. For
example, as statistical offices improve their data, measurement error
decreases, so the error term declines over time. This assumption is violated
when there is autocorrelation. Autocorrelation can be visualized on a data plot
when a given observation is more likely to lie above a fitted line if adjacent
observations also lie above the fitted regression line. Autocorrelation is
common in time series data where a data series may experience "inertia." If a
dependent variable takes a while to fully absorb a shock. Spatial
autocorrelation can also occur geographic areas are likely to have similar
errors. Autocorrelation may be the result of misspecification such as choosing
the wrong functional form. In these cases, correcting the specification is the
preferred way to deal with autocorrelation. In the presence of non-spherical
errors, the generalized least squares estimator can be shown to be BLUE.
Exogeniety of independent variables. This assumption is violated if the
variables are endogenous. Endogeneity can be the result of simultaneity, where
causality flows back and forth between both the dependent and independent
variable. Instrumental variable techniques are commonly used to address this
problem. Full rank. The sample data matrix must have full rank or OLS cannot be
estimated. There must be at least one observation for every parameter being
estimated and the data cannot have perfect multicollinearity. Perfect
multicollinearity will occur in a "dummy variable trap" when a base dummy
variable is not omitted resulting in perfect correlation between the dummy
variables and the constant term. Multicollinearity (as long as it is not
"perfect") can be present resulting in a less efficient, but still unbiased
estimate. Methods. "Applied econometrics" uses theoretical econometrics and
real-world data for assessing economic theories, developing econometric models,
analyzing economic history, and forecasting. Econometrics may use standard
statistical models to study economic questions, but most often they are with
observational data, rather than in controlled experiments. In this, the design
of observational studies in econometrics is similar to the design of studies in
other observational disciplines, such as astronomy, epidemiology, sociology and
political science. Analysis of data from an observational study is guided by
the study protocol, although exploratory data analysis may by useful for
generating new hypotheses. Economics often analyzes systems of equations and
inequalities, such as supply and demand hypothesized to be in equilibrium.
Consequently, the field of econometrics has developed methods for
identification and estimation of simultaneous-equation models. These methods
are analogous to methods used in other areas of science, such as the field of
system identification in systems analysis and control theory. Such methods may
allow researchers to estimate models and investigate their empirical
consequences, without directly manipulating the system. One of the fundamental
statistical methods used by econometricians is regression analysis. For an
overview of a linear implementation of this framework, see linear regression.
Regression methods are important in econometrics because economists typically
cannot use controlled experiments. Econometricians often seek illuminating
natural experiments in the absence of evidence from controlled experiments.
Observational data may be subject to omitted-variable bias and a list of other
problems that must be addressed using causal analysis of simultaneous-equation
models. Experimental economics. In recent decades, econometricians have
increasingly turned to use of experiments to evaluate the often-contradictory
conclusions of observational studies. Here, controlled and randomized
experiments provide statistical inferences that may yield better empirical
performance than do purely observational studies.¬ ¬  ‚Ä¢ Kevin D. Hoover
(2008). "causality in economics and econometrics," "The New Palgrave Dictionary
of Economics", 2nd Edition. Abstract and galley proof. Data. Data sets to which
econometric analyses are applied can be classified as time-series data, cross-
sectional data, panel data, and multidimensional panel data. Time-series data
sets contain observations over time; for example, inflation over the course of
several years. Cross-sectional data sets contain observations at a single point
in time; for example, many individuals' incomes in a given year. Panel data
sets contain both time-series and cross-sectional observations. Multi-
dimensional panel data sets contain observations across time, cross-
sectionally, and across some third dimension. For example, the Survey of
Professional Forecasters contains forecasts for many forecasters (cross-
sectional observations), at many points in time (time series observations), and
at multiple forecast horizons (a third dimension). Instrumental variables. In
many econometric contexts, the commonly-used ordinary least squares method may
not recover the theoretical relation desired or may produce estimates with poor
statistical properties, because the assumptions for valid use of the method are
violated. One widely-used remedy is the method of instrumental variables (IV).
For an economic model described by more than one equation, simultaneous-
equation methods may be used to remedy similar problems, including two IV
variants, Two-Stage Least Squares (2SLS), and Three-Stage Least Squares (3SLS).
Computational methods. Computational concerns are important for evaluating
econometric methods and for use in decision making.¬ ¬  ‚Ä¢ James O. Berger
(2008). "statistical decision theory," "The New Palgrave Dictionary of
Economics", 2nd Edition. Abstract. Such concerns include mathematical well-
posedness: the existence, uniqueness, and stability of any solutions to
econometric equations. Another concern is the numerical efficiency and accuracy
of software. A third concern is also the usability of econometric software.¬ ¬ 
‚Ä¢ Richard E. Quandt (1983). "Computational Problems and Methods," ch. 12, in
"Handbook of Econometrics", v. 1, pp. 699-764.¬ ¬  ‚Ä¢ Ray C. Fair (1996).
"Computational Methods for Macroeconometric Models," "Handbook of Computational
Economics", v. 1, pp. [http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S1574002196010052143]-169. Example. This example assumes that the natural
logarithm of a person's wage is a linear function of (among other things) the
number of years of education that person has acquired. The parameter formula_20
measures the increase in the natural log of the wage attributable to one more
year of education. The term formula_21 is a random variable representing all
other factors that may have direct influence on wage. The econometric goal is
to estimate the parameters, formula_22 under specific assumptions about the
random variable formula_21. For example, if formula_21 is uncorrelated with
years of education, then the equation can be estimated with ordinary least
squares. If the researcher could randomly assign people to different levels of
education, the data set thus generated would allow estimation of the effect of
changes in years of education on wages. In reality, those experiments cannot be
conducted. Instead, the econometrician observes the years of education of and
the wages paid to people who differ along many dimensions. Given this kind of
data, the estimated coefficient on Years of Education in the equation above
reflects both the effect of education on wages and the effect of other
variables on wages, if those other variables were correlated with education.
For example, people born in certain places may have higher wages and higher
levels of education. Unless the econometrician controls for place of birth in
the above equation, the effect of birthplace on wages may be falsely attributed
to the effect of education on wages. The most obvious way to control for
birthplace is to include a measure of the effect of birthplace in the equation
above. Exclusion of birthplace, together with the assumption that formula_4 is
uncorrelated with education produces a misspecified model. Another technique is
to include in the equation additional set of measured covariates which are not
instrumental variables, yet render formula_20 identifiable. An overview of
econometric methods used to study this problem can be found in Card (1999).
Journals. The main journals which publish work in econometrics are
"Econometrica", the "Journal of Econometrics", the "Review of Economics and
Statistics", "Econometric Theory", the "Journal of Applied Econometrics",
"Econometric Reviews", the "Econometrics Journal", "Applied Econometrics and
International Development", the "Journal of Business & Economic Statistics",
and the "Journal of Economic and Social Measurement". Limitations and
criticisms. Like other forms of statistical analysis, badly specified
econometric models may show a spurious correlation where two variables are
correlated but causally unrelated. In a study of the use of econometrics in
major economics journals, McCloskey concluded that economists report p values
(following the Fisherian tradition of tests of significance of point null-
hypotheses), neglecting concerns of type II errors; economists fail to report
estimates of the size of effects (apart from statistical significance) and to
discuss their economic importance. Economists also fail to use economic
reasoning for model selection, especially for deciding which variables to
include in a regression. In some cases, economic variables cannot be
experimentally manipulated as treatments randomly assigned to subjects. In such
cases, economists rely on observational studies, often using data sets with
many strongly associated covariates, resulting in enormous numbers of models
with similar explanatory ability but different covariates and regression
estimates. Regarding the plurality of models compatible with observational
data-sets, Edward Leamer urged that "professionals ... properly withhold belief
until an inference can be shown to be adequately insensitive to the choice of
assumptions". Economists from the Austrian School argue that aggregate economic
models are not well suited to describe economic reality because they waste a
large part of specific knowledge. Friedrich Hayek in his "The Use of Knowledge
in Society" argued that "knowledge of the particular circumstances of time and
place" is not easily aggregated and is often ignored by professional
economists.
