Economic surplus In mainstream economics, economic surplus (also known as total
welfare or Marshallian surplus after Alfred Marshall) refers to two related
quantities. Consumer surplus or consumers' surplus is the monetary gain
obtained by consumers because they are able to purchase a product for a price
that is less than the highest price that they would be willing to pay. Producer
surplus or producers' surplus is the amount that producers benefit by selling
at a market price that is higher than the least that they would be willing to
sell for. In some schools of heterodox economics, the economic surplus denotes
the total income which the ruling class derives from its ownership of scarce
factors of production, which is either reinvested or spent on consumption. In
Marxian economics, the term "surplus" may also refer to surplus value, surplus
product and surplus labour. Overview. On a standard supply and demand diagram,
consumer surplus is the area (triangular if the supply and demand curves are
linear) above the equilibrium price of the good and below the demand curve.
This reflects the fact that consumers would have been willing to buy a single
unit of the good at a price higher than the equilibrium price, a second unit at
a price below that but still above the equilibrium price, etc., yet they in
fact pay just the equilibrium price for each unit they buy. Likewise, in the
supply-demand diagram, producer surplus is the area below the equilibrium price
but above the supply curve. This reflects the fact that producers would have
been willing to supply the first unit at a price lower than the equilibrium
price, the second unit at a price above that but still below the equilibrium
price, etc., yet they in fact receive the equilibrium price for all the units
they sell. Calculation from supply and demand. The graph shows, that if we see
a rise in the equilibrium price and a fall in the equilibrium quantity, then
consumer surplus falls. Distribution of benefits when price falls. When supply
of a good expands, the price falls (assuming the demand curve is downward
sloping) and consumer surplus increases. This benefits two groups of people.
Consumers who were already willing to buy at the initial price benefit from a
price reduction; also they may buy more and receive even more consumer surplus,
and additional consumers who were unwilling to buy at the initial price but
will buy at the new price and also receive some consumer surplus. Consider an
example of linear supply and demand curves. For an initial supply curve S0,
consumer surplus is the triangle above the line formed by price P0 to the
demand line (bounded on the left by the price axis and on the top by the demand
line). If supply expands from S0 to S1, the consumers' surplus expands to the
triangle above P1 and below the demand line (still bounded by the price axis).
The change in consumer's surplus is difference in area between the two
triangles, and that is the consumer welfare associated with expansion of
supply. Some people were willing to pay the higher price P0. When the price is
reduced, their benefit is the area in the rectangle formed on the top by P0, on
the bottom by P1, on the left by the price axis and on the right by line
extending vertically upwards from Q0. The second set of beneficiaries are
consumers who buy more, and new consumers, those who will pay the new lower
price (P1) but not the higher price (P0). Their additional consumption makes up
the difference between Q1 and Q0. Their consumer surplus is the triangle
bounded on the left by the line extending vertically upwards from Q0, on the
right and top by the demand line, and on the bottom by the line extending
horizontally to the right from P1. Rule of one-half. The rule of one-half
estimates the change in consumer surplus for small changes in supply with a
constant demand curve. Note that in this special case where the consumer demand
curve is linear, consumer surplus is the area of a triangle. Following the
figure above,
