Edgeworth's limit theorem Edgeworth's limit theorem is an economic theorem
created by Francis Ysidro Edgeworth that examines a range of possible outcomes
which may result from free market exchange or barter between groups of people.
It shows that while the precise location of the final settlement (the ultimate
division of goods) between the parties is indeterminate, there is a range of
potential outcomes which shrinks as the number of traders increases.
Theoretical outline. Francis Ysidro Edgeworth first described what later became
known as the limit theorem in his book "Mathematical Psychics" (1881). He used
a variant of what is now known as the Edgeworth box (with quantities traded,
rather than quantities possessed, on the relevant axes) to analyse trade
between groups of traders of various sizes. In general he found that 'Contract
without competition is indeterminate, contract with perfect competition is
perfectly determinate, contract with more or less perfect competition is less
or more indeterminate.' Trade without competition. If trade in two goods, X and
Y, occurs between a single pair of traders, A and B, the potential outcomes of
this trade can be shown in an Edgeworth box ("Figure 1"). In this diagram A and
B initially possess the entire stock of X and Y respectively (point E). The
lines U(a) and U(b) are the indifference curves of A and B which run through
points representing combinations of goods which give utility equal to their
initial holdings. As trade here is assumed to be non-coercive, neither of the
traders will agree to a final settlement which leaves them worse off than they
started off and thus U(a) and U(b) represent the outer boundaries of possible
settlements. Edgeworth demonstrated that traders will ultimately reach a point
on the contract curve (between C and C') through a stylized bargaining process
which is termed the recontracting process. As neither person can be made better
off without the other being made worse off at points on the contract curve,
once the traders agree to settle at a point on it, this is a final settlement.
Exactly where the final settlement will be on the contract curve cannot be
determined. It will depend on the bargaining process between the two people;
the party who is able to obtain an advantage while bargaining will be able to
obtain a better price for his or her goods and thus receive the higher gains
from trade. This was Edgeworth's key finding - the result of trade between two
people can be predicted within a certain range but the exact outcome is
indeterminate. This finding was (erroneously) disputed by Alfred Marshall and
the discussions between the two on this point is known as the barter
controversy. Trade with less than perfect competition. Suppose a single extra
pair of identical traders is added to this initial pair. As these new traders
are identical to the first pair, the same Edgeworth box can be used to analyse
the exchange. To examine the new outer limits of the trade, Edgeworth
considered the situation where trade occurs at the limit of trade between two
people (point C or C' in "Figure 2"). If trade were to occur at point C one of
the B's (say B(1)) would receive all the gains from trade. The one A who trades
with B(1) (say A(1)) now has a mix of goods X and Y which he is able to trade
with A(2). As the two A's are identical, they will agree to split their post-
trade endowments equally between them, placing them at point P in "Figure 2"
which gives them a higher utility than they would otherwise receive
(indifference curve U'(a) instead of U(a)). B(2) now has an opportunity and
strong incentive to offer the A's a better price for their goods and trade with
them at this price, leaving B(1) out in the cold. This process of B's competing
against one another to offer the A's a better price will continue until the A's
are indifferent between trading at P and trading on the contract curve ("Figure
3"). The same reasoning can be applied to the case where A(1) initially
receives all the gains from trade, and it can be shown that the outermost limit
given by U(b) will also move inwards. This is called the shrinking core of the
market - as an extra pair of traders is added, the feasible range of trades
shrinks. If a third pair of traders is added, the core of the market shrinks
further. If trade occurs at the limit where B(1) gets all the gains from trade,
the point P is now two thirds of the way along the line EC. This improves the
bargaining power of the A's who are able to get onto a higher indifference
curve as B's compete to trade with them. The outer limit of final settlement
where there are multiple pairs of traders can be generalised ("Figure 4") where
K = (n-1)/n. Trade with perfect competition. If there is a sufficient number of
traders, the core of the market will shrink such that the point of final
settlement is perfectly determinate ("Figure 5"). This point is equal to the
price-taking equilibrium at which trade is assumed to take place at in models
of perfect competition. Generalisation. This analysis can be modified to
accommodate traders who are not identical or who have motivations which aren't
purely selfish as well as the situation where one group of traders is larger
than the other. If the traders are heterogeneous the point P will not reflect a
"split the difference" trade between the group of traders and the outer limit
of trade determined by this point will be modified accordingly. If the utility
of one trader(s) influences the utility of another (i.e. the latter is not
selfish) then the associated limit of the contract curve will shrink inwards,
ruling out the most inequitable trades. If the groups of traders are
differently sized, the outer limits of the contract curve will not shrink an
equal amount. Implications. There are two main implications of the limit
theorem. The first is that the end result of trade between small groups of
people is indeterminate and is determined by what were to Edgeworth non-
economic factors. The second is that the equivalent of a price-taking
equilibrium can arise from competition between very large groups of traders
through the recontracting process. This equilibrium point cannot be moved by
groups of traders acting in collusion to try to obtain the gains from trade for
themselves as other traders will always have an incentive to leave the group
out in the cold. This provides a justification for assuming price-taking
behaviour in certain situations, even though explanations of how a price-taking
situation can arise (such as tatonnement) are clearly implausible. Criticisms.
To a large degree the indeterminacy result relies on the assumption that the
results of bargaining are indeterminate or, at the very least, outside the
realm of economic speculation. Modern advances in game theory, such as those
developed by John Nash, challenge this assumption and derive stable equilibria
(such as the Nash equilibrium ) in complicated bargaining situations. Further,
Edgeworth's proposed recontracting process is highly stylised, involving
traders obtaining information by costlessly making, breaking and re-making
contracts with each other. Marshall strongly criticised Edgeworth on this
point. If the recontracting process does not explain real world behaviour then
the result that the price-taking equilibrium point will be reached by
competitive traders will not necessarily be true.
