Edmund Burke Edmund Burke PC (12 January [NS] 1729– 9 July 1797) was an Irish
statesman, author, orator, political theorist and philosopher who, after moving
to England, served for many years in the House of Commons of Great Britain as a
member of the Whig party. He is mainly remembered for his support of the cause
of the American Revolutionaries, and for his later opposition to the French
Revolution. The latter led to his becoming the leading figure within the
conservative faction of the Whig party, which he dubbed the "Old Whigs", in
opposition to the pro–French Revolution "New Whigs", led by Charles James
Fox. Burke was praised by both conservatives and liberals in the 19th century.
Since the 20th century, he has generally been viewed as the philosophical
founder of modern conservatism, as well as a representative of classical
liberalism. Early life. Burke was born in Dublin, Ireland, to a prosperous
solicitor father (Richard; d. 1761) of the Church of Ireland. It is unclear if
this is the same Richard Burke who converted from Catholicism. His mother Mary
(c. 1702–1770), whose maiden name was Nagle, was a Roman Catholic and came
from an impoverished but genteel County Cork family. The Burke dynasty
descended from an Anglo-Norman surnamed de Burgh (Latinised as de Burgo) who
arrived in Ireland in 1185 following the Norman invasion of Ireland by Henry II
of England in 1171. 'Extracts from Mr. Burke's Table-talk, at Crewe Hall.
Written down by Mrs. Crewe, pp. 62.', "Miscellanies of the Philobiblon Society.
Volume VII" (London: Whittingham and Wilkins, 1862–3), pp. 52–3. Once an
MP, Burke was required to take the oath of allegiance and abjuration, the oath
of supremacy, and declare against transubstantiation. No Catholic is known to
have done so in the 18th century. Although never denying his Irishness, Burke
often described himself as "an Englishman". This was in an age "before 'Celtic
nationalism' sought to make Irishness and Englishness incompatible". As a child
he sometimes spent time away from the unhealthy air of Dublin with his mother's
family in the Blackwater Valley. He received his early education at a Quaker
school in Ballitore, some from Dublin, and remained in correspondence with his
schoolmate Mary Leadbeater, the daughter of the school's owner, throughout his
life. In 1744 he went to Trinity College, Dublin. In 1747, he set up a Debating
Club, known as Edmund Burke's Club, which in 1770 merged with the Historical
Club to form the College Historical Society, now the oldest undergraduate
society in the world. The minutes of the meetings of Burke's club remain in the
collection of the Historical Society. He graduated in 1748. Burke's father
wished him to study for the law, and with this object he went to London in
1750. He entered the Middle Temple, but soon gave up legal study to travel in
Continental Europe. After giving up law, he attempted to earn a livelihood
through writing. Writing. The late Lord Bolingbroke's "Letters on the Study and
Use of History" was published in 1752 and his collected works appeared in 1754.
This provoked Burke into writing his first published work, "A Vindication of
Natural Society: A View of the Miseries and Evils Arising to Mankind",
appearing in Spring 1756. Burke imitated Lord Bolingbroke's style and ideas in
a "reductio ad absurdum" of his arguments for atheistic rationalism,
demonstrating their absurdity. Burke claimed that Bolingbroke's arguments
against revealed religion could apply to all social and civil institutions.
Lord Chesterfield and Bishop Warburton (and others) initially thought that the
work was genuinely by Bolingbroke rather than a satire. All the reviews of the
work were positive, with critics especially appreciative of Burke's quality of
writing. Some reviewers failed to notice the ironic nature of the book, which
led to Burke writing in the preface to the second edition (1757) that it was a
satire. Richard Hurd believed that Burke's imitation was near-perfect and that
this defeated his purpose: an ironist "should take care by a constant
exaggeration to make the "ridicule" shine through the Imitation. Whereas this
"Vindication" is everywhere enforc'd, not only in the language, and on the
principles of L. Bol., but with so apparent, or rather so real an earnestness,
that half his purpose is sacrificed to the other". A minority of scholars have
taken the position that Burke did in fact write the "Vindication" in earnest,
later disowning it only for political reasons. In 1757 Burke published a
treatise on aesthetics, "A Philosophical Enquiry into the Origin of Our Ideas
of the Sublime and Beautiful", which attracted the attention of prominent
Continental thinkers such as Denis Diderot and Immanuel Kant. It was his only
purely philosophical work, and when asked by Sir Joshua Reynolds and Dr.
Laurence to expand it thirty years later, Burke replied that he was no longer
fit for abstract speculation (Burke had written it before he was 19). On 25
February 1757 Burke signed a contract with Robert Dodsley to write a "history
of England from the time of Julius Caesar to the end of the reign of Queen
Anne", its length being eighty quarto sheets (640 pages), under 400,000 words.
It was to be submitted for publication by Christmas 1758. Burke actually
completed to the year 1216, and never published the work. It was not published
until 1812 in Burke's collected works under the title of "An Essay Towards an
Abridgement of the English History", after Burke's death. G. M. Young did not
value Burke's history and claimed that it was "demonstrably a translation from
the French". Lord Acton, on commenting on the story that Burke stopped his
history because David Hume published his, said "it is ever to be regretted that
the reverse did not occur". The following year, with Dodsley, he created the
influential "Annual Register", a publication in which various authors evaluated
the international political events of the previous year. The extent to which
Burke personally contributed to the "Annual Register" is contested. Robert
Murray in his biography of Burke quotes the "Register" as evidence of Burke's
opinions, yet Philip Magnus in his biography does not directly cite it as a
reference. Burke remained its chief editor until at least 1789 and there is no
evidence that any other writer contributed to it before 1766. On 12 March 1757
he married Jane Mary Nugent (1734–1812), daughter of a Catholic physician who
had treated him at Bath. Their son Richard was born on 9 February 1758. Another
son, Christopher, died in infancy. Burke also helped raise a ward, Edmund Nagle
(later Admiral Sir Edmund Nagle), the son of a cousin orphaned in 1763. At
about this same time, Burke was introduced to William Gerard Hamilton (known as
"Single-speech Hamilton"). When Hamilton was appointed Chief Secretary for
Ireland, Burke accompanied him to Dublin as his private secretary, a position
he maintained for three years. In 1765 Burke became private secretary to
liberal Whig statesman Charles Watson-Wentworth, the Marquess of Rockingham, at
the time Prime Minister of Great Britain, who remained Burke's close friend and
associate until his premature death in 1782. Burke was a Freemason. Member of
Parliament. In December 1765 Burke entered the British Parliament as a member
of the House of Commons for Wendover, a pocket borough in the control of Lord
Fermanagh, later 2nd Earl Verney, a close political ally of Rockingham. After
Burke's maiden speech, William Pitt the Elder said Burke had "spoken in such a
manner as to stop the mouths of all Europe" and that the Commons should
congratulate itself on acquiring such a member. The first great subject in
which Burke interested himself was the controversy with the American colonies,
which soon developed into war and ultimate separation; in 1769 he published, in
reply to Grenvillite pamphlet "The Present State of the Nation", his pamphlet
on "Observations on a Late State of the Nation". Surveying the finances of
France, Burke predicts "some extraordinary convulsion in that whole system". In
the same year he purchased Gregories—a estate near Beaconsfield—with mostly
borrowed money. Although it contained an art collection that included works by
Titian, Gregories nevertheless was a heavy financial burden in the following
decades. Burke was never able to fully pay for the estate. His speeches and
writings had now made him famous, and among other effects had brought about the
suggestion that he was the author of the "Letters of Junius". At about this
time, he joined the circle of leading intellectuals and artists in London with
Samuel Johnson as its central luminary, and also included David Garrick, Oliver
Goldsmith, and Joshua Reynolds. Edward Gibbon described him as, 'the most
eloquent and rational madman that I ever knew.' Although Johnson admired
Burke's brilliance, he found him a dishonest politician. Burke took a leading
role in the debate over the constitutional limits to the executive authority of
the King. He argued strongly against unrestrained royal power and for the role
of political parties in maintaining a principled opposition capable of
preventing abuses, either by the monarch or by specific factions within the
government. His most important publication in this regard was his "Thoughts on
the Cause of the Present Discontents" of 23 April 1770. Burke identified the
"discontents" as stemming from the "secret influence" of a neo-Tory group he
calls the "king's friends", whose system "comprehending the exterior and
interior Administrations, is commonly called, in the technical language of the
Court, "Double Cabinet"". Britain needed a party with "...an unshaken adherence
to principle, and attachment to connexion, against every allurement of
interest". Party divisions "...whether operating for good or evil, are things
inseparable from free government". During 1771 Burke wrote a Bill that would
have, if passed, given juries the right to determine what was libel. Burke
spoke in favour of the Bill but it was opposed by some, including Charles James
Fox, and was not passed. Fox, when introducing his own Bill in 1791, repeated
almost verbatim the text of Burke's Bill without acknowledgement. Burke was
also prominent in securing the right to publish debates held in Parliament.
Speaking in a parliamentary debate on the prohibition on the export of grain on
16 November 1770, Burke argued in favour of a free market in corn: "There are
no such things as a high, & a low price that is encouraging, & discouraging;
there is nothing but a natural price, which grain brings at an universal
market." In 1772 Burke was instrumental in passing the Repeal of Certain Laws
Act 1772, which repealed various old laws against dealers and forestallers in
corn. In the "Annual Register" for 1772 (published in July 1773) Burke
condemned the Partition of Poland. He saw it as "the first very great breach in
the modern political system of Europe" and upsetting the balance of power in
Europe. In 1774 he was elected member for Bristol, at the time "England's
second city" and a large constituency with a genuine electoral contest. In May
1778 Burke supported a motion in Parliament to revise the restrictions on Irish
trade. However his constituents in Bristol, a great trading city, urged Burke
to oppose free trade with Ireland. Burke resisted these demands and said: "If,
from this conduct, I shall forfeit their suffrages at an ensuing election, it
will stand on record an example to future representatives of the Commons of
England, that one man at least had dared to resist the desires of his
constituents when his judgment assured him they were wrong". Burke published
"Two Letters to Gentlemen of Bristol on the Bills relative to the Trade of
Ireland", in which he espoused "some of the chief principles of commerce; such
as the advantage of free intercourse between all parts of the same
kingdom...the evils attending restriction and monopoly...and that the gain of
others is not necessarily our loss, but on the contrary an advantage by causing
a greater demand for such wares as we have for sale". Burke also supported Sir
George Savile's attempts to repeal some of the penal laws against Catholics.
This support for unpopular causes, notably free trade with Ireland and Catholic
Emancipation, led to Burke losing his seat in 1780. He also called capital
punishment "the Butchery which we call justice" in 1776 and in 1780 Burke
condemned the use of the pillory for two men convicted for attempting to
practice sodomy. For the remainder of his parliamentary career, Burke sat for
Malton, another pocket borough controlled by the Marquess of Rockingham.
American War of Independence. Prior, pp. 142–3.  One of the reasons why this
speech was so admired was the passage on Lord Bathurst (1684–1775). Burke
imagines an angel in 1704 prophesying to Bathurst the future greatness of
England and also of America: "Young man, There is America—which at this day
serves little more than to amuse you with stories of savage men, and uncouth
manners; yet shall, before you taste of death, shew itself equal to the whole
of that commerce which now attracts the envy of the world". Samuel Johnson was
so irritated at hearing it continually praised that he made a parody of it,
where the devil appears to a young Whig and predicts that Whiggism will in
short time poison even the paradise of America. The administration of Lord
North (1770–1782) tried to defeat the colonists' rebellion by military force.
British and American forces clashed in 1775 and in 1776 came the American
Declaration of Independence. Burke was appalled by celebrations in Britain of
the defeat of the Americans at New York and Pennsylvania. He claimed the
English national character was being changed by this authoritarianism. Burke
wrote: "As to the good people of England, they seem to partake every day more
and more of the Character of that administration which they have been induced
to tolerate. I am satisfied, that within a few years there has been a great
Change in the National Character. We seem no longer that eager, inquisitive,
jealous, fiery people, which we have been formerly". In Burke's view the
British government was fighting "the American English" ("our English Brethren
in the Colonies"), with a German-descended King employing "the hireling sword
of German boors and vassals" to destroy the colonists' English liberties. On
American independence, Burke wrote: "I do not know how to wish success to those
whose Victory is to separate from us a large and noble part of our Empire.
Still less do I wish success to injustice, oppression and absurdity". In 1780
during the Gordon Riots, Burke was a particular target for the rioters, and his
home had to be placed under armed guard by the military. Paymaster of the
Forces. The fall of North led to Rockingham being recalled to power in March
1782. Burke became Paymaster of the Forces and a Privy Councillor, but without
a seat in the Cabinet. Rockingham's unexpected death in July 1782 and his
replacement as Prime Minister by Shelburne put an end to his administration
after only a few months. However, Burke did manage to pass two Acts. The
Paymaster General Act 1782 ended the post as a lucrative sinecure. Previously,
Paymasters had been able to draw on money from the Treasury at their
discretion. Now they were to put the money they had requested to withdraw from
the Treasury into the Bank of England, from where it was to be withdrawn for
specific purposes. The Treasury would receive monthly statements of the
Paymaster's balance at the Bank. This Act was repealed by Shelburne's
administration but the Act that replaced it repeated verbatim almost the whole
text of Burke's Act. The Civil List and Secret Service Money Act 1782 was a
watered down version of Burke's original intentions as outlined in his famous
"Speech on Economical Reform" of 11 February 1780. However he managed to
abolish 134 offices in the royal household and civil administration. The third
Secretary of State and the Board of Trade were abolished and pensions were
limited and regulated. The Act was projected to save £72,368 a year. In
February 1783 Burke resumed the post of Paymaster of the Forces when
Shelburne's government fell and was replaced by a coalition headed by North and
including Charles James Fox. The coalition fell in 1783, and was succeeded by
the long Tory administration of William Pitt the Younger, which lasted until
1801. Burke, who had supported Fox and North, was accordingly in opposition for
the remainder of his political life. Democracy. "The Works of the Right
Honourable Edmund Burke. Volume I" (London: Henry G. Bohn, 1854), pp. 446–8.
A political scientist Hanna Pitkin points out that Burke linked the district's
interest with the proper behaviour of its elected official, explaining, "Burke
conceives of broad, relatively fixed interest, few in number and clearly
defined, of which any group or locality has just one. These interests are
largely economic or associated with particular localities whose livelihood they
characterize, in his over-all prosperity they involve." Burke was a leading
skeptic with respect to democracy. While admitting that theoretically in some
cases it might be desirable, he insisted a democratic government in Britain in
his day would not only be inept but also oppressive. He opposed democracy for
three basic reasons. First, government required a degree of intelligence and
breadth of knowledge of the sort that was very uncommon among the common
people. Second he thought that common people had dangerous and angry passions
that could be easily aroused by demagogues if they had the vote; he feared the
authoritarian impulses that could be empowered by these passions would
undermine cherished traditions and established religion, leading to violence
and confiscation of property. Thirdly, Burke warned that democracy would
tyrannize unpopular minorities who needed the protection of the upper classes.
India and the impeachment of Warren Hastings. Burke pursued for years the
impeachment against Warren Hastings, the former Governor General of Bengal, in
1786. His interaction with the British dominion of India began well before the
impeachment trial. Prior to the impeachment, Parliament had dealt with the
Indian issue for two decades. This trial was the pinnacle of years of unrest
and deliberation. In 1781 Burke was first able to delve into the issues
surrounding the East India Company when he was appointed Chairman of the
Commons' Select Committee on East Indian Affair—from that point until the end
of the trial; India was Burke's primary concern. This committee was charged "to
investigate alleged injustices in Bengal, the war with Hyder Ali, and other
Indian difficulties". While Burke and the committee focused their attention on
these matters, a second 'secret' committee was formed to assess the same
issues. Both committee reports were written by Burke and led to the reassurance
to the Indian princes that Britain would not wage war on them and the demand
for the EIC to recall Hastings. This is Burke's first call for real,
significant change of the imperial practices. When addressing the whole House
of Commons in regards to the committee's report, Burke would describe the
Indian issue as one that "began 'in commerce' but 'ended in empire.'" McCue, p.
155. Burke held that the advent of British dominion, and in particular the
conduct of the East India Company had destroyed much that was good in these
traditions and that, as a consequence of this, and the lack of new customs to
replace them, the Indians were suffering. He set about establishing a set of
British expectations, whose moral foundation would, in his opinion, warrant the
empire. On 4 April 1786 Burke presenting the Commons with the "Article of
Charge of High Crimes and Misdemeanors" against Hastings. The trial, which did
not begin until 14 February 1788, would be the "first major public discursive
event of its kind in England", bringing the morality and duty of imperialism to
the forefront of the public's perception. Burke was already known for his
eloquent rhetorical skills and his involvement in the trial only enhanced its
popularity and significance. For the members of London's fashionable society,
the trial was a spectacle, and was not centered around Hastings' alleged
misconduct and crimes as had been Burke's intent. Burke's indictment, fuelled
by emotional indignation, called Hastings the 'captain-general of iniquity';
who never dined without 'creating a famine'; his heart was 'gangrened to the
core' and he resembled both a 'spider of Hell' and a 'ravenous vulture
devouring the carcases of the dead'. The indictment was a philippic and whereas
it had previously seemed that Hastings would be found guilty, it actually
provoked public sympathy; however, although Hastings was acquitted, the trial
served to establish the principle that the Empire ought to be a moral
undertaking rather than a wholesale looting by either the East India Company or
its servants. French Revolution: 1688 versus 1789. Clark, pp. 66–7. In
January 1790 Burke read Dr. Richard Price's sermon of 4 November 1789 to the
Revolution Society, called "A Discourse On the Love of our Country". The
Revolution Society was founded to commemorate the Glorious Revolution of 1688.
In this sermon Price espoused the philosophy of universal "rights of men".
Price argued that love of our country "does not imply any conviction of the
superior value of it to other countries, or any particular preference of its
laws and constitution of government". Instead, Englishmen should see themselves
"more as citizens of the world than as members of any particular community".
The debate between Price and Burke was "the classic moment at which two
fundamentally different conceptions of national identity were presented to the
English public". Price claimed that the principles of the Glorious Revolution
included "the right to choose our own governors, to cashier them for
misconduct, and to frame a government for ourselves". Immediately after reading
Price's sermon, Burke wrote a draft of what eventually became the "Reflections
on the Revolution in France". On 13 February 1790, a notice in the press said
that Burke would shortly publish a pamphlet on the Revolution and its British
supporters, however he spent the year revising and expanding it. On 1 November
he finally published the "Reflections" and it was an immediate best-seller.
Priced at five shillings, it was more expensive than most political pamphlets
but by the end of 1790 it had gone through ten printings and sold approximately
17,500 copies. A French translation appeared on 29 November and on 30 November
the translator, Pierre-Gaëton Dupont, wrote to Burke saying 2,500 copies had
already been sold. The French translation ran to ten printings by June 1791.
Clark, pp. 181–3. Burke put forward that "We fear God, we look up with awe to
kings; with affection to parliaments; with duty to magistrates; with reverence
to priests; and with respect to nobility. Why? Because when such ideas are
brought before our minds, it is "natural" to be so affected". Burke defended
prejudice on the grounds that it is "the general bank and capital of nations,
and of ages" and superior to individual reason, which is small in comparison.
"Prejudice", Burke claimed, "is of ready application in the emergency; it
previously engages the mind in a steady course of wisdom and virtue, and does
not leave the man hesitating in the moment of decision, skeptical, puzzled, and
unresolved. Prejudice renders a man's virtue his habit". Burke criticised
social contract theory by claiming that society is indeed a contract, but "a
partnership not only between those who are living, but between those who are
living, those who are dead, and those who are to be born". The most famous
passage of the "Reflections" was his description of the events of 5–6 October
1789 and Marie Antoinette's part in them. Burke's account differs little from
modern historians who have used primary sources. His use of flowery language to
describe it, however, provoked both praise and criticism. Philip Francis wrote
to Burke saying that what he wrote of Marie Antoinette was "pure foppery".
Edward Gibbon however reacted differently: "I adore his chivalry". Burke was
informed by an Englishman who had talked with the Duchesse de Biron that when
Marie Antoinette was reading the passage she burst into tears and took
considerable time to finish reading it. Price had rejoiced that the French king
had been "led in triumph" during the October Days but to Burke this symbolised
the opposing revolutionary sentiment of the Jacobins and the natural sentiments
of those like himself who regarded the ungallant assault on Marie Antoinette
with horror, as a cowardly attack on a defenceless woman. Cobban and Smith
(eds.), "Correspondence of Edmund Burke. Volume VI", p. 239. Burke's
"Reflections" sparked a pamphlet war. Thomas Paine penned the "Rights of Man"
in 1791 as a response to Burke; Mary Wollstonecraft published "A Vindication of
the Rights of Men" and James Mackintosh wrote "Vindiciae Gallicae". Mackintosh
was the first to see the "Reflections" as "the manifesto of a Counter
Revolution". Mackintosh later agreed with Burke's views, remarking in December
1796 after meeting him, that Burke was "minutely and accurately informed, to a
wonderful exactness, with respect to every fact relating to the French
Revolution". Mackintosh later said: "Burke was one of the first thinkers as
well as one of the greatest orators of his time. He is without parallel in any
age, excepting perhaps Lord Bacon and Cicero; and his works contain an ampler
store of political and moral wisdom than can be found in any other writer
whatever". In November 1790 a member of the National Assembly of France,
François-Louis-Thibault de Menonville, wrote to Burke, praising the
"Reflections" and requesting more "very refreshing mental food" that he could
publish. This Burke did in April 1791 when he published "A Letter to a Member
of the National Assembly". Burke called for external forces to reverse the
Revolution and included an attack on the late French philosopher Jean-Jacques
Rousseau, as a personality cult had developed in revolutionary France. Although
Burke conceded that Rousseau sometimes shows "a considerable insight into human
nature" he was mostly critical. Although he did not meet Rousseau on his visit
to Britain in 1766–7 he was a friend of David Hume, with whom Rousseau had
stayed. Burke said Rousseau "entertained no principle either to influence of
his heart, or to guide his understanding, but "vanity"", which he "was
possessed to a degree little short of madness". He also cited Rousseau's
"Confessions" as evidence that Rousseau had a life of "obscure and vulgar
vices" that was not "chequered, or spotted here and there, with virtues, or
even distinguished by a single good action". Burke contrasted Rousseau's theory
of universal benevolence and his sending his children to a foundling hospital:
"a lover of his kind, but a hater of his kindred". It certainly was indiscreet
at any period, but especially at his time of life, to parade enemies, or give
his friends occasion to desert him; yet if his firm and steady adherence to the
British constitution placed him in such a dilemma, he would risk all, and, as
public duty and public experience taught him, with his last words exclaim, "Fly
from the French Constitution". At this point Fox whispered that there was "no
loss of friendship". "I regret to say there is", Burke said, "I have indeed
made a great sacrifice; I have done my duty though I have lost my friend. There
is something in the detested French constitution that envenoms every thing it
touches". This provoked a reply from Fox, yet he was unable to give his speech
for some time since he was overcome with tears and emotion, he appealed to
Burke to remember their inalienable friendship but also repeated his criticisms
of Burke and uttered "unusually bitter sarcasms". This only aggravated the
rupture between the two men. Burke demonstrated his separation from the party
on 5 June 1791 by writing to Fitzwilliam, declining money from him. ...that the
foundations laid down by the Commons, on the trial of Doctor Sacheverel, for
justifying the revolution of 1688, are the very same laid down in Mr. Burke's
Reflections; that is to say,—a breach of the "original contract", implied and
expressed in the constitution of this country, as a scheme of government
fundamentally and inviolably fixed in King, Lords and Commons.—That the
fundamental subversion of this antient constitution, by one of its parts,
having been attempted, and in effect accomplished, justified the Revolution.
That it was justified "only" upon the "necessity" of the case; as the "only"
means left for the recovery of that "antient" constitution, formed by the
"original contract" of the British state; as well as for the future
preservation of the "same" government. These are the points to be proved. Burke
then provided quotations from Paine's "Rights of Man" to demonstrate what the
New Whigs believed. Burke's belief that Foxite principles corresponded to
Paine's was genuine. Finally, Burke denied that a majority of "the people" had,
or ought to have, the final say in politics and alter society at their
pleasure. People had rights but also duties, and these duties were not
voluntary. Also, the people could not overthrow morality derived from God.
Although Whig grandees like Portland and Fitzwilliam privately agreed with
Burke's "Appeal", they wished he had used more moderate language. Fitzwilliam
saw the "Appeal" as containing "the doctrines I have sworn by, long and long
since". Francis Basset, a backbench Whig MP, wrote to Burke: "...though for
reasons which I will not now detail I did not then deliver my sentiments, I
most perfectly differ from Mr Fox & from the great Body of opposition on the
French Revolution". Burke sent a copy of the "Appeal" to the King and the King
requested a friend to communicate to Burke that he had read it "with great
Satisfaction". Burke wrote of its reception: "Not one word from one of our
party. They are secretly galled. They agree with me to a title; but they dare
not speak out for fear of hurting Fox. ... They leave me to myself; they see
that I can do myself justice". Charles Burney viewed it as "a most admirable
book—the best & most useful on political subjects that I have ever seen" but
believed the differences in the Whig party between Burke and Fox should not be
publicly aired. Eventually most of the Whigs sided with Burke and voted their
support for the conservative government of Pitt, which, in response to France's
declaration of war against Britain, declared war on the revolutionary
government of France in 1793. Cobban and Smith (eds.), "Correspondence of
Edmund Burke. Volume VI", pp. 479–80. When they smile, I see blood trickling
down their faces; I see their insidious purposes; I see that the object of all
their cajoling is—blood! I now warn my countrymen to beware of these
execrable philosophers, whose only object it is to destroy every thing that is
good here, and to establish immorality and murder by precept and example—'Hic
niger est hunc tu Romane caveto' ['Such a man is evil; beware of him, Roman'.
Horace, "Satires" I. 4. 85.]. Burke supported the war against revolutionary
France, seeing Britain as fighting on the side of the royalists and "émigres"
in a civil war, rather than fighting against the whole nation of France. Burke
also supported the royalist uprising in La Vendée, describing it on 4 November
1793 in a letter to William Windham, as "the sole affair I have much heart in".
Burke wrote to Henry Dundas on 7 October urging him to send reinforcements
there, as he viewed it as the only theatre in the war that might lead to a
march on Paris. However Dundas did not follow Burke's advice. Burke believed
the government was not taking the uprising seriously enough, a view reinforced
by a letter he had received from the Comte d'Artois, dated 23 October,
requesting that he intercede on behalf of the royalists to the government.
Burke was forced to reply on 6 November: "I am not in His Majesty's Service; or
at all consulted in his Affairs". Burke published his "Remarks on the Policy of
the Allies with Respect to France", begun in October, where he said: "I am sure
every thing has shewn us that in this war with France, one Frenchman is worth
twenty foreigners. La Vendee is a proof of this". Burke, "A Letter to a Noble
Lord", pp. 52–53. Burke's last publications were the "Letters on a Regicide
Peace" (October 1796), called forth by the Pitt government's negotiations for
peace with France. Burke regarded this as appeasement, injurious to national
dignity and honour. In the Second Letter, Burke wrote of the revolutionary
French government: "Individuality is left out of their scheme of government.
The state is all in all. Everything is referred to the production of force;
afterwards, everything is trusted to the use of it. It is military in its
principle, in its maxims, in its spirit, and in all its movements. The state
has dominion and conquest for its sole objects—dominion over minds by
proselytism, over bodies by arms". This has been seen as the first time someone
explained the modern totalitarian state. Burke regarded the war with France as
ideological, against an "armed doctrine". He wished that France would not be
partitioned due to the effect this would have on the balance of power in
Europe, and that the war was not against France but against the revolutionaries
governing her. Burke said: "It is not France extending a foreign empire over
other nations: it is a sect aiming at universal empire, and beginning with the
conquest of France". Later life. Eccleshall, p. 77. The economist Adam Smith
remarked that Burke was "the only man I ever knew who thinks on economic
subjects exactly as I do, without any previous communications having passed
between us". Writing to a friend in May 1795, Burke surveyed the causes of
discontent: "I think I can hardly overrate the malignity of the principles of
Protestant ascendency, as they affect Ireland; or of Indianism, as they affect
these countries, and as they affect Asia; or of Jacobinism, as they affect all
Europe, and the state of human society itself. The last is the greatest evil".
However by March 1796 Burke had changed his mind: "Our Government and our Laws
are beset by two different Enemies, which are sapping its foundations,
Indianism, and Jacobinism. In some Cases they act separately, in some they act
in conjunction: But of this I am sure; that the first is the worst by far, and
the hardest to deal with; and for this amongst other reasons, that it weakens
discredits, and ruins that force, which ought to be employed with the greatest
Credit and Energy against the other; and that it furnishes Jacobinism with its
strongest arms against all "formal" Government". Prior, p. 456 Burke died in
Beaconsfield, Buckinghamshire on 9 July 1797. He was buried in Beaconsfield
alongside his son and brother. His wife survived him by nearly fifteen years.
Legacy. In the English-speaking world, Burke is regarded by most political
experts as the father of modern Anglo-conservatism. His liberal conservatism,
which opposed governing based on abstract ideas, and preferred 'organic'
reform, can be contrasted with the autocratic conservatism of Continental
figures such as Joseph de Maistre. Burke's ideas placing property at the base
of human development and the development of society were radical and new at the
time. Burke believed that property was essential to human life. Because of his
conviction that people desire to be ruled and controlled, the division of
property formed the basis for social structure, helping develop control within
a property-based hierarchy. He viewed the social changes brought on by property
as the natural order of events that should be taking place as the human race
progressed. With the division of property and the class system, he also
believed that it kept the monarch in check to the needs of the classes beneath
the monarch. Since property largely aligned or defined divisions of social
class, class too was seen as natural—part of a social agreement that the
setting of persons into different classes is the mutual benefit of all
subjects. His support for Irish Catholics and Indians often led him to be
criticised by Tories. His opposition to British imperialism in Ireland and
India and his opposition to French imperialism and radicalism in Europe, made
it difficult for Whig or Tory to wholly accept Burke as their own. In the 19th
century Burke was praised by both liberals and conservatives. Burke's friend
Philip Francis wrote that Burke "was a man who truly & prophetically foresaw
all the consequences which would rise from the adoption of the French
principles" but because Burke wrote with so much passion people were doubtful
of his arguments. William Windham spoke from the same bench in the House of
Commons as Burke had done when he had separated from Fox and an observer said
Windham spoke "like the ghost of Burke" when he made a speech against peace
with France in 1801. William Hazlitt, a political opponent of Burke, regarded
him as amongst his three favourite writers (the others being Junius and
Rousseau), and made it "a test of the sense and candour of any one belonging to
the opposite party, whether he allowed Burke to be a great man". William
Wordsworth was originally a supporter of the French Revolution and attacked
Burke in 'A Letter to the Bishop of Llandaff' (1793) but by the early 19th
century he had changed his mind and came to admire Burke. In his "Two Addresses
to the Freeholders of Westmorland" Wordsworth called Burke "the most sagacious
Politician of his age" whose predictions "time has verified". He later revised
his poem "The Prelude" to include praise of Burke ("Genius of Burke! forgive
the pen seduced/By specious wonders") and portrayed him as an old oak. Samuel
Taylor Coleridge came to have a similar conversion: he had criticised Burke in
"The Watchman" but in his "Friend" (1809–10) Coleridge defended Burke from
charges of inconsistency. Later, in his "Biographia Literaria" (1817) Coleridge
hails Burke as a prophet and praises Burke for referring "habitually to
"principles". He was a "scientific" statesman; and therefore a "seer"". Henry
Brougham wrote of Burke: "... all his predictions, save one momentary
expression, had been more than fulfilled: anarchy and bloodshed had borne sway
in France; conquest and convulsion had desolated Europe...the providence of
mortals is not often able to penetrate so far as this into futurity". George
Canning believed that Burke's "Reflections" "has been justified by the course
of subsequent events; and almost every prophecy has been strictly fulfilled".
In 1823 Canning wrote that he took Burke's "last works and words the manual of
my politics". The Conservative Prime Minister Benjamin Disraeli "was deeply
penetrated with the spirit and sentiment of Burke's later writings". The
Liberal Prime Minister William Ewart Gladstone considered Burke "a magazine of
wisdom on Ireland and America" and in his diary recorded: "Made many extracts
from Burke—"sometimes almost divine"". The Radical MP and anti-Corn Law
activist Richard Cobden often praised Burke's "Thoughts and Details on
Scarcity". The Liberal historian Lord Acton considered Burke one of the three
greatest liberals, along with William Gladstone and Thomas Babington Macaulay.
Macaulay recorded in his diary: "I have now finished reading again most of
Burke's works. Admirable! The greatest man since Milton". The Gladstonian
Liberal MP John Morley published two books on Burke (including a biography) and
was influenced by Burke, including his views on prejudice. The Cobdenite
Radical Francis Hirst thought Burke deserved "a place among English
libertarians, even though of all lovers of liberty and of all reformers he was
the most conservative, the least abstract, always anxious to preserve and
renovate rather than to innovate. In politics he resembled the modern architect
who would restore an old house instead of pulling it down to construct a new
one on the site". Burke's "Reflections on the Revolution in France" was
controversial at the time of its publication, but after his death, it was to
become his best-known and most influential work, and a manifesto of
conservative thought. The sycophant—who in the pay of the English oligarchy
played the romantic "laudator temporis acti" against the French Revolution just
as, in the pay of the North American colonies at the beginning of the American
troubles, he had played the liberal against the English oligarchy—was an out-
and-out vulgar bourgeois. "The laws of commerce are the laws of Nature, and
therefore the laws of God." (E. Burke, l.c., pp. 31, 32) No wonder that, true
to the laws of God and Nature, he always sold himself in the best market. On
the one hand is revealed as a foremost apostle of Liberty, on the other as the
redoubtable champion of Authority. But a charge of political inconsistency
applied to this life appears a mean and petty thing. History easily discerns
the reasons and forces which actuated him, and the immense changes in the
problems he was facing which evoked from the same profound mind and sincere
spirit these entirely contrary manifestations. His soul revolted against
tyranny, whether it appeared in the aspect of a domineering Monarch and a
corrupt Court and Parliamentary system, or whether, mouthing the watch-words of
a non-existent liberty, it towered up against him in the dictation of a brutal
mob and wicked sect. No one can read the Burke of Liberty and the Burke of
Authority without feeling that here was the same man pursuing the same ends,
seeking the same ideals of society and Government, and defending them from
assaults, now from one extreme, now from the other. The historian Piers Brendon
asserts that Burke laid the moral foundations for the British Empire,
epitomised in the trial of Warren Hastings, that was ultimately to be its
undoing: when Burke stated that "The British Empire must be governed on a plan
of freedom, for it will be governed by no other", this was "...an ideological
bacillus that would prove fatal. This was Edmund Burke's paternalistic doctrine
that colonial government was a trust. It was to be so exercised for the benefit
of subject people that they would eventually attain their
birthright—freedom". As a consequence of this opinion, Burke objected to the
opium trade, which he called a "smuggling adventure" and condemned "the great
Disgrace of the British character in India". A Royal Society of Arts blue
plaque commemorates Burke at 37 Gerrard Street in London's Chinatown. When good
men do nothing. The statement that "The only thing necessary for the triumph of
evil is for good men to do nothing" is often attributed to Burke. Burke never
said this but, in 1770, he wrote in "Thoughts on the Cause of the Present
Discontents" that "when bad men combine, the good must associate; else they
will fall, one by one, an unpitied sacrifice in a contemptible struggle." In
2003 this quote was twice misused on the big screen. The Canadian miniseries ""
and the American Film "Tears of the Sun" both started with the incorrect quote,
the quote was also attributed to Burke in the television series "Frasier"
episode 7 of season 2 in the episode "The Candidate".
