Egalitarianism Egalitarianism () is a trend of thought that favors equality
among living entities. Egalitarian doctrines maintain that all humans are equal
in fundamental worth or social status, according to The Stanford Encyclopedia
of Philosophy. The Cultural theory of risk holds egalitarianism as defined by
(1) a negative attitude towards rules and principles, and (2) a positive
attitude towards group decision-making, with fatalism termed as its opposite.
According to the Merriam-Webster Dictionary, the term has two distinct
definitions in modern English. It is defined either as a political doctrine
that all people should be treated as equals and have the same political,
economic, social, and civil rights or as a social philosophy advocating the
removal of economic inequalities among people or the decentralization of power.
Some sources define egalitarianism as the point of view that equality reflects
the natural state of humanity. Forms. Some specifically focused egalitarian
concerns include economic egalitarianism, legal egalitarianism, luck
egalitarianism, political egalitarianism, gender egalitarianism, racial
equality, asset-based egalitarianism, and Christian egalitarianism. Common
forms of egalitarianism include political and philosophical. Economic.
Egalitarianism in economics is a controversial phrase with conflicting
potential meanings. It may refer either to equality of opportunity, the view
that the government ought not to discriminate against citizens or hinder
opportunities for them to prosper, or the quite different notion of equality of
outcome, a state of economic affairs in which the government promotes equal
prosperity for all citizens. The free-market economist Milton Friedman
supported equality-of-opportunity economic egalitarianism. Economist John
Maynard Keynes supported more equal outcomes. An early example of equality-of-
outcome economic egalitarianism is Xu Xing, a scholar of the Chinese philosophy
of Agriculturalism, who supported the fixing of prices, in which all similar
goods and services, regardless of differences in quality and demand, are set at
exactly the same, unchanging price. In the years following World War II, the
social democracies of Europe have all adopted egalitarian programs designed to
promote general access to health care and education. Political. Egalitarianism
in politics can be of at least two forms. One form is equality of persons in
right, sometimes referred to as natural rights, and John Locke is sometimes
considered the founder of this form. Another form is a distributive
egalitarianism in which the wealth created by labor is organized and controlled
in some equal manner. Karl Marx is considered a proponent of this form of
egalitarianism. Philosophical. At a cultural level, egalitarian theories have
developed in sophistication and acceptance during the past two hundred years.
Among the notable broadly egalitarian philosophies are socialism, communism,
anarchism, libertarianism, left-libertarianism, social liberalism and
progressivism, all of which propound economic, political, and legal
egalitarianism. Several egalitarian ideas enjoy wide support among
intellectuals and in the general populations of many countries. Whether any of
these ideas have been significantly implemented in practice, however, remains a
controversial question. One argument is that liberalism provides democracy with
the experience of civic reformism. Without it, democracy loses any
tie─argumentative or practical─to a coherent design of public policy
endeavoring to provide the resources for the realization of democratic
citizenship. For instance, some argue that modern representative democracy is a
realization of political egalitarianism, while in reality, most political power
still resides in the hands of a ruling class, rather than in the hands of the
people. Religious. In Christianity. The Christian egalitarian view holds that
the Bible teaches the fundamental equality of women and men of all racial and
ethnic mixes, all economic classes, and all age groups, based on the teachings
and example of Jesus Christ and the overarching principles of scripture.
However, within the wide range of Christianity, there are dissenting views from
opposing groups, some of which are Complementarians and Patriarchalists. At its
foundational level, Christian thought holds that "... in Christ, there is
neither Jew nor Greek, slave nor free, man nor woman", defining all as equal in
the sight of God. Various Christian groups have attempted to hold to this view
and develop Christian oriented communities. The most notable of these are the
Amish and Hutterite groups of Europe and North America, living in agricultural
and collective communities. Military. Military egalitarianism has been noted
since ancient times, such as with Shakespeare's St. Crispin's Day Speech. This
occurs in spite of the distinctions military forces attempt to make between
officers and enlisted men. For example Major General Charles J. Dunlap, Jr.
says that United States Air Force culture includes an egalitarianism bred from
officers as warriors who work with small groups of enlisted airmen either as
the service crew or onboard crew of their aircraft. Studies. A study published
in 2009 took into account data sets from major world economies and correlated
them with inequality indices. The study found that the absolute wealth within a
country had little effect on the citizens' well-being or social cohesion, and
that income inequality correlated strongly with social problems such as
homicide, infant mortality, obesity, teenage pregnancies, emotional depression
and prison population. For example, countries such as Japan, Finland and Norway
scored highly in social well-being and income equality, while countries such as
the United States and United Kingdom scored low in both. However, these studies
failed to account for the impact of ethnic and cultural diversity and third-
world immigration in its impact on purported social well-being and income
distribution. A study of American college students published in "Nature" showed
that people are willing to pay to reduce inequality. When subjects were placed
into groups and given random amounts of income, they spent their own money to
reduce the incomes of the highest earners and increase the incomes of the
lowest earners. In a follow-up study, Swiss children showed a significant
increase in sharing between the ages of 3 and 8. It has not been determined
whether the results of either of these experiments are due to an innate
instinct, or exposure to and adoption of the customs of other people.
Reception. The Cultural Theory of Risk distinguishes between hierarchists, who
are positive towards both rules and groups, and egalitarianists, who are
positive towards groups but negative towards rules. This is by definition a
form of "anarchist equality" as referred to by Berkman. The fabric of an
"egalitarianist society" is thus held together by cooperation and implicit peer
pressure rather than by explicit rules and punishment. However, Thompson et al.
theorise that any society consisting of only one perspective, be it
egalitarianist, hierarchist, individualist, fatalist or autonomist, will be
inherently unstable: the claim is that an interplay between all these
perspectives are required if each perspective is to be fulfilling. For
instance, although an individualist according to Cultural Theory is aversive
towards both principles and groups, individualism is not fulfilling if
individual brilliance cannot be recognised by groups, or if individual
brilliance cannot be made permanent in the form of principles. Accordingly,
egalitarianists have no power except through their presence, unless they (by
definition, reluctantly) embrace principles which enable them to cooperate with
fatalists and hierarchists. They will also have no individual sense of
direction in the absence of a group. This could be mitigated by following
individuals outside their group: autonomists or individualists.
