Elasticity (economics) In more technical terms, it is the ratio of the
percentage change in one variable to the percentage change in another variable.
It is a tool for measuring the responsiveness of a function to changes in
parameters in a unitless way. Frequently used elasticities include price
elasticity of demand, price elasticity of supply, income elasticity of demand,
elasticity of substitution between factors of production and elasticity of
intertemporal substitution. Elasticity is one of the most important concepts in
neoclassical economic theory. It is useful in understanding the incidence of
indirect taxation, marginal concepts as they relate to the theory of the firm,
and distribution of wealth and different types of goods as they relate to the
theory of consumer choice. Elasticity is also crucially important in any
discussion of welfare distribution, in particular consumer surplus, producer
surplus, or government surplus. In empirical work an elasticity is the
estimated coefficient in a linear regression equation where both the dependent
variable and the independent variable are in natural logs. Elasticity is a
popular tool among empiricists because it is independent of units and thus
simplifies data analysis. Generally, an elastic variable is one which responds
a lot to small changes in other parameters. Similarly, an inelastic variable
describes one which does not change much in response to changes in other
parameters. A major study of the price elasticity of supply and the price
elasticity of demand for US products was undertaken by Hendrik S. Houthakker
and Lester D. Taylor. Mathematical definition. The approximation becomes exact
in the limit as the changes become infinitesimal in size. The absolute value
operator is for simplicity – generally, depending on context, the sign of the
elasticity is understood as being always positive or always negative. However,
sometimes the elasticity is defined without the absolute value operator, when
the sign may be either positive or negative or may change signs. A context
where this use of a signed elasticity is necessary for clarity is the cross-
price elasticity of demand — the responsiveness of the demand for one product
to changes in the price of another product; since the products may be either
substitutes or complements, this elasticity could be positive or negative.
Applications. The concept of elasticity has an extraordinarily wide range of
applications in economics. In particular, an understanding of elasticity is
fundamental in understanding the response of supply and demand in a market.
Variants. In some cases the discrete (non-infinitesimal) arc elasticity is used
instead. In other cases, such as modified duration in bond trading, a
percentage change in output is divided by a unit (not percentage) change in
input, yielding a semi-elasticity instead.
