Election (1999 film) Election is a 1999 American comedy film adapted from a
1998 novel of the same title by Tom Perrotta. The plot revolves around a three-
way election race in high school, and satirizes both suburban high school life
and politics. The film received an Academy Award nomination for Best Adapted
Screenplay, a Golden Globe nomination for Witherspoon in the Best Actress
category, and the Independent Spirit Award for Best Film in 1999. The film
stars Matthew Broderick, Reese Witherspoon, and Chris Klein and tells the story
of Jim McAllister (Broderick), a popular high school history and civics teacher
in suburban Omaha, Nebraska, and one of his students, Tracy Flick
(Witherspoon), around the time of the school's student body elections.
McAllister's involvement with various school-related functions masks his
frustration with other aspects of his life; Tracy is an overachiever whose
obsession with getting into a good college masks a vindictive and manipulative
personality. When Tracy obtains a nomination for class president in the school
election, McAllister believes she does not deserve the title, and tries his
best to stop her from winning. While it failed to become a major box office
success, home video and DVD releases were more lucrative. Following its
release, the movie has received various rankings; "Election" is ranked #61 on
Bravo's "100 Funniest Movies" and #9 on Entertainment Weekly's list of the 50
Best High School Movies, while Witherspoon's performance as Flick was ranked at
#45 on the list of the "100 Greatest Film Performances of All Time" by Premiere
Magazine. The film was rated R by the Motion Picture Association of America for
strong sexuality, sex-related dialogue and language, and a scene of drug use
and was rated '15' by the BBFC for "some moderate sex and references". Plot.
Jim McAllister (Matthew Broderick) is a high school teacher in the suburbs of
Omaha, Nebraska whose enthusiastic involvement at school masks his frustration
with other aspects of his life. Tracy Flick (Reese Witherspoon) is an
overachieving senior with a secret vindictive and sexual side. Earlier in the
year, Tracy had an affair with another teacher, McAllister's best friend Dave
(Mark Harelik). As a result, Dave was fired and divorced by his wife Linda
(Delaney Driscoll); Tracy walked away without reprisal or punishment. One day,
Tracy announces that she is running for student body president, which horrifies
McAllister, who is in charge of organizing the school's student government and
truly despises Tracy. Set to run unopposed, McAllister decides to teach Tracy a
lesson in humility by introducing another candidate. Paul Metzler (Chris Klein)
is a polite and popular football player at the school. Paul is unable to play
football his final year due to a broken leg, leaving him depressed. McAllister
convinces him to register for the election in order to stop Tracy's chances of
winning, since McAllister thinks that Tracy wins the election, she will have to
spend more time with him which might lead to the same misfortune that his best
friend had. At first, Paul does not like the idea because he does not feel
smart enough to run in the election, and he does not want to go against Tracy,
who has been nice to him, even letting him copy her homework. Eventually, Paul
agrees with McAllister because the election gives him a new purpose. This
brings out Tracy's vindictiveness, as she is jealous of Paul’s ease at being
successful and popular. Meanwhile, Paul's younger sister Tammy (Jessica
Campbell) is dumped by her girlfriend, Lisa (Frankie Ingrassia), who says that
she is heterosexual and was just "experimenting". Lisa does not waste time in
"getting over" Tammy, performing oral sex on Paul after asking him to drive her
home from school one day. The two become an item (Paul claiming that they would
"go to her house school to fuck" and swim in the hot tub) and election
partners, in part to anger Tammy. In retaliation, Tammy decides to run for
president as well, with a platform that student government is a sham. During a
school assembly to hear their speeches, after Tracy and Paul only draw polite
applause, Tammy delivers a defiant speech in which she denounces the election
by saying that the school president does not really help the student body, and
only uses the position to get credentials for college applications, much to
Tracy's chagrin. Tammy also declares that she will dissolve the student
government if elected. This rallies the student body to a standing ovation.
Fearing the student body will vote for Tammy and thus the dissolution of the
student government, Tammy is suspended. While at school one night over the
weekend, Tracy tries to fix one of her posters, but accidentally tears it. In a
fit of uncharacteristic rage, she destroys all of Paul's campaign posters. She
tries to dispose of them at the power plant, but is observed doing so by Tammy.
The next day, when confronted by McAllister, Tracy claims innocence and
threatens legal action against the school. Tracy then sees Tammy talking to
McAllister and showing him the torn posters, which makes Tracy panic. However,
Tammy is actually "confessing" to Tracy's crime and is then transferred to a
private parochial school for girls, which was the original objective of her
false confession, and kicked out of the election. Later, McAllister, who is
secretly attracted to Linda, kisses her spontaneously the day before the
election. Linda asks Jim to rent a motel room for a later rendezvous and he
leaves school during a class to prepare the room. However, when he arrives
later to pick her up, she is not there. He returns home to find Linda and his
wife (Molly Hagan) talking together. Knowing he has been caught, Jim spends the
night in his car outside Linda's house. The next morning, McAllister oversees
the counting of the election ballots at school. During this, he calls Linda
several times, professing his love for her, after a bee sting. Jim's wife kicks
him out of the house when he tries to apologize. After all the ballots are
counted, Tracy has won by one vote (Paul voted for Tracy, feeling she was more
qualified and that it is too arrogant to vote for oneself). After seeing Tracy
dancing around excitedly in the hall, McAllister deduces that she found out
that she won before it was announced. McAllister secretly disposes of two of
Tracy’s ballots and then demands a recount, naming Paul as the winner. While
McAllister and his student argue about the validity of vote, it is suggested
that the tally of protest votes for Tammy (disqualified on the ballot) exceeded
that of either other candidate. When a janitor discovers the two discarded
ballots and presents them to the principal, McAllister resigns from his job.
Divorced and humiliated, McAllister leaves Nebraska, ultimately choosing to
fulfill a longtime dream of moving to New York City, becoming a tour guide at
the American Museum of Natural History, where he meets a new woman. Tracy gets
accepted into Georgetown University (but she still does not fit in with other
students, much to her disappointment), while Paul gets into the University of
Nebraska. Tammy loves her new school, where she has met her new girlfriend. As
the film closes, Jim recounts his final encounter with Tracy. After seeing her
climb into a limousine with a politician, McAllister is reminded of his friend
Dave and what Tracy has done to get where she is. Jim hurls a soda cup at the
limousine, then makes a quick getaway. The final scene of the film shows Jim
asking questions to some children he is giving a tour to at the Museum, all the
while deliberately ignoring an overeager girl, the only one of the group who
could answer, as she reminds him of Tracy. Pre-production and direction. Much
of the film was shot in and around the Omaha area including Dundee, Elkhorn,
Bellevue, Carter Lake, and Papillion. Other scenes were filmed in New York
(including the college scene, which was actually filmed at Adelphi University
on Long Island) and Washington D.C. Production shut down for about a month when
a freak fall snowstorm hit Omaha in October 1997, knocking down trees and power
lines. Direction. The novel's rights were sold to director Alexander Payne in
January 1997. Payne had become a fan of the novel by Tom Perrotta on which the
film is based. The novel was inspired by two key events. The first was the 1992
Bush vs. Clinton election campaign, in which Ross Perot entered as a third
party candidate (a move echoed by Tammy Metzler). The second was an incident at
Memorial High School in Eau Claire, Wisconsin, in which a pregnant student was
elected homecoming queen, but staff announced a different winner and burned the
ballots to cover it up. Within the text of a newspaper article in the film, the
following can be read: "If you've paused the film in order to read this entire
article, your time would be better spent renting "Citizen Ruth" from your local
video store, which was another Payne film. Do you know how hard it is to write
these fake few stories for newspaper movie props? I've got better things to
do." For the school assembly scenes, Payne had to use special effects to make
the gym look full. As Payne said on the commentary, some students learned that
being an extra wasn't all it was cracked up to be, and that left the assembly
scene lacking in students. Payne filmed a select group of students sitting in
different spots for multiple takes, and then (using digital editing) filled in
the blanks to make it look like a packed gym. The film uses a number of
stylized techniques in its storytelling, particularly through the use of freeze
frames, flashbacks and voiceovers, which allow sections of the narrative to be
delivered from the points of view of the four main characters. According to
commentary by Alexander Payne, in the scene where Jim watches pornography in
the basement, the basement was left unaltered. The film was originally shot
with an ending close to the one found in the novel, with Jim McCallister
working in a car dealership, where Tracy visits him before leaving for college.
After testing poorly with audiences, the ending was eventually reshot. The
original ending was unseen until the accidental discovery of an early VHS
workprint of the film at a flea market in 2011. The original ending surfaced on
YouTube but Paramount Pictures has since had it removed claiming copyright
infringement. It can still be found on other various websites. Casting. Several
actors were cast in place of Broderick, Witherspoon, Klein, and Campbell and
turned it down because of the high-risk content and creative differences. Thora
Birch was cast as Tammy Metzler, but left due to creative differences with
Alexander Payne. Many of the remaining cast members were scouted on location,
including the janitor that appears at the beginning and end of the movie. He is
an actual janitor that works for the director's offices in Omaha, Nebraska. He
was formerly a janitor at Duchesne Academy. He has since retired. Also, the
casting director of the movie is the football player that appears in the adult
movie that McAllister watches. Many local Omaha students and teachers were used
in the film for the roles of students and teachers. One in particular was Chris
Klein, who would end up becoming a mainstay in Hollywood and star in other
movies. Payne found him when he was scouting schools for locations to shoot and
a teacher at one of the schools introduced him to Klein. Witherspoon had been
acting in moderately well-received films in the early 1990s. Nicholas D'Agosto,
who appeared towards the end of the film as committee chairman Larry Fouch, was
just a student at Creighton Preparatory School in Omaha, the same high school
Payne attended, when he did this movie. He would go on to college at Marquette
University in Milwaukee before moving out to Los Angeles to pursue an acting
career. Outside references. Sen. Kirsten Gillibrand earned the nickname "Tracy
Flick" within the New York Congressional delegation before her January 2009
appointment by NY Gov. David Paterson to fill Hillary Clinton's U.S. Senate
seat, according to "The New York Times" columnist Maureen Dowd.
