Election monitoring Election monitoring is the observation of an election by
one or more independent parties, typically from another country or a non-
governmental organization (NGO), primarily to assess the conduct of an election
process on the basis of national legislation and international standards. There
are national and international election observers. Monitors do not directly
prevent electoral fraud, but rather record and report such instances. Election
observation increasingly looks at the entire electoral process over a longer
period of time, rather than at election-day proceedings only. The legitimacy of
an election can be affected by the criticism of monitors, provided that they
are themselves seen as unbiased. A notable individual is often appointed
honorary leader of a monitoring organization in an effort to enhance its own
legitimacy. History. The first monitored election was that of a plebiscite in
Moldavia and Wallachia that was monitored by most of the major European powers.
Election monitoring was uncommon until after World War II. Election observation
activities have expanded significantly following the end of the Cold War, along
with the development of international standards on the conduct of democratic
elections and the process of monitoring elections by both international and
domestic observing organizations. In the 1990s, international election
observation focused on elections in countries with weak democracies or
democracies in transition. In recent years, however, there has been an
increasing number of observer mission monitoring elections in long-standing
democracies, including the United States, France, the United Kingdom and
Switzerland. Organizations. International organizations such as the
Organization of American States, the Organization for Security and Co-operation
in Europe, the European Union, the Commonwealth Secretariat, the Council of
Europe and the African Union regularly deploy monitoring teams. The United
Nations no longer provides monitoring services, instead it focuses on electoral
assistance. Individual governments also participate in monitoring efforts,
generally under the umbrella of an international organization. These national
efforts are normally managed by the local electoral commission. A wide array of
NGOs also participate in monitoring efforts. The Carter Center, for example,
played a key role — with the United Nations Electoral Assistance Division and
the National Democratic Institute — in building consensus on a common set of
international principles for election observation. International observation is
complemented in many countries by domestic observer groups. Types of Election
Observation. International Election Observation. Standard international
election observation missions, as deployed by, for the example, the European
Commission or the OSCE Office for Democratic Institutions and Human Rights
(ODIHR), monitor the entire electoral process. Election experts and long-term
observers begin their work weeks before the actual election day, looking at
candidate registration, the legal framework, the media situation, the work of
the election administration, and the campaign environment. On election day,
short-term observers monitor the opening of polling stations, the vote cast,
and the counting and tabulation of results. After election day, observer remain
in the country for another few weeks to monitor how possible election-related
shortcomings and complaints are dealt with by the election administration and
the judiciary. The findings of the observers are made public in reports issued
after election day. In some cases, the objectivity of some international
observers is questioned. Domestic Election Observation. In addition to
international organizations monitoring elections, citizen organizations—or
coalitions of organizations—also monitor elections in their own country. The
most common type of domestic election monitoring comes by way of party poll-
watchers, who are partisan individuals that are looking out for the interests
of their party. Election day activities of partisan observation groups often
included scrutinizing the accreditation, voting, counting and tabulations
processes at polling units throughout election day. There are, however, also
numerous domestic nonpartisan observer groups in many countries. Long Term
Observers (LTO). Most observation missions send a small number of long-term
monitors (known as LTOs) for a period of six to eight weeks. A larger number of
short-term observers (known as STOs) then join the mission for the final week
of the campaign. STOs provide mostly quantitative observation of polling
station and count procedures, with LTOs supplying qualitative analysis and
contextual information about the wider political situation. Local and regional
election monitoring. Though most international observer organisations have a
mandate to observe parliamentary elections, the Congress of the Council of
Europe, in cooperation with the Venice Commission, is specifically mandated to
monitor local and regional elections and is unique in this regard. Since 1990,
over 50 election processes have been observed by the Congress. External links.
"BBC." OSCE is the Organisation for Security and Co-operation in Europe.
