Election Day voter registration In some states of the United States, Election
Day voter registration (also known as EDR) permits eligible citizens to
register to vote when they arrive to vote on Election Day. Registration-Day
voting allows people to vote when they register to vote, on a day near but
prior to the date of the general election. Either of these can be referred to
as Same-Day Registration. Most U.S. states require voters to register before an
election, with various deadlines (such as 30 days or 15 days before an
election). Election Day voter registration allows eligible citizens to register
on election day, by showing valid identification to a poll worker, who checks
the identification, consults the registration list, and, if they are not
registered, registers them on the spot. Eight states have some form of Election
Day voter registration: Idaho, Iowa, Maine, Minnesota, Montana, New Hampshire,
Wisconsin, Wyoming, and Washington DC. Montana began Election Day voter
registration in 2006, and Iowa in 2008. Connecticut and Rhode Island also have
Election Day registration, but only for presidential elections. (North Dakota,
unique among the states, has no voter registration requirement at all.) Newly
popular early voting programs sometimes work in concert with Registration-Day
voting. While not allowing registration on Election Day itself (the last day to
vote), the states of Ohio and North Carolina offer a period where voters can
register and then vote early. Voter turnout is much higher in states using
Election Day registration than in states that do not. In the 2004 presidential
election, voter turnout in same-day voter registration states was 12 percent
higher than states that did not; in the 2006 midterm elections, states with
same-day voter registration had turnout rates 10-12 percent higher than in
other states. Maine. In June 2011, the Maine legislature passed a law that
ended Election Day voter registration, which had been in place since 1973. It
also banned absentee voting during the two business days before an election.
The first measure was the target of a citizen referendum ("people's veto")
which was held in November 2011. Maine voters reinstated Election Day
registration with 59% in favor.
