Electoral reform Continuous change. There are many such movements globally, in
almost all democratic countries, as part of the basic definition of a democracy
is the right to change the rules. Political science is imperfect; electoral
reforms seek to make politics work a bit better, a bit sooner. The solution to
the problems of democracy tends to be "more democracy." Electoral reform is a
permanent feature of any healthy democracy. The Electoral Reform Society is a
political pressure group based in the United Kingdom, believed to be the oldest
organisation concerned with electoral systems in the world. The Society
advocates scrapping First Past the Post (FPTP) for all National and local
elections arguing that the system is 'bad for voters, bad for government and
bad for democracy'. Nation-building. In less democratic countries, elections
are often demanded by dissidents; therefore the most basic electoral reform
project such countries is to achieve a transfer of power to a democratically
elected government with a minimum of bloodshed, e.g. in South Africa in 1994.
This case highlights the complexity of such reform: such projects tend to
require changes to national or other constitutions, and to alter balances of
power. Electoral reforms are often politically painful. Role of United Nations.
The United Nations Fair Elections Commission provides international observers
to national elections that are likely to face challenges by the international
community of nations, e.g., in 2001 in Yugoslavia, in 2002 in Zimbabwe. The
United Nations standards address safety of citizens, coercion, scrutiny, and
eligibility to vote. They do not impose ballot styles, party diversity, or
borders on electoral constituencies. Various global political movements, e.g.,
labour movements, the Green party, Islamism, Zionism, advocate various
cultural, social, ecological means of setting borders that they consider
"objective" or "blessed" in some other way. Contention over electoral
constituency borders within or between nations and definitions of "refugee",
"citizen", and "right of return" mark various global conflicts, including those
in Israel/Palestine, Kashmir, the Congo, and Rwanda. Electoral borders.
Redrawing of electoral constituency (or "riding" or "district") borders should
be conducted at regular intervals, or by statutory rules and definitions, if
for no other reason than to eliminate malapportionment attributable to
population movements. Some electoral reforms seek to fix these borders
according to some cultural or ecological criterion, e.g., bioregional democracy
– which sets borders to fit exactly to ecoregions – to avoid the obvious
abuse of "gerrymandering" in which constituency borders are set deliberately to
favor one party over another, or to improve management of the public's commonly
owned property. National reforms. National electoral reform projects tend to be
simpler and less focused on life-and-death matters. Australia and New Zealand
held Royal Commissions to find the best form of "proportional representation"
of parties in the legislature and redesigned ballots to select or elect these
Members of Parliament. Australia. The Proportional Representation Society of
Australia generally advocate single transferable vote and proportional
representation. Canada. Several national and provincial organizations promote
electoral reform, especially by advocating one form or another of proportional
representation. The largest grassroots organization advocating electoral reform
nationally is Fair Vote Canada. Several referendums to decide whether or not to
adopt such reform have been held during provincial elections in the last
decade; none has thus far resulted in a change from the plurality system
currently in force. Controversially, the threshold for adoption of a new voting
system has regularly been set at a "supermajority", for example, 60% of ballots
cast approving the proposed system in order for the change to be implemented.
New Zealand. Electoral reform in New Zealand began in 1986 with the report of
the Royal Commission on the Electoral System entitled "Towards A Better
Democracy". The Royal Commission recommended that Mixed Member Proportional
(MMP) be adopted instead of the current first-past-the-post system. After two
referendums in 1992 and 1993, New Zealand adopted MMP. In 2004, some local body
elections in New Zealand were elected using single transferable vote instead of
the block vote. United Kingdom. The United Kingdom has generally used first-
past-the-post (FPTP) for many years, but there have been several attempts at
reform. A 1910 Royal Commission on Electoral Systems recommended AV be adopted
for the Commons. A very limited introduction of single transferable vote (STV)
came in the Government of Ireland Act 1914. A Speaker's Conference on electoral
reform in January 1917 unanimously recommended a mix of AV and STV for
elections to the House of Commons. However, in a vote that August, the Commons
rejected STV by 32 votes in the committee stage of the Representation of the
People Bill and, by 1 vote, substituted alternative vote (AV). The House of
Lords then voted for STV, but the Commons insisted on AV. In a compromise, AV
was abandoned and the Boundary Commission were asked to prepare a limited plan
of STV to apply to 100 seats. This plan was then rejected by the Commons,
although STV was introduced for the university constituencies. On 8 April 1921,
a Private Member's Bill to introduce STV was rejected 211 votes to 112 by the
Commons. A Liberal attempt to introduce an Alternative Vote Bill in March 1923
was defeated by 208 votes to 178. On 2 May 1924, another Private Member's Bill
for STV was defeated 240 votes to 146 in the Commons. In January 1931, the
minority Labour government, then supported by the Liberals, introduced a
Representation of the People Bill that included switching to AV. The Bill
passed its second reading in the Commons by 295 votes to 230 on 24 February
1931 and the clause introducing AV was passed in the committee stageby 277 to
253. (The Speaker had refused to allow discussion of STV.) The Bill's second
reading in the Lords followed in June, with an amendment replacing AV with STV
in 100 constituencies being abandoned as outwith the scope of the Bill. An
amendment was passed (by 80 votes to 29) limiting AV to those constituencies in
boroughs with populations over 200,000. The Bill received its third reading in
the Lords on 21 July, but the Labour government fell in August and the Bill was
lost. Elections to the European Parliament in mainlaind Britain were originally
under FPTP, but were switched to list PR following pressure to standardise with
the rest of the EU. When Labour re-gained power in 1997, they introduced a
number of new assemblies, in London, Wales and Scotland, and opted for
additional member systems of PR in all of these. They also adopted the
supplementary vote system for directly-elected mayors. Within Scotland, a
Labour/Liberal Democrat coalition in the new Scottish Parliament later
introduced STV for local elections. However, such reforms were not without
their problems. When 7% of votes (over 140,000) were discounted or spoilt in
the 2007 Scottish Parliamentary and local council elections, Scottish First
Minister Alex Salmond protested that 'the decision to conduct an STV election
at the same time as a first-past-the-post ballot for the Scottish Parliament
was deeply mistaken' In the 2010 UK General Election campaign, the possibility
of a hung parliament and the earlier expenses scandal pushed electoral reform
up the agenda, something long supported by the Liberal Democrats. There were
protests in favour of electoral reform organised by Take Back Parliament. There
is a move to a largely elected Lords. The Conservative-Liberal Democrat
coalition government held a referendum on introducing AV for the Commons on 5
May 2011, which was defeated. There are a number of groups in the United
Kingdom campaigning for electoral reform including the Electoral Reform
Society, Make Votes Count Coalition and Fairshare. United States. In 2002 the
United States enacted the Help America Vote Act significantly reforming its
electoral process. Electoral reform is a continuing process in the United
States motivated by the fear of both electoral fraud and disfranchisement.
