Election commission An election commission is a body charged with overseeing
the implementation of election procedures. The exact name used varies from
country to country, including such terms as ""electoral commission"", ""central
election commission"", ""electoral branch"" or ""electoral court"". Election
commissions can be independent, mixed, judicial or governmental. They may also
be responsible for electoral boundary delimitation. In federations there may be
a separate body for each subnational government. Electoral models. In the
independent model the election commission is independent of the executive and
manages its own budget. Countries with an independent election commission
include Australia, Canada, India, Indonesia, Nigeria, Pakistan, Poland,
Romania, South Africa and Thailand. In some of these countries the independence
of the election commission is constitutionally guaranteed e.g. section 190 of
the Constitution of South Africa. In the branch model the election commission
is often called an electoral branch, and is usually a constitutionally-
recognized separate branch of government, with its members appointed by either
the executive or the legislative branch. Countries with an electoral branch
include Bolivia, Costa Rica, Panama, Nicaragua and Venezuela. In the mixed-
model there is an independent board to determine policy, but implementation is
usually a matter for an executive department with varying degrees of
supervision by the independent board. Countries with such a model include
Cameroon, France, Germany, Japan, Senegal and Spain. In the executive model the
election commission is directed by a cabinet minister as part of the executive
branch of government, and may include local government authorities acting as
agents of the central body. Countries with this model include Denmark,
Singapore, Sweden, Switzerland, Tunisia and the United States. In the judicial
model the election commission is closely supervised by and ultimately
responsible to a special ""electoral court"". Countries with such a model
include Argentina, Brazil and Mexico. Boards of elections in the United States.
A board of elections is a body of officials designated to administer elections
in some U.S. states and municipalities, such as New York City. The board is
typically not under the direct control of the executive branch and therefore is
buffered somewhat from political pressure.
