Electoral geography Electoral Geography is the analysis of the methods,
behavior, and results of elections in the context of geographic space and using
geographical techniques. Specifically, it is an examination of the dual
interaction whereby geographical traits of a territory affects political
decisions and geographical structure of the election system affects electoral
results. The purpose of this analysis is to identify and understand driving
factors and the electoral characteristics of territories in a broad and
integrative manner. Elections. Elections serve as the central political
expression and exercise of power within democratic states, and conducting
elections in democracies requires the translation of the political decisions of
the distributed voting public into resulting “seat” representation of the
various constituencies, except in the cases of Israel and the Netherlands which
each have only a single constituency. It is philosophically accepted that in a
democracy, each vote is equally valid amongst all other votes and thus each
eligible voter casts only one equally valued vote. However, disproportionality
and bias towards specific voting groups arise in the construction of artificial
constituency boundaries in that political parties and policies are unevenly and
inaccurately represented in the aggregate results amongst the electoral regions
when compared to the popular vote. Electoral constituencies. The territorial
unit with boundary distinctions in representative elections is commonly termed
the constituency, district, or precinct, and serves as both a region for the
tabulation and study of the electoral result. These boundaries are defined in
various methods, which are unique to each state, and can cause alterations or
skewing of aggregate vote results and by extension the true decision of the
electorate. Election mchanics. Electoral geographers require the knowledge of
the local and statewide laws and procedures for conducting elections, though it
has been claimed that it is not within their purview to attempt to correct any
observed flaws. The details of voting or the parameters of the election in
various states or in constituencies within the state are critical factors,
which affect the levels of participation and can characterize the outcome. The
mechanics of an election are fully described through identifying the pattern of
constituencies, franchise qualifications and changes, and the method of the
election. The patterning of constituencies is related to the spatial
orientation and drawing of boundaries as detailed previously. The franchise
qualifications define the eligible voter bloc, the electorate, and thus
determine the range of relevant, critical issues, which apply to those who vote
in an election, and alterations in enfranchisement can greatly alter the nature
of the electorate and the outcome of the election. The methods of election are
critical to analyzing the results, as it is impossible to adequately assess the
proportionality of representation or validity of an electoral outcome without
understanding how votes are cast and counted. For example, single-vote, winner
take all systems can greatly disenfranchise minority voters as their selection
is ultimately irrelevant in a two-party dominant system. However, in systems
which employ proportional voting or ranked voting techniques, the extreme
minorities receive greater opportunity for representation. Electoral distortion
and bias. Regardless of the means by which boundaries are drawn, including by
non-partisan or independent governmental associations, bias in electoral
regions can always be observed. The United Kingdom serves as an example as the
constituencies are established by a non-partisan commission and yet bias toward
Labour has been observed in general elections since 1979. Malapportionment.
Malapportionment is unequal and disproportionate representation electoral
systems with multiple constituencies. It is a violation of the democratic
principle of “one person, one vote” in that constituency boundaries enclose
populations of various size, which means that the votes of people in regions of
lower population have greater representation per vote than those in regions
with a higher population. The effect of malapportionment is observed when
equivalent percentages of the total vote results in different numbers of seats
for each party due to one party having greater control in smaller
constituencies and another in larger constituencies. Geographic context. The
spatial distribution and variation of the voting populace in conjunction with
the demographic characteristics and delineation of voting regions provide a
geographic context for the analysis of elections. Along with purely physical
characteristics, distribution of economic resources, lines of communication,
governmental and party platforms, and gender, ethnic, or class groups creates
an interwoven fabric of people and opinion, which is accounted for in electoral
analysis. A population settles for various social, economic, and cultural
reasons which create a defined contour of both population density and related
political opinion. However, this contour is not a static condition and changes
in electoral results must be considered with respect to the change in the type
of people and not just the change in their chosen politics. The distribution of
politics has been attributed to various factors, one of which is described as a
convergence of external stimuli. These stimuli can come in the form of state-
supplied information, local cultural norms, religious affiliations, economic
opportunity, and media presentation of issues. The degree of effect for each
particular stimulus is then a result of the susceptibility of a particular
geography. For example, policy dealing with the governmental treatment of an
urban population would have greater importance to those in a territory with an
urban densities and a far smaller importance in a sparser region. A state or
its political organizations has some power to affect these stimuli and are
therefore considered as a contributing factor in the changes of election
outcomes. Physical contour. Electoral geography considers the way in which the
physical characteristics of a territory directly affect the population and thus
the election decision of these people. The geographic location and associated
natural factors are directly related to the potential in a specific region for
political development and have an additional relationship with the electoral
processes and policy decisions of the region. The study of electoral results
has been shown to identify the regions of specific politics and the relative
cohesion amongst these similar regions. Regions which share large numbers of
physical or demographic characteristics, or both as these two factors are
related, will demonstrate significant similarities in voting participation and
patterns of outcome. Economics, communications, and infrastructure. The
economic development within a given region is also related to the development
of its politics and the issues which are important to the electorate. A state
with disproportionate economic development will necessarily come under pressure
from the poorer constituencies to take action to redistribute wealth and level
the economic prosperity, which will be observable in the electoral results. The
range and availability of communication and issue awareness can affect
perception of issues and skew rational decision making. If a populace is
generally unaware of the implications of policy decisions they are less able to
make informed decisions and are more readily manipulated by candidate or party
claims and marketing techniques, which can make analysis difficult as no
predictable rationale may exist for voting outcomes. Culture, demographics, and
political parties. Background information detailing the established political
parties, issues being contested in an election, and the mechanics of the
election process also help to contextualize and understanding contributing
factors in each individual election. Over time these factors may be changed as
parties are formed or disbanded and policy issues are brought to vote or become
obsolete, which can explain the shifting appearance of the electoral result
over a period of time. The governmental and party platforms serve as categories
into which voters are forced to classify themselves even though it is likely
that no one party platform accurately captures the entirety of the opinions
held by a voter. This makes consideration of the party platform or recent party
activities critical in understanding the changes or stability of electoral
results over space and time. Gender, ethnic, and class disparity can cause
voting that is related to shared background qualities and experience as opposed
to political opinions. This means that candidates from a particular area or
common ethnicity can receive votes from the citizens of that area irrespective
of their party affiliations or national because of their shared experience and
mutual acquaintance. This has been referred to as the “friends and neighbors
effect”. Determinism. There is a distinction amongst geographers between
considering the effect of geography to be fully deterministic and merely having
only a partial effect amongst other effects. Deterministic electoral geography
would result in predictable results regardless of candidate or proposed policy
as the sum of physical geographic traits would entirely control voting
decisions. This interpretation has been widely rejected by geographers.
Instead, it is more fully accepted that geography plays some role in
conjunction with other cultural and interpersonal effects. The “neighborhood
effect” is an observed altering of electoral results due to the tendency of
people who are spatially close to vote similarly because of daily interactions.
Arguments against determinism also rely on observed anomalies in voting
results. An example arises in comparing results of presidential elections in
the United States to the expectation of favoring Democrat or Republican
candidates in urban or rural locations respectively or the expectations for
preference on the county scale based on racial composition with minority groups
favoring the Democrat party. The results indicate that anomalies occur in
distinct voting areas where the Republican or Democrat candidate won counties
that had opposite characteristics of their traditionally carried counties.
These anomalies are attributed to the historical, economic, and cultural
geographies which serve to override the territory traits that were used to
predict the electoral results. In this way voters are motivated by factors
outside their geography to vote in a way that is unexpected and often even
contrary to their individual interests. Electoral mapping. The spatial
variations of support for particular policies are routinely mapped in order to
pictorially represent the electoral geography of a territory, which can allow
for the recognition of patterns of location. Ron Johnston considers the entire
process and outcome of the election through the examining lens of territory
maps. He claims that electoral results are the outcome of superimposing the map
of cultural, economic, religious, and demographic characteristics with the
determined map of electoral districts and applying the issues on the ballot.
The selection of mapping paradigms using color, patterning, brightness or
darkness effects is employed in order to visually detail aspects and
characteristics of interest in elections, such as voter participation,
intensity of support, population density, and constituency boundaries which may
not easily be noticed by considering words and numbers. An example of a mapping
paradigm is observed in United States elections in recent history, wherein
results in favor of Democrat candidates are marked by coloring the constituency
blue and using red for results in favor of Republican candidates. This has been
used to a wide degree and is thus readily acknowledged by United States
citizens in the media and academic display of election results. However, the
variations in electoral results over a territory or place cannot be directly
equated to the land areas represented by mapping as the voting populace is the
subject of interest and study in electoral geography and not the particular
territory they live on during a given election. Human movement is an ongoing
progress, which consistently redefines the distributions of policy preference
and thus the associated election decisions. Thus the passage of time must be
incorporated in electoral analysis through the duality of Electoral geography
also deals with the alterations of election results in a given place over an
extended time interval encompassing many elections. This effect can be mapped
using various techniques which help to show changing opinions and changing
populations in the constituencies of the state over a time interval. Electoral
geography relies upon detailed and accurate mapping techniques with appropriate
contextualization and background knowledge in order to successfully visualize
and analyze the results of an election. World electoral geographies. Canada.
Canadian electoral geography is typified by a high degree of political
regionalism, with most disputes interpreted as conflicts between provinces or
regions. Notably, class consciousness is quite low in Canada as compared to the
former mother country, Britain. Because of the disparity in the population size
of the various provinces, their importance in electoral geography varies
substantially. As well some provinces are small enough and similar enough to
their neighbours that they vote similarly, while others are large enough to
have considerable internal divisions. The smaller Atlantic Provinces might be
considered as unit, but Ontario might be subdivided between the urban,
suburban, rural, and remote regions, or between north, south, east, and west,
or into more specific regions like the Golden Horseshoe or the Greater Toronto
Area. In federal politics, a winning coalition must various sub-regions,
identified not only by place but by ideology. A winning coalition might include
Western social conservatives, suburban Ontario moderates, and Quebec soft
nationalists (Brian Mulroney, 1984, 1988), or Ontario moderates, Quebec
federalists, and most of Atlantic Canada (Jean Chretien, 1993, 1997, 2000), or
most of the West and Atlantic Canada, plus rural and suburban Ontario (Stephen
Harper, 2011). When the main parties are not seen to serve the interest of a
particular region, protest parties or movements often emerge. This has included
several Quebec nationalist parties, parties arising from the phenomenon called
Western alienation, and the Maritime Rights Movement. Partly for this reason,
Canada has typically had a multi-party system for much of its history rather
than the two-party system that is typical of first past the post elections.
This has in turn led to several minority governments in Canada. Regionalism in
Canada is such that is also notable "within" provinces on the stage of
provincial elections. There is considerable distinction between the politics of
Montreal and those of the Saguenay or the Gaspe, and likewise between the Lower
Mainland and the BC Interior. United Kingdom. In the present United Kingdom,
electoral geography is studied extensively and has been compared to the method
in the United States of elections and regionalization, by employing UK methods
of class cleavage, where the Conservative Party tends to be favoured by the
white-collar class and the Labour Party by the UK’s working class. Comparing
the methods of sectionalism in the UK and the US places emphasis on location;
instead of basing support for a party by class, the US does so by location. In
the UK, some areas are more heavily populated than others, giving differences
in population relating to the geography of each individual voting district. In
the UK, to extinguish regional identity, England was divided into nine regions.
It was thought that people who congregate seem to vote alike, rather than
voting on one’s own opinions. This is what is known as the "neighborhood
effect". Even with nine distinct regions, the voting patterns are seemingly
disproportionally divided between the two dominant parties. This forces
researchers to question what causes regional differences in voting outcomes.
The voting method in the UK differs from that of the United States. To produce
an outcome, "all voting takes place in the context of a particular electoral
system. There has to be some agreed way of aggregating votes to produce a
result. Votes indicate individuals’ preferences and in the public elections
these have to be translated into seats by some formula". This formulaic
approach ends in an outcome giving a translated number of seats for each party
in Parliament. Voter awareness in terms of the reasoning, motivation, and
methods of an election are critical for shoring up public support for the
legitimacy of elections and elected officials. Russia. The electoral geography
of Russia is marked by the obvious territorial cleavages between North and
South, urban and rural territories, etc. One phenomenon of territorial
cleavages in electoral preferences in Russia is known as the "red belt"
(compact located regions with high support for the Communist Party). In the
first democratic elections in the history of contemporary Russia it was noticed
that liberal and democratic politicians had much higher support in the northern
regions, whereas the south of Russia appeared more conservative. Both capitals
in Russia - Moscow and the "northern capital" Saint Petersburg - significantly
differ in electoral results from the rest of the country. Only in these cities
is there strong electoral support of liberal and democratic politicians.
Support for United Russia is less than in other regions. United States. The
electoral geography of the United States is a description of regional political
differences, which in recent years has been popularized by the red and blue
paradigm to pictorially represent Republican and Democrat Election results. The
presence of a two-dominant party system creates a great potential for
disenfranchisement of minority voters and their opinions. Qualities of
“northeasterliness”, “westerliness”, and “southerliness”, which
constitute the expectations for Democrat, Republican, and volatile Republican
voting results, have been used in order to understand and define the political
landscape. However, culturally driven anomalies in this general expectation
have been observed. Debate has been common in recent elections in regards to
the election of the President of the United States via the electoral college.
The debate stems from the fact that the electoral college is a malapportioned
body., and thus provides for a scenario whereby a candidate may win the
election via the electoral college without carry a plurality of the popular
vote.
