Electricity market In economic terms, electricity (both power and energy) is a
commodity capable of being bought, sold and traded. An electricity market is a
system for effecting purchases, through bids to buy; sales, through offers to
sell; and short-term trades, generally in the form of financial or obligation
swaps. Bids and offers use supply and demand principles to set the price. Long-
term trades are contracts similar to power purchase agreements and generally
considered private bi-lateral transactions between counterparties. Wholesale
transactions (bids and offers) in electricity are typically cleared and settled
by the market operator or a special-purpose independent entity charged
exclusively with that function. Market operators do not clear trades but often
require knowledge of the trade in order to maintain generation and load
balance. The commodities within an electric market generally consist of two
types: power and energy. Power is the metered net electrical transfer rate at
any given moment and is measured in megawatts (MW). Energy is electricity that
flows through a metered point for a given period and is measured in megawatt
hours (MWh). Markets for energy related commodities are net generation output
for a number of intervals usually in increments of 5, 15 and 60 minutes.
Markets for power related commodities required by, managed by (and paid for by)
market operators to ensure reliability, are considered ancillary services and
include such names as spinning reserve, non-spinning reserve, operating
reserves, responsive reserve, regulation up, regulation down, and installed
capacity. In addition, for most major operators, there are markets for
transmission congestion and electricity derivatives, such as electricity
futures and options, which are actively traded. These markets developed as a
result of the restructuring of electric power systems around the world. This
process has often gone on in parallel with the restructuring of natural gas
markets. History. The earliest introduction of energy market concepts and
privatization to electric power systems took place in Chile in the early 1980s,
in parallel with other market-oriented reforms associated with the Chicago
Boys. The Chilean model was generally perceived as successful in bringing
rationality and transparency to power pricing, but it contemplated the
continuing dominance of several large incumbents and suffered from the
attendant structural problems. Argentina improved on the Chilean model by
imposing strict limits on market concentration and by improving the structure
of payments to units held in reserve to assure system reliability. One of the
principal purposes of the introduction of market concepts in Argentina was to
privatize existing generation assets (which had fallen into disrepair under the
government-owned monopoly, resulting in frequent service interruptions) and to
attract capital needed for rehabilitation of those assets and for system
expansion. The World Bank was active in introducing a variety of hybrid markets
in other Latin American nations, including Peru, Brazil, and Colombia, during
the 1990s, with limited success. A key event for electricity markets occurred
in 1990 when the UK government under Margaret Thatcher privatised the UK
electricity supply industry. The process followed by the British was then used
as a model or at least a catalyst for the deregulation of several other
Commonwealth countries, notably Australia and New Zealand, and regional markets
such as Alberta. However, in many of these other instances the market
deregulation occurred without the widespread privatisation that characterised
the UK example. In the USA the traditional model of the vertically integrated
electric utility with a transmission system designed to serve its own customers
worked extremely well for decades. As dependence on a reliable supply of
electricity grew and electricity was transported over increasingly greater
distances, power pools were formed and interconnections developed. Transactions
were relatively few and generally planned well in advance. However, in the last
decade of the 20th century, some US policy makers and academics projected that
the electrical power industry would ultimately experience deregulation and
Independent System Operators (ISOs) and Regional Transmission Organizations
(RTOs) were established. They were conceived as the way to handle the vastly
increased number of transactions that take place in a competitive environment.
About a dozen states decided to deregulate but some pulled back following the
California electricity crisis of 2000 and 2001. In different deregulation
processes the institutions and market designs were often very different but
many of the underlying concepts were the same. These are: separate the
potentially competitive functions of generation and retail from the natural
monopoly functions of transmission and distribution; and establish a wholesale
electricity market and a retail electricity market. The role of the wholesale
market is to allow trading between generators, retailers and other financial
intermediaries both for short-term delivery of electricity (see spot price) and
for future delivery periods (see forward price). Nature of the market.
Electricity is by its nature difficult to store and has to be available on
demand. Consequently, unlike other products, it is not possible, under normal
operating conditions, to keep it in stock, ration it or have customers queue
for it. Furthermore, demand and supply vary continuously. There is therefore a
physical requirement for a controlling agency, the transmission system
operator, to coordinate the dispatch of generating units to meet the expected
demand of the system across the transmission grid. If there is a mismatch
between supply and demand the generators speed up or slow down causing the
system frequency (either 50 or 60 hertz) to increase or decrease. If the
frequency falls outside a predetermined range the system operator will act to
add or remove either generation or load. In addition, the laws of physics
determine how electricity flows through an electricity network. Hence the
extent of electricity lost in transmission and the level of congestion on any
particular branch of the network will influence the economic dispatch of the
generation units. The scope of each electricity market consists of the
transmission grid or network that is available to the wholesalers, retailers
and the ultimate consumers in any geographic area. Markets may extend beyond
national boundaries. Wholesale electricity market. A wholesale electricity
market exists when competing generators offer their electricity output to
retailers. The retailers then re-price the electricity and take it to market.
While wholesale pricing used to be the exclusive domain of large retail
suppliers, increasingly markets like New England are beginning to open up to
end-users. Large end-users seeking to cut out unnecessary overhead in their
energy costs are beginning to recognize the advantages inherent in such a
purchasing move. Consumers buying electricity directly from generators is a
relatively recent phenomenon. Buying wholesale electricity is not without its
drawbacks (market uncertainty, membership costs, set up fees, collateral
investment, and organization costs, as electricity would need to be bought on a
daily basis), however, the larger the end user's electrical load, the greater
the benefit and incentive to make the switch. For an economically efficient
electricity wholesale market to flourish it is essential that a number of
criteria are met. Professor William Hogan of Harvard University has identified
these criteria. Central to his criteria is a coordinated spot market that has
"bid-based, security-constrained, economic dispatch with nodal prices". Other
academics such as Professors Shmuel Oren and Pablo Spiller of the University of
California, Berkeley have proposed other criteria. Variants of Professor
Hogan's model have largely been adopted in the US, Australia and New Zealand.
Bid-based, security-constrained, economic dispatch with nodal prices. The
system price in the day-ahead market is, in principle, determined by matching
offers from generators to bids from consumers at each node to develop a classic
supply and demand equilibrium price, usually on an hourly interval, and is
calculated separately for subregions in which the system operator's load flow
model indicates that constraints will bind transmission imports. The
theoretical prices of electricity at each node on the network is a calculated
"shadow price", in which it is assumed that one additional kilowatt-hour is
demanded at the node in question, and the hypothetical incremental cost to the
system that would result from the optimized redispatch of available units
establishes the hypothetical production cost of the hypothetical kilowatt-hour.
This is known as "locational marginal pricing" (LMP) or "nodal pricing" and is
used in some deregulated markets, most notably in the PJM Interconnection,
ERCOT, New York, and New England markets in the USA and in New Zealand. In
practice, the LMP algorithm described above is run, incorporating a security-
constrained, least-cost dispatch calculation (see below) with supply based on
the generators that submitted offers in the day-ahead market, and demand based
on bids from load-serving entities draining supplies at the nodes in question.
While in theory the LMP concepts are useful and not evidently subject to
manipulation, in practice system operators have substantial discretion over LMP
results through the ability to classify units as running in "out-of-merit
dispatch", which are thereby excluded from the LMP calculation. In most
systems, units that are dispatched to provide reactive power to support
transmission grids are declared to be "out-of-merit" (even though these are
typically the same units that are located in constrained areas and would
otherwise result in scarcity signals). System operators also normally bring
units online to hold as "spinning-reserve" to protect against sudden outages or
unexpectedly rapid ramps in demand, and declare them "out-of-merit". The result
is often a substantial reduction in clearing price at a time when increasing
demand would otherwise result in escalating prices. Researchers have noted that
a variety of factors, including energy price caps set well below the putative
scarcity value of energy, the impact of "out-of-merit" dispatch, the use of
techniques such as voltage reductions during scarcity periods with no
corresponding scarcity price signal, etc., results in a "missing money"
problem. The consequence is that prices paid to suppliers in the "market" are
substantially below the levels required to stimulate new entry. The markets
have therefore been useful in bringing efficiencies to short-term system
operations and dispatch, but have been a failure in what was advertised as a
principal benefit: stimulating suitable new investment where it is needed, when
it is needed. In LMP markets, where constraints exist on a transmission
network, there is a need for more expensive generation to be dispatched on the
downstream side of the constraint. Prices on either side of the constraint
separate giving rise to congestion pricing and constraint rentals. A constraint
can be caused when a particular branch of a network reaches its thermal limit
or when a potential overload will occur due to a contingent event (e.g.,
failure of a generator or transformer or a line outage) on another part of the
network. The latter is referred to as a "security constraint". Transmission
systems are operated to allow for continuity of supply even if a contingent
event, like the loss of a line, were to occur. This is known as a "security
constrained system". In most systems the algorithm used is a "DC" model rather
than an "AC" model, so constraints and redispatch resulting from thermal limits
are identified/predicted, but constraints and redispatch resulting from
reactive power deficiencies are not. Some systems take marginal losses into
account. The prices in the real-time market are determined by the LMP algorithm
described above, balancing supply from available units. This process is carried
out for each 5-minute, half-hour or hour (depending on the market) interval at
each node on the transmission grid. The hypothetical redispatch calculation
that determines the LMP must respect security constraints and the redispatch
calculation must leave sufficient margin to maintain system stability in the
event of an unplanned outage anywhere on the system. This results in a spot
market with "bid-based, security-constrained, economic dispatch with nodal
prices". Since the introduction of the market, New Zealand has experienced
shortages in 2001 and 2003, high prices all through 2005 and even higher prices
and the risk of a severe shortage in 2006 (as of April 2006). These problems
arose because New Zealand is at risk from drought due to its high proportion of
electricity generated from hydro. Many established markets do not employ nodal
pricing, examples being the UK, EPEX SPOT, and Nord Pool Spot (Nordic and
Baltic countries). Risk management. Financial risk management is often a high
priority for participants in deregulated electricity markets due to the
substantial price and volume risks that the markets can exhibit. A consequence
of the complexity of a wholesale electricity market can be extremely high price
volatility at times of peak demand and supply shortages. The particular
characteristics of this price risk are highly dependent on the physical
fundamentals of the market such as the mix of types of generation plant and
relationship between demand and weather patterns. Price risk can be manifest by
price "spikes" which are hard to predict and price "steps" when the underlying
fuel or plant position changes for long periods. "Volume risk" is often used to
denote the phenomenon whereby electricity market participants have uncertain
volumes or quantities of consumption or production. For example, a retailer is
unable to accurately predict consumer demand for any particular hour more than
a few days into the future and a producer is unable to predict the precise time
that they will have plant outage or shortages of fuel. A compounding factor is
also the common correlation between extreme price and volume events. For
example, price spikes frequently occur when some producers have plant outages
or when some consumers are in a period of peak consumption. The introduction of
substantial amounts of intermittent power sources such as wind energy may have
an impact on market prices. Electricity retailers, who in aggregate buy from
the wholesale market, and generators who in aggregate sell to the wholesale
market, are exposed to these price and volume effects and to protect themselves
from volatility, they will enter into "hedge contracts" with each other. The
structure of these contracts varies by regional market due to different
conventions and market structures. However, the two simplest and most common
forms are simple fixed price forward contracts for physical delivery and
contracts for differences where the parties agree a strike price for defined
time periods. In the case of a contract for difference, if a resulting
wholesale price index (as referenced in the contract) in any time period is
higher than the "strike" price, the generator will refund the difference
between the "strike" price and the actual price for that period. Similarly a
retailer will refund the difference to the generator when the actual price is
less than the "strike price". The actual price index is sometimes referred to
as the "spot" or "pool" price, depending on the market. Many other hedging
arrangements, such as swing contracts, Virtual Bidding, Financial Transmission
Rights, call options and put options are traded in sophisticated electricity
markets. In general they are designed to transfer financial risks between
participants. Retail electricity market. A retail electricity market exists
when end-use customers can choose their supplier from competing electricity
retailers; one term used in the United States for this type of consumer choice
is 'energy choice'. A separate issue for electricity markets is whether or not
consumers face real-time pricing (prices based on the variable wholesale price)
or a price that is set in some other way, such as average annual costs. In many
markets, consumers do not pay based on the real-time price, and hence have no
incentive to reduce demand at times of high (wholesale) prices or to shift
their demand to other periods. Demand response may use pricing mechanisms or
technical solutions to reduce peak demand. Generally, electricity retail reform
follows from electricity wholesale reform. However, it is possible to have a
single electricity generation company and still have retail competition. If a
wholesale price can be established at a node on the transmission grid and the
electricity quantities at that node can be reconciled, competition for retail
customers within the distribution system beyond the node is possible. In the
German market, for example, large, vertically integrated utilities compete with
one another for customers on a more or less open grid. The two main areas of
weakness have been risk management and billing. In the USA in 2001,
California's flawed regulation of retail competition led to the California
electricity crisis and left incumbent retailers subject to high spot prices but
without the ability to hedge against these (see Manifesto on The Californian
Electricity Crisis). In the UK a retailer, Independent Energy, with a large
customer base went bust when it could not collect the money due from customers.
Competitive retail needs open access to distribution and transmission wires.
This in turn requires that prices must be set for both these services. They
must also provide appropriate returns to the owners of the wires and encourage
efficient location of power plants. Independent companies should provide
distribution and transmission services. This solves the cherry-picking problem
which is a major concern of distribution utilities selling retail services and
the ability to institute cross-subsidies, also a major concern of pure retail
companies schemes use two transportation prices. There are two types of fees,
the access fee and the regular fee. The access fee covers the cost of having
and accessing the network of wires available, or the right to use the existing
transmission and distribution network. The regular fee reflects the marginal
cost of transferring electricity through the existing network of wires. New
technology is available and has been piloted by the US Department of Energy
that may be better suited to real-time market pricing. A potential use of
event-driven SOA could be a virtual electricity market where home clothes
dryers can bid on the price of the electricity they use in a real-time market
pricing system. The real-time market price and control system could turn home
electricity customers into active participants in managing the power grid and
their monthly utility bills. Customers can set limits on how much they would
pay for electricity to run a clothes dryer, for example, and electricity
providers willing to transmit power at that price would be alerted over the
grid and could sell the electricity to the dryer. On one side, consumer devices
can bid for power based on how much the owner of the device were willing to
pay, set ahead of time by the consumer. On the other side, suppliers can enter
bids automatically from their electricity generators, based on how much it
would cost to start up and run the generators. Further, the electricity
suppliers could perform real-time market analysis to determine return-on-
investment for optimizing profitability or reducing end-user cost of goods.
Event-driven SOA software could allow homeowners to customize many different
types of electricity devices found within their home to a desired level of
comfort or economy. The event-driven software could also automatically respond
to changing electricity prices, in as little as five-minute intervals. For
example, to reduce the home owner's electricity usage in peak periods (when
electricity is most expensive), the software could automatically lower the
target temperature of the thermostat on the central heating system (in winter)
or raise the target temperature of the thermostat on the central cooling system
(in summer). Electricity market experience. In the main, experience in the
introduction of wholesale and retail competition has been mixed. Many regional
markets have achieved some success and the ongoing trend continues to be
towards deregulation and introduction of competition. However in 2000/2001
major failures such as the California electricity crisis and the Enron debacle
caused a slow down in the pace of change and in some regions an increase in
market regulation and reduction in competition. However, this trend is widely
regarded as a temporary one against the longer term trend towards more open and
competitive markets. Notwithstanding the favorable light in which market
solutions are viewed conceptually, the "missing money" problem has to date
proved intractable. If electricity prices were to move to the levels needed to
incent new merchant (i.e., market-based) transmission and generation, the costs
to consumers would be politically difficult. The increase in annual costs to
consumers in New England alone were calculated at $3 billion during the recent
FERC hearings on the NEPOOL market structure. Several mechanisms that are
intended to incent new investment where it is most needed by offering enhanced
capacity payments (but only in zones where generation is projected to be short)
have been proposed for NEPOOL, PJM and NYPOOL, and go under the generic heading
of "locational capacity" or LICAP (the PJM version currently 2006 under FERC
review is called the "Reliability Pricing Model", or "RPM"). There is
substantial doubt as to whether any of these mechanisms will in fact incent new
investment, given the regulatory risk and chronic instability of the market
rules in US systems, and there are substantial concerns that the result will
instead be to increase revenues to incumbent generators, and costs to
consumers, in the constrained areas. Further reading. Reserve Capacity
Mechanism Review Report
