Electoral college An electoral college is a set of electors who are selected to
elect a candidate to a particular office. Often these represent different
organizations or entities, with each organization or entity represented by a
particular number of electors or with votes weighted in a particular way. Many
times, though, the electors are simply important people whose wisdom would
ideally provide a better choice than a larger body. The system can ignore the
wishes of a general membership. Origins of electoral colleges. Early Germanic
law stated that the German king led only with the support of his nobles. Thus,
Pelayo needed to be elected by his Visigothic nobles before becoming king of
Asturias, and so did Pepin the Short by Frankish nobles in order to become the
first Carolingian king. While most other Germanic nations had developed a
strictly hereditary system by the end of the first millennium, the Holy Roman
Empire did not, and the King of the Romans, who would become Holy Roman Emperor
or at least Emperor-elect, was selected by the college of prince-electors from
the late Middle Ages until 1806 (the last election actually took place in
1792). Church, both the clergy and laity, elected the bishop or presiding
presbyter. However, for various reasons, such as, perhaps, a desire to reduce
the influence of the state or the laity in ecclesiastical matters, electoral
power became restricted to the clergy and, in the case of the Church in the
West, exclusively to a college of the canons of the cathedral church. In the
Pope's case, the system of people and clergy was eventually replaced by a
college of the important clergy of Rome, which eventually became known as the
College of Cardinals. Since 1059, it has had exclusive authority over papal
selection. In the 19th century and beyond, it was usual in many countries that
voters did not directly vote the members of parliament. In Prussia for example,
in 1849–1918 the voters were "Urwähler" (original voters), appointing with
their vote a "Wahlmann" (elector). The group of electors in a district elected
the deputy for the Prussian House of Representatives. Such indirect suffrage
was a means to steer the voting, to make sure that the electors were "able"
persons. For electors, the requirements were usually higher than for the
original voters. The left wing opposition was very much opposed against the
indirect suffrage, although Even today in the Netherlands, the deputies of the
First Chamber are elected by the provincial parliaments. Those provincial
parliaments form the electoral colleges for the First Chamber elections; the
lists of candidates are national. Modern electoral colleges. Countries with
complex regional electorates may elect a head of state by means of an electoral
college rather than a direct popular election. The United States is the only
current example of an indirectly elected executive president, with an electoral
college comprising electors representing the 50 states and the federal
district. Each state has a number of electors equal to its Congressional
representation (in both houses), with the non-state District of Columbia
receiving three electors and other non-state territories having no electors.
The electors generally cast their votes for the winner of the popular vote in
their respective states. However, there are several states where this is not
required by law. In the United States, 270 electoral votes are required to win
the presidential election. Similar systems are used or have been used in other
presidential elections around the world. The President of Finland was elected
by an electoral college between 1919 and 1987. In Germany the members of the
federal parliament together with an equal number of people elected from the
state parliaments constitute the Federal Convention, that exists for the only
purpose of electing the (non-executive) head of state. Similarly, in India the
members of the lower house of Parliament together with weighted votes from the
state parliaments elect the head of state. In Italy the presidential electoral
college is composed of the members of both houses of Parliament and three
members elected by each of the regional assemblies. During Brazil's military
rule period, the president was elected by an electoral college comprising
senators, deputies, state deputies, and lawmakers in the cities. Argentina had
an electoral college established by its original 1853 constitution, which was
used to elect its president during that country's periods of democracy. The
constitution was reformed in 1994 and the electoral college was replaced with a
direct election by popular vote with runoff round. Other countries with
electoral college systems include Burundi, Estonia, India, France (for the
French Senate), the Republic of Ireland (for Seanad Éireann), Kazakhstan,
Madagascar, Pakistan, Trinidad and Tobago and Vanuatu. Within China, both Macau
and Hong Kong each have an Election Committee which functions as an electoral
college for selecting the Chief Executive and formerly (in the case of Hong
Kong) for selecting some of the seats of the Legislative Council. Another type
of Electoral College is used by the British Labour Party to choose its leader.
The college consists of three equally weighted sections: the votes of Labour
MPs and MEPs; the votes of affiliated trade unions and socialist societies; and
the votes of individual members of Constituency Labour Parties. Ecclesiastical
electoral colleges abound in modern times, especially among Protestant and
Eastern Rite Catholic Churches. In the Eastern rite churches, all the bishops
of an autocephalous church elect successor bishops, thus serving as an
electoral college for all the episcopal sees.
