Electronic civil disobedience Electronic civil disobedience, also known as ECD
or cyber civil disobedience, can refer to any type of civil disobedience in
which the participants use information technology to carry out their actions.
Electronic civil disobedience often involves computers and the Internet and may
also be known as hacktivism. The term "electronic civil disobedience" was
coined by a book with that name, the Critical Art Ensemble’s (1996)
"Electronic Civil Disobedience and Other Unpopular Ideas". Electronic civil
disobedience seeks to continue the practices of non violent, yet disruptive
protest originally pioneered by Henry David Thoreau who in 1848 published
"Civil Disobedience." A common forms of ECD are coordinated DDoS against a
specific target, also known as a virtual sit-in. Such virtual sit-ins may be
announced on the internet by groups such as The Electronic Disturbance Theatre
and the borderlands Hacklab. "As hackers become politicized and as activists
become computerized, we are going to see an increase in the number of cyber-
activists who engage in what will become more widely known as Electronic Civil
Disobedience. The same principals of traditional civil disobedience, like
trespass and blockage, will still be applied, but more and more these acts will
take place in electronic or digital form. The primary site for Electronic Civil
Disobedience will be in cyberspace. History. The origins of computerized
activism extend back in pre-Web history to the mid 1980s. Examples include
PeaceNet (1986), a newsgroup service, which allowed political activists to
communicate across international borders with relative ease and speed using
Bulletin Board Systems and email lists. The terms "electronic civil
disobedience" was first coined by the Critical Art Ensemble in the context of
nomadic conceptions of capital and resistance, a concept that can be traced
back to Hakim Bey’s (1991) "T. A. Z. The Temporary Autonomous Zone:
Ontological Anarchy, Poetic Terrorism" and Gilles Deleuze’s and Felix
Guattari’s (1987) "A Thousand Plateaus". ECF uses temporary - and nomadic -
"autonomous zones" as the launch pads from where electronic civil disobedience
is activated (for example, temporary websites that announce the ECD action).
Before 1998, ECD remained largely theoretical musings, or was badly
articulated, such as the Zippies 1994 call for an "Internet Invasion" which
deployed the metaphor of war albeit within the logic of civil disobedience and
information activism. Some commentators pinpointing the 1997 Acteal Massacre in
Chiapas, Mexico, as a turning point towards the internet infrastructure being
viewed not only as means for communication but also a site for direct action.
In reaction to the Acteal Massacre a group called Electronic Disturbance
Theatre (not associated with Autonomedia) created a software called FloodNet,
which improved upon early experiments with virtual sit-ins. The Electronic
Disruption Theatre exhibited its SWARM project21 at the Ars Electronic Festival
on Information Warfare, where it launched a three-pronged FloodNet disturbance
against web sites of the Mexican presidency, the Frankfurt Stock Exchange, and
the Pentagon, in solidarity with the Zapatista Army of National Liberation,
against the Mexican government, against the U.S. military, and against a symbol
of international capital. The Acteal Massacre also prompted another group,
called the Anonymous Digital Coalition, to post messages calling for cyber
attacks against five Mexico City based financial institution’s web sites, the
plan being for thousands of people around the world to simultaneously load
these web sites on to their Internet browsers. Electrohippies flooded the World
Trade Organization site during the World Trade Organization Ministerial
Conference of 1999 protest activity. Electronic civil disobedience and
hacktivism. The term electronic civil disobedience and hacktivism may be used
synonymously, although some commentators maintain that the difference is that
ECD actors don’t hide their names, while most hacktivists wish to remain
anonymous. Some commentators maintain that ECD uses only legal means, as
opposed to illegal actions used by hacktivists. It is also maintained that
hacktivism is done by individuals rather than by specific groups. In reality
the distinction between ECD and hacktivism is not clear. Ricardo Dominguez of
the Electronic Disturbance Theater has been incorrectly referred to by many as
a founder of ECD and hacktivism. He is currently an Assistant Professor of
Visual Arts at the University of California of San Diego and teaches classes on
Electronic Civil Disobedience and Performance Art. His recent project the
Transborder Immigrant Tool is a hacktivist gesture which has received wide
media attention and criticism from anti-immigration groups. Electronic civil
disobedience actions. ECD is often open-source, non-structured, moves
horizontally and non-linearly. For example, virtual sit-ins may be announced on
the internet and participants may have no formal connection with each other,
not knowing each other's identity. ECD actors can participate from home, from
work, from the university, or from other points of access to the Net.
Electronic civil disobedience generally involves large numbers of people and
may use legal and illegal techniques. For example, a single person reloading a
website repeatedly is not illegal, but if enough people do it at the same time
it can render the website inaccessible. Another type of electronic civil
disobedience is the use of the Internet for publicized and deliberate
violations of a law that the protesters take issue with, such as copyright law.
Blatant disregard of copyright law by millions of Internet users every day on
file sharing networks might also be considered a form of constant ECD, as the
people doing it have decided to simply ignore a law that they disagree with.
Intervasion of the UK. In order to draw attention to John Major's Criminal
Justice Bill, a group of cyber-activists staged an event in which they
"kidnapped" 80s counter-cultural hero Tim Leary at a book launch for Chaos &
Cyberculture held on Guy Fawkes Day 1994, and then proceeded to "force him to
DDoS government websites". Leary called the event an "Intervasion". The
Intervasion was preceded by mass email-bombing and denial of service attacks
against government servers with some success. Although ignored by the
mainstream media, the event was reported on Free Radio Berkeley. Grey Tuesday.
One well publicised instance of electronic civil disobedience in the form of
large scale intentional copyright infringement was on February 24, 2004, in an
event called Grey Tuesday announced as "a day of coordinated civil
disobedience". Activists intentionally violated EMI's copyright of "The White
Album" by distributing MP3 files of "The Grey Album", a mashup of "The White
Album" with "The Black Album", in an attempt to draw public attention to
copyright reform issues and anti-copyright ideals. Reportedly over 400 sites
participated including 170 that hosted the album. Jonathan Zittrain, professor
of Internet law at Harvard Law School, comments that "As a matter of pure legal
doctrine, the Grey Tuesday protest is breaking the law, end of story. But
copyright law was written with a particular form of industry in mind. The
flourishing of information technology gives amateurs and homerecording artists
powerful tools to build and share interesting, transformative, and socially
valuable art drawn from pieces of popular cultures. There's no place to plug
such an important cultural sea change into the current legal regime." Border
Haunt. On July 15, 2011, 667 people from 28 different countries participated in
the online collective act of electronic civil disobedience called “Border
Haunt” that targeted the policing of the U.S.-Mexico border. Participants
collected entries from a database maintained by the Arizona Daily Star that
holds the names and descriptions of migrants that died trying to cross the
border territory and then sent those entries into a database run by the company
BlueServo which is used to surveil and police the border. As a result, the
border was conceptually and symbolically haunted for the duration of the one-
day action as the border policing structure received over 1,000 reports of
deceased migrants attempting to cross the border. The Border Haunt action was
organized by Ian Alan Paul, a California based new media artist and was
reported on by Al Jazeera English and the Bay Citizen.
