Elitism Elitism is the belief or attitude that some individuals, who form an
elite — a select group of people with a certain ancestry, intrinsic quality
or worth, higher intellect, wealth, specialized training or experience, or
other distinctive attributes — are those whose influence or authority is
greater than that of others; whose views on a matter are to be taken the most
seriously or carry the most weight; whose views or actions are most likely to
be constructive to society as a whole; or whose extraordinary skills,
abilities, or wisdom render them especially fit to govern. Alternatively, the
term "elitism" may be used to describe a situation in which power is
concentrated in the hands of a limited number of people. Oppositions of elitism
include anti-elitism, egalitarianism, populism and political theory of
pluralism. Elite theory is the sociological or political science analysis of
elite influence in society - elite theorists regard pluralism as a utopian
ideal. Elitism also refers to situations in which an individual assumes special
privileges and responsibilities in the hope that this arrangement will benefit
humanity or themselves. Elitism is closely related to social class and what
sociologists call social stratification. Members of the upper classes are
sometimes known as the social elite. The term "elitism" is also sometimes used
to denote situations in which a group of people claiming to possess high
abilities or simply an in-group or cadre grant themselves extra privileges at
the expense of others. This form of elitism may be described as
"discrimination". Characteristics. Attributes that identify an elite vary;
personal achievement may not be essential. As a term "Elite" usually describes
a person or group of people who are members of the uppermost class of society
and wealth can contribute to that class determination. Personal attributes
commonly purported by elitist theorists to be characteristic of the elite
include: rigorous study of, or great accomplishment within, a particular field;
a long track record of competence in a demanding field; an extensive history of
dedication and effort in service to a specific discipline (e.g., medicine or
law) or a high degree of accomplishment, training or wisdom within a given
field. Elitists tend to favor systems such as meritocracy, technocracy and
plutocracy as opposed to radical democracy, political egalitarianism and
populism. Some synonyms for "elite" might be "upper-class," "aristocratic," or
"big-headed" indicating that the individual in question has a relatively large
degree of control over a society's means of production. This includes those who
gain this position due to socioeconomic means and not personal achievement.
However, these terms are misleading when discussing elitism as a political
theory, because they are often associated with negative "class" connotations
and fail to appreciate a more unbiased exploration of the philosophy. Academic
elitism. Elitism in the context of education is the practice of concentrating
attention on or allocating funding to the best students, or those students who
rank highest in a particular field of endeavour. For example, a politician who
promotes advanced classes for students deemed to be highly intelligent might be
accused of elitism, even if this were argued to promote an egalitarian goal,
such as curing disease. Elitism in education could be based on conventional
assessment of learning ability, knowledge, or other abilities. However, an
"elite" school can also mean a school which is wealthy, or hard to enter. Anti-
elitism. The term "elitism", or the title "elitist", are sometimes used by
people who are (or claim to be) not a member of an elite organization. In
politics, the terms are often used to describe people as being out of touch
with the Average Joe. The implication is that the alleged elitist person or
group thinks they are better than everyone else; and, therefore, put themselves
before others. It could be seen as a synonym for snob. An elitist is not always
seen as truly elite, but only privileged. The definition may have different
appreciations depending of the political contexts. Since elitism may be viewed
as something necessary for creating patterns of good intellectual or
professional performance, it can be used also for maintaining conditions of
lack of competition and privilege. Egalitarianism. Elitism endorses the
exclusion of large numbers of people from positions of privilege or power.
Thus, many populists seek the social equality of egalitarianism, populism,
socialism, or communism. They may also support affirmative action, social
security, luxury taxes, and highly progressive taxes for the wealthiest members
of society. All of these measures seek to reduce the difference of power
between the elite and the ordinary. Pluralism. Pluralism is the belief that
public policy decisions are or should be the result of the struggle of forces
exerted directly or indirectly, by large populations (workers, consumers,
retirees, parents, etc.). This contrasts with elitism, which is the belief that
decisions are, or should be, made essentially according to the ideals of the
elites.
