Emergent democracy Emergent democracy refers to the rise of political
structures and behaviors without central planning and by the action of many
individual participants, especially when mediated by the Internet. More
recently, Clay Shirky has referred to this as "the power of organizing without
organizations." The term was coined to stand in contrast to more traditional
forms of democracy, such as representational democracy and direct democracy.
The phrase draws upon emergence theory for the idea that the simple actions of
individuals can collectively create complex and unpredictable results, as when
the behavior of termites results in large, efficient nests beyond the
comprehension of any individual participant. In the paper that first drew
attention to the term, Joi Ito expresses a hope that the Internet, as a large
and decentralized network, will enable innovative responses by citizens to
highly complex problems. From its outset, emergent democracy has been seen
arising most clearly among bloggers who, as a decentralized network of writers,
can provide a fuller airing and development of ideas than can the relatively
limited resources of traditional media. Supporters of the idea point to
instances in which bloggers have brought about political change by posting
about issues that mainstream media had not paid much attention to. The
canonical example of emergent democracy was the December 2002 resignation of
Trent Lott as Senate majority leader after bloggers publicized his praising of
Strom Thurmond's 1948 segregationist campaign for the presidency. History. Ito
had been vocal about issues with Japanese democracy, and had spoken at Davos
about how broken he felt Japanese democracy was. "Afterwards, Ms. Ogata, the
former UN High Commissioner for Refugees told me that I should stop ranting as
a Japanese and think more about global democracy and global issues," he posted.
"These words stuck with me and last year I tried to think about blogs and
emergent democracy outside of the Japanese context." He organized a group
effort to discuss and document the emergent democracy concept, using a term
initially coined by Ross Mayfield. He announced meetings on his weblog,
inviting his readers to attend a conference call that was augmented by IRC chat
for posting realtime visual cues and backchannel conversation, and a wiki for
gathering notes from the call. This "multimodal" approach was called a
"happening" by Ross Mayfield. The conversation resulted in Ito's online article
that generated discussions about the potential for weblogs and other social
software tools to have an impact on participation in governance. The discussion
and notes were captured in a paper that was placed on a wiki for collaborative
editing and enhancement. Jon Lebkowsky edited the wiki version, and published
it as a chapter in the 2005 book "Extreme Democracy". A "teach-in" on that
topic was held on February 9, 2004 as part of the O'Reilly Emerging Technology
Conference. The emergent democracy paper was incubated within the O'Reilly
Emerging Technologies framework along with Tim O'Reilly's "What is Web 2.0";
the two can be considered as seminal works that influenced the emergence of
today's social web.
