Empirical The word empirical denotes information acquired by means of
observation or experimentation. Empirical data are data produced by an
observation or experiment. A central concept in modern science and the
scientific method is that all evidence must be empirical, or empirically based,
that is, dependent on evidence or consequences that are observable by the
senses. It is usually differentiated from the philosophic usage of empiricism
by the use of the adjective "empirical" or the adverb "empirically". The term
refers to the use of working hypotheses that are testable using observation or
experiment. In this sense of the word, scientific statements are subject to,
and derived from, our experiences or observations. The standard positivist view
of empirically acquired information has been that observation, experience, and
experiment serve as neutral arbiters between competing theories. However, since
the 1960s, Thomas Kuhn has promoted the concept that these methods are
influenced by prior beliefs and experiences. Consequently it cannot be expected
that two scientists when observing, experiencing, or experimenting on the same
event will make the same theory-neutral observations. The role of observation
as a theory-neutral arbiter may not be possible. Theory-dependence of
observation means that, even if there were agreed methods of inference and
interpretation, scientists may still disagree on the nature of empirical data.
Variations. In a second sense "empirical" in science may be synonymous with
"experimental." In this sense, an empirical result is an unified confirmation.
In this context, the term "semi-empirical" is used for qualifying theoretical
methods which use in part basic axioms or postulated scientific laws and
experimental results. Such methods are opposed to theoretical "ab initio"
methods which are purely deductive and based on first principles. In
statistics, "empirical" quantities are those computed from observed values, as
opposed to derived from theoretical considerations. In economics, "empirical"
generally refers to statistical or econometric analysis of numeric data. Other
forms of observation-based hypothesis testing are not considered to be
"empirics." The use of the adjective empirical, especially in scientific
studies using statistics, may also indicate that a particular correlation
between two parameters has been found, but that so far, no theory for the
mechanism of the connection is known.
