Enabling act An enabling act is a piece of legislation by which a legislative
body grants an entity which depends on it for authorization or legitimacy the
power to take certain actions. For example, enabling acts often establish
government agencies to carry out specific government policies in a modern
nation. The effects of enabling acts from different times and places vary
widely. In Germany. The German word for an enabling act is
"Ermächtigungsgesetz". It usually refers to the enabling act of March 23,
1933, which became a cornerstone of Adolf Hitler's seizure of power. Acts of
1914-1927. The first enabling act is dated from August 4, 1914 just after the
outbreak of World War I. With the vote of the Social Democrats, the Reichstag
(the parliament) agreed to give the government certain powers to take the
necessary economic measures during the war. Such enabling acts were also common
in other countries. The Reichstag had to be informed, and had the right to
abolish a decree based on the enabling act. This ensured that the government
used its rights with care and only in rare cases was a decree abolished. The
parliament retained its right to make law. In the Weimar Republic
(1919–1933), there were several enabling acts: three in 1919, one in 1920 and
one in 1921, three in 1923, one in 1926 and one in 1927. The enabling act on 24
February 1923, originally limited until June 1 but extended until October 31,
empowered the cabinet to resist the Occupation of the Ruhr. There was an
enabling act on 13 October 1923 and an enabling act on 8 December 1923 that
would last until the dissolution of the Reichstag on 13 March 1924. Most of
them had a temporal limit but only vague thematic limits. On the basis of these
acts, a vast number of decrees were signed with enormous importance for social
and economic life, the judicial system, and taxes. For example, the reform of
German currency, the establishment of a single, national railway system and
unemployment pay were settled via such decrees (Vollmacht-Verordnungen). The
Emminger Reform of 4 January 1924 abolished the jury as trier of fact and
replaced it with a mixed system of judges and lay judges in Germany's judiciary
which still exists today. These enabling acts were unconstitutional, as the
Weimar constitution did not provide the possibility that one organ (parliament)
would transfer its rights to another one (government). But constitutional
experts accepted them because they came into existence with a two-thirds
majority, the same majority as for constitutional changes. The government had
success in gathering those majorities by threatening to call for presidential
dictatorial decrees (usually called "Notverordnungen"), otherwise. In March
1924, the Reichstag wanted to discuss an abolition of decrees (which was
granted by the enabling act of February that year). President Friedrich Ebert
dismissed parliament to avoid discussion and abolishments. In later years,
since the radicalization of the nationalists (DNVP) in 1928 and the rise of
national socialism from 1930, governments failed to gather two-thirds
majorities. Chancellor Heinrich Brüning (1930–1932) worked with presidential
decrees which replaced most of ordinary legislature, eventually. The enabling
acts had set a poor and dangerous example. But for the government, they had the
advantage that they appeared less unconstitutional and dictatorial compared to
presidential decrees. Parliament could prefer those acts because they were
valid only for a limited time and included mostly a kind of cooperation (e.g.,
via a special house committee). Enabling act of 1933. The German word
"Ermächtigungsgesetz" usually refers to the enabling act of March 23, 1933,
officially "Gesetz zur Behebung der Not von Volk und Reich" ("Law to Remedy the
Distress of the People and the State"). It became a cornerstone of Adolf
Hitler's seizure of power. Unlike, for example, the Wilhelm Marx enabling act
of December 1923, Hitler's act In comparison to the situation of the 1920s,
Hitler's NSDAP and his coalition partner German National People's Party did
have a parliamentary majority since the general elections of March 3, 1933.
Those elections and then the voting in the Reichstag were already overshadowed
by national socialist terror. On March 23, only the Social Democrat delegates
voted against, the Communists were imprisoned, while the Centre and moderate
right parties voted yes in order to prevent "worse". The enabling act of 1933
was renewed by a purely Nazi Reichstag in 1937 and 1939. In 1941 and 1943 it
was renewed by decree, in 1943 without temporal limit. Although it states that
it is valid only for the duration of the current Hitler government of 1933, it
remained even after severe exchanges of ministers. In any case, Hitler called
the cabinet together only very rarely after the first months of 1933-the last
cabinet meeting happened in 1937. He preferred to "govern" via decrees and
personal orders. Federal Republic. In the Federal Republic of Germany, with its
1949 constitution, there have been no enabling acts. The constitution states
that it can be only changed by an explicit alteration of the phrasing. In the
United Kingdom. After the First World War, an enabling act gave a considerable
measure of self-government to the Church of England. In the 1930s, both Sir
Stafford Cripps and Clement Attlee advocated an enabling act to allow a future
Labour government to pass socialist legislation which would not be amended by
normal parliamentary procedures and the House of Lords. According to Cripps,
his "Planning and Enabling Act" would not be able to be repealed, and the
orders made by the government using the act would not be allowed discussion in
Parliament. Cripps also suggested measures against the monarchy, but quickly
dropped the idea. In 1966 Oswald Mosley advocated a government of national
unity drawn from "the professions, from science, from the unions and the
managers, from businessmen, the housewives, from the services, from the
universities, and even from the best of the politicians". This coalition would
be a "hard centre" oriented one which would also get Parliament to pass an
Enabling Act in order to stop what Mosley described as "time-wasting
obstructionism of present procedure". He also claimed that Parliament would
always retain the power to dismiss his government by vote of censure if its
policies failed or if it attempted to "override basic British freedoms". In
early 2006 the highly controversial yet little-publicised Legislative and
Regulatory Reform Bill was introduced to Parliament. This Bill, if enacted into
law, would have enabled Government ministers to amend or repeal any legislation
(including the L&RR Bill itself), subject to vague and highly subjective
restraints, by decree and without recourse to Parliament. The Bill was
variously described as the "Abolition of Parliament Bill" and "...of first-
class constitutional significance... would markedly alter the respective and
long standing roles of minister and Parliament in the legislative process". The
Bill is, in essence, an Enabling Act in all but name. After some amendment by
the government and Lords, the Legislative and Regulatory Reform Bill received
Royal Assent on 8 November 2006. Amendments included removing its ability to
modify itself or the Human Rights Act 1998; most of the other modifications
were much more subjectively defined. In the United States. The term "enabling
act" in United States law is usually in relation to the formation of a new U.S.
state: legislation is passed by Congress authorizing the people of a territory
to frame a constitution; this act also lays down the requirements that must be
met as a prerequisite to statehood. These Acts have usually been titled "An
Enabling Act for a State of (Name)". It may also be in relation to the
formation of an agency or department. The Federal Food Drug and Cosmetic Act is
the enabling Act for the US Food and Drug Administration. In Venezuela. In
Venezuela, enabling laws allowing the President to rule by decree in selected
matters were granted to Rómulo Betancourt (1959), Carlos Andrés Pérez
(1974), Jaime Lusinchi (1984), Ramón José Velásquez (1993) and Rafael
Caldera (1994). Pérez issued over 3000 decrees under the powers delegated to
him. In mid-2000 a similar law enabled Hugo Chávez to legislate on issues
related to the economy, reorganization of government ministries, and crime for
one year. Chávez did not take advantage of this act until shortly before its
expiration, when he passed 49 decrees in rapid succession, many of them highly
controversial. In 2007, a new enabling act granted President Chávez powers for
18 months, giving the president the ability to rule by decree over certain
economic, social, territorial, defense, and scientific matters as well as
control over transportation, regulations for popular participation, and rules
for governing state institutions.
