Enclave and exclave An enclave is a territory entirely surrounded by another
territory. An exclave is a territory legally or politically attached to a
territory with which it is not physically contiguous. These are two distinct
concepts, although many entities fit both definitions. In Fig. 1 at right,
suppose that the darker shaded area (marked B and C) is part of the same
political or territorial entity, for example a sovereign state, and that the
lighter-shaded area marked A is another such entity. Then C is an exclave of B,
and is also an enclave within A. If C were independent it would be an enclave
but not an exclave. In Fig. 2 at right, C is again an exclave of B, but is not
an enclave, because it has boundaries with more than one entity. Origin and
usage. The word "enclave" entered the English jargon of diplomacy in 1868. It
derives from French, which was then the "lingua franca" of diplomacy. The word
enclave and a number of related words exist in French, Spanish and Portuguese
with the meaning of "surrounded, included, embedded, fixed" and they all
ultimately derive from the Latin "clavus" which had two related meanings. One
was "nail" (which is embedded and surrounded) and another was a knot in the
wood (which is also embedded and surrounded). The word exclave is a logical
extension created three decades later. Although the meanings of both words are
close, an exclave may not necessarily be an enclave or vice versa. For example,
Kaliningrad, an exclave of Russia, is not an enclave because it is surrounded
not by one state, but by two: Lithuania and Poland; it also borders the Baltic
Sea. Conversely, Lesotho is an enclave in South Africa, but it is not
politically attached to anything else, meaning that it is not an exclave. In
British administrative history, subnational enclaves were usually called
detachments or detached parts. In English ecclesiastic history, subnational
enclaves were known as peculiars (see also Royal Peculiar). A country
surrounded by another but having access to the sea is not considered to be an
enclave, regardless of size. For this reason Portugal is not an enclave of
Spain, and Gambia is not an enclave of Senegal. Usage in other fields. In
medicine, an "exclave" is a detached part of an organ, as of the pancreas,
thyroid, or other gland. Characteristics. Enclaves may be created for a variety
of historical, political or geographical reasons. Some areas have been left as
enclaves by changes in the course of a river. Since living in an enclave can be
very inconvenient and many agreements have to be found by both countries over
mail addresses, power supply or passage rights, enclaves tend to be eliminated
and many cases that existed before have now been removed. The governments of
India and Bangladesh have been pressed to resolve the complex system of
enclaves along their border - persons in these enclaves have complained of
being effectively stateless. In 2011, India and Bangladesh signed a leasehold
agreement regarding the Tin Bigha Corridor. Many exclaves today have an
independence movement, especially if the exclave is far away from the mainland.
True enclaves. This refers to those territories where a country is sovereign,
but which cannot be reached without entering one particular other country. One
example was West Berlin, before the reunification of Germany, which was "de
facto" a West German exclave within East Germany, and thus an East German
enclave (many small West Berlin land areas, such as Steinstücken, were in turn
separated from the main one, some by only a few meters). "De jure" all of
Berlin was ruled by the four Allied powers; this meant that West Berlin could
not send voting members to the German Parliament, and that its citizens were
exempt from conscription; however, this was not accepted by the East German
government or the Soviet Union, which treated East Berlin as an integral part
of East Germany. Most of the enclaves now existing are to be found in Asia,
with a handful in Africa and Europe. While administrative enclaves are found
frequently elsewhere, there are no nation-level enclaves in Australia or the
Americas. Enclaved countries. The principality of Monaco is not an enclave,
although it only borders on France, because it also possesses a coastline and
thus it is not completely surrounded by another country. Historically, the
Black Homelands or Bantustans of South Africa existed under the Nationalist
government from 1948 to 1994. Most of these had their origins in the "native
reserves" created under earlier British colonial administration. In federal law
of the USA, the Indian Reservation system seems to act like "Enclaved
countries" in most cases. The same would apply for Indian Reserves in Canada
and Aboriginal Reserve in Australia. See also List of countries that border
only one other country. Temporary enclaves. The Scottish Court in the
Netherlands, at Camp Zeist near Utrecht, was temporarily declared as sovereign
territory of the United Kingdom under Scottish law for the duration of the
trial of those accused in the Lockerbie bombing, and was therefore an exclave
of the United Kingdom, and of Scotland, and an enclave within the Netherlands.
It was also so during the appeal of the man convicted. The court was first
convened in 1999, and the land returned to the Netherlands in 2002. Related
constructs and terms. "Practical" enclaves and exclaves and inaccessible
districts. Some territories, attached to the motherland by a thin slice of land
or territorial water, are more easily accessible by traveling through a foreign
country. These territories may be called "practical exclaves" or "pene-
exclaves" (example: the Northwest Angle between the United States and Canada,
or the Spanish village of Os de Civís, which can only be accessed through the
independent Andorra as it is virtually isolated from the rest of Spain by
mountains.) American Lane (), in Greenwich, Connecticut, can be accessed only
from New York State, because it is separated by Interstate 684 from the
remainder of Connecticut. Conversely, a territory that is an exclave but does
not function as one (instead functioning as a contiguous part of the main
nation) is deemed a "quasi-exclave". Subnational enclaves and exclaves.
Sometimes, administrative divisions of a country, for historical or practical
reasons, caused some areas to belong to a division while being attached to
another one. Enclaves within enclaves. It is possible for an enclave to be
completely surrounded not by the main body of another country, but by an
exclave of it. Ethnic enclaves. An ethnic enclave is a community of an ethnic
group inside an area in which another ethnic group predominates. Ghettos,
Little Italys, barrios and Chinatowns are examples. These areas may have a
separate language, culture and economic system. Nagorno-Karabakh is arguably an
ethnic enclave. It is a predominantly ethnic Armenian area inside Azerbaijan.
The Nagorno-Karabakh War which lasted from 1988 to 1994 resulted in the area
self-proclaiming its independence, but this has never been recognized by the
international community, which tends to describe the current situation as a
frozen conflict. The 2008 film "Silent Light" concerns a Mennonite Flemish sect
living within the Mexican state of Chihuahua, who speak a dialect called
Plautdietsch. Exclaves. Nakhichevan Autonomous Republic, which borders Turkey,
Armenia and Iran, is an exclave of Azerbaijan. Additionally, Azerbaijan has
three more small exclaves: Karki, Barkhudarli and Yukhari Askipara (together
with Aşağı Əskipara) which are all inside the territory of Armenia.
Kaliningrad Oblast is a federal subject of Russia (an oblast) situated on the
Baltic coast. Cabinda (also spelled Kabinda, formerly Portuguese Congo) is an
exclave and province of Angola. Oecusse, a district on the northwestern side of
the island of Timor, is an exclave of East Timor. Büsingen is a German exclave
in Switzerland. Campione d'Italia is an Italian exclave within Switzerland.
Ceuta and Melilla are Spanish exclaves within Morocco. Extraterritoriality.
Embassies and military bases are usually exempted from the jurisdiction of the
host country, i.e., the laws of the host nation in which an embassy is located
do not typically apply to the land of the embassy or base itself. This
exemption from the jurisdiction of the host country is defined as
extraterritoriality. Areas of extraterritoriality are not true enclaves as they
are still part of the host country. In addition to embassies, some other areas
have extraterritoriality. Land owned by a foreign country. Some areas of land
in a country are owned by another country and in some cases it has special
privileges, such as being exempt from taxes. These lands are not enclaves and
do not have extraterritoriality since, in all cases, there is no transfer of
sovereignty. The land under the John F. Kennedy memorial at Runnymede, United
Kingdom, is widely thought to have been granted to the United States of America
by the John F. Kennedy Memorial Act 1964 (an Act of the UK Parliament).
However, the Act grants to the United States "an estate in fee simple
absolute", which is a form of title under English law, and the site remains
under the sovereignty of the United Kingdom. National railway passing through
foreign territory. Changes in borders can make a railway that was previously
located solely within a country traverse the new borders. Since railways are
much more expensive than roads to rebuild to avoid this problem, the criss-
cross arrangement tends to last a long time. With passenger trains this may
mean that doors on carriages are locked and guarded to prevent illicit entry
and exit while the train is temporarily in another country. Borders can also be
in the "wrong" place, forcing railways into difficult terrain. Border shifts.
Also, borders have occasionally been shifted for the purpose of avoiding this
sort of arrangement. The best-known example is the Gadsden Purchase, in which
the United States bought land from Mexico on which it was planned to build a
southern route for the transcontinental railroad. Owing to the topography of
the area, acquisition of the land was the only feasible way to construct such a
railroad through the southern New Mexico Territory. Border infrastructure.
Several bridges cross the rivers Oder and Neisse between Germany and Poland. To
avoid needing to coordinate their efforts on a single bridge, the two riparian
states assign each bridge to one or the other; thus Poland is responsible for
"all" maintenance on some of the bridges, including the German side, and vice
versa. The Hallein Salt Mine crosses from Austria into Germany. Under an 1829
treaty Austria can dig under the then-Kingdom of Bavaria. In return some salt
has to be given to Bavaria, and up to 99 of its citizens can be hired to work
in the Austrian mine.
