Endogeneity (economics) In a statistical model, a parameter or variable is said
to be endogenous when there is a correlation between the parameter or variable
and the error term. Endogeneity can arise as a result of measurement error,
autoregression with autocorrelated errors, simultaneity, omitted variables, and
sample selection errors. Broadly, a loop of causality between the independent
and dependent variables of a model leads to endogeneity. For example, in a
simple supply and demand model, when predicting the quantity demanded in
equilibrium, the price is endogenous because producers change their price in
response to demand and consumers change their demand in response to price. In
this case, the price variable is said to have total endogeneity once the demand
and supply curves are known. In contrast, a change in consumer tastes or
preferences would be an exogenous change on the demand curve. Exogeneity vs.
Endogeneity. In a stochastic model, the notion of the usual exogeneity,
sequential exogeneity, strong/strict exogeneity can be defined. Exogeneity is
articulated in such a way that a variable or variables is exogenous for
parameter formula_1. Even if a variable is exogenous for parameter formula_1,
it might be endogenous for parameter formula_3. When the explanatory variables
are not stochastic, then they are strong exogenous for all the parameters. The
problem of endogeneity occurs when the independent variable is correlated with
the error term in a regression model. This implies that the regression
coefficient in an Ordinary Least Squares (OLS) regression is biased, however if
the correlation is not contemporaneous, then it may still be consistent. There
are many methods of overcoming this, including instrumental variable regression
and Heckman selection correction. Static Models. The following are some common
sources of endogeneity. Omitted Variable. In this case, the endogeneity comes
from an uncontrolled confounding variable. A variable is both correlated with
an independent variable in the model and with the error term. (Equivalently,
the omitted variable both affects the independent variable and separately
affects the dependent variable.) Assume that the "true" model to be estimated
is, but we omit formula_5 (perhaps because we don't have a measure for it) when
we run our regression. formula_5 will get absorbed by the error term and we
will actually estimate, If the correlation of formula_9 and formula_10 is not 0
and formula_10 separately affects formula_12 (meaning formula_13), then
formula_9 is correlated with the error term formula_15. Here, x and 1 are not
exogenous for alpha and beta since, given x and 1, the distribution of y
depends not only on alpha and beta, but also on z and gamma. Measurement Error.
Suppose that we do not get a perfect measure of one of our independent
variables. Imagine that instead of observing formula_16 we observe formula_17
where formula_18 is the measurement "noise". When we try to estimate the
following univariate regression, we actually end up estimating, Since both
formula_24 and formula_25 depend on formula_18, they are correlated.
Measurement error in the dependent variable, however, does not cause
endogeneity (though it does increase the variance of the error term). Dynamic
Models. The endogeneity problem is particularly relevant in the context of time
series analysis of causal processes. It is common for some factors within a
causal system to be dependent for their value in period "t" on the values of
other factors in the causal system in period "t-1". Suppose that the level of
pest infestation is independent of all other factors within a given period, but
is influenced by the level of rainfall and fertilizer in the preceding period.
In this instance it would be correct to say that infestation is exogenous
within the period, but endogenous over time. Let the model be y=f(x,z)+u, then
if the variable x is sequential exogenous for parameter formula_1, and y does
not cause x in Granger sense, then the variable x is strong/strict exogenous
for the parameter formula_1. Simultaneity. Generally speaking, simultaneity
occurs in the dynamic model, but this example is static one. Suppose that two
variables are codetermined, with each affecting the other. Suppose that we have
two "structural" equations, We can show that estimating either equation results
in endogeneity. In the case of the first structural equation, we will show that
formula_31. First, solving for formula_5 we get (assuming that formula_33),
Assuming that formula_16 and formula_36 are uncorrelated with formula_25, we
find that, Therefore, attempts at estimating either structural equation will be
hampered by endogeneity. References. Peter Kennedy. "A Guide to Econometrics".
Sixth Edition. (c) 2008. Page 139.
