Endogenous growth theory Endogenous growth theory holds that economic growth is
primarily the result of endogenous and not external forces. Endogenous growth
theory holds that investment in human capital, innovation, and knowledge are
significant contributors to economic growth. The theory also focuses on
positive externalities and spillover effects of a knowledge-based economy which
will lead to economic development. The endogenous growth theory also holds that
policy measures can have an impact on the long-run growth rate of an economy.
For example, subsidies for research and development or education increase the
growth rate in some endogenous growth models by increasing the incentive for
innovation. Models in Endogenous Growth. In the mid-1980s, a group of growth
theorists became increasingly dissatisfied with common accounts of exogenous
factors determining long-run growth. They favored a model that replaced the
exogenous growth variable (unexplained technical progress) with a model in
which the key determinants of growth were explicit in the model. The initial
research was based on the work of Kenneth Arrow (1962), Hirofumi Uzawa (1965),
and Miguel Sidrauski (1967). Paul Romer (1986), Lucas (1988), and Rebelo (1991)
omitted technological change. Instead, growth in these models was due to
indefinite investment in human capital which had spillover effect on economy
and reduces the diminishing return to capital accumulation. The AK model, which
is the simplest endogenous model, gives a constant-saving-rate of endogenous
growth. It assumes a constant, exogenous saving rate and fixed level of the
technology. It shows elimination of diminishing returns leading to endogenous
growth. However, the endogenous growth theory is further supported with models
in which agents optimally determined the consumption and saving, optimizing the
resources allocation to research and development leading to technological
progress. Romer (1987, 1990) and signiﬁcant contributions by Aghion and
Howitt (1992) and Grossman and Helpman (1991), incorporated imperfect markets
and R&D to the growth model. The AK Model. The model works on the property of
absence of diminishing returns to capital. The simplest form of production
function with diminishing return is: where If we substitute formula_6 in
equation of transitional Dynamics of Solow-Swan model (Exogenous growth model)
which shows how an economy’s per capita incomes converges toward its own
steady-state value and to the per capita incomes of other nations. Transitional
Dynamics equation, where Growth rate on formula_7 is given by, on substituting
formula_2, we get, We return here to the case of zero technological progress,
formula_11, because we want to show that per capita growth can now occur in the
long-run even without exogenous technological change. The figure 1.1 explains
the perpetual growth, with exogenous technical progress. The vertical distance
between the two line, formula_12and n+δ gives theformula_13 As,
formula_14n+δ, so thatformula_15. Since the two line are parallel,
formula_13is constant; in particular, it is independent of formula_17. In other
words,formula_17 always grows at steady states rate,formula_19. Since at every
point of time. In addition, since the growth rate of Hence, the entire per
capita variable in the model grows at same rate, given by However, we can
observe thatformula_4 technology displays a positive long-run per capita growth
without any exogenous technological development. The per capita growth depends
on behavioural factors of the model as the saving rate and population. It is
unlike neoclassical model, which is higher saving, s, promotes higher long-run
per capita growth formula_28. Endogenous versus exogenous growth theory. In
neo-classical growth models, the long-run rate of growth is exogenously
determined by either the savings rate (the Harrod–Domar model) or the rate of
technical progress (Solow model). However, the savings rate and rate of
technological progress remain unexplained. Endogenous growth theory tries to
overcome this shortcoming by building macroeconomic models out of microeconomic
foundations. Households are assumed to maximize utility subject to budget
constraints while firms maximize profits. Crucial importance is usually given
to the production of new technologies and human capital. The engine for growth
can be as simple as a constant return to scale production function (the AK
model) or more complicated set ups with spillover effects (spillovers are
positive externalities, benefits that are attributed to costs from other
firms), increasing numbers of goods, increasing qualities, etc. Often
endogenous growth theory assumes constant marginal product of capital at the
aggregate level, or at least that the limit of the marginal product of capital
does not tend towards zero. This does not imply that larger firms will be more
productive than small ones, because at the firm level the marginal product of
capital is still diminishing. Therefore, it is possible to construct endogenous
growth models with perfect competition. However, in many endogenous growth
models the assumption of perfect competition is relaxed, and some degree of
monopoly power is thought to exist. Generally monopoly power in these models
comes from the holding of patents. These are models with two sectors, producers
of final output and an R&D sector. The R&D sector develops ideas that they are
granted a monopoly power. R&D firms are assumed to be able to make monopoly
profits selling ideas to production firms, but the free entry condition means
that these profits are dissipated on R&D spending. Implications. Sustained
economic growth is everywhere and always a process of continual transformation.
The sort of economic progress that has been enjoyed by the richest nations
since the Industrial Revolution would not have been possible if people had not
undergone wrenching changes. Economies that cease to transform themselves are
destined to fall off the path of economic growth. The countries that most
deserve the title of “developing” are not the poorest countries of the
world, but the richest. need to engage in the never-ending process of economic
development if they are to enjoy continued prosperity. (Conclusion, "Growth and
development: a Schumpeterian perspective", 2006 [http://www.cdhowe.org/pdf/
commentary_246.pdf). Criticisms. One of the main failings of endogenous growth
theories is the collective failure to explain conditional convergence reported
in the empirical literature. Another frequent critique concerns the cornerstone
assumption of diminishing returns to capital. Some contend that "new growth
theory" has proven no more successful than exogenous growth theory in
explaining the income divergence between the developing and developed worlds
(despite usually being more complex).
