Energy security Energy security is a term for an association between national
security and the availability of natural resources for energy consumption.
Access to cheap energy has become essential to the functioning of modern
economies. However, the uneven distribution of energy supplies among countries
has led to significant vulnerabilities. Renewable energy resources and
significant opportunities for energy efficiency exist over wide geographical
areas, in contrast to other energy sources, which are concentrated in a limited
number of countries. Rapid deployment of renewable energy and energy
efficiency, and technological diversification of energy sources, would result
in significant energy security and economic benefits. Energy security threats.
The modern world relies on a vast energy supply to fuel everything from
transportation to communication, to security and health delivery systems.
Perhaps most alarmingly, peak oil expert Mike Ruppert has claimed that for
every calorie of food produced in the industrial world, ten calories of oil and
gas energy are invested in the forms of fertilizer, pesticide, packaging,
transportation, and running farm equipment. Energy plays an important role in
the national security of any given country as a fuel to power the economic
engine. Some sectors rely on energy more heavily than others; for example, the
Department of Defense relies on petroleum for approximately 77% of its energy
needs. Threats to energy security include the political instability of several
energy producing countries, the manipulation of energy supplies, the
competition over energy sources, attacks on supply infrastructure, as well as
accidents, natural disasters, rising terrorism, and dominant countries reliance
to the foreign oil supply. Foreign oil supplies are vulnerable to unnatural
disruptions from in-state conflict, exporters’ interests, and non-state
actors targeting the supply and transportation of oil resources. The political
and economic instability caused by war or other factors such as strike action
can also prevent the proper functioning of the energy industry in a supplier
country. For example, the nationalization of oil in Venezuela has triggered
strikes and protests in which Venezuela’s oil production rates have yet to
recover. Exporters may have political or economic incentive to limit their
foreign sales or cause disruptions in the supply chain. Since Venezuela’s
nationalization of oil, anti-American Hugo Chávez has threatened to cut off
supplies to the United States more than once. The 1973 oil embargo against the
U.S. is a historical example in which oil supplies were cut off to the US due
to US support of Israel during the Yom Kippur War. This has been done to apply
pressure during economic negotiations—such as during the Russia-Belarus
energy dispute. Terrorist attacks targeting oil facilities, pipelines, tankers,
refineries, and oil fields are so common they are referred to as “industry
risks”. Infrastructure for producing the resource is extremely vulnerable to
sabotage. One of the worst risks to oil transportation is the exposure of the
five ocean chokepoints, like the Iranian controlled Strait of Hormuz. Anthony
H. Cordsman, a scholar at the Center for Strategic and International Studies in
Washington warns, “It may take only one asymmetric or conventional attack on
a Ghawar Saudi oil field or tankers in the Strait of Hormuz to throw the market
into a spiral." According to an article by the RAND Corporation, oil export
revenues are used to finance terrorist groups, like Hamas and Hizballah. Former
CIA director, Jim Woosley reports, “Except for our own Civil War, this war on
terror is the only war that we have fought where we are paying for both sides.
We pay Saudi Arabia $160 billion for its oil, and $3 or $4 billion of that goes
to the Wahhabis, who teach children to hate. We are paying for these terrorists
with our SUVs.” New threats to energy security have emerged in the form of
the increased world competition for energy resources due to the increased pace
of industrialization in countries such as India and China. Although still a
minority concern, the possibility of price rises resulting from the peaking of
world oil production is also starting to attract the attention of at least the
French government. Increased competition over energy resources may also lead to
the formation of security compacts to enable an equitable distribution of oil
and gas between major powers. However, this may happen at the expense of less
developed economies. The Group of Five, precursors to the G8, first met in 1975
to coordinate economic and energy policies in the wake of the 1973 Arab oil
embargo, a rise in inflation and a global economic slowdown. NATO leaders
meeting in Bucharest in April 2008 may discuss the possibility of using the
military alliance "as an instrument of energy security." One of the
possibilities include placing troops in the Caucasus region to police oil and
gas pipelines. Long term security. Long term measures to increase energy
security center on reducing dependence on any one source of imported energy,
increasing the number of suppliers, exploiting native fossil fuel or renewable
energy resources, and reducing overall demand through energy conservation
measures. It can also involve entering into international agreements to
underpin international energy trading relationships, such as the Energy Charter
Treaty in Europe. All the concern coming from security threats on oil sources
long term security measures will help reduce the future cost of importing and
exporting fuel into and out of countries without having to worry about harm
coming to the goods being transported. The impact of the 1973 oil crisis and
the emergence of the OPEC cartel was a particular milestone that prompted some
countries to increase their energy security. Japan, almost totally dependent on
imported oil, steadily introduced the use of natural gas, nuclear power, high-
speed mass transit systems, and implemented energy conservation measures, It
has become one of the world leaders in the use of renewable energy. The United
Kingdom began exploiting North Sea oil and gas reserves, and became a net
exporter of energy into the 2000s. In other countries energy security has
historically been a lower priority. The United States, for example, has
continued to increase its dependency on imported oil although, following the
oil price increases since 2003, the development of biofuels has been suggested
as a means of addressing this. Increasing energy security is also one of the
reasons behind a block on the development of natural gas imports in Sweden.
Greater investment in native renewable energy technologies and energy
conservation is envisaged instead. India is carrying out a major hunt for
domestic oil to decrease its dependency on OPEC, while Iceland is well advanced
in its plans to become energy-independent by 2050 through deploying 100%
renewable energy. Short term security. Petroleum. Petroleum or otherwise known
as "crude oil" has become the resource most used by countries all around the
world including Russia, China and the United States of America. With all the
oil wells located around the world energy security has become a main issue to
ensure the safety of the petroleum that is being harvested. In the middle east
oil fields become main targets for sabotage because of how heavily countries
rely on oil. Many countries hold strategic petroleum reserves as a buffer
against the economic and political impacts of an energy crisis. All 28 members
of the International Energy Agency hold a minimum of 90 days of their oil
imports, for example. The value of such reserves was demonstrated by the
relative lack of disruption caused by the 2007 Russia-Belarus energy dispute,
when Russia indirectly cut exports to several countries in the European Union.
Due to the theories in peak oil and need to curb demand, the United States
military and Department of Defense had made significant cuts, and have been
making a number of attempts to come up with more efficient ways to use oil.
Natural gas. Compared to petroleum, reliance on imported natural gas creates
significant short term vulnerabilities. Many European countries saw an
immediate drop in supply when Russian gas supplies were halted during the
Russia-Ukraine gas dispute in 2006. Natural gas has been a viable source of
energy in the world. Consisting of mostly methane natural gas is produced using
two methods, biogenic and thermogenic. Biogenic comes from methogenic organisms
located in marshes and landfills where thermogenic comes from buried material
that is heated up from the earths core. Russia is the current leading country
in production of natural gases. One of the biggest problems currently with
natural gas is the ability to storage and transport it. With its low density it
becomes harder to have pipelines in North America to transport enough natural
gas as the demand increases. These pipelines are reaching near capacity and
even at full capacity do not produce the amount of gas needed. Nuclear power.
Uranium for nuclear power is mined and enriched in diverse and "stable"
countries. These include Canada (23% of the world's total in 2007), Australia
(21%), Kazakhstan (16%) and more than 10 other countries. Uranium is mined and
fuel is manufactured significantly in advance of need. Nuclear fuel is
considered by some to be a relatively reliable power source, though a debate
over the timing of peak uranium does exist. Although a very viable resource
nuclear power comes under fire a lot of times because of the danger that people
associate to it, nuclear power is stable but if something were to happen there
are very little options that have been proposed to fix that problem. Another
big factor in the debate with nuclear power is that many people or companies do
not want this high waste energy solution near them due to possible radiation
leaks, nuclear runoff into streams and lakes and also the nuclear power plant
ruins how appealing a city or state looks to other people in the country.
Currently, nuclear power provides only a fraction of the world's total
electricity, and an even smaller fraction of the United States' electricity.
The most notable use of nuclear power within the United States is in US Navy
aircraft carriers, cruisers, and submarines, which have been exclusively
nuclear-powered for several decades. These classes of ship provide the core of
the Navy's power, and as such are the single most noteworthy application of
nuclear power. Renewable energy. The deployment of renewable technologies
usually increases the diversity of electricity sources and, through local
generation, contributes to the flexibility of the system and its resistance to
central shocks. For those countries where growing dependence on imported gas is
a significant energy security issue, renewable technologies can provide
alternative sources of electric power as well as displacing electricity demand
through direct heat production. Renewable biofuels for transport represent a
key source of diversification from petroleum products. As the resources that
have been so crucial to survival in the world to this day start declining in
numbers, countries will begin to realize that the need for renewable fuel
sources will be as vital as ever. With the production of new types of energy
including, solar, geothermal, hydro-electric, biofuel and wind power. With the
amount of sun that hits the world in one hour there is enough energy to power
the world for one year. With the addition of solar panels all around the world
a little less pressure is taken off the need to produce more oil. Geothermal
can potentially lead to other sources of fuel, if companies would take the heat
from the inner core of the earth to heat up water sources we could essentially
use the steam creating from the heated water to power machines, this option is
one of the cleanest and efficient options. Hydro-electric which has been
incorporated into many of the dams around the world produces a lot of energy
and is very easy to produce the energy as the dams control the water that is
allowed through seams which power turbines located inside of the dam. Biofuels
have been researched using many different sources including ethanol and algae,
these options are substantially cleaner than the consumption of petroleum.
"Most LCA results for per- ennial and ligno-cellulosic crops conclude that
biofuels can supplement anthropogenic energy demands and mitigate GHG emissions
to the atmosphere."
