Entrepreneurship Entrepreneurship is the act and art of being an entrepreneur
or "'one'who undertakes innovations, finance and business acumen in an effort
to transform innovations into economic goods"". This may result in new
organizations or may be part of revitalizing mature organizations in response
to a perceived opportunity. The most obvious form of entrepreneurship is that
of starting new businesses (referred as Startup Company); however, in recent
years, the term has been extended to include social and political forms of
entrepreneurial activity. When entrepreneurship is describing activities within
a firm or large organization it is referred to as intra-preneurship and may
include corporate venturing, when large entities spin-off organizations.
According to Paul Reynolds, entrepreneurship scholar and creator of the Global
Entrepreneurship Monitor, "by the time they reach their retirement years, half
of all working men in the United States probably have a period of self-
employment of one or more years; one in four may have engaged in self-
employment for six or more years. Participating in a new business creation is a
common activity among U.S. workers over the course of their careers." And in
recent years has been documented by scholars such as David Audretsch to be a
major driver of economic growth in both the United States and Western Europe.
"As well, entrepreneurship may be defined as the pursuit of opportunity without
regard to resources currently controlled (Stevenson,1983)" Entrepreneurial
activities are substantially different depending on the type of organization
and creativity involved. Entrepreneurship ranges in scale from solo projects
(even involving the entrepreneur only part-time) to major undertakings creating
many job opportunities. Many "high value" entrepreneurial ventures seek venture
capital or angel funding (seed money) in order to raise capital to build the
business. Angel investors generally seek annualized returns of 20-30% and more,
as well as extensive involvement in the business. Many kinds of organizations
now exist to support would-be entrepreneurs including specialized government
agencies, business incubators, science parks, and some NGOs. In more recent
times, the term entrepreneurship has been extended to include elements not
related necessarily to business formation activity such as conceptualizations
of entrepreneurship as a specific mindset (see also entrepreneurial mindset)
resulting in entrepreneurial initiatives e.g. in the form of social
entrepreneurship, political entrepreneurship, or knowledge entrepreneurship
have emerged. History. The entrepreneur is a factor in microeconomics, and the
study of entrepreneurship reaches back to the work of Richard Cantillon and
Adam Smith in the late 17th and early 18th centuries, but was largely ignored
theoretically until the late 19th and early 20th centuries and empirically
until a profound resurgence in business and economics in the last 40 years. In
the 20th century, the understanding of entrepreneurship owes much to the work
of economist Joseph Schumpeter in the 1930s and other Austrian economists such
as Carl Menger, Ludwig von Mises and Friedrich von Hayek. In Schumpeter, an
entrepreneur is a person who is willing and able to convert a new idea or
invention into a successful innovation. Entrepreneurship employs what
Schumpeter called "the gale of creative destruction" to replace in whole or in
part inferior innovations across markets and industries, simultaneously
creating new products including new business models. In this way, creative
destruction is largely responsible for the dynamism of industries and long-run
economic growth. The supposition that entrepreneurship leads to economic growth
is an interpretation of the residual in endogenous growth theory and as such is
hotly debated in academic economics. An alternate description posited by Israel
Kirzner suggests that the majority of innovations may be much more incremental
improvements such as the replacement of paper with plastic in the construction
of a drinking straw. For Schumpeter, entrepreneurship resulted in new
industries but also in new combinations of currently existing inputs.
Schumpeter's initial example of this was the combination of a steam engine and
then current wagon making technologies to produce the horseless carriage. In
this case the innovation, the car, was transformational but did not require the
development of a new technology, merely the application of existing
technologies in a novel manner. It did not immediately replace the horsedrawn
carriage, but in time, incremental improvements which reduced the cost and
improved the technology led to the complete practical replacement of beast
drawn vehicles in modern transportation. Despite Schumpeter's early 20th-
century contributions, traditional microeconomic theory did not formally
consider the entrepreneur in its theoretical frameworks (instead assuming that
resources would find each other through a price system). In this treatment the
entrepreneur was an implied but unspecified actor, but it is consistent with
the concept of the entrepreneur being the agent of x-efficiency. Different
scholars have described entrepreneurs as, among other things, bearing risk. For
Schumpeter, the entrepreneur did not bear risk: the capitalist did. For Frank
H. Knight (1921) and Peter Drucker (1970) entrepreneurship is about taking
risk. The behavior of the entrepreneur reflects a kind of person willing to put
his or her career and financial security on the line and take risks in the name
of an idea, spending much time as well as capital on an uncertain venture.
Knight classified three types of uncertainty. The acts of entrepreneurship are
often associated with true uncertainty, particularly when it involves bringing
something really novel to the world, whose market never exists. However, even
if a market already exists, there is no guarantee that a market exists for a
particular new player in the cola category. The place of the disharmony-
creating and idiosyncratic entrepreneur in traditional economic theory (which
describes many efficiency-based ratios assuming uniform outputs) presents
theoretic quandaries. William Baumol has added greatly to this area of economic
theory and was recently honored for it at the 2006 annual meeting of the
American Economic Association. The entrepreneur is widely regarded as an
integral player in the business culture of American life, and particularly as
an engine for job creation and economic growth. Robert Sobel published "The
Entrepreneurs: Explorations Within the American Business Tradition" in 1974.
Zoltan Acs and David Audretsch have produced an edited volume surveying
Entrepreneurship as an academic field of research, and more than a hundred
scholars around the world track entrepreneurial activity, policy and social
influences as part of the Global Entrepreneurship Monitor (GEM) and its
associated reports. Characteristics of an entrepreneur. Qualities 1.
Disciplined These individuals are focused on making their businesses work, and
eliminate any hindrances or distractions to their goals. They have overarching
strategies and outline the tactics to accomplish them. Successful entrepreneurs
are disciplined enough to take steps every day toward the achievement of their
objectives. 2. Confidence The entrepreneur does not ask questions about whether
they can succeed or whether they are worthy of success. They are confident with
the knowledge that they will make their businesses succeed. They exude that
confidence in everything they do. 3. Open Minded Entrepreneurs realize that
every event and situation is a business opportunity. Ideas are constantly being
generated about workflows and efficiency, people skills and potential new
businesses. They have the ability to look at everything around them and focus
it toward their goals. 4. Self Starter Entrepreneurs know that if something
needs to be done, they should start it themselves. They set the parameters and
make sure that projects follow that path. They are proactive, not waiting for
someone to give them permission. 5. Competitive Many companies are formed
because an entrepreneur knows that they can do a job better than another. They
need to win at the sports they play and need to win at the businesses that they
create. An entrepreneur will highlight their own company’s track record of
success. 6. Creativity One facet of creativity is being able to make
connections between seemingly unrelated events or situations. Entrepreneurs
often come up with solutions which are the synthesis of other items. They will
repurpose products to market them to new industries. 7. Determination
Entrepreneurs are not thwarted by their defeats. They look at defeat as an
opportunity for success. They are determined to make all of their endeavors
succeed, so will try and try again until it does. Successful entrepreneurs do
not believe that something cannot be done. 8. Strong people skills The
entrepreneur has strong communication skills to sell the product and motivate
employees. Most successful entrepreneurs know how to motivate their employees
so the business grows overall. They are very good at highlighting the benefits
of any situation and coaching others to their success. 9. Strong work ethic The
successful entrepreneur will often be the first person to arrive at the office
and the last one to leave. They will come in on their days off to make sure
that an outcome meets their expectations. Their mind is constantly on their
work, whether they are in or out of the workplace. 10. Passion Passion is the
most important trait of the successful entrepreneur. They genuinely love their
work. They are willing to put in those extra hours to make the business succeed
because there is a joy their business gives which goes beyond the money. The
successful entrepreneur will always be reading and researching ways to make the
business better. Successful entrepreneurs want to see what the view is like at
the top of the business mountain. Once they see it, they want to go further.
They know how to talk to their employees, and their businesses soar as a
result. Concept. It has assumed super importance for accelerating economic
growth both in developed and developing countries. It promotes capital
formation and creates wealth in country. It is hope and dreams of millions of
individuals around the world. It reduces unemployment and poverty and it is a
pathway to prosper. Entrepreneurship is the process of exploring the
opportunities in the market place and arranging resources required to exploit
these opportunities for long term gain. It is the process of planning,
organising, opportunities and assuming. Thus it is a risk of business
enterprise. It may be distinguished as an ability to take risk independently to
make utmost earnings in the market. It is a creative and innovative skill and
adapting response to environment. Promotion. Given entrepreneurship's potential
to support economic growth, it is the policy goal of many governments to
develop a culture of entrepreneurial thinking. This can be done in a number of
ways: by integrating entrepreneurship into education systems, legislating to
encourage risk-taking, and national campaigns. An example of the latter is the
United Kingdom's Enterprise Week. Outside of the political world, research has
been conducted on the presence of entrepreneurial theories in doctoral
economics programs. Dan Johansson, fellow at the Ratio Institute in Sweden,
finds such content to be sparse. He fears this will dilute doctoral programs
and fail to train young economists to analyze problems in a relevant way. Many
of these initiatives have been brought together under the umbrella of Global
Entrepreneurship Week, a worldwide celebration and promotion of youth
entrepreneurship, which started in 2008. Financial Bootstrapping. Financial
bootstrapping is a term used to cover different methods for avoiding using the
financial resources of external investors. Bootstrapping can be defined as “a
collection of methods used to minimize the amount of outside debt and equity
financing needed from banks and investors”. The use of private credit card
debt is the most known form of bootstrapping, but a wide variety of methods are
available for entrepreneurs. While bootstrapping involves a risk for the
founders, the absence of any other stakeholder gives the founders more freedom
to develop the company. Many successful companies including Dell Computers and
Facebook were founded this way. External financing. Many businesses need more
capital than can be provided by the owners themselves, and in this case a range
of options are available including: Some of these source provide not only
funds, but also financial oversight, accountability for carrying out tasks and
meeting milestones, and in some cases business contacts and experience - in
many cases in return for an equity stake.
