Entrepreneurial economics "Entrepreneurial Economics" is the study of the
entrepreneur and entrepreneurship within the economy. The accumulation of
factors of production per se does not explain economic development. They are
necessary inputs in production, but they are not sufficient for economic
growth. Human creativity and productive entrepreneurship are needed to combine
these inputs in profitable ways, and hence an institutional environment that
encourages free entrepreneurship becomes the ultimate determinant of economic
growth. Thus, the entrepreneur and entrepreneurship should take center stage in
any effort to explain long-term economic development. Early economic theory,
however did not lay proper attention to the entrepreneur. “The theoretical
firm is entrepreneurless – the Prince of Denmark has been expunged from the
discussion of Hamlet”. This oft-quoted observation was made by William J.
Baumol in the American Economic Review. The article was a prod to the economics
profession to attend to this neglected factor. If entrepreneurship remains as
important to the economy as ever, then the continuing failure of mainstream
economics to adequately account for entrepreneurship indicates that fundamental
principles require re-evaluation. The characteristics of an entrepreneurial
economy are high levels of innovation combined with high level of
entrepreneurship which result in the creation of new ventures as well as new
sectors and industries. Entrepreneurship is difficult to analyse using the
traditional tools of economics e.g. calculus and general equilibrium models.
Current textbooks have only a passing reference to the concept of
entrepreneurship and the entrepreneur. Equilibrium models are central to
mainstream economics, and exclude entrepreneurship. Joseph Schumpeter and
Israel Kirzner argued that entrepreneurs do not tolerate equilibrium. Studies
about entrepreneurs in Economics, Psychology and Sociology largely relate to
four major currents of thought. Early thinkers such as Max Weber emphasized its
occurrence in the context of a religious belief system, thereby suggesting that
some belief systems do not encourage entrepreneurship. This contention has,
however, been challenged by many sociologists. Some thinkers such as K
Samuelson believe that there is no relationship between religion, economic
development and entrepreneurship. Karl Marx considered the economic system and
mode of production as its sole determinants. Weber suggested a direct relation
between the ethics and economic system as both interacted intensively. Another
current of thought underscores the motivational aspects of personal
achievement. This overemphasized the individual and his values, attitudes and
personality. This thought, however, has been severely criticized by many
scholars such as Kilby (1971) and Kunkel (1971). International entrepreneurs.
EDI Ahmedabad, of India conducted a study under the guidance of Prof. David C.
McClelland, a renowned behavioral scientist, to identify a set of competencies
or characteristics of successful entrepreneurs in India, Malawi & Ecuador. He
found that certain characteristics are cross-culturally valid, and concluded
that these competencies are necessary in varying measures in all the cultures
and countries and linked these with the nature of socialization in the society.
A third group of thinkers emphasized the existence of economic
entrepreneurship. The economists assume that factors of production are highly
mobile; that inputs and outputs are homogenous, and that producers, consumers
and resource owners have knowledge of all open possibilities. In underdeveloped
countries, ideal conditions do not exist. As such, the entrepreneurship
envisaged by economists cannot be developed in such a country by considering
the economic dimensions alone. A fourth school of thought attached importance
to the managerial aspects. They emphasized perception of market opportunities
as well as operational skills, required to run a business or an industry. A
critical evaluation of these four major currents of thought however, reveals
certain common characteristics. These include the identification and perception
of economic opportunity, technical, organizational and behavioral skills,
managerial competence, and motivation to achieve results. The various concepts
and theories propounded by researchers seem to indicate that the developing
entrepreneurs in a society depend upon closely interlinked economic, social,
religious, cultural and psychological variables. Prof. Frank Knight Hawley, A.
C. Pigou and others opine that entrepreneurs bear the uncertainty & risk of
production. The theory alone is unable to explain the occupational choice
question. To build a development model of entrepreneurship it is necessary to
look at some of the other characteristics that help explain why some people are
entrepreneurs; risk may be a factor, but it is not the only one. Schumpeter.
Schumpeter’s concept is a synthesis of three different notions of
entrepreneur: risk bearer, innovator and a coordinator cum manager. He assigned
the role of innovator to the entrepreneur and not to the capitalist.
Capitalists supply capital while entrepreneurs innovate. He stated that
’whatever the type, everyone is entrepreneur only when he actually carries
out a new combination and loses that character as soon as he has built up his
business, when he settles to running it as other people run their business’.
The focus here is not on a category of person, but on a function. He was
perhaps influenced by his family history. The entrepreneur has been perceived
as someone who disrupts an existing equilibrium. Innovation is a chaotic,
unpredictable economic process, which cannot be modeled using the equilibrium
based analytical methods used in mainstream economic theory. Challenging
'fundamental principles' like equilibrium models, rational agent, maximization
paradigm, the traditional production function, by applying insight from other
disciplines like theoretical physics (thermodynamics, entropy) might be the way
forward in the study of entrepreneurial economics. Two types of theories
attempt to explain entrepreneurs. One is a sociological approach, which
suggests that as a result of withdrawal of status, some social classes will
work to fill the void and be more entrepreneurial. The other is an economic
approach which implies entrepreneurs identify and fill market gaps. Following
Schumpeter (entrepreneur as an innovator), Leibenstein postulates that the
entrepreneurs are gap-fillers i.e. they have the ability to perceive market
opportunities and to develop new goods/services that are not currently being
supplied. He postulates that entrepreneurs have the special ability to connect
markets and make up for market deficiencies. Additionally, drawing from the
theories of J.B. Say and Cantillon, Leibenstein suggests that entrepreneurs
have the ability to combine various inputs into new innovations in order to
satisfy unfulfilled market demand. Drucker. Peter F. Drucker defines an
entrepreneur as a person who looks out for change, responds to it and exploits
the opportunity generated by the change. It may mean a new business, new
product or a new service. He claims that a resource becomes an economic
resource only when an entrepreneur finds a use for it. Some thinkers suggest
that entrepreneurs are to be found in social sectors e.g., non-governmental
organizations as well, i.e., social entrepreneurs. Another innovator type is
the intrapreneur, who perform entrepreneurial functions, but bear less risk,
because they work in an existing organization. These people innovate, but bear
less risk, and also may not get rewards in proportion to the success of the new
venture, but they certainly are change agents. Coase. Coase believes economics
has become a "theory-driven" subject that has moved into a paradigm in which
conclusions take precedence over problems. "If you look at a page of a
scientific journal like Nature," he said, "every few weeks you have statements
such as, 'We’ll have to think it out again. These results aren’t going the
way we thought they would.' Well, in economics, the results always go the way
we thought they would because we approach the problems in the same way, only
asking certain questions. Entrepreneurial Economics challenges fundamental
principles, using insights from models and theories in the natural sciences."
References. Palgrave Macmillan.
