Entrepreneur An entrepreneur () is an enterprising individual who builds
capital through risk and/or initiative. The term was originally a loanword from
French and was first defined by the Irish-French economist Richard Cantillon.
This term first appeared in the French Dictionary "Dictionnaire Universal de
Commerce" of Jacques des Bruslons published in 1723. Over time, scholars have
defined the term in different ways. Here are some of their definitions.
Influences and characteristics of entrepreneurial behavior. Management skill
and strong team building abilities are often perceived as essential leadership
attributes for successful entrepreneurs. Robert B. Reich considers leadership,
management ability, and team-building as essential qualities of an
entrepreneur. This concept has its origins in the work of Richard Cantillon in
his "Essai sur la Nature du Commerce en" (1755) and Jean-Baptiste Say in his
"Treatise on Political Economy. Psychological studies show that the
psychological propensities for male and female entrepreneurs are more similar
than different. A growing body of work shows that entrepreneurial behavior is
dependent on social and economic factors. For example, countries with healthy
and diversified labor markets or stronger safety nets show a more favorable
ratio of opportunity-driven rather than necessity-driven women entrepreneurs.
Empirical studies suggest that male entrepreneurs possess strong negotiating
skills and consensus-forming abilities. Research studies that explore the
characteristics and personality traits of, and influences on, the entrepreneur
have come to differing conclusions. Most, however, agree on certain consistent
entrepreneurial traits and environmental influences. Although certain
entrepreneurial traits are required, entrepreneurial behaviours are also
dynamic and influenced by environmental factors. Shane and Venkataraman (2000)
argue that the entrepreneur is solely concerned with opportunity recognition
and exploitation, although the opportunity that is recognised depends on the
type of entrepreneur; while Ucbasaran et al. (2001) argue there are many
different types contingent upon environmental and personal circumstances.
Jesper Sørensen has argued that some of the most significant influences on an
individual's decision to become an entrepreneur are workplace peers and the
social composition of the workplace. In researching the likelihood of becoming
an entrepreneur based upon working with former entrepreneurs, Sørensen
discovered a correlation between working with former entrepreneurs and how
often these individuals become entrepreneurs themselves, compared to those who
did not work with entrepreneurs. The social composition of the workplace can
influence entrepreneurism in workplace peers by proving a possibility for
success, causing a “He can do it, why can’t I?” attitude. As Sørensen
stated, “When you meet others who have gone out on their own, it doesn’t
seem that crazy.” Perception of entrepreneurs. The ability of entrepreneurs
to innovate is thought to relate to innate traits such as extroversion and a
proclivity for risk-taking. According to Schumpeter, the capabilities of
innovating, introducing new technologies, increasing efficiency and
productivity, or generating new products or services, are characteristic
qualities of entrepreneurs. Entrepreneurs are catalysts for economic change,
and researchers argue that entrepreneurs are highly creative individuals with a
tendency to imagine new solutions by finding opportunities for profit or
reward. Largely due to the influence of Schumpeter's heroic conceptions of
entrepreneurs, it is widely maintained that entrepreneurs are unusual
individuals. In line with this view, there is an emerging research tradition
investigating the genetic factors that are perceived to make entrepreneurs so
distinctive (Nicolaou and Shane, 2009). However, there are also critical
perspectives that attribute these research attitudes to oversimplified
methodological and/or philosophical assumptions (Gartner, 2001). For example,
it has been argued that entrepreneurs are not that distinctive, but that it is
in essence unrealistic preconceptions about "non-entrepreneurs" that maintain
laudatory portraits of "entrepreneurs" (Ramoglou, 2011). Classification of
entrepreneurs. 1) Innovative entrepreneur: Such entrepreneurs introduce new
goods or new methods of production or discover new markets or reorganize the
enterprise. EX: new product, new ways of product, new markets and reorganise
the enterprise. 2) Imitative or adoptive entrepreneur: Such entrepreneurs
don’t innovate or copy technology or technique of others. EX: Chinese
mobiles. 3) Fabian entrepreneur: Such entrepreneur display grates situation and
scepticism in experimenting with any change in their enterprise. They change
only when there is a serious threat to the very existence of the enterprise. 4)
Drone entrepreneurs: Such entrepreneurs are characterised by a diehard
conservatism and may even be prepared to suffer the losses. EX: Acc. To MC
Kinsey in 2015, 110-130 million people will be unemployed out of which 90-100
million people will be Fresher. 1) Prime mover: This entrepreneur sets in
motion a powerful sequence of development expansion and diversification of
business. EX: Ambani 2) Manager: such an entrepreneur doesn’t initiate
expansion and its content in just staying in business. 3) Minor innovator: This
entrepreneur contributes to economic progress by finding better use for
existing resources. EX: minimum wastage maximum production. 4) Satellite: This
entrepreneur assumes a suppliers role and slowly move towards a productive
enterprise. 5) Local trading: such entrepreneur limits his enterprise to the
local market. 1) Manufacturing 2) Whole selling 3) Retailing 4) Service 1) The
improver: They have unwavering to run these businesses with high integrity and
ethics. EX: MS Oberoi – Oberoi hotels Kiron Majumdar – Biocom ltd. Ballabh
Prasad Aggarwal – Priyagold Ajay Piramil – Piramil glan, Piramil R&D. 2)
The advisor: “Customer is right and we must do everything to please him”
because company is built by advisors and advisors become customer focused. 3)
The superstar: All depends upon the charisma and on the high energy of the
superstar CEO. EX: Richard Branson (400 co’s/Virgin coin), Larry Papa
(Google), Lt. Steve Jobs (Apple), Ratan Tata (Tata sons). 4) The artists: Are
highly creative type, very conscious about business. If feedback is
constructive i.e. positive than also lets go with negative self-image. EX:
Aamir Khan, Michael Dell (Dell), Deep Kalra (Make my trip), MC Cormich (EMI).
5) The visionary: Too focused on dreams with little focused on reality. EX:
Jack Welch (GE), Bill Gates (Microsoft), Kishore Biyani (Future Group), Warner
Buffet (Berkshire Hathaway), Sam Walton (Wall Mart). 6) The analyst: More
focused on fixing problems in a systematic way. EX: Gordon Hore (Intel), Rana
Kapur (Yes Bank), Gautam Adani (Adani Groups) 7) The fireball: A business owned
and operated by a fireball is full of life, energy and optimism. They have “A
get it done attitude in a playful manner”. EX:Malcon Forbes – Forbes
magazine Sanjeev Bikchandani – Info Edge (Naukri.com) 8) The hero: Have an
incredible will and ability to lead the world and your business through
challenges. EX: Dhiru Bhai Ambani, Rahul Bajaj, Vijay maliya. 9) The healer:
They provide nurturing harmony to their business, they have uncanny abilities
to survive and persists inner calm. EX: Dr. Bindeshwar Pathak (Sulabh
International), Kumar Manglam Birla (Son of L.M Birla). Theory-based
Typologies. Recent advances in entrepreneurship research indicate that the
differences in entrepreneurs and the heterogeneity in their behaviors and
actions can be traced back to their the founder's identity. For instance,
Fauchart and Gruber (2011) have recently utilized social identity theory to
illustrate that entrepreneurs can be distinguished in three main types:
Darwinians, Communitarians and Missionaries. These types of founders not only
diverge in fundamental ways in terms of their self-views and their social
motivations in entrepreneurship, but also engage fairly differently in new firm
creation.
