Environmentalism Environmentalism is a broad philosophy, ideology and social
movement regarding concerns for environmental conservation and improvement of
the health of the environment, particularly as the measure for this health
seeks to incorporate the concerns of non-human elements. Environmentalism
advocates the preservation, restoration and/or improvement of the natural
environment, and may be referred to as a movement to control pollution. For
this reason, concepts such as a land ethic, environmental ethics, biodiversity,
ecology and the biophilia hypothesis figure predominantly. At its crux,
environmentalism is an attempt to balance relations between humans and the
various natural systems on which they depend in such a way that all the
components are accorded a proper degree of respect. The exact nature of this
balance is controversial and there are many different ways for environmental
concerns to be expressed in practice. Environmentalism and environmental
concerns are often represented by the color green, but this association has
been appropriated by the marketing industries and is a key tactic of
greenwashing. Environmentalism as a social movement. Environmentalism
denominates a social movement that seeks to influence the political process by
lobbying, activism, and education in order to protect natural resources and
ecosystems. An environmentalist is a person who may speak out about our natural
environment and the sustainable management of its resources through changes in
public policy or individual behavior. This may include supporting practices
such as informed consumption, conservation initiatives, investment in renewable
energy, improved efficiencies in the materials economy, transitioning to new
accounting paradigms such as Ecological economics and renewing and revitalizing
our connections with non-human life. In various ways (for example, grassroots
activism and protests), environmentalists and environmental organizations seek
to give the natural world a stronger voice in human affairs. History. A concern
for environmental protection has recurred in diverse forms, in different parts
of the world, throughout history. For example, in Europe, King Edward I of
England banned the burning of sea-coal by proclamation in London in 1272, after
its smoke had become a problem. The fuel was so common in England that this
earliest of names for it was acquired because it could be carted away from some
shores by the wheelbarrow. Air pollution would continue to be a problem in
England, especially later during the Industrial Revolution, and extending into
the recent past with the Great Smog of 1952. Origins of the modern
environmental movement. In Europe, the Industrial Revolution gave rise to
modern environmental pollution as it is generally understood today. The
emergence of great factories and consumption of immense quantities of coal and
other fossil fuels gave rise to unprecedented air pollution and the large
volume of industrial chemical discharges added to the growing load of untreated
human waste. The first large-scale, modern environmental laws came in the form
of the British Alkali Acts, passed in 1863, to regulate the deleterious air
pollution (gaseous hydrochloric acid) given off by the Leblanc process, used to
produce soda ash. Environmentalism grew out of the amenity movement, which was
a reaction to industrialization, the growth of cities, and worsening air and
water pollution. In Victorian Britain, an early "Back-to-Nature" movement that
anticipated modern environmentalism was advocated by intellectuals such as John
Ruskin, William Morris and Edward Carpenter, who were all against consumerism,
pollution and other activities that were harmful to the natural world. Their
ideas also inspired various proto-environmental groups in the UK, such as the
Commons Preservation Society, the Kyrle Society, the Royal Society for the
Protection of Birds and the Garden city movement, as well as encouraging the
Socialist League and The Clarion movement to advocate measures of nature
conservation. In the United States, the beginnings of an environmental movement
can be traced as far back as 1739, though it was not called environmentalism
and was still considered conservation until the 1950s. Benjamin Franklin and
other Philadelphia residents, citing "public rights," petitioned the
Pennsylvania Assembly to stop waste dumping and remove tanneries from
Philadelphia's commercial district. The US movement expanded in the 1800s, out
of concerns for protecting the natural resources of the West, with individuals
such as John Muir and Henry David Thoreau making key philosophical
contributions. Thoreau was interested in peoples' relationship with nature and
studied this by living close to nature in a simple life. He published his
experiences in the book "Walden," which argues that people should become
intimately close with nature. Muir came to believe in nature's inherent right,
especially after spending time hiking in Yosemite Valley and studying both the
ecology and geology. He successfully lobbied congress to form Yosemite National
Park and went on to set up the Sierra Club. The conservationist principles as
well as the belief in an inherent right of nature were to become the bedrock of
modern environmentalism. In the 20th century, environmental ideas continued to
grow in popularity and recognition. Efforts were starting to be made to save
some wildlife, particularly the American Bison. The death of the last Passenger
Pigeon as well as the endangerment of the American Bison helped to focus the
minds of conservationists and popularize their concerns. In 1916 the National
Park Service was founded by US President Woodrow Wilson. The Nazis had elements
which were supportive of animal rights, zoos and wildlife, and took several
measures to ensure their protection. In 1933 the government enacted a stringent
animal-protection law. Many NSDAP leaders including Adolf Hitler and Hermann
Göring were supporters of animal protection. Several Nazis were
environmentalists (notably Rudolf Hess), and species protection and animal
welfare were significant issues in the regime. Heinrich Himmler made efforts to
ban the hunting of animals. Göring was an animal lover and conservationist.
The current animal welfare laws in Germany are more or less modification of the
laws introduced by the National Socialist regime. In 1935, the regime enacted
the "Reich Nature Protection Act". The concept of the "Dauerwald" (best
translated as the "perpetual forest") which included concepts such as forest
management and protection was promoted and efforts were also made to curb air
pollution. In 1949, "A Sand County Almanac" by Aldo Leopold was published. It
explained Leopold’s belief that humankind should have moral respect for the
environment and that it is unethical to harm it. The book is sometimes called
the most influential book on conservation. Throughout the 1950s, 1960s, 1970s
and beyond, photography was used to enhance public awareness of the need for
protecting land and recruiting members to environmental organizations. David
Brower, Ansel Adams and Nancy Newhall created the Sierra Club Exhibit Format
Series, which helped raise public environmental awareness and brought a rapidly
increasing flood of new members to the Sierra Club and to the environmental
movement in general. "This Is Dinosaur" edited by Wallace Stegner with
photographs by Martin Litton and Philip Hyde prevented the building of dams
within Dinosaur National Monument by becoming part of a new kind of activism
called environmentalism that combined the conservationist ideals of Thoreau,
Leopold and Muir with hard-hitting advertising, lobbying, book distribution,
letter writing campaigns, and more. The powerful use of photography in addition
to the written word for conservation dated back to the creation of Yosemite
National Park, when photographs convinced Abraham Lincoln to preserve the
beautiful glacier carved landscape for all time. The Sierra Club Exhibit Format
Series galvanized public opposition to building dams in the Grand Canyon and
protected many other national treasures. The Sierra Club often led a coalition
of many environmental groups including the Wilderness Society and many others.
After a focus on preserving wilderness in the 1950s and 1960s, the Sierra Club
and other groups broadened their focus to include such issues as air and water
pollution, population control, and curbing the exploitation of natural
resources. In 1962, "Silent Spring" by American biologist Rachel Carson was
published. The book cataloged the environmental impacts of the indiscriminate
spraying of DDT in the US and questioned the logic of releasing large amounts
of chemicals into the environment without fully understanding their effects on
ecology or human health. The book suggested that DDT and other pesticides may
cause cancer and that their agricultural use was a threat to wildlife,
particularly birds. The resulting public concern led to the creation of the
United States Environmental Protection Agency in 1970 which subsequently banned
the agricultural use of DDT in the US in 1972. The limited use of DDT in
disease vector control continues to this day in certain parts of the world and
remains controversial. The book's legacy was to produce a far greater awareness
of environmental issues and interest into how people affect the environment.
With this new interest in environment came interest in problems such as air
pollution and petroleum spills, and environmental interest grew. New pressure
groups formed, notably Greenpeace and Friends of the Earth, as well as notable
local organizations such as the Wyoming Outdoor Council, which was founded in
1967. 1970s. In the 1970s the environmental movement gained rapid speed in the
U.S. and around the world. The Chipko movement was formed in India; influenced
by Mohandas Gandhi, they set up peaceful resistance to deforestation by
literally hugging trees (leading to the term "tree huggers"). Their peaceful
methods of protest and slogan "ecology is permanent economy" were very
influential. Another milestone in the movement was the creation of an Earth
Day. Earth Day was first observed in San Francisco and other cities on March
21, 1970, the first day of Spring. It was created to give awareness to
environmental issues. On March 21, 1971, United Nations Secretary-General U
Thant spoke of a spaceship Earth on Earth Day, hereby referring to the
ecosystem services the earth supplies to us, and hence our obligation to
protect it (and with it, ourselves). Earth Day is now coordinated globally by
the Earth Day Network, and is celebrated in more than 175 countries every year.
The UN's first major conference on international environmental issues, the
United Nations Conference on the Human Environment (also known as the Stockholm
Conference), was held on June 5–16, 1972. It marked a turning point in the
development of international environmental politics. By the mid-1970s, many
felt that people were on the edge of environmental catastrophe. The Back-to-
the-land movement started to form and ideas of environmental ethics joined with
anti-Vietnam War sentiments and other political issues. These individuals lived
outside normal society and started to take on some of the more radical
environmental theories such as deep ecology. Around this time more mainstream
environmentalism was starting to show force with the signing of the Endangered
Species Act in 1973 and the formation of CITES in 1975. Significant amendments
were also enacted to the United States Clean Air Act and Clean Water Act. In
1979, James Lovelock, a British scientist, published "Gaia: A new look at life
on Earth", which put forth the Gaia Hypothesis; it proposes that life on Earth
can be understood as a single organism. This became an important part of the
Deep Green ideology. Throughout the rest of the history of environmentalism
there has been debate and argument between more radical followers of this Deep
Green ideology and more mainstream environmentalists. 1980s. During the 1980s
the growing awareness of global warming and other climate change issues brought
environmentalism into greater public debate. In 1986 the international
conservation organisation the World Wildlife Fund renamed itself the Worldwide
Fund For Nature to reflect a shift to a more strategic approach. Still known as
WWF, however, the organisation brought together religious authorities
representing the five major world religions (Buddhism, Christianity, Hinduism,
Islam, and Judaism) to prepare the 1986 Assisi Declarations. These theological
statements, published by the WWF and UNEP, identified the responsibilities
towards the care of nature expected of followers of each religion thus
providing spiritual motivation for environmental action. The full texts, with
additional similar declarations from Bahá’ísm, Jainism, Shintoism, Sikhism
and Zoroastrianism were later included in the 2003 World Bank publication
'Faith In Conservation'. Environmentalism today. Environmentalism has also
changed to deal with new issues such as global warming, overpopulation and
genetic engineering. Many youth of today's society have become more aware of
the state of the planet and are deeming themselves environmentalists. School
Eco Clubs are now working to create new ideals for the future through
sustainable schools and other minor changes in student lives like buying
organic food, clothing and personal care items. In the future, many of the jobs
opening up will have environmentalist aspects. Environmental movement. The
environmental movement (a term that sometimes includes the conservation and
green movements) is a diverse scientific, social, and political movement. In
general terms, environmentalists advocate the sustainable management of
resources, and the protection (and restoration, when necessary) of the natural
environment through changes in public policy and individual behavior. In its
recognition of humanity as a participant in ecosystems, the movement is
centered around ecology, health, and human rights. Though the movement is
represented by a range of organizations, because of the inclusion of
environmentalism in the classroom curriculum, the environmental movement has a
younger demographic than is common in other social movements (see green
seniors). Environmentalism as a movement covers broad areas of institutional
oppression. Examples of these oppressions are: consumption of ecosystems and
natural resources into waste, dumping waste into disadvantaged communities, air
pollution, water pollution, weak infrastructure, exposure of organic life to
toxins, mono-culture, anti-polythene drive (jhola movement) and various other
focuses. Because of these divisions, the environmental movement can be
categorized into these primary focuses: Environmental Science, Environmental
Activism, Environmental Advocacy, and Environmental Justice. Free market
environmentalism. Free market environmentalism is a theory that argues that the
free market, property rights, and tort law provide the best tools to preserve
the health and sustainability of the environment. It considers environmental
stewardship to be natural, as well as the expulsion of polluters and other
aggressors through individual and class action. Evangelical environmentalism.
Evangelical environmentalism is an environmental movement in the United States
in which some Evangelicals have emphasized biblical mandates concerning
humanity's role as steward and subsequent responsibility for the caretaking of
Creation. While the movement has focused on different environmental issues, it
is best known for its focus of addressing climate action from a biblically
grounded theological perspective. The Evangelical Climate Initiative argues
that human-induced climate change will have severe consequences and impact the
poor the hardest, and that God's mandate to Adam to care for the Garden of Eden
also applies to evangelicals today, and that it is therefore a moral obligation
to work to mitigate climate impacts and support communities in adapting to
change. Preservation and conservation. Environmental preservation in the United
States and other parts of the world, including Australia, is viewed as the
setting aside of natural resources to prevent damage caused by contact with
humans or by certain human activities, such as logging, mining, hunting, and
fishing, often to replace them with new human activities such as tourism and
recreation. Regulations and laws may be enacted for the preservation of natural
resources. Environmental organizations and conferences. Environmental
organizations can be global, regional, national or local; they can be
government-run or private (NGO). Environmentalist activity exists in almost
every country. Moreover, groups dedicated to community development and social
justice also focus on environmental concerns. There are some volunteer
organizations. For example Ecoworld and Paryawaran Sachetak Samiti which is
about the environment and is based in team work and volunteer work. Some US
environmental organizations, among them the Natural Resources Defense Council
and the Environmental Defense Fund, specialize in bringing lawsuits (a tactic
seen as particularly useful in that country). Other groups, such as the US-
based National Wildlife Federation, the Nature Conservancy, and The Wilderness
Society, and global groups like the World Wide Fund for Nature and Friends of
the Earth, disseminate information, participate in public hearings, lobby,
stage demonstrations, and may purchase land for preservation. Statewide
nonprofit organizations such as the Wyoming Outdoor Council often collaborate
with these national organizations and employ similar strategies. Smaller
groups, including Wildlife Conservation International, conduct research on
endangered species and ecosystems. More radical organizations, such as
Greenpeace, Earth First!, and the Earth Liberation Front, have more directly
opposed actions they regard as environmentally harmful. While Greenpeace is
devoted to nonviolent confrontation as a means of bearing witness to
environmental wrongs and bringing issues into the public realm for debate, the
underground "Earth Liberation Front" engages in the clandestine destruction of
property, the release of caged or penned animals, and other criminal acts. Such
tactics are regarded as unusual within the movement, however. On an
international level, concern for the environment was the subject of a United
Nations Conference on the Human Environment in Stockholm in 1972, attended by
114 nations. Out of this meeting developed UNEP (United Nations Environment
Programme) and the follow-up United Nations Conference on Environment and
Development in 1992. Other international organizations in support of
environmental policies development include the Commission for Environmental
Cooperation (as part of NAFTA), the European Environment Agency (EEA), and the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC). Usage in popular culture.
From at least 1946, American comics with an environmental, conservation or
outdoor theme have appeared; including "Mark Trail", Smokey the Bear and
"Woodsy Owl". Criticisms. Criticism of environmentalism tend to fall into two
major categories: environmental skepticism and anti-environmentalism.
Environmental skeptics, such as Bjørn Lomborg (the author of The Skeptical
Environmentalist) dispute the claims of environmentalists, claiming they are
either inaccurate or exaggerated. Anti-environmentalists, on the other hand,
accept many of the claims made by environmentalists while simultaneously
accepting that change is inevitable, regardless of cause and speed. They do not
deny the impact of humanity, but they dispute the argument that humanity can
kill the planet, citing life's several billion year history as evidence that it
is more resilient than many environmentalists realize.
