Equal opportunity Equal opportunity is a stipulation that all people should be
treated similarly, unhampered by artificial barriers or prejudices or
preferences, except when particular “distinctions can be explicitly
justified.” The aim according to this often "complex and contested concept"
is that important jobs should go to those “most qualified” – persons most
likely to perform ably in a given task – and not go to persons for arbitrary
or irrelevant reasons, such as circumstances of birth, upbringing, friendship
ties to whoever is in power, religion, sex, ethnicity, race, caste, or
“involuntary personal attributes” such as disability, age, or sexual
preferences. Chances for advancement should be open to everybody interested
such that they have “an equal chance to compete within the framework of goals
and the structure of rules established.” The idea is to remove arbitrariness
from the selection process and base it on some “pre-agreed basis of fairness,
with the assessment process being related to the type of position,” and
emphasizing procedural and legal means. Individuals should succeed or fail
based on their own efforts and not "extraneous circumstances" such as having
well-connected parents. It is opposed to nepotism and plays a role in whether a
social structure is seen as legitimate. Differing political viewpoints. People
with differing political viewpoints often see the concept differently. The
meaning of "equal opportunity" is debated in fields such as political
philosophy, sociology and psychology. It is being applied to increasingly wider
areas beyond employment including lending, housing, college admissions, voting
rights, and elsewhere. In the classical sense, "equality of opportunity" is
closely aligned with the concept of equality before the law and ideas of
meritocracy. Theory of equal opportunity. Outlines of the concept. According to
the "Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy", the concept assumes that society is
stratified with a diverse range of roles, some of which are more desirable than
others. And the benefit of equality of opportunity is to bring fairness to the
selection process for coveted roles in corporations, associations, nonprofits,
universities, and elsewhere. There is no "formal linking" between equality of
opportunity and political structure, according to one view, in the sense that
there can be equality of opportunity in democracies, autocracies, and in
communist nations, although it is primarily associated with a competitive
market economy and embedded within the legal frameworks of democratic
societies. People with different political perspectives see "equality of
opportunity" differently: liberals disagree about which conditions are needed
to ensure it; many "old-style" conservatives see inequality and hierarchy in
general as beneficial out of a respect for tradition. It can apply to a
specific hiring decision, or to all hiring decisions by a specific company, or
rules governing hiring decisions for an entire nation. The scope of "equal
opportunity" has expanded to cover more than issues regarding the rights of
minority groups, but covers practices regarding "recruitment, hiring, training,
layoffs, discharge, recall, promotions, responsibility, wages, sick leave,
vacation, overtime, insurance, retirement, pensions, and various other
benefits." The concept has been applied to numerous aspects of public life,
including accessibility of polling stations, care provided to HIV patients,
whether men and women have equal opportunities to travel on a spaceship,
bilingual education, skin color of models in Brazil, television time for
political candidates, army promotions, admittance to universities, and
ethnicity in the United States. The term is interrelated with and often
contrasted with other conceptions of equality such as equality of outcome and
equality of autonomy. Basic model. People generally think of equality of
opportunity in terms of the rules of a certain society and in situations where
there is a certain job to be filled. For example, a call goes out for people to
apply for a specific job. All persons who might be interested in this job learn
about it, that is, they are informed in some way that the position is
available. Then, they indicate that they want to apply for this position –
all eligible people should have a chance to compete for this job. At this point
the evaluation stage begins – this is the official "starting point". The
competition is often thought of using the metaphor of a running race. Next,
there is a formal process to determine which applicant gets the job, and this
selection process should be related to what the job is about, that is, the
evaluation should consider the "qualifications deemed relevant to successful
performance in a position or program." For example, if a firefighter position
is open, then applicants may have to demonstrate their ability to carry a heavy
sack up a flight of stairs; if a professor's post is open, then applicants may
have to show that they have the requisite degrees. But the process of assigning
"individuals to places in the social hierarchy is determined by some form of
competitive process." The selection process should not be based on some
arbitrary or irrelevant criterion such as religion or skin color, but rather
should emphasize "individual abilities and ambition" or, as Martin Luther King,
Jr. said in his famous "I Have a Dream" speech that he hoped his four children
would be judged not by the "color of their skin but by the content of their
character." Then, from this "starting gate" position, regardless of the
particular view of equality of opportunity, applicants are seen as essentially
accountable for the results from that point onwards – whether they succeed or
fail is up to their own ability at this point. And one applicant gets the job.
In a usual conception, equality of opportunity logically implies unequal
results afterwards, so there is support for the view that equality of
opportunity and equality of outcome are philosophically incompatible. Different
types. There are differing senses of what equality of opportunity is and
related notions, with slight variations and nuances. What is common to most of
the conceptions is that the individual is accountable when the race or
examination or review begins, but senses of equality of opportunity differ most
essentially on "when" the race should begin. Formal equality of opportunity.
This sense was also expressed by economists Milton and Rose Friedman in their
1980 book "Free to Choose". The Friedmans explained that equality of
opportunity was "not to be interpreted literally" since some children are born
blind while others are born sighted, but that "its real meaning is ... a career
open to the talents." This means that there should be "no arbitrary obstacles"
blocking a person from realizing their ambitions, and that "Not birth,
nationality, color, religion, sex, nor any other irrelevant characteristic
should determine the opportunities that are open to a person – only his
abilities." A somewhat different view was expressed by John Roemer who used the
term "nondiscrimination principle" to mean that "all individuals who possess
the attributes relevant for the performance of the duties of the position in
question be included in the pool of eligible candidates, and that an
individual's possible occupancy of the position be judged only with respect to
those relevant attributes." Matt Cavanagh argued that race and sex shouldn't
matter when getting a job, but that the sense of equality of opportunity should
not extend much further than preventing straightforward discrimination. It is a
relatively straightforward task for legislators to ban blatant efforts to favor
one group over another and encourage equality of opportunity as a result. Japan
banned gender-specific job descriptions in advertising as well as sexual
discrimination in employment as well as other practices deemed unfair, although
a subsequent report suggested that the law was having minimal effect in
securing Japanese women high positions in management. In the United States, the
Equal Employment Opportunity Commission sued a private test preparation firm,
Kaplan, for unfairly using credit histories to discriminate against African
Americans in terms of hiring decisions. According to one analysis, it is
possible to imagine a democracy which meets the formal criteria (1 through 3)
but which still favors wealthy candidates who are selected in free and fair
elections. Substantive equality of opportunity. In a sense, substantive
equality of opportunity moves the "starting point" further back in time.
Sometimes it entails the use of affirmative action policies to help all
contenders become equal before they get to the starting point, perhaps with
greater training, or sometimes redistributing resources via coercion or
taxation to make the contenders more equal. It holds that all who have a
"genuine opportunity to become qualified" be given a chance to do so. And it is
sometimes based on a recognition that unfairness exists, hindering social
mobility, combined with a sense that the unfairness should not exist or should
be lessened in some manner. One example postulated was that a warrior society
could provide special nutritional supplements to poor children, offer
scholarships to military academies, and dispatch "warrior skills coaches" to
every village as a way to make opportunity substantively more fair. The idea is
give every ambitious and talented youth a chance to compete for prize positions
regardless of their circumstances of birth. The "substantive" position was
advocated by Bhikhu Parekh in 2000 in "Rethinking Multiculturalism" who wrote
that "all citizens should enjoy equal opportunities to acquire the capacities
and skills needed to function in society and to pursue their self-chosen goals
equally effectively" and that "equalising measures are justified on grounds of
justice as well as social integration and harmony." Parekh argued that equal
opportunities included so-called "cultural rights" which are "ensured by the
politics of recognition." Affirmative action programs usually fall under the
"substantive" category. The idea is to help disadvantaged groups get back to a
normal starting position after a long period of discrimination. The programs
involve government action, sometimes with resources being transferred from an
advantaged group to a disadvantaged one, and these programs have been justified
on the grounds that imposing quotas counterbalances the past discrimination as
well as being a "compelling state interest" in diversity in society. For
example, there was a case in Sao Paulo in Brazil of a quota imposed on the São
Paulo Fashion Week to require that "at least 10 percent of the models to be
black or indigenous", as a coercive measure to counteract a "longstanding bias
towards white models." It does not have to be accomplished via government
action; for example, in the 1980s in the United States, President Reagan
dismantled parts of affirmative action, but one report in the "Chicago Tribune"
suggested that companies remained committed to the principle of equal
opportunity regardless of government requirements. In another instance, upper-
middle class students taking the Scholastic Aptitude Test in the United States
performed better, since they had had more "economic and educational resources
to prepare for these test than others." The test, itself, was seen as fair in a
"formal" sense, but the overall result was seen as nevertheless unfair. In
India, the Indian Institutes of Technology found that to achieve "substantive"
equality of opportunity, the school had to reserve 22.5 percent of seats for
applicants from "historically disadvantaged schedule castes and tribes." Elite
universities in France began a special "entrance program" to help applicants
from "impoverished suburbs." Equality of fair opportunity. Economist Paul
Krugman agrees mostly with the Rawlsian approach in that he would like to
"create the society each of us would want if we didn’t know in advance who
we’d be. Krugman elaborated: "If you admit that life is unfair, and that
there’s only so much you can do about that at the starting line, then you can
try to ameliorate the consequences of that unfairness." Level playing field.
Some theorists have posed a "level playing field" conception of equality of
opportunity, similar in many respects to the "substantive" principle, (although
it has been used in different contexts to describe "formal" equality of
opportunity) and it is a core idea regarding the subject of distributive
justice espoused by John Roemer and Ronald Dworkin and others. Like the
"substantive" notion, the "level playing field" conception goes farther than
the usual "formal" approach. The idea is that initial "unchosen inequalities"
– prior circumstances over which an individual had no control but which
impact his or her success in a given competition for a particular post –
these unchosen inequalities should be eliminated as much as possible, according
to this conception. According to Roemer, society should "do what it can to
"level the playing field" so that all those with relevant potential will
eventually be admissible to pools of candidates competing for positions.
Afterwards, when an individual competes for a specific post, he or she might
make specific choices which cause future inequalities – and these
inequalities are deemed acceptable because of the previous presumption of
fairness. And this system helps undergird the legitimacy of a society's
divvying up of roles as a result in the sense that it makes certain achieved
inequalities "morally acceptable," according to persons who advocate this
approach. This conception has been contrasted to the "substantive" version
among some thinkers, and it usually has ramifications for how society treats
young persons in such areas as education and socialization and health care. But
this conception has been criticized as well. Rawls postulated the difference
principle which argued that "inequalities are justified only if needed to
improve the lot of the worst off, for example by giving the talented an
incentive to create wealth." Meritocracy. There is some overlap among these
different conceptions with the term meritocracy which describes an
administrative system which rewards such factors as individual intelligence,
credentials, education, morality, knowledge or other criteria believed to
confer "merit". Equality of opportunity is often seen as a major aspect of a
meritocracy. One view was that equality of opportunity was more focused on what
happens "before" the race begins, while meritocracy is more focused on fairness
at the competition stage. Moral senses. There is general agreement that
"equality of opportunity" is good for society, although there are diverse views
about how it is good, since it is a value judgement. It is generally viewed as
a positive political ideal in the abstract sense. In nations where equality of
opportunity is absent, it can negatively impact economic growth, according to
some views; one report in "Al Jazeera" suggested that Egypt, Tunisia, and other
Middle Eastern nations were stagnating economically in part because of a dearth
of equal opportunity. The principle of "equal opportunity" can conflict with
notions of meritocracy in circumstances in which individual differences in
human abilities are believed to be determined mostly by genetics; in such
circumstances, there can be conflict about how to achieve fairness in such
situations. Practical considerations. Difficulties with implementation. There
is general agreement that programs to bring about certain types of equality of
opportunity can be difficult, and that efforts to cause one result often have
unintended consequences or cause other problems. There is agreement that the
"formal" approach is easier to implement than the others, although there are
difficulties there too. A government policy that requires equal treatment can
pose problems for lawmakers. A requirement for government to provide equal
health care services for all citizens can be prohibitively expensive. If
government seeks equality of opportunity for citizens to get health care by
rationing services using a maximization model to try to save money, new
difficulties might emerge. For example, trying to ration health care by
maximizing the "quality-adjusted years of life" might steer monies away from
disabled persons even though they may be more deserving, according to one
analysis. In another instance, "BBC News" questioned whether it was wise to ask
female army recruits to undergo the same strenuous tests as their male
counterparts, since many women were being injured as a result. Age
discimination can present vexing challenges for policymakers trying to
implement equal opportunity. According to several studies, attempts to be
equally fair to both a young and an old person are problematic because the
older person has presumably fewer years left to live, and it may make more
sense for a society to invest greater resources in a younger person's health.
Treating both persons equally, while following the letter of the equality of
opportunity, seems unfair from a different perspective. Another difficulty is
that it is hard for a society to bring substantive equality of opportunity to
every type of position or industry. If a nation focuses efforts on some
industries or positions, then people with other talents may be left out. For
example, in an example in the "Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy", a warrior
society might provide equal opportunity for all kinds of people to achieve
military success through fair competition, but people with non-military skills
such as farming may be left out. Lawmakers have run into problems trying to
implement equality of opportunity. In 2010 in Britain, a legal requirement
"forcing public bodies to try to reduce inequalities caused by class
disadvantage" was scrapped after much debate, and replaced by a hope that
organizations would try to focus more on "fairness" than "equality"; fairness
is generally seen as a much vaguer concept than equality, but easier for
politicians to manage if they are seeking to avoid fractious debate. In New
York City, mayor Ed Koch tried to find ways to maintain the "principle of equal
treatment" while arguing against more "substantive" and abrupt transfer
payments called "minority set-asides". Difficulties with measurement. The
consensus view is that trying to measure equality of opportunity is difficult
whether examining a single hiring decision or looking at groups over time. It
is difficult to prove unequal treatment although statistical analysis can
provide indications of problems, but it is subject to conflicts over
interpretation and methodological issues. For example, a study in 2007 by the
University of Washington examined its own treatment of women. Researchers
collected statistics about female participation in numerous aspects of
university life, including percentages of women with full professorships (23%),
enrollment in programs such as nursing(90%) and engineering (18%). There is
wide variation in how these statistics might be interpreted. For example, the
23% figure for women with full professorships could be compared to the total
population of women (presumably 50%) perhaps using census data, or it might be
compared to the percentage of women with full professorships at competing
universities. It might be used in an analysis of how many women applied for the
position of full professor compared to how many women attained this position.
Further, the 23% figure could be used as a "benchmark" or "baseline" figure as
part of an ongoing "longitudinal analysis" to be compared with future surveys
to track progress over time. In addition, the strength of the conclusions is
subject to statistical issues such as sample size and bias. For reasons such as
these, there is considerable difficulty with most forms of statistical
interpretation. Statistical analysis of "equal opportunity" has been done using
sophisticated examinations of computer databases. An analysis in 2011 by
University of Chicago researcher Stefano Allesina examined 61,000 names of
Italian professors by looking at the "frequency of last names", doing one
million random drawings, and he suggested that Italian academia was
characterized by violations of "equal opportunity" practices as a result of
these investigations. The last names of Italian professors tended to be similar
more often than predicted by random chance. The study suggested that newspaper
accounts showing that "nine relatives from three generations of a single family
(were) on the economics faculty" at the University of Bari were not
aberrations, but indicated a pattern of nepotism throughout Italian academia.
There is support for the view that often "equality of opportunity" is measured
by the criteria of equality of outcome, although with difficulty. In one
example, an analysis of relative equality of opportunity was done based on
outcomes, such as a case to see whether hiring decisions were fair regarding
men versus women; the analysis was done using statistics based on average
salaries for different groups. In another instance, a cross-sectional
statistical analysis was conducted to see whether social class affected
participation in the United States Armed Forces during the Vietnam War; a
report in "Time Magazine" by MIT suggested that soldiers came from a variety of
social classes, and that the principle of equal opportunity had worked,
possibly because soldiers had been chosen by a lottery process for
conscription. In college admissions, equality of outcome can be measured
directly by comparing offers of admission given to different groups of
applicants; for example, there have been reports in newspapers of
discrimination against Asian-Americans regarding college admissions in the
United States which suggest that Asian-American applicants need higher grades
and test scores to win admission to prestigious universities than other ethnic
groups. Marketplace considerations. "Equal opportunity" has been described as a
fundamental "basic notion" in business and commerce, and described by economist
Adam Smith as a basic economic precept. There has been research suggesting that
"competitive markets will tend to drive out such discrimination" since
employers or institutions which hire based on arbitrary criteria will be weaker
as a result, and not perform as well as firms which embrace equality of
opportunity. Firms competing for overseas contracts have sometimes argued in
the press for equal chances during the bidding process, such as when American
oil corporations wanted equal shots at developing oil fields in Sumatra; and
firms, seeing how fairness is beneficial while competing for contracts, can
apply the lesson to other areas such as internal hiring and promotion
decisions. A report in "USA Today" suggested that the goal of equal opportunity
was "being achieved throughout most of the business and government labor
markets because major employers pay based on potential and actual
productivity." Fair opportunity practices include measures taken by an
organization to ensure fairness in the employment process. A basic definition
of equality is the idea of equal treatment and respect. In job advertisements
and descriptions, the fact that the employer is an equal opportunity employer
is sometimes indicated by the abbreviations EOE or MFDV which stands for
Minority, Female, Disabled, Veteran. Analyst Ross Douthat in "The New York
Times" suggested that equality of opportunity depends to a great extent on a
rising economy which brings new chances for upward mobility, and he suggested
that greater equality of opportunity is more easily achieved during "times of
plenty." Efforts to achieve equal opportunity can rise and recede, sometimes as
a result of economic conditions or political choices. History. According to
professor David Christian of MacQuarie University, an underlying "big history"
trend has been a shift from seeing people as resources to exploit towards a
perspective of seeing people as individuals to empower. According to Christian,
in many ancient agrarian civilizations, roughly nine of every ten persons was a
peasant exploited by a ruling class. In the past thousand years, there has been
a gradual movement in the direction of greater respect for equal opportunity,
as political structures based on generational hierarchies and feudalism broke
down during the late Middle Ages and new structures emerged during the
Renaissance. Monarchies were replaced by democracies; kings were replaced by
parliaments and congresses. Slavery was abolished generally. The new entity of
the nation state emerged with highly specialized parts, including corporations,
laws, and new ideas about citizenship, and values about individual rights found
expression in constitutions, laws, and statutes. In the United States, one
legal analyst suggested that the real beginning of the modern sense of "equal
opportunity" was in the Fourteenth Amendment which provided "equal protection
under the law." The amendment did not mention "equal opportunity" directly, but
it helped undergird a series of later rulings which dealt with legal struggles,
particularly by African Americans and later women, seeking greater political
and economic power in the growing republic. In 1933, a congressional
"Unemployment Relief Act" forbade discrimination "on the basis of race, color,
or creed". The Supreme Court's 1954 Brown v Board of Education decision
furthered government initiatives to end discrimination. In 1961, President
Kennedy signed Executive Order 10925 which enabled a presidential committee on
equal opportunity, which was soon followed by President Johnson's Executive
Order 11246. The Civil Rights Act of 1964 became the legal underpinning of
equal opportunity in employment. Businesses and other organizations learned to
comply with the rulings by specifying fair hiring and promoting practices and
posting these policy notices on bulletin boards, employee handbooks, and
manuals as well as training sessions and films. Courts dealt with issues about
equal opportunity, such as the 1989 Wards Cove decision, the Supreme Court
ruled that statistical evidence, by itself, was insufficient to prove racial
discrimination. The Equal Employment Opportunity Commission was established,
sometimes reviewing charges of discrimination cases which numbered in the tens
of thousands annually during the 1990s. Some law practices specialized in
employment law. Conflict between "formal" and "substantive" approaches
manifested itself in backlashes, sometimes described as reverse discrimination,
such as the Bakke case when a white male applicant to medical school sued on
the basis of being denied admission because of a quota system preferring
minority applicants. In 1990, the Americans with Disabilities Act prohibited
discrimination against disabled persons, including cases of equal opportunity.
In 2008, the Genetic Information Nondiscrimination Act prevents employers from
using genetic information when hiring, firing, or promoting employees. Measures
of Equal Opportunity. Many economists measure the degree of equal opportunity
with measures of Economic mobility. For instance, Joseph Stiglitz asserts that
with five economic divisions and full equality of opportunity, "20 percent of
those in the bottom fifth would see their children in the bottom fifth. Denmark
almost achieves that — 25 percent are stuck there. Britain, supposedly
notorious for its class divisions, does only a little worse (30 percent). That
means they have a 70 percent chance of moving up. The chances of moving up in
America, though, are markedly smaller (only 58 percent of children born to the
bottom group make it out), and when they do move up, they tend to move up only
a little." Similar analyses can be performed for each economic division and
overall. They all show how far from the ideal all industrialized nations are,
and how correlated measures of equal opportunity are with income inequality and
wealth inequality. Criticism. There is agreement that the concept of equal
opportunity lacks a precise definition. While it generally describes “open
and fair competition” with equal chances for achieving sought-after jobs or
positions as well as an absence of discrimination, the concept is elusive with
a “wide range of meanings.” It is hard to measure, and implementation poses
problems as well as disagreements about what to do. There have been various
criticisms directed at both the "substantive" and "formal" approach. One
account suggests that left-leaning thinkers who advocate equality of outcome
fault even "formal" equality of opportunity on the grounds that it "legitimates
inequalities of wealth and income." John William Gardner suggested several
views: (1) that inequalities will always exist regardless of trying to erase
them (2) that bringing everyone "fairly to the starting line" without dealing
with the "destructive competitiveness that follows" (3) any equalities achieved
will entail future inequalities. "Substantive" equality of opportunity has led
to concerns that efforts to improve fairness "ultimately collapses into the
different one of equality of outcome or condition." Economist Larry Summers
advocated an approach of focusing on "equality of opportunity" and not
"equality of outcomes" and that the way to strengthen equal opportunity was to
bolster public education. A contrasting report in "The Economist" criticized
efforts to contrast "equality of opportunity" and "equality of outcome" as
being opposite poles on a hypothetical ethical scale, such that "equality of
opportunity" should be the "highest ideal" while "equality of outcome" was
"evil". Rather, the report argued that any difference between the two types of
equality was illusory and that both terms were highly interconnected. According
to this argument, wealthier people have greater opportunities––wealth
itself can be considered as "distilled opportunity"––and children of
wealthier parents have access to better schools, health care, nutrition and so
forth. Accordingly, people who endorse "equality of opportunity" may like the
idea of it in principle, yet at the same time they would be unwilling to take
the extreme steps or "titanic interventions" necessary to achieve real
intergenerational equality. A slightly different view in "The Guardian"
suggested that "equality of opportunity" was merely a "buzzword" to sidestep
the thornier political question of income inequality. Economist Paul Krugman
sees equality of opportunity as a "non-Utopian compromise" which works and is a
"pretty decent arrangement" which varies from country to country. But there are
differing views, such as by Matt Cavanagh, who criticised equality of
opportunity in his 2002 book "Against Equality of Opportunity". Cavanath
favored a limited approach of opposing specific kinds of discrimination as
steps to help people get greater control over their lives. D'Souza argued that
it was wrong for government to try to bring his daughter down, or to force him
to raise up other people's children. But a counterargument is that there is a
benefit to everybody, including D'Souza's daughter, to have a society with less
anxiety about downward mobility, less class resentment, and less possible
violence. An argument similar to D'Souza's was raised by Nozick in "Anarchy,
State, and Utopia", who wrote that the only way to achieve equality of
opportunity was "directly worsening the situations of those more favored with
opportunity, or by improving the situation of those less well-favored." Nozick
gave an argument of two suitors competing to marry one "fair lady": X was
plain; Y was better looking and more intelligent. If Y didn't exist, then "fair
lady" would have married X; but Y exists, so she marries Y. Nozick asks: Does
suitor X have a legitimate complaint against Y on the basis of unfairness since
Y didn't "earn" his good looks or intelligence? Nozick suggests that there is
no grounds for complaint. Nozick argued against equality of opportunity on the
grounds that it violates the rights of property, since the equal opportunity
maxim interferes with an owner's right to do what he or she pleases with a
property. Property rights were a major component of the philosophy of John
Locke, and are sometimes referred to as "Lockean rights". The sense of the
argument is along these lines: equal opportunity rules regarding, say, a hiring
decision within a factory, made to bring about greater fairness, violate a
factory owner's rights to run the factory as he or she sees best; it has been
argued that a factory owner's right to property encompasses all decision-making
within the factory as being part of those property rights. That some people's
"natural assets" were unearned is irrelevant to the equation, according to
Nozick, and he argued that people are nevertheless entitled to enjoy these
assets and other things freely given by others. Friedrich Hayek felt that luck
was too much of a variable in economics, such that one can not devise a system
with any kind of fairness when many market outcomes are unintended. By sheer
chance or random circumstances, a person may become wealthy just by being in
the right place and time, and Hayek argued that it is impossible to devise a
system to make opportunities equal without knowing how such interactions may
play out. Hayek saw not only "equality of opportunity" but all of social
justice as a "mirage". Some conceptions of equality of opportunity,
particularly the substantive and "level playing field" variants, have been
criticized on the basis that they make assumptions to the effect that people
have similar genetic makeups. Other critics have suggested that social justice
is more complex than mere equality of opportunity. Robert Nozick made the point
that what happens in society can not always be reduced to competitions for a
coveted position; in 1974, Nozick wrote that "life is not a race in which we
all compete for a prize which someone has established" and that there is "no
unified race" and there is not some one person "judging swiftness."
