Equality of outcome Equality of outcome, equality of condition, or equality of
results is a controversial political concept. Although it is not always clearly
defined, it usually describes a state in which people have approximately the
same material wealth or, more generally, in which the general economic
conditions of their lives are similar. Achieving this requires reducing or
eliminating material inequalities between individuals or households in a
society. This could involve a transfer of income and/or wealth from wealthier
to poorer individuals, or adopting other institutions designed to promote
equality of condition from the start. The concept is central to some political
ideologies and is used regularly in political discourse, often in contrast to
the term equality of opportunity. A related way of defining equality of outcome
is to think of it as "equality in the central and valuable things in life."
Comparisons with related concepts. "Equality of outcome" is often compared to
related concepts of equality. Generally, the concept is most often contrasted
with the concept of "equality of opportunity", but there are other concepts as
well. The term has been seen differently from differing political perspectives,
but of all of the terms relating to "equality", "equality of outcome" is the
most "controversial" or "contentious". Political philosophy. In political
philosophy, there are differing views whether equal outcomes are beneficial or
not. One view is that there is a moral basis for equality of outcome, but that
means to achieve such an outcome can be malevolent. "Equality of outcome" can
be a good thing "after" it has been achieved since it reflects the natural
"interdependence of citizens in a highly organized economy" and provides a
"basis for social policies" which foster harmony and good will, including
social cohesion and reduced jealousy. One writer suggested greater
socioeconomic equality was "indispensable if we want to realise our shared
commonsense values of societal fairness." Analyst Kenneth Cauthen in his 1987
book "The Passion for Equality" suggested that there were moral underpinnings
for having equal outcomes because there is a common good––which people both
contribute to and receive benefits from––and therefore should be enjoyed in
common; Cauthen argued that this was a fundamental basis for both equality of
opportunity as well as equality of outcome. Analyst George Packer, writing in
the journal "Foreign Affairs", argued that "inequality undermines democracy" in
the United States partially because it "hardens society into a class system,
imprisoning people in the circumstances of their birth." Packer elaborated that
inequality "corrodes trust among fellow citizens" and compared it to an
"odorless gas which pervades every corner" of the nation. An opposing view is
that equality of outcomes is not beneficial overall for society since it
dampens motivation necessary for humans to achieve great things, such as new
inventions, intellectual discoveries, and artistic breakthroughs. According to
this view, wealth and income is a reward needed to spur such activity, and with
this reward removed, then achievements which would benefit everybody may not
happen. If equality of outcomes is seen as beneficial for society, and if
people have differing levels of material wealth in the present, then methods to
transform a society towards one with greater equality of outcomes is
problematic. A mainstream view is that mechanisms to achieve equal
outcomes––to take a society and with unequal wealth and force it to equal
outcomes––are fraught with moral as well as practical problems since they
often involve force to compel the transfer. And there is general agreement that
outcomes matter. In one report in Britain, unequal outcomes in terms of
personal wealth had a strong impact on average life expectancy, such that
wealthier people tended to live seven years longer than poorer people, and that
egalitarian nations tended to have fewer problems with societal issues such as
mental illness, violence, teenage pregnancy, and other social problems. Authors
of the book "The Spirit Level" contended that "more equal societies almost
always do better" on other measures, and as a result, striving for equal
outcomes can have overall beneficial effects for everybody. Philosopher John
Rawls, in his "A Theory of Justice" (1971), developed a "second principle of
justice" that economic and social inequalities can only be justified if they
benefit the most disadvantaged members of society. Further, Rawls claims that
all economically and socially privileged positions must be open to all people
equally. Rawls argues that the inequality between a doctor's salary and a
grocery clerk's is only acceptable if this is the only way to encourage the
training of sufficient numbers of doctors, preventing an unacceptable decline
in the availability of medical care (which would therefore disadvantage
everyone). Analyst Paul Krugman writing in "The New York Times" agreed with
Rawls' position in which both equality of opportunity and equality of outcome
were linked, and suggested that "we should try to create the society each of us
would want if we didn’t know in advance who we’d be." Krugman favored a
society in which hard-working and talented people can get rewarded for their
efforts but in which there was a "social safety net" created by taxes to help
the less fortunate. Comparing equalities: outcome vs opportunity. Both
"equality of outcome" and "equality of opportunity" have been contrasted to a
great extent. When evaluated in a simple context, the more preferred term in
contemporary political discourse is "equality of opportunity" which the public,
as well as individual commentators, see as the nicer or more "well-mannered" of
the two terms. And the term "equality of outcome" is seen as more controversial
which connotes socialism or possibly communism and is viewed skeptically. A
mainstream political view is that the comparison of the two terms is valid, but
that they are somewhat mutually exclusive in the sense that striving for either
type of equality would require sacrificing the other to an extent, and that
achieving "equality of opportunity" necessarily brings about "certain
inequalities of outcome." For example, striving for equal outcomes might
require discriminating between groups to achieve these outcomes; or striving
for equal opportunities in some types of treatment might lead to unequal
results. Policies that seek an equality of outcome often require a deviation
from the strict application of concepts such as meritocracy, and legal notions
of equality before the law for all citizens. 'Equality seeking' policies may
also have a redistributive focus. The two concepts, however, are not always
cleanly contrasted, since the notion of "equality" is complex. Some analysts
see the two concepts not as polar opposites but as highly related such that
they can not be understood without considering the other term. One writer
suggested it was unrealistic to think about "equality of opportunity" in
isolation, without considering inequalities of income and wealth. Another
agreed that it is impossible to understand "equality" without some assessment
of outcomes. A third writer suggested that trying to pretend that the two
concepts were "fundamentally different" was an error along the lines of a
conceit. In contemporary political discourse, of the two concepts, "equality of
outcome" has sometimes been criticized as the "politics of envy" and is often
seen as more "controversial" than "equality of opportunity". One wrote that
"equality of opportunity is then set up as the mild-mannered alternative to the
craziness of outcome equality." One theorist suggested that an over-emphasis on
either type of equality can "come into conflict with individual freedom and
merit." The philosopher Friedrich Nietzsche did not like either type of
"equality" and was opposed in principle to democracy, and he associated
equality with what he termed "slave morality." Critics of equality of
opportunity note that while it is relatively easier to deal with unfairness for
people with different races or genders, it is much harder to deal with social
class since "one can never entirely extract people from their ancestry and
upbringing." As a result, critics contend that efforts to bring fairness by
equal opportunity are stymied by the difficulty of people having differing
starting points at the beginning of the socio-economic competition. A person
born into an upper-middle-class family will have greater advantages by the mere
fact of birth than a person born into poverty. One newspaper account criticized
discussion by politicians on the subject of "equality" as "weasely", and
thought that terms using the word were politically correct and bland.
Nevertheless, when comparing "equality of opportunity" with "equality of
outcome", the sense was that the latter type was "worse" for society. Equality
of outcome may be incorporated into a philosophy that ultimately seeks equality
of opportunity. Moving towards a higher equality of outcome (albeit not
perfectly equal) can lead to an environment more adept at providing equality of
opportunity by eliminating conditions that restrict the possibility for members
of society to fulfill their potential. For example, a child born in a poor,
dangerous neighborhood with poor schools and little access to healthcare may be
significantly disadvantaged in his attempts to maximize use of talents, no
matter his work ethic. Thus, even proponents of meritocracy may promote some
level of equality of outcome in order to create a society capable of truly
providing equality of opportunity. While outcomes can usually be measured with
a great degree of precision, it is much more difficult to measure the
intangible nature of "opportunities". That is one reason why many proponents of
equal opportunity use measures of equality of outcome to judge success. Analyst
Anne Phillips argued that the proper way to assess the effectiveness of the
hard-to-measure concept of "equality of opportunity" is by the extent of the
actual and easier-to-measure "equality of outcome". Nevertheless, she described
single criteria to measure "equality of outcome" as problematic: the metric of
"preference satisfaction" was "ideologically loaded" while other measures such
as income or wealth were insufficient, according to her view, and she advocated
an approach which combined data about resources, occupations, and roles. To the
extent that incidental inequalities can be passed from one generation to
another through substantial gifts and wealth inheritance, some claim that
equality of opportunity for children cannot be achieved without greater
equality of outcome for parents. Moreover, access and opportunity to various
social institutions is partially dependent on equality of outcome. Proponents
argue that rigging equality of outcome can be a force preventing co-optation of
non-economic institutions important to social control and policy formation,
such as the legal system, media or the electoral process, by individuals and
coalitions of wealthy people. Greater equality of outcome is likely to reduce
relative poverty, purportedly leading to a more cohesive society. However, if
taken to an extreme it may lead to greater absolute poverty if it negatively
affects a country's GDP by damaging workers' sense of work ethic by destroying
incentives to work harder. Critics of equality of outcome believe that it is
more important to raise the standard of living of the poorest in absolute
terms. Some critics additionally disagree with the concept of equality of
outcome on philosophical grounds . A related argument is often encountered in
education and more specifically in the debates on the grammar school in the
United Kingdom and in the debates on gifted education in various countries.
According to that argument, people by nature have differing levels of ability
and initiative which lead some to achieve better outcomes than others.
Therefore, it is considered impossible to ensure equality of outcome without
imposing "in"equality of opportunity. The concept in political argument. The
concept of "equality of outcome" is an important one in battling between
differing political positions, since the concept of "equality", overall, was
seen as positive and an important foundation which is "deeply embedded in the
fabric of modern politics." There is much political jousting over what,
exactly, equality means. It is not a new phenomenon; battling between so-called
"haves" and "have-nots" has happened throughout human civilization, and was a
focus of philosophers such as Aristotle in his treatise "Politics". Analyst
Julian Glover in "The Guardian" wrote that "equality" challenged both left-
leaning and right-leaning positions, and suggested that the task of left-
leaning advocates is to "understand the impossibility and undesirability of
equality" while the task for right-leaning advocates was to "realise that a
divided and hierarchical society cannot – in the best sense of that word –
be fair."
