Equality before the law Equality before the law, also known as legal equality,
is the principle under which all people are subject to the same laws of justice
(due process). All are equal before the law. Article 7 of the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights states that ""All are equal before the law and are
entitled without any discrimination to equal protection of the law."" According
to the United Nations, this principle is particularly important to the
minorities and to the poor. Thus, the law and the judges must treat everybody
by the same laws regardless of their gender, ethnicity, religion, socio-
economic status etc, without privilege. Equality before the law is one of the
basic principles of classical liberalism. History. In his famous funeral
oration of 431 BC, the Athenian leader Pericles discussed this concept. This
may be the first known instance. Thucydides, "The History of the Peloponnesian
War", Written 431 B.C.E, Translated by Richard Crawley (1874), retrieved via
Project Gutenberg. Classical liberalism. Classical liberalism calls for
equality before the law, not for equality of outcome. Classical liberalism
opposes pursuing group rights at the expense of individual rights. Feminism.
Feminists call for equality before the law regardless of gender. Still in 1988
the later supreme court justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg wrote: "Generalizations
about the way women or men are ... cannot guide me reliably in making decisions
about particular individuals". In an ACLU's s Women's Rights Project in the
1970s Ginsburg challenged the laws that gave health service benefits to wives
of servicemen but not to husbands of servicewomen and prohibited women from
certain businesses including running a bar alone. However, some radical
feminists have opposed equality before the law, because they think that it
maintains the weak position of the weak. Nebraska. The phrase "Equality before
the law" is the motto of the State of Nebraska and appears on its state seal.
Parricide law. Article 200 of the Criminal Code of Japan, the penalty regarding
parricide, was declared unconstitutional for violating the equality under the
law by the Supreme Court of Japan in 1973, as a result of the trial of the
Tochigi patricide case.
