Eric Hoffer Eric Hoffer (July 25, 1902 – May 21, 1983) was an American social
writer. He was the author of ten books and was awarded the Presidential Medal
of Freedom in February 1983. His first book, "The True Believer", published in
1951, was widely recognized as a classic, receiving critical acclaim from both
scholars and laymen, although Hoffer believed that his book "The Ordeal of
Change" was his finest work. In 2001, the Eric Hoffer Award was established in
his honor with permission granted by the Eric Hoffer Estate in 2005. Biography.
Hoffer was born in the Bronx, New York City in 1902, the son of Elsa (née
Goebel) and Knut Hoffer, a cabinetmaker. His parents were immigrants from
Alsace. By the age of five, he could read in both German and English. When he
was age five, his mother fell down a flight of stairs with Eric in her arms.
Hoffer went blind for unknown medical reasons two years later, but later in
life he said he thought it might have been due to trauma, commenting "I lost my
sight at the age of seven. Two years before, my mother and I fell down a flight
of stairs. She did not recover and died in that second year after the fall. I
lost my sight and for a time my memory". After his mother's death he was raised
by a live-in relative or servant, a German woman named Martha. His eyesight
inexplicably returned when he was 15. Fearing he would again go blind, he
seized upon the opportunity to read as much as he could for as long as he
could. His eyesight remained, and Hoffer never abandoned his habit of voracious
reading. Hoffer was a young man when his father, a cabinetmaker, died. The
cabinetmaker's union paid for the funeral and gave Hoffer a little over three
hundred dollars. Hoffer then took a bus to Los Angeles in 1920. He spent the
next 10 years on Los Angeles' skid row, reading, occasionally writing, and
working odd jobs. In 1931, he considered committing suicide by drinking a
solution of oxalic acid, but he could not bring himself to swallow the poison.
The experience gave him a new determination to live adventurously. It was then
he left skid row and became a migrant worker. Following the harvests along the
length of California, he collected library cards for each town near the fields
where he worked and, living by preference, "between the books and the
brothels". A seminal event for Hoffer occurred in the mountains where he had
gone in search of gold. Snowed in for the winter, he read the "Essays" by
Michel de Montaigne. Montaigne's book impressed Hoffer deeply, and he often
made reference to its importance for him. He also developed a great respect for
America's underclass, which, he declared, was "lumpy with talent". During the
1930s, he wrote a novel, "Four Years in Young Hank's Life", and a novelette,
"Chance and Mr. Kunze", both partly autobiographical, and a long article about
his experiences and revelations in a federal work camp, "Tramps and Pioneers".
The fictional work was never published, but a truncated version of the article
was published by Harper's Magazine after Hoffer became well known. Hoffer
attempted to enlist in the Armed forces in 1942 but was rejected because of a
hernia. To contribute to the war effort, he worked as a longshoreman on the
docks of The Embarcadero. During this period he began to write. Hoffer retired
from the docks in 1967 and from public life in 1970. In 1970 he endowed the
Lili Fabilli and Eric Hoffer Laconic Essay Prize for students, faculty, and
staff at the University of California, Berkeley. He died at his home in San
Francisco on May 21, 1983 at the age of 80. Working class roots. He once
remarked, "my writing grows out of my life just as a branch from a tree." When
called an intellectual, he insisted that he was a longshoreman. Hoffer has been
dubbed by some authors as a "longshoreman philosopher". On the nature and
origins of mass movements. Hoffer believed that self-esteem was of central
importance to psychological well-being. He focused on what he viewed as the
consequences of a lack of self-esteem. Concerned about the rise of totalitarian
governments, especially those of Adolf Hitler and Joseph Stalin, he tried to
find the roots of these "madhouses" in human psychology. He postulated that
fanaticism and self-righteousness are rooted in self-hatred, self-doubt, and
insecurity. In "The True Believer" (1951) he claimed that a passionate
obsession with the outside world or the private lives of others was an attempt
to compensate for a lack of meaning in one's own life. The book discusses
religious and political mass movements, and extensive discussions of Islam and
Christianity. A core principle in the book is Hoffer's assertion that mass
movements are interchangeable: fanatical Nazis became fanatical Communists,
fanatical Communists became fanatical anti-Communists, and Saul, persecutor of
Christians, became Paul, a fanatical Christian. For the "true believer",
substance is less important than being part of a movement. Hoffer's work was
non-Freudian, at a time when much of American psychology was informed by the
Freudian paradigm. Hoffer appeared on public television in 1964 and then in two
one-hour conversations on CBS with Eric Sevareid in the late 1960s. Views and
opinions. Subsequent to the publication of "The True Believer" (1951), Eric
Hoffer touched upon Asia and American interventionism in several of his essays.
In “The Awakening of Asia” (1954), published in "The Reporter" and later
his book "The Ordeal of Change" (1963), Hoffer discusses the reasons for unrest
on the continent. In particular, he argues that the root cause of social
discontent in Asia was not government corruption, “communist agitation,” or
the legacy of European colonial “oppression and exploitation.” Rather a
“craving for pride” was the central problem in Asia, suggesting a problem
that could not be relieved through typical American intervention. For
centuries, Hoffer notes that Asia had “submitted to one conqueror after
another." Throughout these centuries, Asia had “been misruled, looted, and
bled by both foreign and native oppressors without” so much as “a peep”
from the general population. Though not without negative effect, corrupt
governments and the legacy of European imperialism represented nothing new
under the sun. Indeed, the European colonial authorities had been “fairly
beneficent” in Asia. To be sure, communism exerted an appeal of sorts. For
the Asian “pseudo-intellectual” it promised elite status and the phony
complexities of “doctrinaire double talk". For the ordinary Asian, it
promised partnership with the seemingly emergent Soviet Union in a
“tremendous, unprecedented undertaking” to build a better tomorrow.
According to Hoffer, however, communism in Asia was dwarfed by the desire for
pride. To satisfy such desire, Asians would willingly and irrationally not only
sacrifice their economic well-being, but their lives as well. Unintentionally,
the West had created this appetite, causing “revolutionary unrest” in Asia.
The West had done so by eroding traditional communal bonds, bonds that once had
woven the individual to the patriarchal family, clan, tribe, “cohesive rural
or urban unit,” and “religious or political body." Without the security and
spiritual meaning produced by such bonds, Asians had been liberated from
tradition only to find themselves now atomized, isolated, exposed, and
abandoned, “left orphaned and empty in a cold world." Certainly, Europe had
undergone a similar destruction of tradition, but it had occurred centuries
earlier at the end of the Medieval period and produced better results thanks to
different circumstances. For the Asians of the 1950s, the circumstances
differed markedly. Most were illiterate and impoverished, living in a world
that included no expansive physical or intellectual vistas. Dangerously, the
“articulate minority” amongst the Asian population inevitably disconnected
themselves from the ordinary people, thereby failing to acquire “a sense of
usefulness and of worth” that came by “taking part in the world’s work."
As a result, they were “condemned to the life of chattering posturing pseudo-
intellectuals,” who coveted “the illusion of weight and importance." Most
significantly, Hoffer asserts that the disruptive awakening of Asia came about
as a result of an unbearable sense of weakness. Indeed, Hoffer discusses the
problem of weakness, asserting that while “power corrupts the few . . .
weakness corrupts the many.” Hoffer notes that “the resentment of the weak
does not spring from any injustice done them but from the sense of their [own
inadequacy and impotence.” In short, the weak “hate not wickedness” but
hate themselves for being weak. Consequently, self-loathing produces explosive
effects that cannot be mitigated through social engineering schemes, such as
programs of wealth redistribution. In fact, American “generosity” is
counterproductive, perceived in Asia simply as an example of Western
“oppression." In the wake of the Korean War, Hoffer does not recommend
exporting at gunpoint either American political institutions or mass democracy.
In fact, Hoffer advances the possibility that winning over the multitudes of
Asia may not even be desirable. If on the other hand, necessity truly dictates
that for “survival” the United States must persuade the “weak” of Asia
to “our side,” Hoffer suggests the wisest course of action would be to
master “the art or technique of sharing hope, pride, and as a last resort,
hatred with others." During the Vietnam War, despite his disgust for the anti-
war movement and acceptance of the notion that the war was somehow necessary to
prevent a third world war, Hoffer remained skeptical concerning American
interventionism, specifically the intelligence with which the war was being
conducted in Southeast Asia. After the United States became involved in the
war, Hoffer wished to avoid defeat in Vietnam because of his fear that such a
defeat would transform American society for ill, opening the door to those who
would preach a “stab in the back legend” and allow for the rise of an
American version of Hitler. In "The Temper of Our Time" (1967), Hoffer implies
that the United States as a rule should avoid interventions in the first place,
writing that “the better part of statesmanship might be to know clearly and
precisely what not to do, and leave action to the improvisation of chance.”
In fact, Hoffer indicates that “it might be wise to wait for enemies to
defeat themselves,” as they might fall upon each other with the United States
out of the picture. In May 1968, about a year after the Six Day War, he wrote
an article for the "Los Angeles Times" entitled "Israel's Peculiar Position:
" Hoffer asks why "everyone expects the Jews to be the only real Christians in
this world" and why Israel should sue for peace after its victory. Hoffer
believed that rapid change is not necessarily a positive thing for a society,
and too rapid change can cause a regression in maturity for those who were
brought up in a different society. He noted that in America in the 1960s, many
young adults were still living in extended adolescence. Seeking to explain the
attraction of the New Left protest movements, he characterized them as the
result of widespread affluence, which, in his words, "is robbing a modern
society of whatever it has left of puberty rites to routinize the attainment of
manhood." He saw these puberty rites as essential for self-esteem, and noted
that mass movements and juvenile mindsets tend to go together, to the point
that anyone, no matter what age, who joins a mass movement immediately begins
to exhibit juvenile behavior. Hoffer further noted that the reason why working-
class Americans did not, by and large, join protest movements and subcultures
was that they had entry into meaningful labor as an effective rite of passage
out of adolescence, while both the very poor who lived on welfare and the
affluent were, in his words, "prevented from having a share in the world's
work, and of proving their manhood by doing a man's work and getting a man's
pay," and thus remained in a state of extended adolescence, lacking in
necessary self-esteem, and prone to joining mass movements as a form of
compensation. Hoffer suggested that this need for meaningful work as a rite of
passage into adulthood could be fulfilled with a two-year civilian national
service program (not unlike programs during the Great Depression such as the
Civilian Conservation Corps). He wrote: "The routinization of the passage from
boyhood to manhood would contribute to the solution of many of our pressing
problems. I cannot think of any other undertaking that would dovetail so many
of our present difficulties into opportunities for growth." Hoffer's papers.
Hoffer's papers, including 131 of the notebooks he carried in his pockets, were
acquired in 2000 by the Hoover Institution Archives. The papers fill of shelf
space. Because Hoffer cultivated an aphoristic style, the unpublished notebooks
(dated from 1949 to 1977) contain very significant work. Available for
scholarly study since at least 2003, little of their contents has yet been
published. A selection of fifty aphorisms, focusing on the development of
unrealized human talents through the creative process, appeared in the July
2005 issue of "Harper's Magazine". Interviews. "Conversations with Eric
Hoffer", 12 part interview by James Day of KQED, San Franscisco, 1963. "Eric
Hoffer: The Passionate State of Mind" with Eric Sevareid, CBS, September 19,
1967 (rebroadcast on November 14, due to popular demand). "The Savage Heart: A
Conversation with Eric Hoffer", with Eric Sevareid, CBS, January 28, 1969.
Further reading. "American Iconoclast: The Life and Times of Eric Hoffer",
Shachtman, Tom, Titusville, NJ, Hopewell Publications, 2011. ISBN 978-1-933435-
38-1.
