Ethical consumerism Ethical consumerism (alternatively called ethical
consumption, ethical purchasing, moral purchasing, ethical sourcing, ethical
shopping or green consumerism) is a type of consumer activism practiced through
'positive buying' in that ethical products are favoured, or 'moral boycott',
that is negative purchasing and company-based purchasing. The term "ethical
consumer", now used generically, was first popularised by the UK magazine the
Ethical Consumer, first published in 1989. Ethical Consumer magazine's key
innovation was to produce 'ratings tables,' inspired by the criteria-based
approach of the then emerging ethical investment movement. Ethical Consumer's
ratings tables awarded companies negative marks (and from 2005 overall scores)
across a range of ethical and environmental categories such a 'animal rights',
'human rights' and 'pollution and toxics', empowering consumers to make
ethically informed consumption choices and providing campaigners with reliable
information on corporate behaviour. Such criteria-based ethical and
environmental ratings have subsequently become a commonplace both in providing
consumer information and in business-to-business corporate social
responsibility and sustainability ratings such as those provided by Innovest,
Calvert, Domini, IRRC, TIAA-CREF and KLD Analytics. Today, Bloomberg and
Reuters even provide "environmental, social and governance" ratings direct to
the financial data screens of hundreds of thousands of stock market traders.
The not-for-profit Ethical Consumer Research Association continues to publish
Ethical Consumer magazine and its associated website, which provides free
access to ethical ratings tables. Basis. Global morality. In "The Global
Markets As An Ethical System", John McMurtry argues that no purchasing decision
exists that does not itself imply some moral choice, and that there is no
purchasing that is not ultimately moral in nature. This mirrors older
arguments, especially by the Anabaptists, e.g. Mennonites, Amish, that one must
accept all personal moral and spiritual liability of all harms done at any
distance in space or time to anyone by one's own choices. It is often suggested
that Judeo-Christian scriptures further direct followers towards practising
good stewardship of the Earth, under an obligation to a God who is believed to
have created the planet for us to share with other creatures... It should be
noted, however, that a very similar argument can be presented from an entirely
secular humanist point of view, and there are many people who believe that it
is simply better for human beings to acknowledge that the planet supports life
only because of a delicate balance of many different factors. Accordingly,
sustainability is required and purchasing for vanity or status is abhorred and
shunned. This theory is echoed in some modern eco-villages who adopt very
similar stances, effectively blocking all goods that do not satisfy their moral
criteria at the village gate, and relying on internally produced food and tools
as much as possible. Spending as morality. Some trust criteria, e.g.
creditworthiness or implied warranty, are considered to be part of any
purchasing or sourcing decision. However, these terms refer to broader systems
of guidance that would, ideally, cause any purchasing decision to disqualify
offered products or services based on non-price criteria that do not affect the
functional, but rather moral, liabilities of the entire production process.
Paul Hawken, a proponent of Natural Capitalism, refers to "comprehensive
outcomes" of production services as opposed to the "culminative outcomes" of
using the product of such services. Often, moral criteria are part of a much
broader shift away from commodity markets towards a deeper service economy
where all activities, from growing to harvesting to processing to delivery, are
considered part of the value chain and for which consumers are "responsible".
Andrew Wilson, Director of the UK's Ashridge Centre for Business and Society,
argues that "Shopping is more important than voting", and others that the
disposition of money is the most basic role we play in any system of economics.
Some theorists believe that it is the clearest way that we express our actual
moral choices, i.e., if we say we care about something but continue to buy from
parties that have a high probability of risk of harm or destruction of that
thing, we don't really care about it, we are practicing a form of simple
hypocrisy. Criticism. Critics argue that the ability to affect structural
change is limited in ethical consumerism. Some cite the preponderance of niche
markets as the actual effect of ethical consumerism, while others argue that
information is limited regarding the outcomes of a given purchase, preventing
consumers from making informed ethical choices. Critics have also argued that
the uneven distribution of wealth prevents consumerism, ethical or otherwise,
from fulfilling its democratic potential. In line with the halo associated with
green consumerism, people act more altruistically after mere exposure to green
than conventional products. However, people act less altruistically and are
more likely to cheat and steal after purchasing green products as opposed to
conventional products. Together, the studies show that consumption is more
tightly connected to our social and ethical behaviors in directions and domains
other than previously thought. This may have implications for pollution
licensing programs, for example. A polluter that buys a pollution license in
effect has "bought green", which makes them more likely to engage in unethical
behavior, leading to increased pollution. Without considering human psychology,
such programs could aggravate the very problems they hope to solve. See Law of
Unintended Consequences. In a 2010 newspaper article, British environmental
writer and activist George Monbiot described green consumerism as "a
catastrophic mistake" on the grounds that "it strengthens extrinsic values"
(those that "concern status and self-advancement"), thereby "making future
campaigns less likely to succeed". Growing diverse use of the term. As large
corporations have tried to position themselves as moral, principled or ethical
organisations, the definition has become wider and means different things to
different groups of people. For example, McDonald's started to sell salads, (a
more healthy choice) and has a corporate social responsibility blog. Ethical
Consumerism can be seen as a movement in marketing, which may or may not
reflect actual changes in the practices of businesses. Particular areas of
interest for large businesses are environmental impact and the treatment of
workers at the bottom of the organisational hierarchy. This change reflects an
increasing awareness of ethical issues and corporate identity amongst
mainstream consumers. Positive buying. Positive buying means favoring ethical
products, be they fair trade, cruelty free, organic, recycled, re-used, or
produced locally. This option is arguably the most important since it directly
supports progressive companies. Standards and labels. Along with disclosure of
ingredients, some mandatory labelling of origins of clothing or food is
required in all developed nations. This practice has been extended in some
developing nations, e.g., where every item carries the name, phone number and
fax number of the factory where it was made so a buyer can inspect its
conditions. And, more importantly, to prove that the item was not made by
"prison labor", use of which to produce export goods is banned in most
developed nations. Such labels have also been used for boycotts, as when the
merchandise mark Made in Germany was introduced in 1887. These labels serve as
tokens of some reliable validation process, some instructional capital, much as
does a brand name or a nation's flag. They also signal some social capital, or
trust, in some community of auditors that must follow those instructions to
validate those labels. Some companies in the United States, though currently
not required to reduce their carbon footprint, are doing so voluntarily by
changing their energy use practices, as well as by directly funding (through
carbon offsets), businesses that are already sustainable—or are developing or
improving green technologies for the future. In 2009, Atlanta's Virginia-
Highland became the first Carbon-Neutral Zone in the United States. Seventeen
merchants of Atlanta's Virginia-Highland allowed their carbon footprint to be
audited. Now, they are partnered with the Valley Wood Carbon Sequestration
Project—thousands of acres of forest in rural Georgia—through the Chicago
Climate Exchange. The businesses involved in the partnership display the Verus
Carbon Neutral seal in each storefront and posted a sign prominently declaring
the area's Carbon Neutral status. Over time, some theorists suggest, the amount
of social capital or trust invested in nation-states (or "flags") will continue
to decrease, and that placed in corporations (or "brands") will increase. This
can only be offset by retrenched national sovereignty to reinforce shared
national standards in tax, trade, and tariff laws, and by placing the trust in
civil society in such "moral labels". These arguments have been a major focus
of the anti-globalization movement, which includes many broader arguments
against the amoral nature of markets as such. However, the economic school of
Public Choice Theory pioneered by James M. Buchanan has offered counter-
arguments based on economic demonstration to this theory of 'amoral markets'
versus 'moral governments'. Boycott. "Moral boycott" is the practice of
avoiding or boycotting products which a consumer believes to be associated with
unethical behavior. An individual can choose to boycott a product.
Alternatively, the decision may be the application of criteria reflective of a
morality (or, in the terminology of ethics, a theory of value) to any
purchasing decisions. Products. Reasons for products boycotts include
Corporations. Examples include corporations that Such boycotts can cause great
damage to reputations, not to mention loss of profits, and has, in part, led to
the development of the concept of corporate social responsibility. Consumers
are encouraged by animal welfare organisations to only shop at supermarkets
which have strict animal welfare policies regarding the products they sell.
Compassion in World Farming produce a supermarket survey every 2 years
assessing supermarket performance in the UK. Research. GfK NOP, the market
research group, has made a five-country study of consumer beliefs about the
ethics of large companies. The report was described in a "Financial Times"
article published on February 20, 2007 entitled "Ethical consumption makes mark
on branding", and was followed up by an online debate/discussion hosted by
FT.com ([http://www.ft.com/ethicalbrands]). The countries surveyed were
Germany, the USA, Britain, France and Spain. More than half of respondents in
Germany and the US believed there is a serious deterioration in standards of
corporate practice. Almost half of those surveyed in Britain, France and Spain
held similar beliefs. About a third of respondents told researchers they would
pay higher prices for ethical brands though perception of various companies
ethical or unethical status varied considerably from country to country. The
most ethically perceived brands were The Co-op (in the UK), Coca Cola (in the
US), Danone (in France), Adidas (in Germany) and Nestlé (in Spain). Coca Cola,
Danone, Adidas and Nestlé did not appear anywhere in the UK's list of 15 most
ethical companies. Nike appeared in the lists of the other four countries but
not in the UK's list. In the UK, the Co-operative Bank has produced an Ethical
Consumerism Report (formerly the Ethical Purchasing Index) since 2001. The
report measures the market size and growth of a basket of 'ethical' products
and services, and valued UK ethical consumerism at GBP36.0 billion (USD54.4
billion) in 2008. A number of organisations provide research-based evaluations
of the behavior of companies around the world, assessing them along ethical
dimensions such as human rights, the environment, animal welfare and politics.
Green America is a not-for-profit membership organization founded in 1982 that
provides the "Green American Seal of Approval" and produces a "Responsible
Shopper" guide to "alert consumers and investors to problems with companies
that they may shop with or invest in." The Ethical Consumer Research
Association is a not-for-profit workers' co-operative founded in the UK in 1988
to "provide information on the companies behind the brand names and to promote
the ethical use of consumer power" which provides an online seachable database
under the name Corporate Critic or Ethiscore. The Ethiscore is a weightable
numerical rating designed as a quick guide to the ethical status of companies,
or brands in a particular area, and is linked to a more detailed ethical
assessment. "alonovo" is an online shopping portal that provides similar
weightable ethical ratings termed the "Corporate Social Behavior Index".
Related concepts. Conscious consuming. Conscious Consuming is a social movement
that based around increased awareness of the impact of purchasing decisions on
the environment and the consumers health and life in general. It is also
concerned with the effects of media and advertising on consumers. Many aspects
of Conscious Consuming have been practiced throughout the world but not in a
cohesive form. As a result of organizations such as Adbusters and the Center
for a New American Dream, the Conscious Consuming movement began in Boston in
the summer of 2003 when a group of people gathered together and planned an
alternative gift fair, "Gift It Up!" In the fall of 2004, another group of
Bostonians formed a group named "Conscious Consuming" and began meeting to
discuss a broad range of topics, from the environmental impact of consumption
to the effect of media and advertising. The memberships quickly overlapped and
in 2005, the groups merged into Conscious Consuming. Conscious consuming has
its roots in voluntary simplicity, in which people re-evaluate their work-life
balance in order to spend more of their time and money on the things that
matter to them. As people work less, there is more time for connecting with
family and friends, volunteerism, hobbies, and community service. A natural
off-shoot of working less is spending less. Instead of spending time and money
shopping, people engaging in voluntary simplicity buy less. They get goods
using web sites like craigslist, trade with friends, make do with what they
have, or hit yard sales. When they do purchase something new, the decision to
buy is made consciously. A would-be shopper asks, "Is this item made in line
with my values? Am I supporting the local economy? Are the people who produce
this item treated and compensated fairly? Is this item built to last?" As a
result of these questions, conscious consumers find themselves supporting
organic agriculture, fair-trade and sweat-shop free products, and local and
independent businesses. Conscientious consumption. The consumer rationalizes
unnecessary and even unwanted consumption by saying that "it's for a good
cause". As a result, the consumer buys pink ribbons during National Breast
Cancer Awareness Month, green products to support the environment, candy and
popcorn from school children, greeting cards and gift wrap from charities, and
many other, often unwanted objects. The consumer avoids considering whether the
price offered is fair, whether a small cash donation would be more effective
with far less work, or even whether selling the item is consistent with the
ostensible mission, such as when sports teams sell candy. Some of these efforts
are based on concept brands: the consumer is buying an association with women's
health or environmental concerns as much as he is buying a tangible product.
Alternative giving. In response to an increasing demand for ethical consumerism
surrounding gift giving occasions, charities have promoted an alternative gift
market, in which charitable contributions are made on behalf of the gift
"recipient". The "recipient" receives a card explaining the selected gift,
while the actual gift item (frequently agricultural supplies or domestic
animals) is sent to a family in a poor community.
