Ethnic nationalism Ethnic nationalism or Ethnicism is a form of nationalism
wherein the "nation" is defined in terms of ethnicity. Whatever specific
ethnicity is involved, ethnic nationalism always includes some element of
descent from previous generations and the implied claim of ethnic essentialism,
i.e. the understanding of ethnicity as an essence that remains unchanged over
time. The central theme of ethnic nationalists is that "..nations are defined
by a shared heritage, which usually includes a common language, a common faith,
and a common ethnic ancestry." It also includes ideas of a culture shared
between members of the group, and with their ancestors, and usually a shared
language; however it is different from purely cultural definitions of "the
nation" (which allow people to become members of a nation by cultural
assimilation) and a purely linguistic definitions (which see "the nation" as
all speakers of a specific language). Herodotus is the first who stated the
main characteristics of ethnicity, with his famous account of what defines
Greek identity, where he lists kinship (Greek: ὅμαιμον - "homaimon",
"of the same blood"), language (Greek: ὁμόγλωσσον - "homoglōsson",
"speaking the same language"), cults and customs (Greek: ὁμότροπον -
"homotropon", "of the same habits or life"). Ideology. The central political
tenet of ethnic nationalism is that ethnic groups can be identified
unambiguously, and that each such group is entitled to self-determination. The
outcome of this right to self-determination may vary, from calls for self-
regulated administrative bodies within an already-established society, to an
autonomous entity separate from that society, to a sovereign state removed from
that society. In international relations, it also leads to policies and
movements for irredentism — to claim a common nation based upon ethnicity. In
scholarly literature, ethnic nationalism is usually contrasted with civic
nationalism. Ethnic nationalism bases membership of the nation on descent or
heredity—often articulated in terms of common blood or kinship—rather than
on political membership. Hence, nation-states with strong traditions of ethnic
nationalism tend to define nationality or citizenship by jus sanguinis (the law
of blood, descent from a person of that nationality) while countries with
strong traditions of civic nationalism tend to define nationality or
citizenship by jus soli (the law of soil, birth within the nation-state).
Ethnic nationalism is therefore seen as exclusive, while civic nationalism
tends to be inclusive. Rather than allegiance to common civic ideals and
cultural traditions, then, ethnic nationalism tends to emphasise narratives of
common descent. The theorist Anthony D. Smith uses the term 'ethnic
nationalism' for non-Western concepts of nationalism as opposed to Western
views of a nation defined by its geographical territory. Diaspora studies
scholars extend this non-geographically bound concept of "nation" among
diasporic communities, at times using the term ethnonation or ethnonationalism
to describe a conceptual collective of dispersed ethnics. Ethnic nationalism is
also present in many states' immigration policies in the form of repatriation
laws. States such as Armenia, Bulgaria, Croatia, Finland, Germany, Greece,
Hungary, Italy, Ireland, Israel, Romania, Serbia, and Turkey provide automatic
or rapid citizenship to members of diasporas of their own dominant ethnic
group, if desired. For example, Italy allows citizenship almost entirely on the
basis of jus sanguinis (having an Italian Ancestor). Israel's Law of Return,
grants every Jew the right to settle in Israel and automatically acquire
citizenship. In Germany, citizenship is open to ethnic Germans. According to
the Greek nationality law, Greeks born abroad may transmit citizenship to their
children from generation to generation indefinitely. On the other hand, civic
nationalism defines membership as an individual's duty to observe given laws
and in turn receive legal privileges. A nation-state for the ethnic group
derives political legitimacy from its status as homeland of that ethnic group,
from its protective function against colonization, persecution or racism, and
from its claim to facilitate the shared cultural and social life, which may not
have been possible under the ethnic group's previous status as an ethnic
minority.
