Etoy Etoy is a European digital art group. Etoy won several international
awards including the Prix Ars Electronica in 1996. Their main slogan is:
"leaving reality behind." Etoy routinely experiments with the boundaries of
art, such as selling shares of "stock" in the etoy.corporation, a registered
company in Switzerland and travelling the world as well as living in
"etoy.tanks" (cargo containers). History. Etoy was founded in 1994 and the
authors behind etoy's brand were an art collective that started to sell virtual
shares and is owned now by hundreds of etoy.shareholders: international art
collectors, the etoy.agents and toywar.soldiers (who protected the etoy.brand
during the toywar). The etoy.inventors own, control and protect the corporate
"sculpture". In 2007, German and Swiss director Andrea Reiter realised a
documentary (produced by Hugofilm) about etoy's "Mission Eternity" project, a
"digital cult of the dead". According to Toywar.com eToys Inc. offered etoy
$516,000 for the rights to the etoy.com domain name. After etoy rejected this
offer, eToys Inc. responded by filing a lawsuit on the grounds of "unfair
competition, trademark delusion, security fraud, illegal stock market
operation, pornographic content, offensive behaviour and terrorist activity."
The Toywar soon ensued. eToys was successful at one point in the litigation
process and was able to get an injunction to temporarily shut down the etoy
website. But before long the Toywar developed into a high-profile tactical
media event. Toywar. The "toywar" was a legal battle between the Internet toy
retailer eToys.com and etoy for the domain name etoy.com. Fearing brand
dilution and customer confusion about the similar domain names, eToys sued etoy
for trademark infringement, and asked etoy to remove graphic images and profane
language from their website that were bringing customer complaints. The artists
refused to comply, and eToys eventually obtained a preliminary injunction
against etoy which shut down their website. etoy fought back with a coordinated
public relations campaign and Internet-based denial of service attacks on
eToys.com. After several weeks eToys dropped the lawsuit and the etoy website
returned to operation. It has been called "the most expensive performance in
art history", citing eToys' market capitalization loss of $4.5 billion dollars
during the conflict. However most analysts denied that this had been caused by
the efforts of etoy and its supporters alone. The story is one of the subjects
of the documentary film, "info wars". An email campaign was led by Internet
activists including etoy agents developing the toywar website, a battlefield
for 2000 toysoldiers. A book about the story of the etoy corporation, "Leaving
reality behind", by Regula Bochsler and Adam Wishart was released in 2002. The
Twelve Days of Christmas. With the ongoing legal struggle with eToys,
etoy.Avisor Reinhold Grether issued a call to arms, asking for agents of the
Toy.Army to create "new toys" to help with the fight. ®TMark responded by
creating a game-esque campaign called The Twelve Days of Christmas. The Twelve
Days of Christmas aimed to interrupt the website of eToys during its busiest
time of the year. ®TMark calls their "new toy" a "multi-user Internet game
whose goal is to damage (or possibly even destroy) the company ". This was just
one of the many projects created by ®TMark for the "etoy fund", which aimed at
causing financial devastation to the value of eToys stock. The project also
involved placing numerous pages on the eToys server, including financial
documents, which would slow the eToys server during the busiest sale season of
the year. The Surrender. The ongoing battle hurt the image of eToys Inc. The
company's stock fell by over 70%, plummeting from $67 to $19. The Toywar had
also begun to garner worldwide press attention. After a number of weeks, eToys
decided to surrender, dropping the lawsuit and etoy's website was returned to
operation. It has been reported that eToys declared bankruptcy after the legal
dispute with etoy.
