Event study An Event study is a statistical method to assess the impact of an
event on the value of a firm. For example, the announcement of a merger between
two business entities can be analyzed to see whether investors believe the
merger will create or destroy value. The basic idea is to find the abnormal
return attributable to the event being studied by adjusting for the return that
stems from the price fluctuation of the market as a whole. As the event
methodology can be used to elicit the effects of any type of event on the
direction and magnitude of stock price changes, it is very versatile. Event
studies are thus common to various research areas, such as accounting and
finance, management, economics, marketing, information technology, law, and
political science. One aspect oftentimes used to structure the overall body of
event studies is the breath of the studied event types. On the one hand, there
is research investigating the stock market responses to economy-wide events
(i.e., market shocks, such as regulatory changes, or catastrophic events). On
the other hand, event studies are used to investigate the stock market
responses to corporate events, such as mergers and acquisitions, earnings
announcements, debt or equity issues, corporate reorganisations, investment
decisions and corporate social responsibility (MacKinlay 1997; McWilliams &
Siegel, 1997). Motivation. The logic behind the event study methodology (within
the specific context of mergers) is explained in Warren-Boulton and Dalkir
(2001): Methodologies. The general event study methodology is explained in, for
example, MacKinlay (1997) or Mitchell and Netter (1994). Warren-Boulton and
Dalkir use an event-probability methodology originally developed by McGuckin
"et al." (1992) to be applied to merger analysis. Their specific methodology
involves ex-ante calculation of the financial markets' assessment of the
probability that the merger will indeed take place in the future. It is
important to note that short-horizon event studies are more reliable than long-
horizon event studies as the latter have many limitations. However, Kothari and
Warner (2005) (S.P. Kothari and Jerold Warner) were able to refine long-horizon
methodologies in order to improve the design and reliability of the studies
over longer periods. Application to merger analysis. Warren-Boulton and Dalkir
(2001) apply their event-probability methodology to the proposed merger between
"Staples, Inc." and "Office Depot" (1996), which was challenged by the Federal
Trade Commission and eventually withdrawn. Empirical methods. Methodologically,
event studies imply the following: Based on an estimation window prior to the
analyzed event, the method estimates what the normal stock returns of the
affected firm(s) should be at the day of the event and several days prior and
after the event (i.e., during the event window). Thereafter, the method deducts
this 'normal returns' from the 'actual returns' to receive 'abnormal returns'
attributed to the event. Event studies, however, may differ with respect to
their specification of normal returns. The most common model for normal returns
is the 'market model' (MacKinlay 1997). Following this model, the analysis
implies to use an estimation window (typically sized 120 days) prior to the
event to derive the typical relationship between the firm's stock and a
reference index through a regression analysis. Based on the regression
coefficients, the normal returns are then projected and used to calculate the
abnormal returns. Alternative models for the normal returns include the CAPM
model, or more simplistic approaches such as mean returns (see Schimmer 2012
for an overview). Findings. Warren-Boulton and Dalkir (2001) find highly
significant returns to the only rival firm in the relevant market. Based on
these returns, they are able to estimate the price effect of the merger in the
product market which is highly consistent with the estimates of the likely
price increase from other independent sources.
