Exceptionalism Exceptionalism is the perception that a country, society,
institution, movement, or time period is "" (i.e., unusual or extraordinary) in
some way and thus does not need to conform to normal rules or general
principles. Used in this sense, the term reflects a belief formed by lived
experience, ideology, perceptual frames, or perspectives influenced by
knowledge (or lack thereof) of historical or comparative circumstances.
History. The German romantic philosopher-historians, especially Johann
Gottfried Herder (1744-1803) and Johann Gottlieb Fichte (1762-1814), dwelt on
the theme of uniqueness in the late 18th century. They de-emphasized the
political state and instead emphasized the uniqueness of the "Volk", comprising
the whole people, their languages and traditions. Each nation, considered as a
cultural entity with its own distinctive history, possessed a "national
spirit", or "soul of the people" (in German: "Volksgeist"). This idea had a
strong influence in the growth of nationalism in 19th-century European lands
— especially ones ruled by élites from somewhere else. Many countries of all
kinds have claimed exceptionality, including the modern United States, Britain,
Imperial Japan, Iran, Spain, the USSR, North Korea, France and Germany.
Historians have added many other cases, including historic empires such as
ancient Rome, the Ottoman Empire and China, along with a wide range of minor
kingdoms in history. In each case, proponents have presented a basis as to why
the country is exceptional compared to other countries, drawing upon
circumstance, cultural background and mythos, and self-perceived national aims.
Separateness. Commentators often use the term "exceptionalism" to describe
surprising developments in economic progress, such as the economic growth of
post-World War II Western Europe Exceptionalism can represent an error
analogous to historicism in assuming that only peculiarities are relevant to
analysis, while overlooking meaningful comparisons. "hat is seemingly
exceptional in one country may be found in other countries." As indigenous
peoples explore their respective cultural heritages, their seeking to be
separately classified or newly-understood may be a form of exceptionalism. In
ideologically-driven debates, a group may assert "exceptionalism", with or
without the term, in order to exaggerate the appearance of difference, perhaps
to create an atmosphere permissive of a wider latitude of action, and to avoid
recognition of similarities that would reduce perceived justifications. If
unwarranted, this represents an example of special pleading, a form of spurious
argumentation that ignores relevant bases for meaningful comparison. Groups
likewise may be accused of "exceptionalism", perhaps for avoiding normal terms
of analysis. The term may be a marker for an implication that a point of view
is widely misunderstood, such as the notion that Islamic jihad is
misunderstood. The term "exceptionalism" can imply criticism of a tendency to
remain separate from others. For example, the reluctance of the United States
government to join various international treaties is sometimes called
"exceptionalist", as is an assertion that a person or group refuses to
acknowledge, and perhaps communally participate in, a widely-accepted principle
or practice. In editorial language, the term "exceptionalism" may be a marker
for "the extent to which a region or group is justifiably or factually
distinct." Medical exceptionalism. Use of the term "HIV exceptionalism" implies
that AIDS is a contagious disease that is or should be treated differently from
other contagions or entails benefits not available to those suffering from
other diseases. Genetic exceptionalism is a policy program that medicalizes
genetic information. Like the exceptionalism surrounding HIV testing, genetic
exceptionalism is based on the belief that the average person needs a licensed
health professional to guide and support him through the discovery of
information with health implications, even if this information is common
knowledge, such as that he has red hair, which is associated with a higher risk
of sunburns and skin cancer. In countries with strong genetic exceptionalism
laws, the individual must have permission from a physician to obtain
information about his genes.
