Exclusive mandate An exclusive mandate is a government's assertion of its
legitimate authority over a certain territory, part of which another government
controls with stable, "de facto" sovereignty. It is also known as a claim to
sole representation or an exclusive authority claim. Germany from 1949 to 1990.
Federal Republic of Germany. For nearly all of its existence, the Federal
Republic of Germany insisted on an exclusive mandate for all of Germany,
claiming to be the sole legitimate successor to the German Reich that existed
from 1871 to 1945. This claim was initially based solely on the government's
mandate by virtue of free elections. In a statement made before the German
Bundestag, German Chancellor Konrad Adenauer asserted this mandate as early as
October 21, 1949, in response to the constitution of the German Democratic
Republic (GDR) coming into effect. The Secretary of State Summit of the three
western powers on September 18, 1950 in New York, supported Chancellor
Adenauer's claim. When the Soviet Union proclaimed the sovereignty of the GDR,
the German Bundestag once again unanimously insisted upon its exclusive mandate
to govern the entire German people. At the Treaties of Paris ("Pariser
Verträge"), at which the Federal Republic of Germany was admitted into the
North Atlantic Treaty Organization, the allied nations adopted the position
which the three western allies had already confirmed at the Nine-Power
Conference in London: that the Federal Republic had the exclusive right to act
on behalf of the entire German people in matters of foreign policy. The western
nations thereby accepted the exclusive mandate of the Federal Republic of
Germany. Judicially, the claim was based on the view that the German state as a
whole had been preserved, and that hence no two German states could exist. The
German Democratic Republic was therefore merely German territory occupied by a
Soviet puppet regime, thus lacking autonomy. According to an alternate view,
the GDR was in a state of civil war with the "actual" German government, based
in Bonn, and therefore could not be recognized as a state under international
law. A third, the so-called "umbrella state" theory, entails the existence of
two fragment states under the umbrella of a single German nation that had been
formed in 1871 and which had never actually been annihilated; this theory arose
in the late 1960s and was confirmed in a ruling of the Federal Constitutional
Court of Germany of 31 July 1973 regarding the "Basic Treaty" outlining
principal neighborly relations between East and West Germany. Aside from such
considerations pertaining to international law, the reunification clause of the
Basic Law suggested that international recognition of the German Democratic
Republic was to be avoided, so as not to sever the constitutional mandate to a
unified German state. The exclusive mandate was reaffirmed in the Hallstein
Doctrine, according to which the Federal Republic broke diplomatic relations
with states that maintained diplomatic relations with the GDR, except for the
Soviet Union. Until 1973, asserting an exclusive mandate was a strictly
observed policy, and the Federal Republic regarded the Democratic Republic as
an unlawfully constituted Soviet puppet state. Over time, especially after the
election of a social-liberal coalition led by Willy Brandt in 1969, the
exclusive mandate was softened, as it severely limited the Federal Republic's
domestic and international autonomy. Starting in 1973, the Federal Republic
took the line that the Democratic Republic was a "de facto" government within a
single German nation, of which the Federal Republic was "de jure" the sole
representative. With the admission of both German states to the United Nations
in 1973, matters regarding the exclusive mandate were no longer relevant.
Regardless, the Federal Republic of Germany did not recognize unique
citizenship of the German Democratic Republic until the GDR ceased to exist in
1990, and generally considered East Germans to be German citizens under the old
all-German citizenship (i.e. "Bundesbürger", citizens of West Germany);
refugees were therefore not deported. In addition, visitors from the GDR would
receive a West German passport upon request, for example, in order to ease
travel to the United States. After the fall of the Berlin wall in November
1989, East Germans were greeted with Begrüßungsgeld (100 West German Deutsche
Mark) and could travel freely within West Germany, while West German access to
the East was still hindered for some weeks by visa and the Mindestumtausch
mandatory minimum exchange of 25 DM. German Democratic Republic (1949–90).
The constitution of the German Democratic Republic also acknowledged that
Germany is an indivisible Republic, and thus only one German citizenship. The
GDR, therefore, was also founded on the premise of being the "de jure"
sovereign representative of all Germany. It regarded the West German regime as
an unlawfully constituted NATO puppet state. In 1974, however, the
reunification clause was stricken from the GDR's constitution. Thereafter, it
regarded itself as a separate state from West Germany. The GDR erected the
Berlin Wall in 1961 partly to prevent Germans moving freely within Germany. The
socialist state ceased to exist within a year after the fall of the wall in
1989 when its states joined the Federal Republic in the German reunification of
1990. Ireland. Articles 2 and 3 of the Irish constitution as originally enacted
in 1937 contained a territorial claim over the six counties of Northern
Ireland, which lay under "de facto" British sovereignty (as they still do
today). In particular, Article 2 stated that "national territory consists of
the whole island of Ireland". This was regarded by unionists in Northern
Ireland as an illegal extraterritorial claim, and encountered some hostility.
In 1999 the Republic of Ireland revised Articles 2 and 3 as part of the
Northern Ireland peace process to remove the explicit territorial claim: they
now provide merely that "[it is the entitlement and birthright of every person
born in the island of Ireland... to be part of the Irish Nation". The Ulster
Unionist Party has accepted the revision of the articles, but the larger
Democratic Unionist Party has not. Mainland China and Taiwan. Since the end of
the Chinese civil war in 1949, the Republic of China was limited to Taiwan
(taken from Japan in 1945, ceded by Qing China in 1895) and a few islands near
Fujian, while the People's Republic of China controlled mainland China, and
since 1950 also the island of Hainan. Both Chinese governments claimed
sovereignty over all of China. Until 1971, the Republic of China was a
permanent member of the UN Security Council with veto power. Since then,
however, it was excluded in favor of the People's Republic of China, and since
1972, it was also excluded from all UN-subcommittees. Since the death of Chiang
Kai-shek in 1975, Republic of China no longer aggressively asserts its
exclusive mandate and most of the world's nations have since broken their
official diplomatic ties with Republic of China (except for 23 nations as of
2008). Nevertheless, most nations, as well as the People's Republic government,
continue to maintain unofficial relations. Since the 1990s, the stance of the
Republic of China has softened. When the ROC established ties with Kiribati in
2003, it did not demand that Kiribati break its existing ties with the PRC.
However, the PRC's stance has not softened and it does not maintain diplomatic
relations with the 23 countries that recognize the ROC. Korea. When South Korea
and North Korea were created within months of each other in 1948, both claimed
sovereignty over all of Korea. Both states claimed that the other was an
unlawfully constituted puppet state of the United States and the Soviet Union,
respectively. In 1991, however, both nations joined the UN, as part of their
reconciliation policy. Vietnam. The Democratic Republic of Vietnam was
proclaimed in 1945; the Republic of Vietnam gained its independence from France
in 1954. North and South Vietnam both staked claims to all of Vietnam until
South Vietnam unconditionally surrendered to North Vietnam in 1975. When some
European countries (such as Switzerland) started recognizing North Vietnam
towards the end of the Vietnam war, South Vietnam did not interrupt its
diplomatic relations with them. Switzerland thus recognized North Vietnam in
1971 but also turned its consulate in Saigon (South Vietnam) into an embassy
until the end of the war in 1975.
