Executive order U.S. Presidents have issued executive orders since 1789,
usually to help officers and agencies of the executive branch manage the
operations within the federal government itself. Executive orders have the full
force of law, since issuances are typically made in pursuance of certain Acts
of Congress, some of which specifically delegate to the President some degree
of discretionary power (delegated legislation), or are believed to take
authority from a power granted directly to the Executive by the Constitution.
However, these perceived justifications cited by Presidents when authoring
Executive Orders have come under criticism for exceeding Executive authority;
at various times throughout U.S. history, challenges to the legal validity or
justification for an order have resulted in legal proceedings. In other
countries, similar edicts may be known as decrees, or orders in council. Basis
in US Constitution. US presidents have issued executive orders since 1789.
Although there is no Constitutional provision or statute that explicitly
permits executive orders, there is a vague grant of "executive power" given in
Article II, Section 1, of the Constitution, and furthered by the declaration
"take Care that the Laws be faithfully executed" made in Article II, Section 3,
Clause 5. Most Executive Orders use these Constitutional reasonings as the
authorization allowing for their issuance to be justified as part of the
President's sworn duties, the intent being to help direct officers of the US
Executive carry out their delegated duties as well as the normal operations of
the federal government: the consequence of failing to comply possibly being the
removal from office. History and use. Until the early 1900s, executive orders
went mostly unannounced and undocumented, seen only by the agencies to which
they were directed. However, the Department of State instituted a numbering
scheme for executive orders in 1907, starting retroactively with an order
issued on October 20, 1862, by President Abraham Lincoln. The documents that
later came to be known as "Executive Orders" probably gained their name from
this document, captioned "Executive Order Establishing a Provisional Court in
Louisiana." Until 1952, there were no rules or guidelines outlining what the
president could or could not do through an executive order. However, the
Supreme Court ruled in "Youngstown Sheet & Tube Co. v. Sawyer", 343 US 579
(1952) that Executive Order 10340 from President Harry S. Truman placing all
steel mills in the country under federal control was invalid because it
attempted to make law, rather than clarify or act to further a law put forth by
the Congress or the Constitution. Presidents since this decision have generally
been careful to cite which specific laws they are acting under when issuing new
executive orders. Wars have been fought upon executive order, including the
1999 Kosovo War during Bill Clinton's second term in office. However, all such
wars have had authorizing resolutions from Congress. The extent to which the
president may exercise military power independently of Congress and the scope
of the War Powers Resolution remain unresolved constitutional issues, although
all presidents since its passage have complied with the terms of the Resolution
while maintaining that they are not constitutionally required to do so.
Criticisms. Critics have accused presidents of abusing executive orders, of
using them to make laws without Congressional approval, and of moving existing
laws away from their original mandates. Large policy changes with wide-ranging
effects have been effected through executive order, including the integration
of the armed forces under Harry Truman and the desegregation of public schools
under Dwight D. Eisenhower. One extreme example of an executive order is
Executive Order 9066, where Franklin D. Roosevelt delegated military authority
to remove any or all people (used to target specifically Japanese Americans and
German Americans) in a military zone. The authority delegated to General John
L. DeWitt subsequently paved the way for all Japanese-Americans on the West
Coast to be sent to internment camps for the duration of World War II.
Executive Order 13233, which restricted public access to the papers of former
presidents, was more recently criticized by the Society of American Archivists
and other groups, stating that it "violates both the spirit and letter of
existing US law on access to presidential papers as clearly laid down in 44
USC. 2201–07," and adding that the order "potentially threatens to undermine
one of the very foundations of our nation." President Obama later revoked
Executive Order 13233 in January 2009. Legal conflicts. To date, U.S. courts
have overturned only two executive orders: the aforementioned Truman order, and
a issued by President Clinton that attempted to prevent the federal government
from contracting with organizations that had strike-breakers on the payroll.
Congress was able to overturn an executive order by passing legislation in
conflict with it during the period of 1939 to 1983 until the Supreme Court
ruled in "Immigration and Naturalization Service v. Chadha" that the
"legislative veto" represented "the exercise of legislative power" without
"bicameral passage followed by presentment to the President." The loss of the
legislative veto has caused Congress to look for alternative measures to
override executive orders such as refusing to approve funding necessary to
carry out certain policy measures contained with the order or to legitimize
policy mechanisms. In the former, the president retains the power to veto such
a decision; however, the Congress may override a veto with a two-thirds
majority to end an executive order. It has been argued that a Congressional
override of an executive order is a nearly impossible event due to the
supermajority vote required and the fact that such a vote leaves individual
lawmakers very vulnerable to political criticism. State governors' executive
orders. Executive orders as issued by the governors of the states are not laws,
but do have the same binding nature. Executive orders are usually based on
existing constitutional or statutory powers of the Governor and do not require
any action by the state legislature to take effect. Executive orders may, for
example, demand budget cuts from state government when the state legislature is
not in session, and economic conditions take a downturn, thereby decreasing tax
revenue below what was forecast when the budget was approved. Depending on the
state constitution, a governor may specify by what percentage each government
agency must reduce by, and may exempt those that are already particularly
underfunded, or cannot put long-term expenses (such as capital expenditures)
off until a later fiscal year. The governor may also call the legislature into
special session. There are also other uses for gubernatorial executive orders.
In 2007 for example, the Governor of Georgia made an executive order for all of
its state agencies to reduce water use during a major drought. This was also
demanded of its counties' water systems, however it is unclear whether this
would have the force of law. Presidential proclamation. A presidential
proclamation "states a condition, declares a law and requires obedience,
recognizes an event or triggers the implementation of a law (by recognizing
that the circumstances in law have been realized)." Presidents “define”
situations or conditions on situations that become legal or economic truth.
These orders carry the same force of law as executive orders – the difference
between the two is that executive orders are aimed at those inside government
while proclamations are aimed at those outside government. The administrative
weight of these proclamations is upheld because they are often specifically
authorized by congressional statute, making them “delegated unilateral
powers.” Presidential proclamations are often dismissed as a practical
presidential tool for policy making because of the perception of proclamations
as largely ceremonial or symbolic in nature. However, the legal weight of
presidential proclamations suggests their importance to presidential
governance.
