Expected utility hypothesis In economics, game theory, and decision theory the
expected utility hypothesis is a theory of utility in which "betting
preferences" of people with regard to uncertain outcomes (gambles) are
represented by a function of the payouts (whether in money or other goods), the
probabilities of occurrence, risk aversion, and the different utility of the
same payout to people with different assets or personal preferences. This
theory has proved useful to explain some popular choices that seem to
contradict the expected value criterion (which takes into account only the
sizes of the payouts and the probabilities of occurrence), such as occur in the
contexts of gambling and insurance. Daniel Bernoulli initiated this theory in
1738. Until the mid twentieth century, the standard term for the expected
utility was the moral expectation, contrasted with "mathematical expectation"
for the expected value. The von Neumann–Morgenstern utility theorem provides
necessary and sufficient "rationality" axioms under which the expected utility
hypothesis holds. Expected value and choice under risk. In the presence of
risky outcomes, a decision maker could use the expected value criterion as a
rule of choice: higher expected value investments are simply the preferred
ones. For example, suppose there is a gamble in which the probability of
getting a $100 payment is 1 in 80 and the alternative, and far more likely,
outcome, is getting nothing. Then the expected value of this gamble is $1.25.
Given the choice between this gamble and a guaranteed payment of $1, by this
simple expected value theory people would choose the $100-or-nothing gamble.
However, under expected utility theory, some people would be risk averse enough
to prefer the sure thing, even though it has a lower expected value, while
other less risk averse people would still choose the riskier, higher-mean
gamble. Bernoulli's formulation. Nicolas Bernoulli described the St. Petersburg
paradox (involving infinite expected values) in 1713, prompting two Swiss
mathematicians to develop expected utility theory as a solution. The theory can
also more accurately describe more realistic scenarios (where expected values
are finite) than expected value alone. In 1728, Gabriel Cramer, in a letter to
Nicolas Bernoulli, wrote, "the mathematicians estimate money in proportion to
its quantity, and men of good sense in proportion to the usage that they may
make of it." In 1738, Nicolas' cousin Daniel Bernoulli, published the canonical
18th Century description of this solution in "Specimen theoriae novae de
mensura sortis" or "Exposition of a New Theory on the Measurement of Risk".
Daniel Bernoulli proposed that a mathematical function should be used to
correct the expected value depending on probability. This provides a way to
account for risk aversion, where the risk premium is higher for low-probability
events than the difference between the payout level of a particular outcome and
its expected value. Bernoulli's paper was the first formalization of marginal
utility, which has broad application in economics in addition to expected
utility theory. He used this concept to formalize the idea that the same amount
of additional money was less useful to an already-wealthy person than it would
be to a poor person. Infinite expected value — St. Petersburg paradox. The
St. Petersburg paradox (named after the journal in which Bernoulli's paper was
published) arises when there is no upper bound on the potential rewards from
very low probability events. Because some probability distribution functions
have an infinite expected value, an expected-wealth maximizing person would pay
an infinite amount to take this gamble. In real life, people do not do this.
Bernoulli proposed a solution to this paradox in his paper: the utility
function used in real life means that the expected utility of the gamble is
finite, even if its expected value is infinite. (Thus he hypothesized
diminishing marginal utility of increasingly larger amounts of money.) It has
also been resolved differently by other economists by proposing that very low
probability events are neglected, by taking into account the finite resources
of the participants, or by noting that one simply cannot buy that which is not
sold (and that sellers would not produce a lottery whose expected loss to them
were unacceptable). Von Neumann–Morgenstern formulation. The von Neumann-
Morgenstern axioms. There are four axioms of the expected utility theory that
define a "rational" decision maker. They are completeness, transitivity,
independence and continuity. Completeness assumes that an individual has well
defined preferences and can always decide between any two alternatives. This
means that the individual either prefers A to B, or is indifferent between A
and B, or prefers B to A. Transitivity assumes that, as an individual decides
according to the completeness axiom, the individual also decides consistently.
Independence also pertains to well-defined preferences and assumes that two
gambles mixed with a third one maintain the same preference order as when the
two are presented independently of the third one. The independence axiom is the
most controversial one. Continuity assumes that when there are three lotteries
(A, B and C) and the individual prefers A to B and B to C, then there should be
a possible combination of A and C in which the individual is then indifferent
between this mix and the lottery B. If all these axioms are satisfied, then the
individual is said to be rational and the preferences can be represented by a
utility function, i.e. one can assign numbers (utilities) to each outcome of
the lottery such that choosing the best lottery according to the preference
formula_11 amounts to choosing the lottery with the highest expected utility.
This result is called the von Neumann—Morgenstern utility representation
theorem. In other words: if an individual always chooses his/her most preferred
alternative available, then the individual will choose one gamble over another
if and only if there is a utility function such that the expected utility of
one exceeds that of the other. The expected utility of any gamble may be
expressed as a linear combination of the utilities of the outcomes,with the
weights being the respective probabilities. Utility functions are also normally
continuous functions. Such utility functions are also referred to as von
Neumann–Morgenstern (vNM) utility functions. This is a central theme of the
expected utility hypothesis in which an individual chooses not the highest
expected value, but rather the highest expected utility. The expected utility
maximizing individual makes decisions rationally based on the axioms of the
theory. The von Neumann–Morgenstern formulation is important in the
application of set theory to economics because it was developed shortly after
the Hicks-Allen "ordinal revolution" of the 1930s, and it revived the idea of
cardinal utility in economic theory. Note, however, that while in this context
the "utility function" is cardinal, in that implied behavior would be altered
by a non-linear monotonic transformation of utility, the "expected utilty
function" is ordinal because any monotonic increasing transformation of it
gives the same behavior. Risk aversion. The expected utility theory implies
that rational individuals act as though they were maximizing expected utility,
and takes into account that individuals may be risk averse, meaning that the
individual would refuse a fair gamble (a fair gamble has an expected value of
zero). Risk aversion implies that their utility functions are concave and show
diminishing marginal wealth utility. The risk attitude is directly related to
the curvature of the utility function: risk neutral individuals have linear
utility functions, while risk seeking individuals have convex utility functions
and risk averse individuals have concave utility functions. The degree of risk
aversion can be measured by the curvature of the utility function. Special
classes of utility functions are the CRRA (constant relative risk aversion)
functions, where RRA(w) is constant, and the CARA (constant absolute risk
aversion) functions, where ARA(w) is constant. They are often used in economics
for simplification. A decision that maximizes expected utility also maximizes
the probability of the decision's consequences being preferable to some
uncertain threshold (Castagnoli and LiCalzi,1996; Bordley and
LiCalzi,2000;Bordley and Kirkwood, ). In the absence of uncertainty about the
threshold, expected utility maximization simplifies to maximizing the
probability of achieving some fixed target. If the uncertainty is uniformly
distributed, then expected utility maximization becomes expected value
maximization. Intermediate cases lead to increasing risk-aversion above some
fixed threshold and increasing risk-seeking below a fixed threshold. Examples
of von Neumann-Morgenstern utility functions. The utility function formula_14
was originally suggested by Bernoulli (see above). It has relative risk
aversion constant and equal to one, and is still sometimes assumed in economic
analyses. The utility function formula_15 exhibits constant absolute risk
aversion, and for this reason is often avoided, although it has the advantage
of offering substantial mathematical tractability when asset returns are
normally distributed. Note that, as per the affine transformation property
alluded to above, the utility function formula_16 gives exactly the same
preferences orderings as does formula_17; thus it is irrelevant that the values
of formula_17 and its expected value are always negative: what matters for
preference ordering is which of two gambles gives the higher expected utility,
not the numerical values of those expected utilities. The class of constant
relative risk aversion utility functions contains three categories. Bernoulli's
utility function has relative risk aversion equal to unity. The functions for
formula_21 have relative risk aversion equal to formula_22. And the functions
for formula_24 also have relative risk aversion equal to formula_22. See also
the discussion of utility functions having hyperbolic absolute risk aversion
(HARA). Measuring risk in the expected utility context. Often people refer to
"risk" in the sense of a potentially quantifiable entity. In the context of
mean-variance analysis, variance is used as a risk measure for portfolio
return; however, this is only valid if returns are normally distributed or
otherwise jointly elliptically distributed. However, D. E. Bell proposed a
measure of risk which follows naturally from a certain class of von Neumann-
Morgenstern utility functions. Let utility of wealth be given by formula_26 for
individual-specific positive parameters "a" and "b". Then expected utility is
given by Thus the risk measure is formula_28, which differs between two
individuals if they have different values of the parameter formula_29, allowing
different people to disagree about the degree of risk associated with any given
portfolio. Criticism. Expected utility theory is criticized by behavioral
decision science. It argues that, whilst Bernoulli's paper was concise and
brilliant, the theory is not perfect. For example, in 2000 behavioral economist
Matthew Rabin proved mathematically that the utility of wealth cannot explain
loss aversion and attempts to so use it will fail. Bernoulli's theory on the
utility of wealth assumed that if two people have the same wealth all other
things being equal the people should be equally happy. However, where two
people have US$1m but one has just prior to that had US$2m but lost US$1m
whereas the other had US$500 and had just gained US$999,500 they will not be
equally happy. Bernoulli's theory thus lacked a reference point. Nevertheless
it remained a dominant theory for over 250 years. Kahneman and Tversky in 1979
presented their prospect theory which showed empirically, among other things,
how preferences of individuals are inconsistent among same choices, depending
on how those choices are presented. Like any mathematical model, expected
utility theory is an abstraction and simplification of reality. The
mathematical correctness of expected utility theory and the salience of its
primitive concepts do not guarantee that expected utility theory is a reliable
guide to human behavior or optimal practice. The mathematical clarity of
expected utility theory has helped scientists design experiments to test its
adequacy, and to distinguish systematic departures from its predictions. This
has led to the field of behavioral finance, which has produced deviations from
expected utility theory to account for the empirical facts. Conservatism in
updating beliefs. It is well established that humans find logic hard,
mathematics harder, and probability even more challenging. Psychologists have
discovered systematic violations of probability calculations and behavior by
humans. Consider, for example, the Monty Hall problem. In updating probability
distributions using evidence, a standard method uses conditional probability,
namely the rule of Bayes. An experiment on belief revision have suggested that
humans change their beliefs faster when using Bayesian methods than when using
informal judgment. Irrational deviations. Behavioral finance has produced
several generalized expected utility theories to account for instances where
people's choice deviate from those predicted by expected utility theory. These
deviations are described as "irrational" because they can depend on the way the
problem is presented, not on the actual costs,rewards, or probabilities
involved. Particular theories include prospect theory, rank-dependent expected
utility and cumulative prospect theory and SP/A theory Preference reversals
over uncertain outcomes. Starting with studies such as Lichtenstein & Slovic
(1971), it was discovered that subjects sometimes exhibit signs of preference
reversals with regard to their certainty equivalents of different lotteries.
Specifically, when eliciting certainty equivalents, subjects tend to value "p
bets" (lotteries with a high chance of winning a low prize) lower than "$ bets"
(lotteries with a small chance of winning a large prize). When subjects are
asked which lotteries they prefer in direct comparison, however, they
frequently prefer the "p bets" over "$ bets." Many studies have examined this
"preference reversal," from both an experimental (e.g., Plott & Grether, 1979)
and theoretical (e.g., Holt, 1986) standpoint, indicating that this behavior
can be brought into accordance with neoclassical economic theory under specific
assumptions. Uncertain probabilities. If one is using the frequentist notion of
probability, where probabilities are considered to be facts, then applying
expected value and expected utility to decision-making requires knowing the
probability of various outcomes. However, this is unknown in practice: one is
operating under uncertainty (in economics, one talks of Knightian uncertainty).
Thus one must make assumptions, but then the expected value of various
decisions is very sensitive to the assumptions. This is particularly a problem
when the expectation is dominated by rare extreme events, as in a long-tailed
distribution. Alternative decision techniques are robust to uncertainty of
probability of outcomes, either not depending on probabilities of outcomes and
only requiring scenario analysis (as in minimax or minimax regret), or being
less sensitive to assumptions. Bayesian approaches to probability treat it as a
degree of belief, and thus deny the existence of Knightian uncertainty and
uncertain probabilities.
