Factor price equalization Factor price equalization is an economic theory, by
Paul A. Samuelson (1948), which states that the prices of identical factors of
production, such as the wage rate, or the return to capital, will be equalized
across countries as a result of international trade in commodities. The theorem
assumes that there are two goods and two factors of production, for example
capital and labour. Other key assumptions of the theorem are that each country
faces the same commodity prices, because of free trade in commodities, uses the
same technology for production, and produces both goods. Crucially these
assumptions result in factor prices being equalized across countries without
the need for factor mobility, such as migration of labor or capital flows.
Whichever factor receives the lowest price before two countries integrate
economically and effectively become one market will therefore tend to become
more expensive relative to other factors in the economy, while those with the
highest price will tend to become cheaper. An often-cited example of factor
price equalization is . When two countries enter a free trade agreement, wages
for identical jobs in both countries tend to approach each other. After the
North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA) was signed, for instance, unskilled
labor wages gradually fell in the United States, at the same time as they
gradually rose in Mexico. The same force has applied more recently to the
various countries of the European Union. The result was first proven
mathematically as an outcome of the Heckscher-Ohlin model assumptions. Simply
stated the theorem says that when the prices of the output goods are equalized
between countries as they move to free trade, then the prices of the factors
(capital and labor) will also be equalized between countries. This theory was
independently discovered by Abba Lerner in 1933 but was published much later in
1952. The "Lerner Diangram" remains a key analytical tool in teaching
international trade theory to undergraduates.
