Factors of production In economics, factors of production are the "inputs" to
the production process. "Finished goods" are the "output". Input determines the
quantity of output i.e. output depends upon input. Input is the starting point
and output is the end point of production process and such input-output
relationship is called a production function. All factors of production like
land, labor, capital and technology are required in combination at a time to
produce a commodity. In economics, production means creation or an addition of
utility. Factors of production (or productive 'inputs' or 'resources') are any
commodities or services used to produce goods and services. 'Factors of
production' may also refer specifically to the 'primary factors', which are
stocks including land, labor (the ability to work), and capital goods applied
to production. Materials and energy are considered secondary factors in
classical economics because they are obtained from land, labor and capital. The
primary factors facilitate production but neither become part of the product
(as with raw materials) nor become significantly transformed by the production
process (as with fuel used to power machinery). 'Land' includes not only the
site of production but natural resources above or below the soil. The factor
land may, however, for simplification purposes be merged with capital in some
cases (due to land being of little importance in the service sector and
manufacturing). Recent usage has distinguished human capital (the stock of
knowledge in the labor force) from labor. Entrepreneurship is also sometimes
considered a factor of production. Sometimes the overall state of technology is
described as a factor of production. The number and definition of factors
varies, depending on theoretical purpose, empirical emphasis, or school of
economics. Historical schools and factors. In the interpretation of the
currently dominant view of classical economic theory developed by neoclassical
economists, the term "factors" did not exist until after the classical period
and is not to be found in any of the literature of that time. Differences are
most stark when it comes to deciding which factor is the most important. For
example, in the Austrian view—often shared by neoclassical and other "free
market" economists—the primary factor of production is the time of the
entrepreneur, which, when combined with other factors, determines the amount of
output of a particular good or service. However, other authors argue that
"entrepreneurship" is nothing but a specific kind of labor or human capital and
should not be treated separately. The Marxian school goes further, seeing labor
(in general, including entrepreneurship) as the primary factor of production,
since it is required to produce capital goods and to utilize the gifts of
nature. But this debate is more about basic economic theory (the role of the
factors in the economy) than it is about the definition of the factors of
production. Physiocracy. In French Physiocracy, the main European school of
economics before Adam Smith, the productive process is explained as the
interaction between participating classes of the population. These classes are
therefore the factors of production within physiocracy: capital,
entrepreneurship, land, and labor. Classical. The classical economics of Adam
Smith, David Ricardo, and their followers focuses on physical resources in
defining its factors of production, and discusses the distribution of cost and
value among these factors. Adam Smith and David Ricardo referred to the
"component parts of price" as the costs of using: The classical economists also
employed the word "capital" in reference to money. Money, however, was not
considered to be a factor of production in the sense of capital stock since it
is not used to directly produce any good. The return to loaned money or to
loaned stock was styled as interest while the return to the actual proprietor
of capital stock (tools, etc.) was styled as profit. See also returns. The
Chapman Effect also known as diminished return, occurs when an employee is at
fault for impeding the projected return of a company. Meaning that this
employee distracts others, which causes output to decline (classical output
function). Marxian. The "subject of labor" refers to natural resources and raw
materials, including land. The "instruments of labor" are tools, in the
broadest sense. They include factory buildings, infrastructure, and other
human-made objects that facilitate labor's production of goods and services.
This view seems similar to the classical perspective described above. But
unlike the classical school and many economists today, Marx made a clear
distinction between labor actually done and an individual's "labor power" or
ability to work. Labor done is often referred to nowadays as "effort" or "labor
services." Labor-power might be seen as a stock which can produce a flow of
labor. Labor, not labor power, is the key factor of production for Marx and the
basis for Marx's labor theory of value. The hiring of labor power only results
in the production of goods or services ("use-values") when organized and
regulated (often by the "management"). How much labor is actually done depends
on the importance of conflict or tensions within the labor process.
Neoclassical economics. Neoclassical economics, one of the branches of
mainstream economics, started with the classical factors of production of land,
labor, and capital. However, it developed an alternative theory of value and
distribution. Many of its practitioners have added various further factors of
production (see below). A fourth factor? As mentioned, recent authors have
added to the classical list. For example, J.B. Clark saw the co-ordinating
function in production and distribution as being served by entrepreneurs; Frank
Knight introduced managers who co-ordinate using their own money (financial
capital) and the financial capital of others. In contrast, many economists
today consider "human capital" (skills and education) as the fourth factor of
production, with entrepreneurship as a form of human capital. Yet others refer
to intellectual capital. More recently, many have begun to see "social capital"
as a factor, as contributing to production of goods and services.
Entrepreneurship. Consider entrepreneurship as a factor of production, leaving
debate aside. In markets, entrepreneurs combine the other factors of
production, land, labor, and capital, in order to make a profit. Often these
entrepreneurs are seen as innovators, developing new ways to produce and new
products. In a planned economy, central planners decide how land, labor, and
capital should be used to provide for maximum benefit for all citizens. Of
course, just as with market entrepreneurs, the benefits may mostly accrue to
the entrepreneurs themselves. The word has been used in other ways. The
sociologist C. Wright Mills refers to "new entrepreneurs" who work within and
between corporate and government bureaucracies in new and different ways.
Others (such as those practicing public choice theory) refer to "political
entrepreneurs," i.e., politicians and other actors. Much controversy rages
about the benefits produced by entrepreneurship. But the real issue is about
how well institutions they operate in (markets, planning, bureaucracies,
government) serve the public. This concerns such issues as the relative
importance of market failure and government failure. Non tangible forms of
capital. Human capital. Contemporary analysis distinguishes tangible, physical,
or nonhuman capital goods from other forms of capital such as human capital.
Human capital is embodied in a human being and is acquired through education
and training, whether formal or on the job. Human capital is important in
modern economic theory. Education is a key element in explaining economic
growth over time (see growth accounting). It is also often seen as the solution
to the "Leontief paradox" in international trade. Intellectual capital. A more
recent coinage is intellectual capital, used especially as to information
technology, recorded music, written material. This intellectual property is
protected by copyrights, patents, and trademarks. This view posits a new
Information Age, which changes the roles and nature of land, labour, and
capital. During the Information Age (circa 1971–present), the Knowledge Age
(circa 1991 to 2002), and the Intangible Economy (2002–present) many see the
primary factors of production as having become less concrete. These factors of
production are now seen as knowledge, collaboration, process-engagement, and
time quality. According to economic theory, a "factor of production" is used to
create value and allow economic performance. As the four "modern-day" factors
are all essentially abstract, the current economic age has been called the
Intangible Economy. Intangible factors of production are subject to network
effects and the contrary economic laws such as the law of increasing returns.
Social capital. Social capital is often hard to define, but to one textbook -
Microeconomics in Context - it is: Neva Goodwin, Julie A. Nelson, Frank
Ackerman, and Thomas Weisskopf, 2005. "Microeconomics in Context," p. 124
Knowledge, ideas, and values, and human relationships are transmitted as part
of the culture. This type of capital cannot be owned by individuals and is
instead part of the common stock owned by humanity. But they are often crucial
to maintaining a peaceful society in which normal economic transactions and
production can occur. Another kind of social capital "can" be owned
individually. This kind of individual asset involves reputation, what
accountants call "goodwill", and/or what others call "street cred," along with
fame, honor, and prestige. It fits with Pierre Bourdieu’s definition of
"social capital" as: quoted in Sobel. This means that the value of individual
social assets that Bourdieu points to depend on the current "social capital" as
defined above. Natural resources. Ayres and Warr (2009) are among the
economists who criticize orthodox economics for overlooking the role of natural
resources and the effects of declining resource capital. See also: "Natural
resource economics" Energy. Energy can be seen as individual factor of
production, with an elasticity larger than labor. A cointegration analysis
support results derived from linear exponentional (LINEX) production functions.
