Fahrenheit 9/11 controversy The documentary film Fahrenheit 9/11 generated, and
even courted controversy since it was first announced, even before its release
just prior to the U.S. presidential election, 2004. The film by Michael Moore
criticizes the Bush administration's attempt to pursue Osama bin Laden in the
aftermath of the September 11, 2001, attacks, as well as the Iraq War. Bush
defenders and some commentators have criticized the film for factual and
contextual inaccuracies. Ray Bradbury's title dispute. The title of the film
refers to Ray Bradbury's novel "Fahrenheit 451" and the September 11 attacks of
2001. The "Fahrenheit 451" reference is emphasized by the film's tagline ""The
temperature where freedom burns"" (compare with "Fahrenheit 451's" tagline,
""The temperature at which books burn""). Moore has stated that the title came
from the subject of an e-mail he received from a fan shortly after September
11. Bradbury was upset by what he considered the appropriation of his title. He
wanted the film renamed. Attacks on the film. "Move America Forwards letter-
writing campaign. The conservative political action group Move America Forward
mounted a letter-writing campaign pressuring theater chains not to screen the
film, which it compared to "an al-Qaeda training video." "We've been causing
them cinemas an enormous amount of aggravation", said group member and talk
radio host Melanie Morgan. Citizens United's FEC challenge. Citizens United, a
conservative group run by David Bossie, filed a complaint before the Federal
Election Commission charging that ads for the film constitute political
advertising and thus may not be aired 60 days before an election or 30 days
before a party convention. On August 5, the FEC unanimously dismissed the
complaint finding no evidence that the movie's ads had broken the law. A
further complaint filed in 2005 was also rejected. Controversy over the film's
content. Shailagh Murray described "Fahrenheit 9/11" in "The Wall Street
Journal" as a "harshly satirical and controversial portrait of the Bush
presidency." Stephen Dalton of "The Times" wrote that the movie "hits enough of
its satirical targets to qualify as an important and timely film." Desson
Thomson says "there is more to "Fahrenheit 9/11" than partisan ridicule. ...
What's remarkable here isn't Moore's political animosity or ticklish wit. It's
the well-argued, heartfelt power of his persuasion." Author and blogger Andrew
Sullivan expressed the opposite view, writing that Moore's film is "deeply
corrosive of the possibility of real debate and reason in our culture."
Canadian journalist Linda McQuaig wrote in response to Sullivan: "Hell, the
media shut down real debate long ago. It is precisely because the debate has
been so thoroughly corroded by the mainstream media ... that Moore's film is
being so gratefully received by so many." Denis Hamill considers "Fahrenheit 9/
11" to be a "corrective to the daily drumbeat of right-wing talk radio."
English-American journalist and literary critic Christopher Hitchens and
Democratic politician Ed Koch contend that "Fahrenheit 9/11" contains
distortions and untruths and is propaganda. Hitchens also compared Michael
Moore to Leni Riefenstahl in his critique for "Slate" magazine: "Here we
glimpse a possible fusion between the turgid routines of MoveOn.org and the
filmic standards, if not exactly the filmic skills, of Sergei Eisenstein or
Leni Riefenstahl." He later labeled Moore "a completely promiscuous opportunist
extremely callous person." Author and political commentator Peter Holding
called Hitchens' analogy "hysterical, unfair and offensive," adding that "some
of the criticism directed towards Moore's film displays the very same
characteristics for which Moore's film has been criticised". Fellow "Slate"
columnist and Iraq war critic David Edelstein, though generally supportive of
the film, wrote "Fahrenheit 9/11" "is an act of counterpropaganda that has a
boorish, bullying force", but called it a "legitimate abuse of power."
Prominent left-wing intellectual Bernard-Henri Lévy agreed the war was "a bad
idea", but was sympathetic to the neoconservative point of view and disagreed
with what he perceived to be the film's "core" argument, that "we have no
reason to be interfering" in the Middle East. Joe Scarborough alleges that
Moore has ducked criticism and dodged interviews from both himself and
Hitchens. Moore has published both a list of facts and sources for "Fahrenheit
9/11" and a document establishing agreements between the points made in his
film and the findings of the 9/11 Commission (the independent, bipartisan panel
directed by Congress and Bush to investigate the facts and circumstances
surrounding the September 11 attacks). Bush reading to school children. Early
on in the film, Moore explains that Bush continued reading "The Pet Goat" with
a classroom of second graders at Emma E. Booker Elementary School in Sarasota,
Florida for an extended period of time after being told of the attacks. The
school's principal, Gwendolyn Tose'-Rigell, explained, "I don't think anyone
could have handled it better. What would it have served if he had jumped out of
his chair and ran out of the room?" Some of the schoolchildren, now grown, have
expressed similar views; Mariah Williams, one of the students, stated in 2011
that, "I'm just glad he didn't get up and leave because then I would have been
more scared and confused." A 9/11 Commission Staff Report entitled "Improvising
a Homeland Defense" said: "The President felt he should project strength and
calm until he could better understand what was happening." According to senior
White House correspondent Bill Sammon and his inside look at the Bush
administration's response to 9/11, "Fighting Back: The War on Terrorism from
Inside the White House", Press Secretary Ari Fleischer was holding up a legal
pad upon which he had written a message telling Bush not to say anything yet.
Alleged discrepancy on Osama's presumed innocence. According to Christopher
Hitchens, Moore had argued in a previous public debate that Osama bin Laden was
to be presumed innocent until proven guilty, and thus questions the treatment
of bin Laden in the film. "Something – I cannot guess what, since we knew as
much then as we do now – has since apparently persuaded Moore that Osama Bin
Laden is as guilty as hell. Indeed, Osama is suddenly so guilty and so all-
powerful that any other discussion of any other topic is a dangerous
'distraction' from the fight against him. I believe that I understand the
convenience of this late conversion." Hitchens was subsequently invited to
appear on Joe Scarborough's MSNBC talk show, "Scarborough Country", at which
point a tape recording of his debate with Moore at the Telluride Film Festival
in 2002 was replayed. When the video ended, Hitchens proceeded to explain: "Why
does someone who thought that Osama was innocent and Afghanistan was no problem
suddenly switch in this way? Because unless he says that he was dead wrong all
along and Osama Laden was innocent and wronged, he can't say that everything
else is a distraction from the hunt for Osama." Host Joe Scarborough agreed
with Hitchens and criticised Moore for inconsistency, accusing him of
"hypocrisy" for assuming bin Laden is innocent one minute "and yet, in this
movie, at the very beginning, he criticizes George Bush for not assuming the
bin Laden family is somehow guilty, then letting them out of the country."
"Flak" magazine editor Stephen Himes, after watching "Scarborough Country" and
reviewing a transcript of the Telluride debate, wrote that Hitchens had
misconstrued Moore's remarks: "Hitchens actually performs some Clintonian
semantic gymnastics here. Moore's "if" is not intending 'I think Osama is
innocent and the Afghan war is unjustified;' he's trying to make an argument
for American due process: 'If he and his group were the ones who did this, then
they should be tracked down, captured and brought to justice'." Film critic
Christopher Parry also took issue with Hitchens' interpretation of Moore's
remarks, writing "If you've got to build a case against Jeffery Dahmer, you've
got to build a case against Bin Laden." Saudi flights. Moore implicates the
White House in allowing relatives of Osama bin Laden to leave the United States
without being interviewed at length by the FBI. In his narration in the movie,
Moore states that "At least six private jets and nearly two dozen commercial
planes carried the Saudis and the Bin Ladens out of the U.S. after September
13." Moore based this statement on the research of Craig Unger, author of
"House of Bush, House of Saud", whom he interviewed for the film. Passenger
lists can be found at the House of Bush website. Approval of the flights.
Christopher Hitchens points to a statement by former counterterrorism chief
Richard Clarke when interviewed by "The Hill" newspaper in May 2004, in which
"he, and he alone, took the responsibility for authorizing Saudi departures."
Hitchens says that Moore interviewed Clarke and "either he didn't ask Clarke,
who authorized those flights, or Clarke told him it was me and only me, and he
didn't think it was good enough to use. ... Either way, that's below the level
of trash TV, trash journalism." After quitting his White House position, Clarke
became a prominent critic of the Bush administration's war on terrorism.
Hitchens contends that the film does not mention Clarke's remarks so that it
can criticize Bush for not going after Bin Laden's family, while holding up
Clarke as a heroic, anti-war figure. The filmmaker defended himself in an
interview with ABC News correspondent Jake Tapper, answering: "Actually I do
the article and it's blown up 40 foot on the screen, you can see Richard
Clarke's name right there saying that he approved the flights based on the
information the FBI gave him. It's right there, right up on the screen. I don't
agree with Clarke on this point. Just because I think he's good on a lot of
things doesn't mean I agree with him on everything." The FBI's denial that it
had a role in approving the flights. On May 18, 2004, Washington newspaper "The
Hill" quoted FBI spokesman on counterterrorism John Iannarelli as denying that
the FBI had any "role in facilitating these flights one way or another." The
FBI's denial of involvement was repeated to "The Hill" by another spokesperson,
Donna Spiser, in a May 26, 2004 article. She is quoted as saying "We haven't
had anything to do with arranging and clearing the flights." She states that
the FBI's involvement was limited to interviewing those people on the flight it
thought were of interest: "We did know who was on the flights and interviewed
anyone we thought we needed to." Alleged lack of cooperation from the White
House. The May 18 article in "The Hill", which was published prior to Clarke's
May 25 claim of responsibility, quoted 9/11 Commission vice-chair Lee H.
Hamilton as saying: "We don't know who authorized flights. We've asked that
question 50 times." A May 26 article in "The Hill" quoted another Commission
member, Tim Roemer, as being unconvinced by Clarke's claim of sole
responsibility for approving the flights: "It doesn't seem that Richard Clarke
had enough information to clear it... I just don't think that the questions are
resolved, and we need to dig deeper... Clarke sure didn't seem to say that he
was the final decisionmaker. I believe we need to continue to look for some
more answers." Allegations concerning the Bush administration's refusal to
provide information to the 9/11 Commission about the Saudi flights are
disputed. The May 18, 2004 article in "The Hill" says that Commission vice-
chairman Lee Hamilton "disclosed the administration's refusal to answer
questions on the sensitive subject during a recent closed-door meeting with a
group of Democratic senators, according to several Democratic sources." It also
says that Republican Commission member John Lehman "said... that he told the
senators the White House has been fully cooperative." President Bush, who met
privately with the Saudi Arabian ambassador on the morning of Sept. 13, 2001,
is suspected of personally authorizing the controversial flights while all
other air travel had been halted. Interviewing of bin Laden relatives. Moore
interviews author Craig Unger and retired FBI agent Jack Cloonan, both of whom
say bin Laden family members were not questioned in a serious manner at length
before being allowed to leave. The September 11 Commission has found that 22 of
the 26 people on the "bin Laden" flight were interviewed before being allowed
to leave the country with many being asked "detailed questions". A September 2,
2004 CNN news article reported that "However, in a recent interview with the
AP, bin Laden's estranged sister-in-law said she does not believe that family
members have cut off entirely. Carmen Binladin, who has changed the spelling of
her name and lives in Switzerland, said bin Laden is not the only religious
brother in the family, and she expects his sisters to support him as well.
'They are very close to Osama,' she said." Declassified FBI documents. In June
2007, Judicial Watch released partially declassified FBI documents on the
flights obtained under a Freedom of Information Act request. Eric Lichtblau,
writing in the "New York Times", said the heavily redacted documents "do not
appear to contradict directly any of those central findings the Sept. 11
commission but they raise some new questions about the episode." In several
cases, "Saudi travelers were not interviewed before departing the country, and
F.B.I. officials sought to determine how what seemed to be lapses had
occurred." Judicial Watch President Tom Fitton said: "The documents contain
numerous errors and inconsistencies which prove the FBI conducted a slapdash
investigation of the Saudi flights." War in Iraq. The film suggests that the
invasion of Iraq was an illegitimate attack on a sovereign nation – an
unnecessary attack against an exaggerated threat. It makes a case against
components of the Bush Doctrine, specifically against the concepts of pre-
emptive war combined with American unilateralism. The film also contends that
the focus of the United States should have been directed elsewhere. Christopher
Hitchens criticized the film for not mentioning the history of repression,
aggression, war crimes and the general state of human rights in Saddam
Hussein's Iraq, nor Iraq's noncompliance with numerous United Nations
resolutions. Hitchens writes, "in this peaceable kingdom, according to Moore's
flabbergasting choice of film shots, children are flying little kites, shoppers
are smiling in the sunshine, and the gentle rhythms of life are undisturbed.
Then—wham! From the night sky come the terror weapons of American
imperialism. Watching the clips Moore uses, and recalling them well, I can
recognize various Saddam palaces and military and police centers getting the
treatment. But these sites are not identified as such. In fact, I don't think
Al Jazeera would, on a bad day, have transmitted anything so utterly
propagandistic." While interviewing Hitchens on his show, Scarborough claimed
to be outraged at Moore's portrayal of the Iraqi insurgency, claiming Moore's
film suggests "those killing Americans in Iraq aren't the enemy, but rather
they are the revolution and the Minutemen, who are sure to win their battle
against the occupation" and that "Moore says that the enemy is George Bush and
Saddam Hussein and Mr. Zarqawi and Mr. Bin Laden are no problem. ... Indeed,
they are the Minutemen. They're the staunch American revolutionaries." Moore
has frequently stated his opinion that Saddam was a brutal tyrant, though this
opinion is not mentioned in the film. He said calling attention to Saddam's
crimes was unnecessary considering the corporate media had continually pressed
that point themselves, making it public knowledge. Christopher Hitchens
criticizes Moore for stating, in his film, that Iraq had not killed or attacked
an American: "Moore asserts that Iraq under Saddam had never attacked or killed
or even threatened (his words) any American. I never quite know whether Moore
is as ignorant as he looks, or even if that would be humanly possible."
Hitchens writes that Palestinian terrorists Muhammad Zaidan and Abu Nidal had
been free to move in and out of Baghdad, and that Saddam's armed forces had
exchanged fire and killed American soldiers during the first Gulf War. When
interviewed by Jake Tapper, Moore denied having said Hussein's regime had not
ever killed an American, insisting his movie had been misquoted: "That isn't
what I said. Quote the movie directly. "Murdered". The government of Iraq did
not commit a premeditated murder on an American citizen." His narration is
reproduced verbatim in "The Official Fahrenheit Reader", including a chapter on
critiques and supporting evidence. Children of members of Congress serving in
Iraq. Moore says that only one member of Congress had a child serving in Iraq:
Army Staff Sergeant Brooks Johnson, the son of Senator Tim Johnson (D-SD).
According to Karen Kucher, when "Fahrenheit 9/11" was nearing release to the
home-video market, two additional Congressmen's children were stationed in
Iraq: the son of Congressman Duncan L. Hunter (R-CA), USMC Lieutenant Duncan D.
Hunter (who was later elected to Congress himself); and the son of Joe Wilson
(R-SC), Army National Guard Captain Alan Wilson. "Fahrenheit 9/11" also used
footage of Moore confronting various members of Congress, encouraging them to
enlist their own children to fight in Iraq. Moore approached Congressman Mark
Kennedy (R-MN) and showed Kennedy giving Moore a quizzical, confused look.
Kennedy expressed displeasure about his portrayal, saying he offered to help
Moore and also indicated he had a nephew serving in Afghanistan, but this was
edited out of the film. Peter Damon lawsuit. Moore's inclusion of a 10-second
clip with amputee Peter Damon has been criticized. Damon said the filmmaker
"should be ashamed of himself" for claiming that soldiers were deceived into
supporting the Iraq war and for using his injuries as reason to oppose the
conflict. Damon "agreewith the President 100%. A lot of the guys down at Walter
Reed feel the same way." According to Damon's doctor, Lt. Col. Chester
Buckenmaier, Moore took "a very positive thing we're doing for soldiers" who
lost limbs and "used it to tell a lie." Responding to the criticism, associate
producer Joanne Doroshow said, "Anybody who has seen the film knows we have
nothing but the deepest respect for the soldiers who were wounded. One of the
purposes of the movie was to examine the impossible situation they were put
into and to raise questions about why they were sent there." Peter Damon sued
Moore in federal court for $85 million, alleging that the film gave a false
impression and was defamatory. Moore's attorney argued in response that the
film quoted Damon verbatim and did not take his statements out of context nor
give a false impression. The judge agreed and dismissed Damon's suit. In March
2008, the First Circuit Court of Appeals unanimously affirmed the ruling in
Moore's favor. Unauthorized copying. Unauthorized copying of the film was
widespread. An early version taped at a cinema was distributed using the peer-
to-peer file sharing protocol BitTorrent. The distributors expressed
unhappiness and suggested potential legal action, but according to the "Sunday
Herald", Moore's responded, "I don't have a problem with people downloading the
movie and sharing it with people as long as they're not trying to make a profit
off of my labor". A "mint copy" of the film possibly appeared on the Lions Gate
website itself, reported "The Inquirer". Unlicensed screenings were also held
in Cuba.
