Fair trade Fair trade is an organized social movement that aims to help
producers in developing countries to make better trading conditions and promote
sustainability. The movement known as fairtrade indicating the certification
advocates the payment of a higher price to exporters as well as higher social
and environmental standards. It focuses in particular on exports from
developing countries to developed countries, most notably handicrafts, coffee,
cocoa, sugar, tea, bananas, honey, cotton, wine, fresh fruit, chocolate,
flowers, and gold. There are several recognized Fairtrade certifiers, including
Fairtrade International (formerly called FLO/Fairtrade Labelling Organizations
International), IMO and Eco-Social. Additionally, Fair Trade USA, formerly a
licensing agency for the Fairtrade International label, broke from the system
and is implementing its own fair trade labelling scheme, which has resulted in
controversy due to its inclusion of independent smallholders (selling via
contract production) and estates for all crops. (fairworldproject.org) In 2008,
products certified with Fairtrade International's Fairtrade certification
amounted to approximately US$4.98 billion (€3.4B) worldwide, a 22% year-to-
year increase. The Fair trade industry does not reveal how much of this is the
extra price charged for Fairtrade goods, or how much of the extra price reaches
the producer. Fairtrade branding has extended beyond food and fibre, a
development that has been particularly vibrant in the UK where there are 500
Fairtrade Towns, 118 Fairtrade universities, over 6,000 Fairtrade churches, and
over 4,000 UK schools registered in the Fairtrade Schools Scheme. Definition.
fair trade is a trading partnership, based on dialogue, transparency, and
respect, that seeks greater equity in international trade. It contributes to
sustainable development by offering better trading conditions to, and securing
the rights of, marginalized producers and workers – especially in the South.
Fair trade organizations, backed by consumers, are engaged actively in
supporting producers, awareness raising and in campaigning for changes in the
rules and practice of conventional international trade. How it works. There are
a large number of Fair Trade and ethical marketing organizations having
different marketing strategies, different standards and different criteria, and
there have been major changes in marketing strategies over the last twenty
years.Most Fair Trade is sold by those Fair Trade organizations that believe it
is necessary to market through supermarkets to get sufficient volume of trade
to have any real impact on the Third World. The Fairtrade brand is by far the
biggest of these fair trade coffee brands. Packers in developed countries pay a
fee to The Fairtrade Foundation for the right to use the brand and logo, and
nearly all the fee goes on marketing. Packers and retailers can charge as much
as they want for the coffee. The coffee has to come from a certified Fairtrade
cooperative, and there is a minimum price when the world market is
oversupplied, and 10c per lb extra at other times. The cooperatives can, on
average, sell only a third of their output as Fairtrade, because of lack of
demand, and sell the rest at world prices. In the producing country Fairtrade
is marketed by only by Fairtrade cooperatives, while other coffee is marketed
by Fairtrade cooperatives (as uncertified coffee), by other cooperatives and by
ordinary traders. To become certified Fairtrade producers, the primary
cooperative and its member farmers must operate to certain political standards,
imposed from Europe. FLO-CERT, the for-profit side, handles producer
certification, inspecting and certifying producer organizations in more than 50
countries in Africa, Asia, and Latin America. In the Fair trade debate there
are many complaints of failure to enforce these standards, with producers,
cooperatives, importers and packers profiting by evading them. There remain
many Fair Trade organizations that adhere to a greater or smaller degree to the
original objectives of Fair Trade, and that market products through alternative
channels where possible, and market through specialist Fair Trade shops, but
they have a small proportion of the total market. General structure of the
movement. In 1998, the first four federations listed above joined together as
FINE, an informal association whose goal is to harmonize fair trade standards
and guidelines, increase the quality and efficiency of fair trade monitoring
systems, and advocate fair trade politically. Student groups have also been
increasingly active in the past years promoting fair trade products. Although
hundreds of independent student organizations are active worldwide, most groups
in North America are either affiliated with United Students for Fair Trade
(USA) or the Canadian Student Fair Trade Network (Canada). History. The first
attempts to commercialize fair trade goods in Northern markets were initiated
in the 1940s and 1950s by religious groups and various politically oriented
non-governmental organizations (NGOs). Ten Thousand Villages, an NGO within the
Mennonite Central Committee (MCC) and SERRV International were the first, in
1946 and 1949 respectively, to develop fair trade supply chains in developing
countries. The products, almost exclusively handicrafts ranging from jute goods
to cross-stitch work, were mostly sold in churches or fairs. The goods
themselves had often no other function than to indicate that a donation had
been made. Solidarity trade. The current fair trade movement was shaped in
Europe in the 1960s. Fair trade during that period was often seen as a
political gesture against neo-imperialism: radical student movements began
targeting multinational corporations and concerns that traditional business
models were fundamentally flawed started to emerge. The slogan at the time,
"Trade not Aid", gained international recognition in 1968 when it was adopted
by the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD) to put the
emphasis on the establishment of fair trade relations with the developing
world. The year 1965 saw the creation of the first Alternative Trading
Organization (ATO): that year, British NGO Oxfam launched "Helping-by-Selling",
a program which sold imported handicrafts in Oxfam stores in the UK and from
mail-order catalogues. By 1968, the oversized newsprint publication, the Whole
Earth Catalog, was connecting thousands of specialized merchants, artisans, and
scientists directly with consumers who were interested in supporting
independent producers, with the goal of bypassing corporate retail and
department stores. The Whole Earth Catalog sought to balance the international
free market by allowing direct purchasing of goods produced primarily in
America and Canada, but also in Latin America and South America. In 1969, the
first worldshop opened its doors in the Netherlands. The initiative aimed at
bringing the principles of fair trade to the retail sector by selling almost
exclusively goods produced under fair trade terms in "underdeveloped regions".
The first shop was run by volunteers and was so successful that dozens of
similar shops soon went into business in the Benelux countries, Germany, and in
other Western European countries. Throughout the 1960s and 1970s, important
segments of the fair trade movement worked to find markets for products from
countries that were excluded from the mainstream trading channels for political
reasons. Thousands of volunteers sold coffee from Angola and Nicaragua in
worldshops, in the back of churches, from their homes, and from stands in
public places, using the products as a vehicle to deliver their message: give
disadvantaged producers in developing countries a fair chance on the world’s
market, and support their self-determined sustainable development. The
alternative trade movement blossomed, if not in sales, then at least in terms
of dozens of ATOs being established on both sides of the Atlantic, of scores of
worldshops being set up, and of well-organized actions and campaigns attacking
exploitation and foreign domination, and promoting the ideals of Nelson
Mandela, Julius Nyerere, and the Nicaraguan Sandinistas: the right to
independence and self-determination, to equitable access to the world’s
markets and consumers. Handicrafts vs. agricultural goods. In the early 1980s,
Alternative Trading Organizations faced major challenges: the novelty of some
fair trade products began to wear off, demand reached a plateau, and some
handicrafts began to look "tired and old fashioned" in the marketplace. The
decline of segments of the handicrafts market forced fair trade supporters to
rethink their business model and their goals. Moreover, several fair trade
supporters during this period were worried by the contemporary impact on small
farmers of structural reforms in the agricultural sector as well as the fall in
commodity prices. Many of them came to believe it was the movement's
responsibility to address the issue and remedies usable in the ongoing crisis
in the industry. In the subsequent years, fair trade agricultural commodities
played an important role in the growth of many ATOs: successful on the market,
they offered a much-needed, renewable source of income for producers and
provided Alternative Trading Organizations a complement to the handicrafts
market. The first fair trade agricultural products were tea and coffee, quickly
followed by: dried fruits, cocoa, sugar, fruit juices, rice, spices and nuts.
While in 1992, a sales value ratio of 80% handcrafts to 20% agricultural goods
was the norm, in 2002 handcrafts amounted to 25.4% of fair trade sales while
commodity food lines were up at 69.4%. Rise of labeling initiatives. Sales of
fair trade products only really took off with the arrival of the first
Fairtrade certification initiatives. Although buoyed by ever growing sales,
fair trade had been generally contained to relatively small worldshops
scattered across Europe and to a lesser extent, North America. Some felt that
these shops were too disconnected from the rhythm and the lifestyle of
contemporary developed societies. The inconvenience of going to them to buy
only a product or two was too high even for the most dedicated customers. The
only way to increase sale opportunities was to start offering fair trade
products where consumers normally shop, in large distribution channels. The
problem was to find a way to expand distribution without compromising consumer
trust in fair trade products and in their origins. A solution was found in
1988, when the first Fairtrade certification initiative, Max Havelaar, was
created in the Netherlands under the initiative of Nico Roozen, Frans Van Der
Hoff, and Dutch development NGO Solidaridad. The independent certification
allowed the goods to be sold outside the worldshops and into the mainstream,
reaching a larger consumer segment and boosting fair trade sales significantly.
The labeling initiative also allowed customers and distributors alike to track
the origin of the goods to confirm that the products were really benefiting the
producers at the end of the supply chain. The concept caught on: in the ensuing
years, similar non-profit Fairtrade labelling organizations were set up in
other European countries and North America. In 1997, a process of convergence
among labelling organizations – or "LIs" (for "Labeling Initiatives") – led
to the creation of Fairtrade Labelling Organizations International (FLO). FLO
is an umbrella organization whose mission is to set the Fairtrade standards,
support, inspect and certify disadvantaged producers, and harmonize the
Fairtrade message across the movement. In 2002, FLO launched for the first time
an International Fairtrade Certification Mark. The goals of the launch were to
improve the visibility of the Mark on supermarket shelves, facilitate cross
border trade, and simplify procedures for both producers and importers. At
present, the certification mark is used in over 50 countries and on dozens of
different products, based on FLO’s certification for coffee, tea, rice,
bananas, mangoes, cocoa, cotton, sugar, honey, fruit juices, nuts, fresh fruit,
quinoa, herbs and spices, wine, footballs, etc. Product certification. "Note:
Customary spelling of Fairtrade is one word when referring to the FLO product
labeling system, see Fairtrade certification" Fairtrade labelling (usually
simply Fairtrade or Fair Trade Certified in the United States) is a
certification system designed to allow consumers to identify goods which meet
agreed standards. Overseen by a standard-setting body (FLO International) and a
certification body (FLO-CERT), the system involves independent auditing of
producers and traders to ensure the agreed standards are met. For a product to
carry either the International Fairtrade Certification Mark or the Fair Trade
Certified Mark, it must come from FLO-CERT inspected and certified producer
organizations. The crops must be grown and harvested in accordance with the
international Fair trade standards set by FLO International. The supply chain
must also have been monitored by FLO-CERT, to ensure the integrity of the
labelled product. Fairtrade certification purports to guarantee not only fair
prices, but also the principles of ethical purchasing. These principles include
adherence to ILO agreements such as those banning child and slave labour,
guaranteeing a safe workplace and the right to unionise, adherence to the
United Nations charter of human rights, a fair price that covers the cost of
production and facilitates social development, and protection and conservation
of the environment. The Fairtrade certification system also attempts to promote
long-term business relationships between buyers and sellers, crop prefinancing,
and greater transparency throughout the supply chain and more. These claims
have been challenged by critics, The Fairtrade certification system covers a
growing range of products, including bananas, honey, coffee, oranges, Cocoa
bean|cocoa, cotton, dried and fresh fruits and vegetables, juices, nuts and oil
seeds, quinoa, rice, spices, sugar, tea, and wine. Companies offering products
that meet the Fairtrade standards may apply for licences to use one of the
Fairtrade Certification Marks for those products. The International Fairtrade
Certification Mark was launched in 2002 by FLO, and replaced twelve Marks used
by various Fairtrade labelling initiatives. The new Certification Mark is
currently used worldwide (with the exception of the United States). The Fair
Trade Certified Mark is still used to identify Fairtrade goods in the United
States. WFTO Fair Trade Organization membership. In an effort to complement the
Fairtrade product certification system and allow most notably handcraft
producers to also sell their products outside worldshops, the World Fair Trade
Organization (WFTO) launched in 2004 a new Mark to identify fair trade
organizations (as opposed to products in the case of FLO International and
Fairtrade). Called the FTO Mark, it allows consumers to recognize registered
Fair Trade Organizations worldwide and guarantees that standards are being
implemented regarding working conditions, wages, child labour, and the
environment. The FTO Mark gave for the first time all Fair Trade Organizations
(including handcrafts producers) definable recognition amongst consumers,
existing and new business partners, governments, and donors. Alternative
trading organizations. An alternative trading organization (ATO) is usually a
non-governmental organization (NGO) or mission-driven business aligned with the
Fair Trade movement, aiming "to contribute to the alleviation of poverty in
developing regions of the world by establishing a system of trade that allows
marginalized producers in developing regions to gain access to developed
markets". Alternative trading organizations have Fair Trade at the core of
their mission and activities, using it as a development tool to support
disadvantaged producers and to reduce poverty, and combine their marketing with
awareness-raising and campaigning. Alternative trading organizations are often,
but not always, based in political and religious groups, though their secular
purpose precludes sectarian identification and evangelical activity.
Philosophically, the grassroots political-action agenda of these organizations
associates them with progressive political causes active since the 1960s:
foremost, a belief in collective action and commitment to moral principles
based on social, economic and trade justice. According to EFTA, the defining
characteristic of alternative trading organizations is that of equal
partnership and respect - partnership between the developing region producers
and importers, shops, labelling organizations, and consumers. Alternative trade
"humanizes" the trade process - making the producer-consumer chain as short as
possible so that consumers become aware of the culture, identity, and
conditions in which producers live. All actors are committed to the principle
of alternative trade, the need for advocacy in their working relations and the
importance of awareness-raising and advocacy work. Examples of such
organisations are Ten Thousand Villages, Equal Exchange and SERRV International
in the US and Equal Exchange Trading, Traidcraft, Oxfam Trading, Twin Trading
and Alter Eco in Europe. (see the Alternative Trading Organization page for
further examples). Worldshops. Worldshops or fair trade shops are specialized
retail outlets offering and promoting fair trade products. Worldshops also
typically organize various educational fair trade activities and play an active
role in trade justice and other North-South political campaigns. Worldshops are
often not-for-profit organizations and run by locally based volunteer networks.
Although the movement emerged in Europe and a vast majority of worldshops are
still based on the continent, worldshops can also be found today in North
America, Australia and New Zealand. Worldshops' aim is to make trade as direct
and fair with the trading partners as possible. Usually, this means a producer
in a developing country and consumers in industrialized countries. The
worldshops' target is to pay the producers a fair price that guarantees
substinence and guarantees positive social development. They often cut out any
intermediaries in the import chain. A web movement has recently begun to
provide fair trade items at fair prices to the consumers. One popular one is
Fair Trade a Day where a different fair trade item is featured each day. World
wide. International. Every year the sales of Fair Trade products grow close to
30% and in 2004 were worth over $500 million USD. In the case of coffee, sales
grow nearly 50% per year in certain countries. In 2002, 16 000 tons of
Fairtrade coffee was purchased by consumers in 17 countries. “Fair trade
coffee is currently produced in 24 countries in Latin America, Africa and
Asia”. The 165 FLO associations in Latin America and Caribbean are located in
14 countries and together export over 85% of the world’s Fair Trade coffee.
Africa. Africa’s exports come from places such as South Africa, Ghana,
Uganda, Tanzania and Kenya, these exports are valued at $24 million USD.
Between the years of 2004 and 2006 Africa quickly expanded their number of FLO
certified producer groups, rising from 78 to 171; nearly half of which reside
in Kenya, following closely behind are Tanzania and South Africa. The FLO
products Africa is known for are tea, cocoa, flowers and wine. In Africa there
are smallholder cooperatives and plantations which produce Fair Trade certified
tea. Latin America. Studies in the early 2000s show that the income, education
and health of coffee producers involved with Fair Trade in Latin America were
improved, versus producers who were not participating. Brazil, Nicaragua, Peru
and Guatemala, having the biggest population of coffee producers, make use of
some of the most substantial land for coffee production in Latin America and do
so by taking part in Fair Trade. Fair trade commodities. Fair trade commodities
are goods that have been exchanged from where they were grown or made to where
they are purchased, and have been certified by a fair trade certification
organization, such as Fair Trade USA or World Fair Trade Organization. Such
organizations are typically overseen by Fairtrade International. Fairtrade
International sets international fair trade standards and supports fair trade
producers and cooperatives. Sixty percent of the fair trade market revolves
around food products such as coffee, tea, cocoa, honey, and bananas. Non-food
commodities include crafts, textiles, and flowers. Although fair trade
represents only .01% of the food and beverage industry in the United States, it
is growing rapidly and may become a significant portion of the national food
and beverage industry. Coffee. Coffee is the most well-established fair trade
commodity. Growth in the fair trade coffee industry has extended the commodity
away from solely small farms and companies. Now multinational corporations such
as Starbucks and Nestle use fair trade coffee. Locations. The largest sources
of fair trade coffee are Uganda and Tanzania, followed by Latin American
countries such as Guatemala and Costa Rica. As of 1999, major importers of fair
trade coffee included Germany, the Netherlands, Switzerland, and the United
Kingdom. There is a North/South divide between fair trade consumers and
producers. North American countries are not yet among the top importers of fair
trade coffee because fair trade was introduced in Europe before the United
States and Canada. Labor. Starbucks began to purchase more fair trade coffee in
2000 because of charges of labor rights violations in Central American
plantations. Several competitors, including Nestle, followed suit. Large
corporations that sell non-fair trade coffee take 55% of what consumers pay for
coffee while only 10% goes to the producers. Small growers dominate the
production of coffee, especially in Latin American countries such as Peru.
Coffee is the fastest expanding fairly traded commodity, and an increasing
number of producers are small farmers that own their own land and work in
cooperatives. Even the incomes of growers of fair trade coffee beans depend on
the market value of coffee where it is consumed, so farmers of fair trade
coffee do not necessarily live above the poverty line or get completely fair
prices for their commodity. Unsustainable farming practices can harm plantation
owners and laborers. Unsustainable practices such as using chemicals and
unshaded growing are risky. Small growers who put themselves at economic risk
by not having diverse farming practices could lose money and resources due to
fluctuating coffee prices, pest problems, or policy shifts. Sustainability. As
coffee becomes one of the most important export crops in certain regions such
as northern Latin America, nature and agriculture are transformed. Increased
productivity requires technological innovations, and the coffee agroecosystem
has been changing rapidly. In the nineteenth century in Latin America, coffee
plantations slowly began replacing sugarcane and subsistence crops. Coffee
crops became more managed; they were put into rows and unshaded, meaning
diversity of the forest was decreased and Coffea trees were shorter. As plant
and tree diversity decreased, so did animal diversity. Unshaded plantations
allow for a higher density of Coffea trees, but negative effects include less
protection from wind and more easily eroded soil. Technified coffee plantations
also use chemicals such as fertilizers, insecticides, and fungicides. Fair
trade certified commodities must adhere to sustainable agro-ecological
practices, including reduction of chemical fertilizer use, prevention of
erosion, and protection of forests. Coffee plantations are more likely to be
fair trade certified if they use traditional farming practices with shading and
without chemicals. This protects the biodiversity of the ecosystem and ensures
that the land will be usable for farming in the future and not just for short-
term planting. Commitment to sustainable practices is reflected in the
prevalence of organic coffee in tandem with fair trade coffee. In the United
States, 85% of fair trade certified coffee is also organic. Consumer attitudes.
Consumers typically have positive attitudes for products that are ethically
made. These products may include promises of fair labor conditions, protection
of the environment, and protection of human rights. All fair trade products
must meet standards such as these. Despite positive attitudes toward ethical
products including fair trade commodities, consumers often are not willing to
pay the higher price associated with fair trade coffee. The attitude-behavior
gap can help explain why ethical and fair trade products take up less than 1%
of the market. Coffee consumers can say they would be willing to pay a higher
premium for fair trade coffee, but most consumers are actually more concerned
with the brand, label, and flavor of the coffee. However, socially conscious
consumers with a commitment to buying fair trade products are more likely to
pay the premium associated with fair trade coffee. Once enough consumers begin
purchasing fair trade, companies are more likely to carry fair trade products.
Safeway Inc. began carrying fair trade coffee after individual consumers
dropped off postcards asking for it. Fair trade coffee companies. Green
Mountain Coffee Roasters Starbucks Equal Exchange Pura Vida Coffee Larry's
Beans Katz Coffee Cocoa. Many countries that export cocoa rely on cocoa as
their single export crop. In Africa in particular, governments tax cocoa as
their main source of revenue. Cocoa is a permanent crop, which means that it
occupies land for long periods of time and does not need to be replanted after
each harvest. Locations. Cocoa is farmed in the tropical regions of West
Africa, Southeast Asia, and Latin America. In Latin America, cocoa is produced
in Costa Rica, Panama, Peru, Bolivia, and Brazil. Much of the cocoa produced in
Latin America is organic and regulated by an Internal control system. Bolivia
has fair trade cooperatives that permit a fair share of money for cocoa
producers. African cocoa-producing countries include Cameroon, Madagascar, Sao
Tome and Principe, Ghana, Tanzania, Uganda, and Cote d'Ivoire. Cote d'Ivoire
exports over a third of the world's cocoa beans. Southeast Asia accounts for
about 14% of the world's cocoa production. Major cocoa-producing countries are
Indonesia, Malaysia, and Papua New Guinea. Labor. One suggestion for the reason
that laborers in Africa are marginalized in world trade is because the colonial
division of labor kept Africa from developing its own industries. Africa and
other developing countries received low prices for their exported commodities
such as cocoa, which caused poverty to abound. Fair trade seeks to establish a
system of direct trade from developing countries to counteract this unfair
system. Most cocoa comes from small family-run farms in West Africa. These
farms have little market access and thus rely on middlemen to bring their
products to market. Sometimes middlemen are unfair to farmers. Farmers do not
get a fair price for their product despite relying on cocoa sales for the
majority of their income. One solution for fair labor practices is for farmers
to become part of an Agricultural cooperative. Cooperatives pay farmers a fair
price for their cocoa so farmers have enough money for food, clothes, and
school fees. One of the main tenants of fair trade is that farmers receive a
fair price, but this does not mean that the larger amount of money paid for
fair trade cocoa goes directly to the farmers. In reality, much of this money
goes to community projects such as water wells rather than to individual
farmers. Nevertheless, cooperatives such as fair trade-endorsed Kuapa Kokoo in
Ghana are often the only Licensed Buying Companies that will give farmers a
fair price and not cheat them or rig sales. Farmers in cooperatives are
frequently their own bosses and get bonuses per bag of cocoa beans. These
arrangements are not always assured and fair trade organizations can't always
buy all of the cocoa available to them from cooperatives. Marketing. The
marketing of fair trade cocoa to European consumers often portrays the cocoa
farmers as dependent on western purchases for their livelihood and well-being.
Showing African cocoa producers in this way is problematic because it is
reminiscent of the imperialistic view that Africans cannot live happily without
the help of westerners. It puts the balance of power in favor of the consumers
rather than the producers. Consumers often aren't willing to pay the extra
price for fair trade cocoa because they do not know what fair trade is.
Activist groups are vital in educating consumers about the unethical aspects of
unfair trade and promoting demand for fairly traded commodities. Activism and
ethical consumption not only promote fair trade but also act against powerful
corporations such as Mars, Incorporated that refuse to acknowledge the use of
forced child labor in the harvesting of their cocoa. Sustainability.
Smallholding farmers not only frequently lack access to markets, they lack
access to resources that lead to sustainable cocoa farming practices. Lack of
sustainability can be due to pests, diseases that attack cocoa trees, lack of
farming supplies, and lack of knowledge about modern farming techniques. One
issue pertaining to cocoa plantation sustainability is the amount of time it
takes for a cocoa tree to produce pods. A solution to this is to change the
type of cocoa tree being farmed. In Ghana, a hybrid cocoa tree yields two crops
after three years rather than the typical one crop after five years. Fair trade
cocoa companies. Ben & Jerry's Divine Chocolate Green & Black's Guittard
Chocolate Company Endangered Species Chocolate Chocolove Dagoba Chocolate Theo
Chocolate Textiles. Fair trade textiles are primarily made from fair trade
cotton. They are frequently grouped with fair trade crafts and goods made by
artisans in contrast to cocoa, coffee, sugar, tea, and honey, which are
agricultural commodities. Locations. India and West Africa are the primary
exporters of fair trade cotton, although many countries grow fair trade cotton.
Textiles and clothing are exported from Hong Kong, Thailand, Malaysia, and
Indonesia. Labor. Labor is different for textile production than for
agricultural commodities because textile production takes place in a factory,
not on a farm. Children provide a source of cheap labor, and child labor is
prevalent in Pakistan, India, and Nepal. Fair trade cooperatives ensure fair
and safe labor practices, including disallowing child labor. Fair trade textile
producers are most often women in developing countries. They struggle with
meeting the consumer tastes in North America and Europe. In Nepal, textiles
were originally made for household and local use. In the 1990s, women began
joining cooperatives and exporting their crafts for profit. Now handicrafts are
Nepal's largest export. It is often difficult for women to balance textile
production, domestic responsibilities, and agricultural work. Cooperatives
foster the growth of democratic communities in which women have a voice despite
being historically in underprivileged positions. For fair trade textiles and
other crafts to be successful in western markets, World Fair Trade
Organizations require a flexible workforce of artisans in need of stable
income, links from consumers to artisans, and a market for quality ethnic
products. However, making cotton and textiles fair trade does not always have a
positive impact on laborers. Burkina Faso and Mali export the largest amount of
cotton in Africa. Although many cotton plantations in these countries attained
fair trade certification in the 1990s, participation in fair trade further
ingrains existing power relations and inequalities that cause poverty in Africa
rather than challenging them. Fair trade does not do much for farmers when it
does not challenge the system that marginalizes producers. Despite not
empowering farmers, the change to fair trade cotton has positive effects
including female participation in cultivation. Textiles and garments are
intricate and require one individual operator, in contrast to the collective
farming of coffee and cocoa beans. Textiles are not a straightforward commodity
because to be fairly traded, there must be regulation in cotton cultivation,
dyeing, stitching, and every other step in the process of textile production.
Fair trade textiles must not be confused with the sweat-free movement although
the two movements intersect at the worker level. Forced or unfair labor in
textile production is not limited to developing countries. Charges of use of
sweatshop labor are endemic in the United States. Immigrant women work long
hours and receive less than minimum wage. In the United States, there is more
of a stigma against child labor than forced labor in general. Consumers in the
United States are willing to suspend the importation of textiles made with
child labor in other countries but do not expect their exports to be suspended
by other countries, even when produced using forced labor. Fair trade clothing
and textile companies. Maggie's Organics prAna HAE Now Good & Fair Clothing Co.
Fair Indigo Indigenous Large companies and fair trade commodities. Large
transnational companies have begun to use fair trade commodities in their
products. In April 2000, Starbucks began offering fair trade coffee in all of
their stores. In 2005, the company promised to purchase ten million pounds of
fair trade coffee over the next 18 months. This would account for a quarter of
the fair trade coffee purchases in the United States and 3% of Starbucks' total
coffee purchases. The company maintains that increasing its fair trade
purchases would require an unprofitable reconstruction of the supply chain.
Fair trade activists have made gains with other companies: Sara Lee in 2002 and
Proctor & Gamble (the maker of Folgers) in 2003 agreed to begin selling a small
amount of fair trade coffee. Nestle, the world's biggest coffee trader, began
selling a blend of fair trade coffee in 2005. In 2006, The Hershey Company
acquired Dagoba, an organic and fair trade chocolate brand. Much contention
surrounds the issue of fair trade products becoming a part of large companies.
Starbucks is still only 3% fair trade - enough to appease consumers, but not
enough to make a real difference to small farmers, according to some activists.
The ethics of buying fair trade from a company that is not committed to the
cause are questionable; these products are only making a small dent in a big
company even though these companies' products account for a significant portion
of global fair trade. Politics. European Union. In 1994, the European
Commission prepared the "Memo on alternative trade" in which it declared its
support for strengthening Fair Trade in the South and North and its intention
to establish an EC Working Group on Fair Trade. Furthermore, the same year, the
European Parliament adopted the "Resolution on promoting fairness and
solidarity in North South trade" (OJ C 44, 14.2.1994), a resolution voicing its
support for fair trade. In 1996, the Economic and Social Committee adopted an
"Opinion on the European 'Fair Trade' marking movement". A year later, in 1997,
the document was followed by a resolution adopted by the European Parliament,
calling on the Commission to support Fair Trade banana operators. The same
year, the European Commission published a survey on "Attitudes of EU consumers
to Fair Trade bananas", concluding that Fair Trade bananas would be
commercially viable in several EU Member States. In 1998, the European
Parliament adopted the "Resolution on Fair Trade" (OJ C 226/73, 20.07.1998),
which was followed by the Commission in 1999 that adopted the "Communication
from the Commission to the Council on 'Fair Trade'" COM(1999) 619 final,
29.11.1999. In 2000, public institutions in Europe started purchasing Fairtrade
Certified coffee and tea. Furthermore, that year, the Cotonou Agreement made
specific reference to the promotion of Fair Trade in article 23 g) and in the
Compendium. The European Parliament and Council Directive 2000/36/EC also
suggested promoting Fair Trade. In 2001 and 2002, several other EU papers
explicitly mentioned fair trade, most notably the 2001 Green Paper on Corporate
Social Responsibility and the 2002 Communication on Trade and Development. In
2004, the European Union adopted the "Agricultural Commodity Chains, Dependence
and Poverty – A proposal for an EU Action Plan", with a specific reference to
the Fair Trade movement which has "been setting the trend for a more socio-
economically responsible trade." (COM(2004)0089). In 2005, in the European
Commission communication "Policy Coherence for Development – Accelerating
progress towards attaining the Millennium Development Goals", (COM(2005) 134
final, 12.04.2005), fair trade is mentioned as "a tool for poverty reduction
and sustainable development". And finally, on July 6 in 2006, the European
Parliament unanimously adopted a resolution on fair trade, recognizing the
benefits achieved by the Fair Trade movement, suggesting the development of an
EU-wide policy on Fair Trade, defining criteria that need to be fulfilled under
fair trade to protect it from abuse and calling for greater support to Fair
Trade (EP resolution "Fair Trade and development", 6 July 2006). "This
resolution responds to the impressive growth of Fair Trade, showing the
increasing interest of European consumers in responsible purchasing," said
Green MEP Frithjof Schmidt during the plenary debate. Peter Mandelson, EU
Commissioner for External Trade, responded that the resolution will be well
received at the Commission. "Fair Trade makes the consumers think and therefore
it is even more valuable. We need to develop a coherent policy framework and
this resolution will help us." France. In 2005, French parliament member
Antoine Herth issued the report "40 proposals to sustain the development of
Fair Trade". The report was followed the same year by a law, proposing to
establish a commission to recognize fair trade Organisations (article 60 of law
no. 2005-882, Small and Medium Enterprises, 2 August 2005). In parallel to the
legislative developments, also in 2006, the French chapter of ISO (AFNOR)
adopted a reference document on Fair Trade after five years of discussion.
Italy. In 2006, Italian lawmakers started debating how to introduce a law on
fair trade in Parliament. A consultation process involving a wide range of
stakeholders was launched in early October. A common definition of fair trade
was most notably developed. However, its adoption is still pending as the
efforts were stalled by the 2008 Italian political crisis. Netherlands. The
Dutch province of Groningen was sued in 2007 by coffee supplier Douwe Egberts
for explicitly requiring its coffee suppliers to meet fair trade criteria, most
notably the payment of a minimum price and a development premium to producer
cooperatives. Douwe Egberts, which sells a number of coffee brands under self-
developed ethical criteria, believed the requirements were discriminatory.
After several months of discussions and legal challenges, the province of
Groningen prevailed in a well-publicized judgement. Coen de Ruiter, director of
the Max Havelaar Foundation, called the victory a landmark event: "it provides
governmental institutions the freedom in their purchasing policy to require
suppliers to provide coffee that bears the fair trade criteria, so that a
substantial and meaningful contribution is made in the fight against poverty
through the daily cup of coffee". Criticisms. Ethical basis of criticisms.
Consumers have been shown to be content paying higher prices for Fairtrade
products, in the belief that this helps the very poor. The main ethical
criticism of Fairtrade is that this premium over non-Fairtrade products does
not reach the producers and is instead collected by businesses, employees of
co-operatives or used for unnecessary expenses. Furthermore, research has cited
the implementation of certain Fairtrade standards as a cause for greater
inequalities in markets where these rigid rules are inappropriate for the
specific market. What happens to the money. Little money reaches the Third
World. The Fairtrade Foundation does not monitor how much extra retailers
charge for Fairtrade goods, so it is rarely possible to determine how much
extra is charged or how much reaches the producers, in spite of the Unfair
Trading legislation. In four cases it has been possible to find out. One
British café chain was passing on less than one percent of the extra charged
to the exporting cooperative; in Finland, Valkila, Haaparanta and Niemi found
that consumers paid much more for Fairtrade, and that only 11.5% reached the
exporter. Kilian, Jones, Pratt and Villalobos talk of US Fairtrade coffee
getting $5 per lb extra at retail, of which the exporter would have received
only 2%. Mendoza and Bastiaensen calculated that in the UK only 1.6% to 18% of
the extra charged for one product line reached the farmer. All these studies
assume that the importers paid the full Fairtrade price, which is not
necessarily the case. Less money reaches farmers. The Fairtrade Foundation does
not monitor how much of the extra money paid to the exporting cooperatives
reaches the farmer. The cooperatives incur costs in reaching the Fairtrade
political standards, and these are incurred on all production, even if only a
small amount is sold at Fairtrade prices. The most successful cooperatives
appear to spend a third of the extra price received on this: some less
successful cooperatives spend more than they gain. While this appears to be
agreed by proponents and critics of Fairtrade, there is a dearth of economic
studies setting out the actual revenues and what the money was spent on. FLO
figures are that 40% of the money reaching the Third World is spent on
‘business and production’ which would include these costs, as well as costs
incurred by any inefficiency and corruption in the cooperative or the marketing
system. The rest is stated to be spent on social projects, rather than being
passed on to farmers. There is no evidence that Fairtrade farmers get higher
prices on average. Anecdotes state that farmers were paid more or less by
traders than by Fairtrade cooperatives. Few of these anecdotes address the
problems of price reporting in Third World markets, and few appreciate the
complexity of the different price packages which may or may not include credit,
harvesting, transport, processing, etc. Cooperatives typically average prices
over the year, so they pay less than traders at some times, more at others.
Bassett (2009) is able to compare prices only where Fairtrade and non-Fairtrade
farmers have to sell cotton to the same monopsonistic ginneries which pay low
prices. Prices would have to be higher to compensate farmers for the increased
costs they incur to produce Fairtrade. For instance, Fairtrade encouraged
Nicaraguan farmers to switch to organic coffee, which resulted in a higher
price per pound, but a lower net income because of higher costs and lower
yields. Lack of evidence of impact. There have been very few attempts at fair
trade impact studies. It would be methodologically and logically incorrect to
use these attempts to conclude that Fairtrade in general does or does not have
a positive impact. Griffiths (2011) argues that few of these attempts meet the
normal standards for an impact study, such as comparing the before and after
situation, and having meaningful control groups. Serious methodological
problems arise in sampling, in comparing prices, and from the fact that the
social projects of Fairtrade do not usually aim to produce economic benefits.
Inefficient marketing system. One reason for low prices is that Fairtrade
farmers have to sell through a monopsonist cooperative, which may be
inefficient or corrupt – certainly some private traders are more efficient
than some cooperatives. They cannot choose the buyer who offers the best price,
or switch when their cooperative is going bankrupt if they wish to retain
fairtrade status. There are also complaints that Fairtrade deviates from the
free market ideal of some economists. Brink calls fair trade a "misguided
attempt to make up for market failures" encouraging market inefficiencies and
overproduction. Corruption. The Fair Trade marketing system provides more
opportunities for corruption than the normal marketing system; and less
possibility of, or incentive for, controlling corruption. Corruption has been
noted in false labelling of coffee as Fairtrade by retailers and by packers in
the developing countries, paying exporters less than the Fairtrade price for
Fairtrade coffee (kickbacks) failure to provide the credit and other services
specified state that, if this is indeed so, Fairtrade farmers will increase
production. As the demand for coffee is highly inelastic, a small increase in
supply means a large fall in market price, so perhaps a million Fairtrade
farmers get a higher price and 24 million others get a substantially lower
price. Critics quote the example of farmers in Vietnam being paid over the
world price in the 1980s, planting lots of coffee, then flooding the world
market in the 1990s. The Fairtrade minimum price means that when the world
market price collapses, it is the non-Fairtrade farmers, particularly the
poorest, who have to cut down their coffee trees. This argument is supported by
mainstream economists, not just free marketers. This argument falls away if, as
critics and FLO state, farmers do not get a higher price. Diverting aid from
other farmers. Fairtrade supporters boast of ‘The Honeypot Effect’ – that
cooperatives which become Fairtrade members then attract additional aid from
other NGO charities, government and international donors as a result of their
membership. Typically there are now six to twelve other donors. Critics point
out that this inevitably means that resources are being removed from other,
poorer, farmers. It also makes it impossible to argue that any positive or
negative changes in the living standards of farmers are due to Fairtrade rather
than to one of the other donors. Other ethical issues. Secretiveness. Under EU
law (Directive 2005/29/EC on Unfair Commercial Practices) the criminal offence
of Unfair Trading is committed if (a) ‘it contains false information and is
therefore untruthful or in any way, including overall presentation, deceives or
is likely to deceive the average consumer, even if the information is factually
correct’, (b) ‘it omits material information that the average consumer
needs . . . and thereby causes or is likely to cause the average consumer to
take a transactional decision that he would not have taken otherwise’ or (c)
‘fails to identify the commercial intent of the commercial practice . . .
causes or is likely to cause the average consumer to take a transactional
decision that he would not have taken otherwise.’ Griffiths (2011) points to
false claims that Fairtrade producers get higher prices, the almost universal
failure to disclose the extra price charged for Fairtrade products, to disclose
how much of this actually reaches the Third World, to disclose what this is
spent on in the Third World, to disclose how much, if any, reaches farmers, and
to disclose the harm that Fairtrade does to non-Fairtrade farmers. He also
points to the failure to disclose when ‘the primary commercial intent’ is
to make money for retailers and distributors in rich countries. Imposing
politics. The Fairtrade criteria are essentially political, and critics state
that it is unethical to bribe Third World producers to adopt a set of political
views that they may not agree with, and the donors providing the money may not
agree with. In addition many of the failures of Fairtrade derive from these
political views, such as the unorthodox marketing system imposed. Boersma
(2002, 2009) the founder of Fairtrade, and like minded people are aiming at a
new, non-capitalist way of running the market and the economy. This may not tie
in with the objectives of producers, consumers, importers or retailers.
Unethical selling techniques. Booth says that the selling techniques used by
some sellers and some supporters of Fairtrade are bullying, misleading, and
unethical. There are problems with the use of boycott campaigns and other
pressure to force sellers to stock a product they think ethically suspect.
However, the opposite has been argued, that a more participatory and multi-
stakeholder approach to auditing might improve the quality of the process. Some
people argue that these practices are justifiable: that strategic use of
labeling may help embarrass (or encourage) major suppliers into changing their
practices. They may make transparent corporate vulnerabilities that activists
can exploit. Or they may encourage ordinary people to get involved with broader
projects of social change. Misleading volunteers. A lot of people volunteer to
work to support Fairtrade. They may do unpaid work for firms, or market
Fairtrade in schools, universities, local governments, or parliament. Crane and
Davies’ study shows that distributors in developed countries make
‘considerable use of unpaid volunteer workers for routine tasks, many of whom
seemed to be under the (false) impression that they were helping out a
charity.’ Failure to monitor standards. There are complaints that the
standards are inappropriate and may harm producers, sometimes making them work
several months more for little return. There have been claims that adherence to
fair trade standards by producers has been poor and that enforcement of
standards by Fairtrade is very weak. Notably by Christian Jacquiau and by Paola
Ghillani, who spent four years as president of Fairtrade Labelling
Organizations There are many complaints of poor enforcement problems: labourers
on Fairtrade farms in Peru are paid less than the minimum wage; some non-
Fairtrade coffee is sold as Fairtrade ‘the standards are not very strict in
the case of seasonally hired labour in coffee production.’ ‘some fair trade
standards are not strictly enforced’ supermarkets avoid their responsibility.
In 2006, a "Financial Times" journalist found that ten out of ten mills visited
had sold uncertified coffee to co-operatives as certified. It reported that
"The FT was also handed evidence of at least one coffee association that
received Fairtrade certification despite illegally growing some 20 per cent of
its coffee in protected national forest land. Trade justice and fair trade.
Segments of the trade justice movement have also criticized fair trade in the
past years for allegedly focusing too much on individual small producer groups
while stopping short of advocating immediate trade policy changes that would
have a larger impact on disadvantaged producers' lives. French author and RFI
correspondent Jean-Pierre Boris championed this view in his 2005 book "Commerce
inéquitable". Political objections. There have been largely political
criticisms of Fairtrade from the left and the right. Some believe the fair
trade system is not radical enough. French author Christian Jacquiau, in his
book "Les coulisses du commerce équitable", calls for stricter fair trade
standards and criticizes the fair trade movement for working within the current
system (i.e., partnerships with mass retailers, multinational corporations,
etc.) rather than establishing a new fairer, fully autonomous trading system.
Jacquiau is also a staunch supporter of significantly higher fair trade prices
in order to maximize the impact, as most producers only sell a portion of their
crop under fair trade terms. It has been argued that the approach of the
FairTrade system is too rooted in a Northern consumerist view of justice which
Southern producers do not participate in setting. "A key issue is therefore to
make explicit who possesses the power to define the terms of Fairtrade, that is
who possesses the power to determine the need of an ethic in the first
instance, and subsequently command a particular ethical vision as the truth."
Notes and references.  tags. See for an explanation of how to generate
footnotes using the tags.-->
