Farband There were at least two American Jewish organizations colloquially
known as the Farband—the Communist-oriented Yidisher Kultur Farband (Jewish
Culture Association) and the Labor Zionist-oriented Yidish Natsionaler Arbeter
Farband (Jewish National Workers Alliance). Yidisher Kultur Farband. YKUF /
Jewish Culture Association. The Yidisher Kultur Farband (YKUF, rarely called by
its English name, the Jewish Culture Association) was a U.S. association,
initially Communist-oriented, formed for preserving and developing Yiddish
culture in Yiddish and in English, through an art section, a writers' group,
reading circles, and publications. YKUF was founded in Paris in September 1937
by Jewish Communists and their supporters as an international body to
disseminate ideology to the Yiddish-reading and Yiddish-speaking community. The
organizing meeting was an international congress of Yiddish culture, the first
to be held since the 1908 Czernowitz Conference for the Yiddish Language; about
100 delegates attended, including 11 from the United States. The first chairman
of YKUF was the non-Communist writer A. Mukdoni; the secretary (to 1957) was
the poet Zishe Weinper, an efficient fundraiser for YKUF and, according to
Melech Epstein, a "secret member of the Communist Party." In the U.S.,
financial support also came from the Jewish People's Fraternal Order, the
Jewish section of the International Workers Order. At the time of the non-
aggression pact between Joseph Stalin and Adolf Hitler in August 1939, many of
the non-Communist artists and writers affiliated with YKUF left the
organization. Branches of the international YKUF were established in various
countries. The U.S. branch, founded in 1937, ceased operation soon after the
death of Itche Goldberg on December 27, 2006. Prominent cultural figures, such
as Kalman Marmor and Nachman Meisel, saw to it that Farlag YKUF, the
organization’s New York-based publishing house, issued highly-regarded
anthologies and studies of Yiddish literature. It published more than 250
books, including Yiddish fiction and poetry, memoirs (by Reuben Brainin, among
others), history, and anthologies such as America in Yiddish Literature (1961).
The U.S. YKUF began publishing the journal Yidishe Kultur in 1938, initially a
monthly, in recent decades it appeared bimonthly or seven times a year. Meisel,
who was not a Communist Party member and had edited a Polish literary magazine,
became its first editor; in 1964, he was succeeded by Itche Goldberg, who
edited it since that time to 2004. With Goldberg's death, the magazine ceased
publication. The political roots of YKUF are more of historical note than
ideological tendency in its last decades. In the mid-1990s, contact and
rapprochement developed between YKUF and its historically socialist counterpart
organization, the Congress for Jewish Culture, also based in New York, as well
as the Congress’s publication, Zukunft. They subsequently cooperated in such
activities as commemorations of the Warsaw Ghetto Uprising, and memorials for
the Soviet-Yiddish writers murdered in August, 1952, in Moscow 's Lubyanka
prison. Yidish Natsionaler Arbeter Farband. Jewish National Workers Alliance.
The Yidish Natsionaler Arbeter Farband or Jewish National Workers Alliance was
an early Yiddish-speaking Labor Zionist landsmanshaft in North America. Its
official organ was the "Yidishe Kempfer" or Jewish Fighter, edited by Baruch
Zuckerman. The Farband operated as a mutual aid society parallel to the
political party Poale Zion, organizing cooperative insurance and medical plans
and an extensive Yiddish and Hebrew educational system, as well as having
developed in the 1920s a cooperative housing building in the Bronx, New York.
The Farband even developed and maintained cemeteries for movement members.
While mainly based in New York, the Farband was active throughout the United
States and Canada, forming local chapters and summer camps in many cities with
significant Jewish communities. The summer camp for the New York chapter was
called Camp Kinderwelt, located in upstate New York, and had an adjoining
adults camp called Unser Camp. In 1931 the Farband Yugnt Clubs, their youth
wing, joined with Young Poale Zion to form the Young Poale Zion Alliance as the
official youth wing of the entire Labor Zionist movement in America. In 1971,
the Farband joined with Poale Zion, the Labor Zionist Organization of America,
and the American Habonim Association to form the Labor Zionist Alliance, which
in 2004 re-branded and renamed itself as Ameinu.
