List of Fascist movements This article discusses regimes and movements that are
alleged to have been either fascist or sympathetic to fascism. It is often a
matter of dispute whether a certain government is to be characterized as
fascist, authoritarian, totalitarian, or a police state. The term "fascism"
itself is controversial, and has been defined in various ways by different
authors. Many of the regimes and movements discussed in this article can be
considered fascist according to some definitions but not according to others.
See definitions of fascism for more information on that subject. The Axis.
Italy (1922–1943). The first fascist country, it was ruled by Benito
Mussolini ("Il Duce") until he was dismissed and arrested on 25 July 1943.
Mussolini was then rescued from prison by German troops, and set up a short
lived puppet state named "Repubblica di Salò" in northern Italy under the
protection of the German army. Germany (1933–1945). The Nazi Party came to
power in Germany as a minority party when its leader, Adolf Hitler, was named
chancellor following the elections of 1933. Hitler moved swiftly to consolidate
power, first through passage of the Enabling Act of 1933; after the death of
President Paul von Hindenburg in 1934, the entire power of the German state was
concentrated in Hitler's hands. The Nazis cowed the populace through thuggery
and intimidation, including outright persecution of the country's Jewish
citizenry, ending in the Holocaust. One of Hitler's cornerstone policies was
known as Lebensraum, which served as the rationale for Germany's expansionist
foreign policy and ultimately led to the Second World War. Japan (1931–1945).
Right-wing elements in Japan, including industrialists, military officers, and
the nobility, had long opposed democracy as an anathema to national unity.
Military cliques began to dominate the national government starting in the
1930s. A major militarist nationalist movement in Japan from the 1920s to the
1930s was the Imperial Way Faction ""Kodoha"" of which future wartime Prime
Minister Hideki Tōjō was a part. In 1936, Japan and Germany signed the Anti-
Comintern Pact, aimed at countering the Soviet Union and Communist
International. In 1940, Prime Minister Fumimaro Konoye established the Imperial
Rule Assistance Association, or Taisei Yokusankai, to consolidate all political
parties under a single umbrella group. That same year, Japan joined Germany and
Italy in the Tripartite Pact. Other countries. Austria (1933–45). Engelbert
Dollfuß's idea of a "Ständestaat" was borrowed from Mussolini. Dollfuß
dissolved parliament and established a clerical-fascist dictatorship which
lasted until Austria was incorporated into Nazi Germany through the "Anschluss"
of 1938. Brazil (1937–1945). Many historians have argued that Brazil's Estado
Novo under Getúlio Vargas was a Brazilian variant of the continental fascist
regimes. For a period of time, Vargas' regime was aligned with Plínio
Salgado's Integralist Party, Brazil's fascist movement. It was also staunchly
anti-Marxist (which encompassed and included common persecutions, executions,
torture and mass murder of leftists in general), considered to be a common
trait shared by fascist movements. China, Republic of (1932–1938; 1941-1945).
In the 1930s, an elitist group around Chiang Kai-shek looked to fascism as a
"quick" solution to the modernization of China. The Blue Shirts Society
(藍衣社 in Chinese, hereinafter referred to as the BSS), was a secret clique
in the Kuomintang (KMT, or the Chinese Nationalist Party). Under the direction
of Chiang Kai-shek it sought to lead the KMT and China by following the
ideology of Fascism and was a secret police or para-military force. Chiang
Kaishek was confident in his goal to modernize China through an essentially
Western method (fascism) and to use it as an instrument, while moulding it into
a Confucianist philosophy. His ideas were given shape by the Blueshirts – in
effect an elitist organization within the Kuomintang government structure. This
organization practised the ancient Chinese theory of "knowledge and action" in
order to inspire the Chinese people. Likewise, the more left-wing though
politically syncretic faction of the Kuomintang led by Wang Jingwei, which
split from the mainline right-wing faction of the Kuomintang led by Chiang Kai-
shek, gradually embraced and espoused increasingly fascist oriented positions,
including anti-communist doctrine. This eventually led to their recognition by
members of the Axis Powers, including Germany and Italy, when Jingwei's faction
of the Kuomintang gained prominence and assumed control of a puppet regime
based in Nanjing established in 1941 by forces of the invading Japanese
military. Croatia (1941–1945). "Poglavnik" Ante Pavelić, leader of the
infamous Ustaše movement, came to power in 1941 as the Croatian puppet leader
under the control of Nazi Germany. Under the indirect control of Germany, the
Ustaše regime was based heavily upon both upon clerical fascism and the
Italian model of fascism, with elements of racial integrity and organic
nationalism drawn from Nazism. Finland (1929–1932). The Lapua Movement,
established in 1929, originally a nationalist movement that opposed Sweden and
Russia, turned into a fascist movement in the early 1930s. However, the party's
origins could date back to the early 1920s, in anti-communist forces during the
Finnish Civil War. They attempted a coup d'état in 1932, after which the
movement was banned. The Lapua Movement, however, affected the selection of
Pehr Evind Svinhufvud as the president and the passing of extensive anti-
communist laws. Finland stayed a democracy throughout World War II, despite co-
operating with the Nazi Germany. Finland is sometimes erroneously thought to
have had a fascist government. This is commonly said to have been caused by
Soviet propaganda. France (1940–1944). The Vichy regime of Philippe Pétain,
established following France's defeat by Germany, collaborated with the Nazis.
However, the minimal importance of fascists in the government until its direct
occupation by Germany makes it appear to seem more similar to the regime of
Franco or Salazar than the model fascist powers. While it has been argued that
anti-Semitic raids performed by the Vichy regime were more in the interests of
pleasing Germany than in service of ideology, anti-semitism was a full
component of the "National Revolution" ideology of Vichy. As early as October
1940 the Vichy regime introduced the infamous "statut des Juifs", that produced
a new legal definition of Jewishness and which barred Jews from certain public
offices. They interned Liberals, Communists, Jews, Gypsies, homosexuals, in
concentration camps as soon as 1940. Worse still, in May 1941 the Parisian
police force had collaborated in the internment of foreign Jews. As a means of
identifying Jews, the German authorities required all Jews in the occupied zone
to wear a yellow badge. On the 11 June, they demanded that 100, 000 Jews be
handed over for deportation. The most infamous of these mass arrests was the
so-called Vel' d'Hiv Roundup ("Rafle du Vel' d'Hiv") which took place in Paris
on the 16 and 17 July 1942. The Vélodrome d'Hiver was a large cycle track
situated on the rue Nélaton near the Quai de Grenelle in the 15th
arrondissement of Paris. In a vast operation codenamed "Spring Breeze" ("Vent
printanier"), the French police rounded up 13,152 Jews from Paris and its
surrounding suburbs. These were mostly adult men and women however
approximately 4,000 children were among them. Identifications for the arrests
were made easier by the large number of files on Jews complied and held by
Vichy authorities since 1940. The French police, headed by René Bousquet, were
entirely responsible for this operation and no German soldiers assisted. Pierre
Laval, head of Vichy, included the children in the deportations to Auschwitz
against general German orders. Most of the deportees sealed in the transports
died enroute due to lack of food or water. The few survivors were sent to the
gas chambers. A few months later, a police operation took place in Marseille,
known as the Battle of Marseille, and led to massive raids in the so-called
"free zone", administrated by Vichy. Greece (1936–1941). Ioannis Metaxas'
1936 to 1941 dictatorship was partly fascist in its ideological nature, and
might hence be characterized as quasi-fascist or authoritarian. It had a
National Youth Organisation based on the Hitlerjugend, developed an
armamentistic-centered economy, established a police-state akin to that of Nazi
Germany (Greece received tactical and material support from Himmler, who
exchanged correspondence with the Greek Minister of State Security Konstantinos
Maniadakis) and brutality against communists and ethnic minorities such as the
Macedonians was widespread. The Colonel George Papadopoulos' 1967 to 1974
military dictatorship, which was supported by the United States however, was
less ideological and lacked a clear fascist element other than militarism.
Hungary (1932–1945). By 1932, support for right-wing ideology, embodied by
Prime Minister Gyula Gömbös, had reached the point where Hungarian Regent
Miklós Horthy could not postpone appointing a fascist prime minister. Horthy
also showed signs of admiring the efficiency and conservative leanings of the
Italian fascist state under Mussolini and was not too reluctant to appoint a
fascist government (with terms for the extent of Horthy's power). Horthy would
keep control over the mainstream fascist movement in Hungary until near the end
of the Second World War. However, Gömbös never had a truly powerful fascist
base of support. Instead, the radical Arrow Cross Party, which gained support
in Budapest as well as the countryside, became a powerful political movement,
gaining nearly 800,000 votes in the election of 1939. Horthy became paranoid
due to his new rival, and imprisoned the Arrow Cross Party's leader, Ferenc
Szálasi. However, this action only increased popular support for the fascist
movement. In another attempt to challenge the Arrow Cross, Horthy's government
began to imitate the Arrow Cross Party's ideology. Starting in 1938, several
racial laws, mostly against Jews, were passed by the regime, but the extremist
Arrow Cross Party, led by Ferenc Szálasi, was banned until German pressure
lifted the law, and until Germany occupied Hungary during Operation Margarethe
on March 19, 1944, no Jews were in direct danger of being annihilated. In July
1944, armour-colonel Ferenc Koszorús and the First Armour Division, under
Horthy's orders, resisted the Arrow Cross militia and prevented the deportation
of the Jews of Budapest, thus saved over 200,000 lives. This act impressed upon
the German occupying forces, including Adolf Eichmann, that as long as Hungary
continued to be governed by Horthy, no real "Endlösung" could begin. Following
Horthy's attempt to have Hungary change sides on October 13, Szálasi, with
German military support, launched Operation Panzerfaust and replaced Admiral
Horthy as Head of State. The regime changed to a system more in line with
Nazism and would remain this way until the capture of Budapest by Soviet
troops. Over 400,000 Jews were sent by Hungary to German death camps from 1944
to 1945. Norway (1943–1945). Vidkun Quisling had staged a "coup d'état"
during the German invasion on April 9, 1940. This first government was replaced
by a Nazi puppet government under his leadership from February 1, 1943. His
party had never had any substantial support in Norway, undermining his attempts
to emulate the Italian fascist state. Portugal (1932–1974). The Estado Novo
regime of António de Oliveira Salazar borrowed many of the ideas towards
military and governance from Mussolini's Fascist regime, as well as adapting to
the Spanish example of paternal iconography for authoritarianism. Even though
the regime was supportive of Mussolini and Hitler's efforts it kept on the
political sidelines throughout the war, and instead only offered aid and
business with both Italy and Germany during this period. Poland (1930s). During
the 1930s, rise of fascist-inspired organizations occurred in Poland. Fascist
organizations like Association of Polish Fascists (Związek Faszystów
Polskich) were however marginal and ephemeral. Fascists-inspired organizations
were however stronger, than parties with clearly fascist program. National
Radical Camp Falanga was most prominent of them. It was created by radical
youth members with National Democratic origins. Falanga was nonetheless quickly
banned by the authoritarian ruling Sanacja regime and continued to operate
clandestinely. It was also involved in frequent street violence and anti-
Semitic riots. Romania (1940–1944). The Iron Guard turned more and more into
a pro-Nazi and pro-German movement and took power in September 1940 when Ion
Antonescu forced King Carol II to abdicate. However, the cohabitation between
the Iron Guard and Ion Antonescu was short-lived. During the 1930s, the group
combined a mix of Christian faith, antisemitism, and calls for land reform for
farmers, who still lived in a quasi-feudal society. However, the extremely
violent nature of the movement made it difficult for the Iron Guard to attract
conservatives and middle class people, and as a result, the movement could
never be as successful as the Nazi Party. The Antonescu regime that followed
had elements of fascism, but it lacked a clear political program or party. It
was more a military dictatorship. The regime was characterized by nationalism,
anti-semitism, and anti-communism, but had no social program. Despite the Iaşi
pogrom and a near-liquidation of the Jews of many parts of Moldavia, the regime
ultimately refused to send the Romanian Jews to German death camps. The regime
was overthrown on 23 August 1944 in a coup led by king Mihai of Romania.
Slovakia (1939–1944). The Slovak People's Party was a quasi-fascist
nationalist movement. It was associated with the Roman Catholic Church and
founded by Father Andrej Hlinka. His successor Monsignor Jozef Tiso was a
president of nominally independent Slovakia in 1939–1945. His government
colleagues like Vojtech Tuka or Alexander Mach collaborate with fascism. The
clerical element lends comparison with Austrofascism or the clerical fascism of
Croatia, though not to the excesses of either model. The market system was run
on principles agreeing with the standard Italian fascist model of industrial
regulation. Spain (1936–1975). After the 1936 arrest and execution of its
founder José Antonio Primo de Rivera during the Spanish Civil War, the fascist
Falange Española Party was allied to and ultimately came to be dominated by
Generalísimo Francisco Franco, who became known as "El Caudillo", the
undisputed leader of the Nationalist side in the war, and, after victory, head
of state until his death over 35 years later. However, it was best described as
an autocracy based on the Falangist fascist principles in its early years. By
the mid-50s, the Spanish Miracle and the rise of Opus Dei in the Franco regime
led to Falangist fascism being discarded and fascists minimized in importance.
Fascism in democratic nations. Prior to World War II, fascist or quasi-fascist
movements also appeared in democratic nations, often taking their inspiration
from the regimes established by Mussolini and Hitler. Australia (1931 – late
1930s). The New Guard attempted to violently remove New South Wales Premier
Jack Lang from office. Canada (1930s–1940). In the 1930s, Canada had fascist
fringe groups within it. One stronger group was the "Parti national social
chrétien" of Adrien Arcand which had significant support. Arcand believed in
the anti-Semitic policies of Hitler and called himself the "Canadian Führer".
In 1934, his Quebec-based party merged with the western-based fascist
Nationalist Party of Canada. In 1938, the English Canadian and French Canadian
fascist movements united into the National Unity Party. The only fascist
politician ever to be elected in Canada was a man by the name of P. M. Campbell
who ran and won under the fascist Unity Party of Alberta for Lethbridge in the
1937 Alberta Provincial Election. In 1940, all fascist parties were banned
under Canada's War Measures Act. Belgium (1930s–1945). The Rexist movement
and the Vlaamsch Nationaal Verbond party achieved some electoral success in the
1930s. The party could be label as clerical fascist with its roots in Catholic
Conservatism. The party gained rapid support for a brief period, focusing on
the secularism, corruption, and ineffectiveness on parliamentary democracy in
Belgium. Many of its members assisted the Nazi occupation during World War II.
The Verdinaso movement, too, can be considered fascist. Its leader, Joris Van
Severen, was killed before the Nazi occupation. Some of its adepts
collaborated, but others joined the resistance. These collaborationist
movements are generally classified as belonging to the National Socialist model
or the German fascist model because of its brand of racial nationalism and the
close relation with the occupational authorities. Ireland (1932–1933).
Fascist sympathizers led by General Eoin O'Duffy established the Army Comrades
Association, or "Blueshirts", in 1932, as a veterans organization. Renamed the
National Guard, it eventually became the paramilitary wing of the United
Ireland Party. The Blueshirts wanted to establish a corporate state in Ireland,
and frequently clashed with Republican supporters of the ruling Fianna Fáil
who were using force to disrupt that party's meetings. O’Duffy planned a
parade in Dublin in 1933, and the government, fearing a coup, banned the
organization. The organization began to decline soon after. Blueshirts under
O’Duffy's leadership later fought for Franco during the Nationalist uprising
in Spain. Mexico (1930–1942). A reactionary nationalist movement called
Acción Revolucionaria Mexicana (Mexican Revolutionary Action), founded by
former Villista general Nicolas Rodriguez Carrasco, agitated for right-wing
causes, such as the deportation of Jews and Chinese-Mexicans, throughout the
1930s. ARM maintained a paramilitary force called the Goldshirts, which clashed
frequently with Communist activists, and supported the presidential faction of
Plutarco Calles against the liberal reformist president Lázaro Cárdenas. The
paramilitary group was banned in 1936 and the ARM officially disbanded in 1942,
when Mexico declared war against the Axis. The Netherlands (1923–1945). The
"Verbond van Actualisten" (Union of Actualists) was the oldest fascist movement
in the Netherlands. It was established on 22 January 1923 and its ideology was
based on Mussolini's Italian fascist movement. It ceased all activities in
November 1928 after having had no success at all. It was succeeded bij the
"Vereeniging De Bezem" (Association 'The Broom') which was founded on 15
December 1928 by some men who previously were active in the "Verbond van
Actualisten". Its aim was to clean Dutch politics – hence the name. Its
downfall in 1932 was caused by continuous discord between its leaders. On 14
December 1931 Anton Mussert en Cornelis van Geelkerken founded the "Nationaal-
Socialistische Beweging in Nederland" (NSB), the National Socialist Movement in
the Netherlands. It started as a fascist movement, Italian style, but at the
same time its ideology was based on Hitlers NSDAP. In the years 1935–1936 the
party embraced antisemitism. Its best pre-war election result was 7,9% of the
voters (1935). The maximum number of member of the NSB was 100,000 (around 1%
of the Dutch population). Soon after the German occupation in May 1940 the NSB
became the only allowed political party. Never once during the years of WW II
the NSB was giving any real power, in stead the Germans used the NSB for their
own purposes. After the German defeat the NSB disappeared. On 29 June 1932 Jan
Baars (previously active in the "Vereeniging 'De Bezem'") founded the
"Algemeene Nederlandsche Fascisten Bond" (General Dutch Fascist Federation). It
was the first Dutch fascist political party to gain significant election
resultats and it had a considerable number of members. Its political views were
quite moderate and it disapproved German Nazi racism and antisemitism. It ended
its existence in 1934. Its main successful successor was "Zwart Front" (Black
Front), 1934–1941. Its leaders were from Catholic origin and the party was
strongly based on Italian fascism. During the pre-war period it never
established a prominent position like Mussert's NSB. After the German invasion
in May 1940, the number of members rose from 4,000 to 12,000. The Germans
prohibited "Zwart Front" in December 1941. Other, smaller, fascist and Nazi
parties were: "Verbond van Nationalisten" (Union of Nationalists, 1928–1934),
the "Nationaal-Socialistische Nederlandsche Arbeiders Partij" (National
Socialist Dutch Workers Party, 1931–1941), "Nationaal-Socialistische Partij"
(National Socialist Party, 1932–1941), "Nederlandsche Fascisten Unie" (Dutch
Fascist Union, 1933), "Unie van Nederlandsche Fascisten" (Union of Dutch
Fascists, 1933), "Oranje-Fascisten" (Orange Fascists, 1933), "Frysk Fascisten
Front" (Frisian Fascist Front, 1933), "Corporatieve Concentratie" (Corporative
Concentration, 1933–1934), "Verbond voor Nationaal Herstel" (Union for
National Restoration, 1933–1941), "Nederlandsche Nationaal-Socialistische
Partij" (Dutch National Socialist Party, 1935) and the "Nederlandsche
Volkspartij" (Dutch People's Party, 1938–1940. Dutch fascism and Nazism is
known for its lack of coherence and it was dominated by the ego's of its
leaders. An important fact for its marginal position in pre-war Dutch politics
was the absence of a 'lost generation' of combatants of WW I. Lebanon. In
Lebanon, the Kataeb Party (Phalange) was formed in 1936, with inspiration of
the Spanish Falange and Italian Fascism. The founder of the party, Pierre
Gemayel, founded the party after returning from a visit at the 1936 Summer
Olympics. The party is still active today. United Kingdom (1932–1940). Sir
Oswald Mosley, an admirer of Mussolini, established the British Union of
Fascists in 1932 as a nationalist alternative to the three mainstream political
parties in Britain. Though the BUF achieved only limited success in some local
elections, its paramilitary blackshirts engaged in street brawling and violence
against trade unionists and Communists. Alarmed at the organization's violence,
the government banned the blackshirts in 1936. Sympathy for the organization
evaporated rapidly as war with the Axis approached. The BUF was banned in 1940
and Mosely was jailed for the duration of the war. However, the relative
stability of democratic institutions, the long-time assimilation of Jews, and
the lack of a strong, threatening Communist movement, made it difficult for
fascism to succeed in Britain. United States. Few people in the United States
ever identified themselves as "fascists" or openly supported fascism. Fascists
rarely, if ever, refer to themselves as "fascist." Official fascist groups
tended to be small and existed mostly during the 1930s. For example, the Silver
Legion of William Dudley Pelley and the German-American Bund of Fritz Kuhn
openly supported Nazi Germany in the 1930s. At the same time, Catholic radio
host Father Charles Coughlin began to show sympathy towards Nazism and strong
anti-semitism. The American Nazi Party of George Rockwell was a small fringe
group during the following decades, supporting white power and opposing the
growing civil rights movement. However, there have been numerous claims that
certain people, organizations or institutions in the United States exhibited
similarities to fascism, particularly in the 1930s while fascism was on the
rise in Europe. Governor and Senator Huey Long was accused of setting up a
strong-arm regime in the state of Louisiana. The Fascist sympathies, and
support for Germany and Italy, of many of the richest families in America were
noted in the letters of William Dodd, the American ambassador to Germany, as
were payments to newspaper magnate William Randolph Hearst for favorable
articles about Nazi Germany in the American press. Concerns about such
attractions to fascism were reflected in the semi-satirical novel, "It Can't
Happen Here", by Sinclair Lewis, published in 1935. In 1933, there was an
alleged conspiracy to overthrow President Franklin D. Roosevelt by military
coup. This was known as the Business Plot, because it involved the industrial
and financial elite whose interests were supposedly threatened by the New Deal.
The Business Plot became known to the public when retired Marine Corps General
Smedley Butler testified to the of the U.S. Congress that he had been
approached by a group of wealthy business interests, led by the Du Pont and J.
P. Morgan industrial empires, to orchestrate a fascist coup against Roosevelt.
On the other hand, there are claims by certain conservatives and libertarians
that Roosevelt himself borrowed some ideas from European fascism in the 1930s.
Comparisons are drawn between the cartelisation of Italian industry by
Mussolini and the 'cartelisation' of American industry by Roosevelt under the
National Recovery Act. Most fascist governments adopted economic policies
favorable to big business. They sought to consolidate large corporations in
their countries by bringing business leaders together and encouraging them to
form monopolies and oligopolies. This was part of the fascist policy known as
corporatism. Some of Roosevelt's critics accuse him of having pursued similar
policies in the hope that the combined effort of American big business would be
able to bring the country out of the Great Depression. For more information on
this view, see The New Deal and corporatism. Differences among fascist
movements. Despite the arousal of fascist movements across Europe and the
world, many were different in their nature in ideology. Some like the Iron
Guard and Arrow Cross Party had strong support among the proletariat, unlike
Nazism and Italian Fascism, which relied more on the support of the middle
class. Meanwhile, some regimes, especially those appointed by Hitler like Vichy
France, was made up of the conservative and aristocratic elite. Others also had
different degrees of Catholic elements. Some groups, like the ones in Croatia,
Austria, Belgium, and Slovakia, had its roots in reactionary and populist
Catholicism. The Iron Guard also had strong religious influences and was
defined, by its leaders, as more of a religious order than a political party.
Fascist leaders like Francisco Franco and Vidkun Quisling tried to stage direct
military coups, while other fascist groups formed political parties and tried
to take power through the existing democratic process, such as Oswald Mosleys
British Union of Fascists.
