Fasci Siciliani The Fasci Siciliani , short for Fasci Siciliani dei Lavoratori
(Sicilian Workers Leagues), were a popular movement of democratic and socialist
inspiration, which arose in Sicily in the years between 1889 and 1894. The
Fasci gained the support of the poorest and most exploited classes of the
island by channeling their frustration and discontent into a coherent programme
based on the establishment of new rights. Consisting of a jumble of
traditionalist sentiment, religiosity, and socialist consciousness, the
movement reached its apex in the summer of 1893, when new conditions were
presented to the landowners and mine owners of Sicily concerning the renewal of
share cropping and rental contracts. Upon the rejection of these conditions,
there was an outburst of strikes that rapidly spread throughout the island, and
was marked by violent social conflict, almost rising to the point of
insurrection. The leaders of the movement were not able to keep the situation
from getting out of control. The proprietors and landowners asked the
government to intervene, and Prime Minister Francesco Crispi declared a state
of emergency in January 1894, dissolving the organizations, arresting its
leaders and restoring order through the use of extreme force. Some reforms
followed, including workmen's compensation and pension schemes. The suppression
of the strikes also led to an increase in emigration. Characteristics. The
Fasci movement was made up of a federation of scores of associations that
developed among farm workers, tenant farmers, and small sharecroppers as well
as artisans, intellectuals, and industrial workers. The immediate demands of
the movement were fair land rents, higher wages, lower local taxes and
distribution of misappropriated common land. Between 1889 and 1893 some 170
Fasci were established in Sicily. According to some sources the movement
reached a membership of more than 300,000 by the end of 1893. The Fasci
constituted autonomous organizations with their own insignia (red rosettes),
uniforms and sometimes even musical bands, and their own local halls for
reunions and congresses. While many of the leaders were of socialist or
anarchist leanings, few of their supporters were true revolutionaries.
Nevertheless, the peasants who assembled into the Fasci were eager for social
justice and convinced that a new world was about to be born. A crucifix hung
beside the red flag in many of their meeting-places, and portraits of the King
beside those of the revolutionaries Garibaldi, Mazzini and Marx. Cheers for the
King were often heard in their marches that almost resembled quasi-religious
processions. Many of the Fasci were part of the "Party of Italian Workers"
("Partito dei Lavoratori Italiani", the initial name of the Italian Socialist
Party) that had been founded at a conference in Genoa on August 14, 1892. The
rural Fasci in particular were a curious phenomenon: both ancient and modern.
They combined millenarian aspirations with urban intellectual leadership often
in contact with workers’ organizations and ideas in the more industrialized
Northern Italy. According to the Marxist historian Eric Hobsbawm, the Fasci
were millenarian insofar as the socialism preached by the movement was seen by
the Sicilian peasantry as a new religion, the true religion of Christ –
betrayed by the priests, who were on the side of the rich – that foretold the
dawn of a new world, without poverty, hunger and cold, in accordance with
God’s will. The Fasci, which included many women, were encouraged by the
messianic belief that the start of a new reign of justice was looming and the
movement spread like an epidemic. Foundation and rapid growth. The Fasci were
the result of the revolt of the Sicilian peasants against the introduction of
capitalist relationships into the rural economy aggravated by the world
depression in agriculture of the 1880s. The agrarian crisis between 1888 and
1892 led to a steep decrease in wheat prices. The island’s main sources of
wealth – wine, fruit and sulphur – suffered a heavy blow. The dominant
landowning class channeled most of the economic burden on to the peasantry, in
the form of higher rents and discriminatory local taxation. As social tension
rose, a handful of young and hitherto quite unknown socialist intellectuals –
many of them recent graduates of Palermo University – seized their
opportunity. The movement grew under the first government of Prime minister
Francesco Crispi (1887-1891) and coincided with unpopular tax increases and
ratification of a series of laws curtailing personal freedom. The Italian
economy had been sliding into a deep recession since the late 1880s. New
tariffs had been introduced in 1887 on agricultural and industrial goods,
followed by a trade war with France, which badly damaged Italian commerce. Many
farmers, especially in southern Italy suffered severely. The first official
"Fascio" was founded on May 1 (Labour Day), 1891, in Catania by Giuseppe de
Felice Giuffrida. (An earlier "Fascio" was set up in Messina on March 18, 1889,
but was dormant after its founder, Nicola Petrina, was arrested in July of that
year and not released until 1892. Another reason why the first "Fascio" of
Messina – formed after the example of the "Fasci operai" leagues constituted
in Central and North Italy from 1871 – did not develop was that it brought
together not individual workers but the workers' associations of the city,
which retained their independence, their status and economic orientation.)
Other leaders included Rosario Garibaldi Bosco in Palermo, Nicola Barbato in
Piana dei Greci, Bernardino Verro in Corleone, and Lorenzo Panepinto in Santo
Stefano Quisquina. While the ruling elite depicted the men of the Fasci as
treasonous socialists, communists and anarchists seeking to overthrow the
monarchy; in fact many were devout Catholics and monarchists. The movement
sometimes had a messianic nature, characterised by statements as "Jesus was a
true socialist and wanted just what the Fasci were demanding." Nicola Barbato
was known as "the workers' apostle." The keenest socialist among the Fasci
leaders was Garibaldi Bosco. In August 1892 he attended the Socialist party’s
congress at Genoa and on his return obediently purged his fascio of its
anarchist and other non-socialist members. His ideal of a united democratic
front was shared by the father of Sicilian socialism, Napoleone Colajanni. The
leader in Catania, De Felice, also maintained contact with leading anarchists
like Amilcare Cipriani. On these and other important issues there was much
friction between Catania and Palermo. Crispi was replaced by Antonio Di Rudinì
in February 1891, who was succeeded by Giovanni Giolitti in May 1892. On
January 20, 1893, when peasants of Caltavuturo occupied communal land that they
claimed was theirs, local authorities killed 13 and wounded 21 in the
Caltavuturo massacre. Disturbances continued throughout the year. The Fasci
started out as urban movements, animated by artisans, which evolved into a more
popular and combative mass movement with the adherence of sulphur miners, and
in a later stage with the involvement of peasants and sharecroppers. In the
autumn of 1893, labour conflicts in the cities and the mines came together with
the protests and claims of the farmers. The movement reached its greatest
breadth in the manifestations against taxes, involving the lowest tiers of the
city and the countryside, becoming difficult, if not impossible, to control by
its leaders. Initial success. From its initial origins in Eastern Sicily,
especially in Catania, the movement got its real impetus with the establishment
of the "Fascio" of Palermo on June 29, 1892. The Leagues rapidly radiated over
all Sicily. In the spring of 1893 the leaders of the movement decided to carry
their propaganda to the peasants and miners of the countryside. Between March
and October the number of fasci grew from 35 to 162. On May 21-22, 1893, a
Congress was held in Palermo attended by 500 delegates from nearly 90 leagues
and socialist circles. A Central Committee was elected, composed of nine
members: Giacomo Montalto for the province of Trapani, Nicola Petrina for the
province of Messina, Giuseppe De Felice Giuffrida for the province of Catania,
Luigi Leone for the province of Siracusa, Antonio Licata for the province
Agrigento, Agostino Lo Piano Pomar for the province of Caltanissetta, Rosario
Garibaldi Bosco, Nicola Barbato and Bernardino Verro for the province of
Palermo. The Congress decided that all Leagues were obliged to join the Party
of Italian Workers. In July 1893 a peasant conference at Corleone drafted model
agrarian contracts for labourers, sharecroppers and tenants and presented them
to the landowners. When those refused to negotiate, a strike against landowners
and against state taxes broke out over a large part of western Sicily. The so-
called "Patti di Corleone", are considered by historians to be the first trade
union collective contract in capitalist Italy. In September the state
authorities intervened and some of the landowners were persuaded to capitulate.
Elsewhere the strike continued until November 1893. Railwaymen of Catania and
Palermo, the sulphur-miners and many other workers followed their example
winning higher wages or better working conditions. The successful struggle
convinced the Sicilian ruling elite that the "upheaval" had to be stopped. They
were seized by panic and some even demanded the closing of all schools to halt
the spread of subversive doctrines. Prefects and frightened local councils
bombarded Rome with requests for the immediate suppression of the Fasci.
Despite the heavy pressure from the King, the army and conservative circles in
Rome, however, Giolitti would neither treat strikes – which were not illegal
– as a crime nor dissolve the Fasci nor authorise the use of firearms against
popular demonstrations. His policy was “to allow these economic struggles to
resolve themselves through amelioration of the condition of the workers” and
not to interfere in the process. Rising tensions. Nonetheless, Giolitti
acknowledged the need to stifle the agitation. From May 1893 onwards, leaders
of the Fasci were arrested occasionally and police and military reinforcements
were sent to Sicily. In the autumn of 1893 the leadership lost control over the
Fasci and the popular agitation got out of hand. Peasant squatters seized land,
violent crowds demonstrated for work and against local misgovernment, tax
offices were burnt down and clashes with the police grew more frequent and
bloody. The violent social conflict almost rose to the point of insurrection.
The proprietors and landowners asked the government to intervene. However, his
attitude could not be maintained. Landowners were infuriated by the
unwillingness of the government to use force, while the peasants were annoyed
by the unwillingness to redistribute land from the latifundia. Landowners
matched the strike with a lockout, and many peasants, probably a majority in
the strike centres, were left without tenancies when the planting season ended
in mid-December. In December 1893 the failure of the Giolitti government to
restore public order gave rise to a general demand that Crispi should return to
power. Giolitti had to resign on November 24, 1893, as a result of the Banca
Romana scandal. In addition to the unrest in Sicily, a wave of rioting spread
through Italy in August 1893, triggered by the killing of a number of migrant
workers in the salt pans of Aigues Mortes in southern France escalated into a
more generalized working-class revolt supported by anarchists an violent riots
in Rome and Naples. Italy seemed to be slipping to a revolution. By the time
Crispi returned to power in December 1893, Italy appeared to many to be on the
brink of collapse. Crispi promised important measures of land reform for the
near future. He was not blind to the misery and the need for social reform.
Before 1891 he had been the patron of the Sicilian working-class and many of
their associations had been named after him. Colajanni, the chief architect of
Giolitti’s fall by exposing the "Banca Romana" scandal, was first offered the
Ministry of Agriculture, which he refused, then sent to Sicily on a mission of
appeasement. Crispi’s good intentions got lost in the outcry for strong
measures. In the three weeks of uncertainty before the government was formed,
the rapid spread of violence drove many local authorities to defy Giolitti’s
ban on the use of firearms. In December 1893, 92 peasants lost their lives in
clashes with the police and army. Government building were burned as well as
flour mills and bakeries that refused to lower their prices when taxes were
lowered or abolished. Eleven people were killed on December 10, 1893, in
Giardinello after a rally that asked for the abolition of taxes on food and
disbandment of the local field guards ("guardie campestri"). The protestors
carried the portrait of the King taken from the municipality and burned tax
files. Another 11 protestors were killed in Lercara Friddi on December 25.
These disorders were not the product of a revolutionary plot, but Crispi
believed otherwise. On the strength of dubious documents and reports, Crispi
decided there was an organised conspiracy to detach his own Sicily from Italy;
the leaders of the Fasci were in league with the clerics and financed by French
gold, and war and invasion were imminent. Crackdown. On January 3, 1894, Crispi
declared a state of siege throughout Sicily. Army reservists were recalled and
General Roberto Morra di Lavriano was dispatched with 40,000 troops. The old
order was restored through the use of extreme force, including summary
executions. The Fasci were outlawed, the army and the polices killed scores of
protesters, and hundreds wounded. Thousands of militants, including all the
leaders, were put in jail or sent into internal exile. Some 1,000 persons were
deported to the penal islands without trial. All working-class societies and
cooperatives were dissolved and freedom of the press, meeting and association
was suspended. A solidarity revolt of anarchists and republicans in the
Lunigiana was crushed as well. The government also seized the opportunity to
'revise' the electoral registers. In Catania 5,000 of the 9,000 electors were
struck off. Exactly in the early days of January a meeting of the Central
Committee of the Fasci took place in Palermo to discuss the position of the
movement. Two sharply contrasting positions emerged. De Felice Giuffrida, known
for his anarchist tendencies, supported the need to take advantage of the
situation of unrest to provoke a revolution on the island. However, the
majority took an opposite view, arguing the need to proceed peacefully. A
revolt was not only inappropriate, but it would be detrimental to the movement.
The meeting condemned the violent incidents in various parts of the island, and
launched an appeal to stay calm and not to retaliate. In the end De Felice
Giuffrida accepted the position of the majority. But the die was cast for the
authorities to arrest De Felice, Montalto, Petrina, and others. Garibaldi
Bosco, Barbato and Verro were arrested on board the steamship Bagnara that was
about to leave for Tunis. On February 28, 1894 Crispi presented the "evidence"
for a widespread conspiracy in parliament: the so-called "International Treaty
of Bisacquino", signed by the French Government, the Czar of Russia, Giuseppe
De Felice, the anarchists and the Vatican, with the goal to detach Sicily from
the rest of the country and put it under a Franco-Russian protectorate. The
Radical deputy Felice Cavallotti ridiculed the conspiracy of Crispi, poking fun
at "the famous treaty between the Emperor of Russia, the President of the
French Republic, and Mr De Felice". The so-called "Treaty of Bisacquino" was so
named not because it was signed in the Sicilian town, but because it had been
invented by the Director of Public Safety of Bisacquino, the Neapolitan Sessi.
Trial in Palermo. The trials against the central committee of the Fasci that
took place in Palermo, in April and May 1894, were the final blow to the
movement. In spite of an eloquent defence, which turned the Court into a
political platform and thrilled every socialist in the country, they were
condemned to heavy sentences of imprisonment. On May 30, 1894, the leaders of
the movement received their sentence: Giuseppe de Felice Giuffrida to 18 years
and Rosario Bosco, Nicola Barbato and Bernardino Verro to 12 years in jail.
“In front of you,” Barbato told the judges, “we provided the documents
and evidence of our innocence. My friends thought it necessary to support their
defence legally; I will not do so. Not because I have no confidence in you, but
it is the law that does not concern me. So I do not defend myself. You have to
sentence: we are the elements that destroy your sacred institutions. You have
to sentence: it is logical, human. I will always pay tribute to your loyalty.
But we say to our friends outside: do not ask for pardon, do not ask for
amnesty. Socialist civilization should not begin with an act of cowardice. We
demand a condemnation, we do not ask for mercy. Martyrs are more useful to the
holy cause than any propaganda. Condemn us!” The heavy sentence aroused
strong reactions in Italy and in the United States. In Palermo a group of
students went to the Teatro Bellini and asked the orchestra to perform the hymn
of Garibaldi. And the theatre applauded. In March 1896, after Crispi had to
resign due to the humiliating defeat of the Italian army at Battle of Adwa in
Ethiopia during First Italo-Ethiopian War, the new liberal government under
Prime minister Antonio Di Rudinì recognized the excessive brutality of the
repression. Many Fasci members were pardoned and released from jail. Di Rudinì
made it clear though that a reorganization of the Fasci would not be tolerated.
After their release, De Felice, Barbato and Bosco were met by a large crowd of
supporters in Rome, who released the horses form their carriage and dragged
them to the hotel, cheering for socialism and denouncing Crispi. Aftermath. The
brutal repression backfired to some extent. The Fasci leaders used the military
tribunals to make impassioned and well-reported speeches in their defence. The
tribunals were too repressive and revolted the Liberal consciences of many
Northern Italians. In July 1894, in an attempt to recoup his former 'left
wing', Crispi introduced a bill to take over large estates and any uncultivated
land. Land would be rented out on long leases in medium-sized holdings and
leaseholders would be given reduced credit and tax concessions. However, the
bill failed to convince the Radicals and democrats of Crispi's good intentions,
while it infuriated the Sicilian landowners, who – after the suppression of
the Fasci – were now unwilling to make any concessions. They fought hard
against the bill, under the leadership of Di Rudiní. When Crispi fell from
power after Adwa in March 1896, Di Rudiní became Prime Minister and the
Sicilian establishment was safe. Nevertheless, the revolt inspired social
reforms. In 1898 two measures of social legislation were passed by the minister
of the treasury of Di Rudini’s cabinet, Luigi Luzzatti. The industrial
workmen’s compensation scheme from 1883 was made obligatory with the employer
bearing all costs; and a voluntary fund for contributory disability and old age
pensions was created. Many former adherents of the Fasci left Sicily. Life had
grown hard and employment difficult to find because of their involvement with
the movement. For those in Sicily who wanted to change their life for the
better in those days, there were only two alternatives: rebel or emigrate.
After the failure of the rebellion many peasants had no choice but to vote with
their feet and opted for emigration. According to Hobsbawm, the Fasci were a
prime example of primitive agrarian movement that became modern by aligning
itself with socialism and communism. Many of its leaders continued in the
Socialist Party and continued the struggle for land rights and land reform once
they were released. Despite the 1894 defeat, permanent movements were set up in
some areas of Sicily using modern socialist models of organisation. After World
War I the communist movement built on these, such as during the Biennio Rosso.
The Fasci inspired social struggle in Sicily well into the 1950s. Mafia
involvement. Some historians emphasize that the leagues were engaged in class
struggle against a coalition of landowners and mafiosi and ignore evidence of
strategic alliances between the Fasci and the Mafia. The leagues were not only
led by socialists and anarchists; some were run by local gentry and mafiosi.
The Mafia bosses Vito Cascioferro and Nunzio Giaimo led the Fasci in Bisacquino
in alliance with Verro. The Mafia was sometimes needed to enforce flying
pickets with credible threats of violence and to make the strike costly to
landowners by destroying their property. In order to give the strike teeth and
to protect himself from harm, Verro became a member of a Mafia group in
Corleone, the "Fratuzzi" (Little Brothers). However, during the great strike of
the Fasci in September 1893, the "Fratuzzi" mobilized to boycott it, providing
the necessary manpower to work on the lands that the peasants refused to
cultivate. Since then Verro broke away from the mafiosi, and – according to
police reports – became their most bitter enemy. He was killed by the Mafia
in 1915 when he was the mayor of Corleone.
