Fascio Fascio, plural -sci is an Italian word literally meaning "a bundle" or
"a sheaf", and figuratively "league", and which was used in the late 19th
century to refer to political groups of many different (and sometimes opposing)
orientations. A number of nationalist "fasci" later evolved into the 20th
century Fasci movement, which became known as "fascism". During the 19th
century, the bundle of rods, in Latin called "fasces" and in Italian "fascio",
came to symbolize strength through unity, the point being that whilst each
independent rod was fragile, as a bundle they were strong. By extension, the
word "fascio" came in modern Italian political usage to mean group, union, band
or league. It was first used in this sense in the 1870s by groups of
revolutionary democrats in Sicily, to describe themselves. The most famous of
these groups was the "Fasci Siciliani" during 1891–94. Thereafter, the word
retained revolutionary connotations. It was these connotations which made it
attractive, for example, to young nationalists who demanded Italian
intervention in World War I. The "fasci" they formed were scattered over Italy,
and it was to one of these spontaneously created groups, devoid of party
affiliations, that Benito Mussolini belonged. On August 18, 1914, Alceste de
Ambris speaking from the rostrum of the Milanese Syndical Union (USM) began a
ferocious attack against neutrality and urged intervention against German
reaction and the necessity of aiding France and the United Kingdom in World War
I. He equated the war with the French Revolution. This caused a deep split
within the Unione Sindacale Italiana (USI). The majority opted for neutrality.
The Parma Labor Chamber, the USM, and other radical syndicalists left the USI
and on October 1, 1914, founded the "Fasci d'Azione rivoluzionaria
internazionalista". On October 5, Angelo Oliviero Olivetti published their
manifesto in the first issue of a new series of "Pagine libere". Mussolini
shortly thereafter joined this group and took leadership. On December 11, 1914,
Mussolini started a political group, "Fasci d'azione rivoluzionaria", which was
a fusion of two other movements: the above group, "Fasci d'azione
rivoluzionaria internazionalista" and a previous group he started called the
"Fasci autonomi d'azione rivoluzionaria". This new group was also referred to
as the Milan "fascio", of which Mussolini was the leader. January 24, 1915 was
the turning point in the history of the "fasci" as their leaders met in Milan
and formed a national organization. In 1919, after the war had ended, Mussolini
reconstituted the Milan "fascio", using the new name Fasci italiani di
combattimento ("Italian league of combatants"). Other "fasci" of the same name
were created, with the common goal of opposing all those– including the king
and state– whose pacific leanings were deemed to be depriving Italy of the
fruits of victory in the war. According to H. W. Schneider, the new Milan
"fascio" was formed of roughly the same people who had been members of the
older "fascio" in 1915, but with a new name and a new objective. On November 7,
1921, the Partito Nazionale Fascista (PNF), National Fascist Party, came into
existence. In Italy, after World War II, the term "fascio" is used as
pejorative for "neo-fascista". Other Italian Fasci
