Father of the House Father of the House is a term that has by tradition been
unofficially bestowed on certain members of some national legislatures, most
notably the House of Commons in the United Kingdom. In some legislatures the
term refers to the oldest member, but in others it refers the longest-serving
member. The term Mother of the House or Mother of Parliament is also found,
although the usage varies between countries. It is used simply as the female
alternative to Father of the House, being applied when the relevant member is a
woman. United Kingdom. House of Commons. The "Father of the House" is a title
that is by tradition bestowed on the senior Member of the House of Commons who
has the longest unbroken service. If two or more MPs have the same length of
current uninterrupted service, then whoever was sworn in earliest at its
commencement, as listed in Hansard, is named Father. In the House of Commons,
the sole mandatory duty of the Father of the House is to preside over the
election of a new Speaker whenever that office becomes vacant. The relevant
Standing Order does not refer to this member by the title "Father of the
House", referring instead to the longest-serving member of the House present
who is not a Minister of the Crown (meaning that if the Father is absent or a
government minister, the next person in line presides). The current Father of
the House of Commons is Sir Peter Tapsell, Conservative MP for Louth and
Horncastle, who began his continuous service from the 1966 general election.
Should Tapsell cease to be a Member of the House of Commons, MPs with
continuous service from the 1970 general election will become eligible to be
Father of the House. The members with this length of service are: Sir Gerald
Kaufman, Kenneth Clarke, Michael Meacher and Dennis Skinner (listed according
to the order in which they took the oath after the 1970 election). The Father
of the House is not necessarily the sitting MP with the earliest date of first
election: Sir Peter Tapsell was first elected in 1959, and is the only
remaining 1950s MP, but lost his seat in 1964 and was out of Parliament until
1966; this meant that Alan Williams was Father of the House until his
retirement at the 2010 general election by virtue of his continuous service
since the 1964 general election. Michael Foot, as the only remaining MP from
the 1945 election between 1987 and 1992, was never Father of the House because
he was out of Parliament between 1955 and a by-election in 1960. Similarly,
though Sir Winston Churchill was first elected in 1900, he did not become
Father of the House until 1959 because he lost his seat in 1922, not returning
to the Commons until 1924. Sir Henry Campbell-Bannerman was simultaneously
Father of the House and Prime Minister from May 1907 until shortly before his
death in April 1908. House of Lords. The current Father of the House of Lords
is Lord Carrington (Conservative), who became eligible to take his seat on his
21st birthday in 1940 (having succeeded to the title in 1938 while still a
minor) and actually first took his seat in October 1945. After the House of
Lords Act 1999 removed the automatic right of hereditary peers to sit in the
House of Lords, Carrington (along with all former Leaders of the House) was
given a life peerage to enable him to continue to sit. Should Carrington cease
to be a Member of the House of Lords, the remaining peers who first sat in the
1940s will become eligible to be Father of the House. There are currently two:
Lord Montagu of Beaulieu (sat first on 26 November 1947) and Lord Denham (sat
first on 13 December 1949). Both are hereditary peers who were elected to
remain in the House under the provisions of the 1999 Act. The senior life peer
by date of creation is Lord Chalfont, who entered the House in 1964. House of
Commons of Northern Ireland (defunct). The Parliament of Northern Ireland,
including the House of Commons of Northern Ireland, was prorogued in 1972 and
abolished completely in 1973 leaving the title of Father of the House defunct.
Australia. In Australia, the current member of the House of Representatives
with the longest period of continuous service, whether a Minister or not, is
known as "Father of the House". Similarly, the current member of the Senate
with the longest period of continuous service is known as "Father of the
Senate". The longer serving of the two Fathers is called "Father of the
Parliament". As in Britain, these terms have no official status. However,
unlike Britain: Since 1 July 2008, Senator Ron Boswell, who was first elected
in 1983, has been the Father of the Senate. Since 1 September 1998, Philip
Ruddock, who was first elected in 1973, has been the Father of the House of
Representatives and Father of the Parliament. Canada. The longest-serving
member of the House of Commons who is not a cabinet minister is known as the
Dean of the House, and presides over the election of the Speaker at the
beginning of each Parliament. The same term is used for the equivalent position
in the U.S. House of Representatives. Germany. Starting with the Frankfurter
Nationalversammlung (Frankfurt Parliament) of 1848, all democratic German
parliaments had a Father (or Mother) of the House, usually called
"Alterspräsident" (President by right of age). Under the current constitution
(Grundgesetz) of 1949, the Alterspräsident will preside over the Parliament
(Bundestag) at the start of each legislative period. Following tradition, the
Alterspräsident will first ascertain himself that he is the oldest member of
the Bundestag by stating his birth date and asking if anyone is present who was
born before his date. If no older member of the Bundestag is present (which is
usually the case) he will formally declare that he indeed is the
Alterspräsident and will start proceedings. As acting President of the
Bundestag (Bundestagspräsident) he delivers the first programmatic speech and
oversees the elections of the President of the Bundestag and the Vicepresidents
of the Bundestag (Bundestagsvizepräsidenten). He then stands down and yields
his power to the newly elected Bundestagspräsident. As the position of Father
of the House usually draws a certain public attention, the PDS twice nominated
old independents (Stefan Heym in 1994, Fred Gebhardt in 1998) to obtain this
office. None of them served a complete term (Heym resigned in 1996, Gebhardt
died in 2000). This was considered a manipulation. Israel. In the beginning of
each Knesset, before the election of a permanent speaker, there is a temporary
speaker. In the past it was the oldest member of Knesset, now it is the
longest-serving member. Michael Eitan is the most recent Knesset member to
serve in this capacity, doing so from February 24 - March 30, 2010. Ireland. In
the Republic of Ireland, the term Father of the Dáil is an unofficial title
applied to the longest-serving Teachta Dála (TD) in the house, regardless of
their position. The current Father is the Taoiseach and Fine Gael party leader,
Enda Kenny, TD, since the retirement of Séamus Pattison at the 2007 general
election. On a number of occasions two or more people have shared the position
of Father of the Dáil. New Zealand. In New Zealand, the term Father- or Mother
of the House is an unofficial title applied to the longest-serving MP in the
house, regardless of their position. The Father of the House has no official
role in Parliament. The current Father of the House in the Parliament of New
Zealand is Peter Dunne, the leader of the United Future New Zealand, having
served continuously since the 1984 general election. The current Speaker of the
House, Lockwood Smith, has also served continuously since 1984, but as members
are sworn into office in alphabetical order, Dunne by virtue of this has served
the longest. In New Zealand's first election of , the electorate was the first
to declare the election of a successful candidate, Hugh Carleton, was returned
unopposed. In the subsequent General Assembly of 1854, Carleton liked to be
known as the Father of the House. List of Fathers (and Mothers) of the House
Norway. In Norway it is the representative of the Storting with longest
seniority that is temporary Stortingspresident (speaker). Per Kristian Foss had
this position in 2009 until Dag Terje Andersen was elected. Finland. "Note:
this is a list of longest-serving Finnish MPs; however, before the election of
the Speaker, the Finnish Parliament is chaired by the oldest MP, not the
longest-serving one."
