Federalism Federalism is a political concept in which a "group" of members are
bound together by covenant (Latin: "foedus", ) with a governing representative
head. The term "federalism" is also used to describe a system of government in
which sovereignty is constitutionally divided between a central governing
authority and constituent political units (such as states or provinces).
Federalism is a system based upon democratic rules and institutions in which
the power to govern is shared between national and provincial/state
governments, creating what is often called a federation. Proponents are often
called federalists. European vs. American Federalism. In Europe, "federalist"
is sometimes used to describe those who favor a common federal government, with
distributed power at regional, national and supranational levels. Most European
federalists want this development to continue within the European Union.
European federalism originated in post-war Europe; one of the more important
initiatives was Winston Churchill's speech in Zurich in 1946. In the United
States, federalism originally referred to belief in a stronger central
government. When the U.S. Constitution was being drafted, the Federalist Party
supported a stronger central government, while "Anti-Federalists" wanted a
weaker central government. This is very different from the modern usage of
"federalism" in Europe, and in the United States. The distinction stems from
the fact that "federalism" is situated in the middle of the political spectrum
between a confederacy and a unitary state. The U.S. Constitution was written as
a reaction to the Articles of Confederation, under which the United States was
a loose confederation with a weak central government. Further, during the
American Civil War, members of the Confederate States of America, which seceded
in favor of a weaker central government, referred to pro-Union soldiers of the
United States government as "Federals." Thus in the United States "federalism"
argued for a stronger central government, relative to a confederacy. In
contrast, Europe has a greater history of unitary states than North America,
thus European "federalism" argues for a weaker central government, relative to
a unitary state. The modern American usage of the word is much closer to the
European sense. As the power of the Federal government has increased, some
people have perceived a much more unitary state than they believe the Founding
Fathers intended. Most people politically advocating "federalism" in the United
States argue in favor of limiting the powers of the federal government,
especially the judiciary (see Federalist Society, New Federalism). In Canada,
federalism typically implies opposition to sovereigntist movements (most
commonly Quebec separatism). The governments of Argentina, Australia, Brazil,
India and Mexico, among others, are also organized along federalist principles.
Federalism may encompass as few as two or three internal divisions, as is the
case in Belgium or Bosnia and Herzegovina. In general, two extremes of
federalism can be distinguished: at one extreme, the strong federal state is
almost completely unitary, with few powers reserved for local governments;
while at the other extreme, the national government may be a federal state in
name only, being a confederation in actuality. In 1999, the Government of
Canada established the Forum of Federations as an international network for
exchange of best practices among federal and federalizing countries.
Headquartered in Ottawa, the Forum of Federations partner governments include
Australia, Brazil, Canada, Ethiopia, Germany, India, Mexico, Nigeria and
Switzerland. Some Christian denominations are organized on federalist
principles; in these churches this is known as "ecclesiastic" or "theological
federalism". Examples of federalism. United States. Federalism in the United
States is the evolving relationship between state governments and the federal
government of the United States. American government has evolved from a system
of dual federalism to one of associative federalism. In "Federalist No. 46,"
James Madison asserted that the states and national government "are in fact but
different agents and trustees of the people, constituted with different
powers." Alexander Hamilton, writing in "Federalist No. 28," suggested that
both levels of government would exercise authority to the citizens' benefit:
"If their peoples' rights are invaded by either, they can make use of the other
as the instrument of redress." (1) Because the states were preexisting
political entities, the U.S. Constitution did not need to define or explain
federalism in any one section but it often mentions the rights and
responsibilities of state governments and state officials in relation to the
federal government. The federal government has certain "express powers" (also
called "enumerated powers") which are powers spelled out in the Constitution,
including the right to levy taxes, declare war, and regulate interstate and
foreign commerce. In addition, the "Necessary and Proper Clause" gives the
federal government the "implied power" to pass any law "necessary and proper"
for the execution of its express powers. Other powers—the "reserved
powers"—are reserved to the people or the states. The power delegated to the
federal government was significantly expanded by the Supreme Court decision in
McCulloch v. Maryland (1819), amendments to the Constitution following the
Civil War, and by some later amendments—as well as the overall claim of the
Civil War, that the states were legally subject to the final dictates of the
federal government. After the American Civil War, the federal government
increased greatly in influence on everyday life and in size relative to the
state governments. Reasons included the need to regulate businesses and
industries that span state borders, attempts to secure civil rights, and the
provision of social services. The federal government acquired no substantial
new powers until the acceptance by the Supreme Court of the Sherman Anti-Trust
Act. From 1938 until 1995, the U.S. Supreme Court did not invalidate any
federal statute as exceeding Congress' power under the Commerce Clause. Most
actions by the federal government can find some legal support among the express
powers, such as the Commerce Clause, whose applicability has been narrowed by
the Supreme Court in recent years. In 1995 the Supreme Court rejected the Gun-
Free School Zones Act in the Lopez decision, and also rejected the civil remedy
portion of the Violence Against Women Act of 1994 in the "United States v.
Morrison" decision. Recently, the Commerce Clause was interpreted to include
marijuana laws in the "Gonzales v. Raich" decision. Dual federalism holds that
the federal government and the state governments are co-equals, each sovereign.
However, since the Civil War Era, the national courts often interpret the
federal government as the final judge of its own powers under dual federalism.
The establishment of Native American governments (which are separate and
distinct from state and federal government) exercising limited powers of
sovereignty, has given rise to the concept of "bi-federalism." Federalism in
Europe. Several federal systems exist in Europe, such as in Switzerland,
Austria, Germany, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina and the European Union.
Germany and the EU are the only examples in the world where members of the
federal upper houses, (the Bundesrat and the Council), are neither elected nor
appointed but are composed of the governments of their constituents. In
Germany, federalism was abolished only during Nazism (1933–1945) and in East
Germany during most of its existence (1952–1990). Adolf Hitler viewed
federalism as an obstacle to his goals. As he wrote in "Mein Kampf", "National
Socialism must claim the right to impose its principles on the whole German
nation, without regard to what were hitherto the confines of federal states."
Therefore the idea of a strong, centralized government has negative
associations in German politics, although prior to 1919 or 1933, many social
democrats and liberals favored centralization in principle. Since earlier in
Britain, an Imperial Federation was once seen as a method of solving the Home
Rule problem in Ireland, federalism has long been proposed as a solution to the
"Irish Problem", and more lately, the "West Lothian question". European Union.
Following the end of World War II, several movements began advocating a
European federation, such as the Union of European Federalists or the European
Movement, founded in 1948. Those organizations were influential in the European
unification process, but never in a decisive way. Although federalism was
mentioned both in the drafts of the Maastricht treaty and the Treaty
establishing a Constitution for Europe, it was never adopted by the
representatives of the member countries, all of whom would have to agree to the
term. The strongest advocates of European federalism have been Germany, Italy,
Belgium and Luxembourg while those historically most strongly opposed have been
the United Kingdom and France; while other countries that have never campaigned
specifically for a particular means of governance in Europe are considered as
federalists. Some would consider this to be the case with states such as Spain,
Portugal, Greece, and Hungary. It is also remarkable that in recent times the
French government has become increasingly pro-European Union, while countries
like the Czech Republic have taken on the roles of primary opponents to a
stronger EU. Australia. On January 1, 1901 the Australian nation emerged as a
federation. The Australian continent was colonized by the United Kingdom in
1788, who subsequently established six self-governing colonies there. In the
1890s the governments of these colonies all held referendums on becoming a
unified, independent nation. When all the colonies voted in favour of
federation, the Federation of Australia commenced, resulting in the
establishment of the Commonwealth of Australia in 1901. Whilst the Federation
of Australia emerged in 1901, the States of Australia remained colonies of
Britain until 1986 when the UK and Australia passed the "Australia Acts". The
model of Australian federalism adheres closely to the original model of the
United States of America, though through a Westminster system. Brazil. In
Brazil, the fall of the monarchy in 1889 by a military "coup d'état" led to
the rise of the presidential system, headed by Deodoro da Fonseca. Aided by
well-known jurist Ruy Barbosa, Fonseca established federalism in Brazil by
decree, but this system of government would be confirmed by every Brazilian
constitution since 1891, although some of them would distort some of the
federalist principles. The 1937 Constitution, for example, granted the federal
government the authority to appoint State Governors (called interventors) at
will, thus centralizing power in the hands of President Getúlio Vargas. Brazil
also uses the Fonseca system to regulate interstate trade. The Brazilian
Constitution of 1988 introduced a new component to the ideas of federalism,
including municipalities as federal entities. Brazilian municipalities are now
invested with some of the traditional powers usually granted to states in
federalism, and although they are not allowed to have a Constitution, they are
structured by an organic law. Canada. In Canada, the system of federalism is
described by the division of powers between the federal parliament and the
country's provincial governments. Under the Constitution Act (previously known
as the British North America Act) of 1867, specific powers of legislation are
allotted. Section 91 of the constitution gives rise to federal authority for
legislation, whereas section 92 gives rise to provincial powers. For matters
not directly dealt with in the constitution, the federal government retains
residual powers; however, conflict between the two levels of government,
relating to which level has legislative jurisdiction over various matters, has
been a longstanding and evolving issue. Areas of contest include legislation
with respect to regulation of the economy, taxation, and natural resources.
Colombia. The Colombian Civil War (1860–1862) destroyed the newly formed
Granadine Confederation and created the United States of Colombia on similarly
federal theories, though their actual policies generally differed. Venezuela.
The Federal War ended in 1863 with the signing of the Treaty of Coche by both
the centralist government of the time and the Federal Forces. The United States
of Venezuela were subsequently incorporated under a "Federation of Sovereign
States" upon principles borrowed from the Articles of Confederation of the
United States of America. In this Federation, each State had a "President" of
its own that controlled almost every issue, even the creation of "State
Armies," while the Federal Army was required to obtain presidential permission
to enter any given state. However, more than 140 years later, the original
system has gradually evolved into a quasi-centralist form of government. While
the 1999 Constitution still defines Venezuela as a Federal Republic, it
abolished the Senate, transferred competences of the States to the Federal
Government and granted the President of the Republic vast powers to intervene
in the States and Municipalities. India. The Government of India (referred to
as the "Union Government") was established by the Constitution of India, and is
the governing authority of a "federal union" of 28 states and 7 union
territories. The governance of India is based on a tiered system, where in the
Constitution of India appropriates the subjects on which each tier of
government has executive powers. The Constitution uses the Seventh Schedule to
delimit the subjects under three categories, namely the Union list, the State
list and the Concurrent list. Asymmetric federalism. A distinguishing aspect of
Indian federalism is that unlike many other forms of federalism, it is
asymmetric. Article 370 makes special provisions for the state of Jammu and
Kashmir as per its Instrument of Accession. Article 371 makes special
provisions for the states of Andhra Pradesh, Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, Goa,
Mizoram, Manipur, Nagaland and Sikkim as per their accession or state-hood
deals. Also one more aspect of Indian federalism is system of President's Rule
in which the central government (through its appointed Governor) takes control
of state's administration for certain months when no party can form a
government in the state or there is violent disturbance in the state. Coalition
politics. Although the Constitution does not say so, India is now a
multilingual federation. India has a multi-party system,with political
allegiances frequently based on linguistic, regional and caste identities,
necessitating coalition politics, especially at the Union level.Coalition
politics have created a balance in the legislatures. Russian Federation. The
post-Imperial nature of Russian subdivision of government changed towards a
generally autonomous model which began with the establishment of the USSR (of
which Russia was governed as part). It was liberalized in the aftermath of the
Soviet Union, with the reforms under Boris Yeltsin preserving much of the
Soviet structure while applying increasingly liberal reforms to the governance
of the constituent republics and subjects (while also coming into conflict with
Chechen secessionist rebels during the Chechen War). Some of the reforms under
Yeltsin were scaled back by Vladimir Putin. All of Russia's subdivisional
entities are known as subjects, with some smaller entities, such as the
republics enjoying more autonomy than other subjects on account of having an
extant presence of a culturally non-Russian ethnic minority. Federalism with
two components. Belgium. On one hand, this means that the Belgian political
landscape, generally speaking, consists of only two components: the Dutch-
speaking population represented by Dutch-language political parties, and the
majority populations of Wallonia and Brussels, represented by their French-
speaking parties. The Brussels region emerges as a third component. This
specific dual form of federalism, with the special position of Brussels,
consequentially has a number of political issues—even minor ones—that are
being fought out over the Dutch/French-language political division. With such
issues, a final decision is possible only in the form of a compromise. This
tendency gives this dual federalism model a number of traits that generally are
ascribed to confederalism, and makes the future of Belgian federalism
contentious. This aspect of Belgian federalism helps to explain the
difficulties of partition; Brussels, with its importance, is linked to both
Wallonia and Flanders and vice-versa. This situation, however, does not erase
the traits of a confederation in the Belgian system. Proposed federalism. It
has been proposed in several unitary states to establish a federal system, for
various reasons. China. China is the largest unitary state in the world by both
population and land area. Although China has had long periods of central rule
for centuries, it is often argued that the unitary structure of the Chinese
government is far too unwieldy to effectively and equitably manage the
country's affairs. On the other hand, Chinese nationalists are suspicious of
decentralization as a form of secessionism and a backdoor for national
disunity; still others argue that the degree of autonomy given to provincial-
level officials in the People's Republic of China amounts to a "de facto"
federalism. Libya. Shortly after the 2011 Libyan civil war, some in the eastern
region of the country (Cyrenaica) began to call for the new regime to be
federal, with the traditional three regions of Libya (Cyrenaica, Tripolitania,
and Fezzan) being the constituent units. A group calling itself the Cyrenaican
Transitional Council issued a declaration of autonomy on 6 March 2012; this
move was rejected by the National Transitional Council in Tripoli. Christian
Church. Federalism also finds expression in ecclesiology (the doctrine of the
church). For example, presbyterian church governance resembles parliamentary
republicanism (a form of "political federalism") to a large extent. In
Presbyterian denominations, the local church is ruled by elected elders, some
of which are ministerial. Each church then sends representatives or
commissioners to presbyteries and further to a general assembly. Each greater
level of assembly has ruling authority over its constituent members. In this
governmental structure, each component has some level of sovereignty over
itself. As in "political federalism", in presbyterian ecclesiology there is
shared sovereignty. Other ecclesiologies also have significant representational
and federalistic components, including the more anarchic congregational
ecclesiology, and even in more hierarchical episcopal ecclesiology. Some
Christians argue that the earliest source of political federalism (or
federalism in human institutions; in contrast to theological federalism) is the
ecclesiastical federalism found in the Bible. They point to the structure of
the early Christian Church as described (and to many, prescribed) in the New
Testament. This is particularly demonstrated in the Council of Jerusalem,
described in Acts chapter 15, where the Apostles and elders gathered together
to govern the Church; the Apostles being representatives of the universal
Church, and elders being such for the local church. To this day, elements of
federalism can be found in almost every Christian denomination, some more than
others. Constitutional structure. Division of powers. In a federation, the
division of power between federal and regional governments is usually outlined
in the constitution. It is in this way that the right to self-government of the
component states is usually constitutionally entrenched. Component states often
also possess their own constitutions which they may amend as they see fit,
although in the event of conflict the federal constitution usually takes
precedence. In almost all federations the central government enjoys the powers
of foreign policy and national defense. Were this not the case a federation
would not be a single sovereign state, per the UN definition. Notably, the
states of Germany retain the right to act on their own behalf at an
international level, a condition originally granted in exchange for the Kingdom
of Bavaria's agreement to join the German Empire in 1871. Beyond this the
precise division of power varies from one nation to another. The constitutions
of Germany and the United States provide that all powers not specifically
granted to the federal government are retained by the states. The Constitution
of some countries like Canada and India, on the other hand, state that powers
not explicitly granted to the provincial governments are retained by the
federal government. Much like the US system, the Australian Constitution
allocates to the Federal government (the Commonwealth of Australia) the power
to make laws about certain specified matters which were considered too
difficult for the States to manage, so that the States retain all other areas
of responsibility. Under the division of powers of the European Union in the
Lisbon Treaty, powers which are not either exclusively of European competence
or shared between EU and state are retained by the constituent states. Where
every component state of a federation possesses the same powers, we are said to
find 'symmetric federalism'. Asymmetric federalism exists where states are
granted different powers, or some possess greater autonomy than others do. This
is often done in recognition of the existence of a distinct culture in a
particular region or regions. In Spain, "historical communities" such as
Navarre, Galicia, Catalonia, and the Basque Country have more powers than other
autonomous communities, partly to deal with their distinctness and to appease
nationalist leanings, partly out of respect of privileges granted earlier in
history. It is common that during the historical evolution of a federation
there is a gradual movement of power from the component states to the centre,
as the federal government acquires additional powers, sometimes to deal with
unforeseen circumstances. The acquisition of new powers by a federal government
may occur through formal constitutional amendment or simply through a
broadening of the interpretation of a government's existing constitutional
powers given by the courts. Usually, a federation is formed at two levels: the
central government and the regions (states, provinces, territories), and little
to nothing is said about second or third level administrative political
entities. Brazil is an exception, because the 1988 Constitution included the
municipalities as autonomous political entities making the federation
tripartite, encompassing the Union, the States, and the municipalities. Each
state is divided into municipalities ("municípios") with their own legislative
council ("câmara de vereadores") and a mayor ("prefeito"), which are partly
autonomous from both Federal and State Government. Each municipality has a
"little constitution", called "organic law" ("lei orgânica"). Mexico is an
intermediate case, in that municipalities are granted full-autonomy by the
federal constitution and their existence as autonomous entities ("municipio
libre", "free municipality") is established by the federal government and
cannot be revoked by the states' constitutions. Moreover, the federal
constitution determines which powers and competencies belong exclusively to the
municipalities and not to the constituent states. However, municipalities do
not have an elected legislative assembly. Federations often employ the paradox
of being a union of states, while still being states (or having aspects of
statehood) in themselves. For example, James Madison (author of the US
Constitution) wrote in Federalist Paper No. 39 that the US Constitution "is in
strictness neither a national nor a federal constitution; but a composition of
both. In its foundation, it is federal, not national; in the sources from which
the ordinary powers of the Government are drawn, it is partly federal, and
partly national..." This stems from the fact that states in a federation
maintain all sovereignty that they do not yield to the federation by their own
consent. This was reaffirmed by the Tenth Amendment to the United States
Constitution, which reserves all powers and rights that are not delegated to
the Federal Government as left to the States and to the people. Organs of
government. The structures of most federal governments incorporate mechanisms
to protect the rights of component states. One method, known as 'intrastate
federalism', is to directly represent the governments of component states in
federal political institutions. Where a federation has a bicameral legislature
the upper house is often used to represent the component states while the lower
house represents the people of the nation as a whole. A federal upper house may
be based on a special scheme of apportionment, as is the case in the senates of
the United States and Australia, where each state is represented by an equal
number of senators irrespective of the size of its population. Alternatively,
or in addition to this practice, the members of an upper house may be
indirectly elected by the government or legislature of the component states, as
occurred in the United States prior to 1913, or be actual members or delegates
of the state governments, as, for example, is the case in the German Bundesrat
and in the Council of the European Union. The lower house of a federal
legislature is usually directly elected, with apportionment in proportion to
population, although states may sometimes still be guaranteed a certain minimum
number of seats. In Canada, the provincial governments represent regional
interests and negotiate directly with the central government. A First Ministers
conference of the prime minister and the provincial premiers is the de facto
highest political forum in the land, although it is not mentioned in the
constitution. Federations often have special procedures for amendment of the
federal constitution. As well as reflecting the federal structure of the state
this may guarantee that the self-governing status of the component states
cannot be abolished without their consent. An amendment to the constitution of
the United States must be ratified by three-quarters of either the state
legislatures, or of constitutional conventions specially elected in each of the
states, before it can come into effect. In referendums to amend the
constitutions of Australia and Switzerland it is required that a proposal be
endorsed not just by an overall majority of the electorate in the nation as a
whole, but also by separate majorities in each of a majority of the states or
cantons. In Australia, this latter requirement is known as a "double majority".
Some federal constitutions also provide that certain constitutional amendments
cannot occur without the unanimous consent of all states or of a particular
state. The US constitution provides that no state may be deprived of equal
representation in the senate without its consent. In Australia, if a proposed
amendment will specifically impact one or more states, then it must be endorsed
in the referendum held in each of those states. Any amendment to the Canadian
constitution that would modify the role of the monarchy would require unanimous
consent of the provinces. The German Basic Law provides that no amendment is
admissible at all that would abolish the federal system. Federalism as a
political philosophy. The meaning of "federalism", as a political movement, and
of what constitutes a 'federalist', varies with country and historical context.
Movements associated with the establishment or development of federations can
be either centralising or decentralising. For example, at the time those
nations were being established, factions known as 'federalists' in the United
States and Australia were those who advocated the creation of strong central
government. Similarly, in European Union politics, federalists are mostly those
who seek greater EU integration. In contrast, in Spain and post-war Germany,
federal movements have sought decentralisation: the transfer of power from
central authorities to local units. In Canada, where Quebec separatism has been
a political force for several decades, the 'federalist' force is dedicated to
keeping Quebec inside Canada.
