Ferdowsi Hakīm Abu'l-Qāsim Ferdowsī Tūsī () known as Ferdowsi (; also
spelled as "Firdausi"; 940–1020 CE) was a highly revered Persian poet. He was
the author of the "Shahnameh", the national epic of Iran and related societies.
The "Shahnameh" was originally composed by Ferdowsi for the princes of the
Samanid dynasty, who were responsible for a revival of Persian cultural
traditions after the Arab invasion of the seventh century. The "Shahnameh"
chronicles the legendary history of the pre-Islamic kings of Iran from Keyumars
to Yazdegerd III. Ferdowsi continued work on the poem after the Samanids were
conquered by the Ghaznavids. The new ruler Mahmud of Ghazni, a Turk, may have
lacked the interest in Ferdowsi's work shown by the Samanids, resulting in him
losing favor with the royal court. In later passages of his poem, Ferdowsi
complains about poverty and the ravages of old age. Ferdowsi spent over three
decades (from 977 to 1010) working on the "Shahnameh", which became one of the
most influential works of Persian literature. Life. Family. Ferdowsi was born
into a family of Iranian landowners ("dehqans") in 940 C.E. in the village of
Paj, near the city of Tus in the province of Khorasan, in northeastern Iran.
Ferdowsi was a Shia Muslim, which is attested by the "Shahnameh" and also
confirmed by early accounts. Little is known about Ferdowsi's early life, even
his precise name is in doubt. According to the 13th-century Arab translator of
the "Shahnameh", Bondari, the poet's full name was "al-Amīr al-Ḥakīm
Abu’l-Qāsem Manṣūr ibn al-Ḥasan al-Ferdowsī al-Ṭūsī". It is not
known when or why he adopted the pen name "Ferdowsi" ("man of paradise"). The
poet had a wife, who was probably literate and came from the same "dehqan"
class. He had a son, who died aged 37, and was mourned by the poet in an elegy
which he inserted into the "Shahnameh". Background. Ferdowsi belonged to the
class of "dehqans". These were landowning Iranian aristocrats who had
flourished under the Sassanid dynasty (the last pre-Islamic dynasty to rule
Iran) and whose power, though diminished, had survived into the Islamic era
which followed the Arab conquests of the seventh century. The "dehqans" were
intensely patriotic (so much so that "dehqan" is sometimes used as a synonym
for "Iranian" in the "Shahnameh") and saw it as their task to preserve the
cultural traditions of Iran, including the legendary tales about its kings. The
Muslim conquests of the seventh century had been a watershed in Iranian
history, bringing the new religion of Islam, submitting Iranians to the rule of
the Arab caliphate and promoting Arabic culture and language at the expense of
Persian. By the late 9th century, the power of the caliphate had weakened and
local Iranian dynasties emerged. Ferdowsi grew up in Tus, a city under the
control of one of these dynasties, the Samanids, who claimed descent from the
Sassanid general Bahram Chobin (whose story Ferdowsi recounts in one of the
later sections of the "Shahnameh"). The Samanid bureaucracy used the New
Persian language rather than Arabic and the Samanid elite had a great interest
in pre-Islamic Iran and its traditions and commissioned translations of Pahlavi
(Middle Persian) texts into New Persian. Abu Mansur ʿAbd-al-Razzāq, a
"dehqan" and governor of Tus, had several local scholars compile a prose
"Shahnameh" ("Book of Kings"), which was completed in 957. Although it no
longer survives, Ferdowsi used it as one of the sources of his epic. Samanid
rulers were patrons of such important Persian poets as Rudaki and Daqiqi.
Ferdowsi followed in the footsteps of these writers. Details about Ferdowsi's
education are lacking. Judging by the "Shahnameh", there is no evidence he knew
either Arabic or Pahlavi. Although New Persian was permeated by Arabic
vocabulary by Ferdowsi's time, there are relatively few Arabic loan words in
the "Shahnameh". This may have been a deliberate strategy by the poet. Life as
a poet. It is possible that Ferdowsi wrote some early poems which have not
survived. He began work on the "Shahnameh" around 977, intending it as a
continuation of the work of his fellow poet Daqiqi, who had been assassinated
by a slave. Like Daqiqi, Ferdowsi employed the prose "Shahnameh" of ʿAbd-al-
Razzāq as a source. He received generous patronage from the Samanid prince
Mansur and completed the first version of the "Shahnameh" in 994. When the
Turkic Ghaznavids overthrew the Samanids in the late 990s, Ferdowsi continued
to work on the poem, rewriting sections to praise the Ghaznavid Sultan Mahmud.
Mahmud's attitude to Ferdowsi and how well he rewarded the poet are matters
which have long been subject to dispute and have formed the basis of legends
about the poet and his patron (see below). The Turkic Mahmud may have been less
interested in tales from Iranian history than the Samanids. The later sections
of the "Shahnameh" have passages which reveal Ferdowsi's fluctuating moods: in
some he complains about old age, poverty, illness and the death of his son; in
others, he appears happier. Ferdowsi finally completed his epic on 8 March
1010. Virtually nothing is known for sure about the last decade of his life.
Tomb. Ferdowsi was buried in his own garden, burial in the Muslim cemetery of
Tus having been forbidden by a local cleric. A Ghaznavid governor of Khorasan
constructed a mausoleum over the grave and it became a revered site. The tomb,
which had fallen into decay, was rebuilt between 1928 and 1934 on the orders of
Reza Shah and has now become the equivalent of a national shrine. Legend.
According to legend, Sultan Mahmud of Ghazni offered Ferdowsi a gold piece for
every couplet of the "Shahnameh" he wrote. The poet agreed to receive the money
as a lump sum when he had completed the epic. He planned to use it to rebuild
the dykes in his native Tus. After thirty years of work, Ferdowsi finished his
masterpiece. The sultan prepared to give him 60,000 gold pieces, one for every
couplet, as agreed. However, the courtier Mahmud had entrusted with the money
despised Ferdowsi, regarding him as a heretic, and he replaced the gold coins
with silver. Ferdowsi was in the bath house when he received the reward.
Finding it was silver not gold, he gave the money away to the bathkeeper, a
refreshment seller and the slave who had carried the coins. When the courtier
told the sultan about Ferdowsi's behaviour, he was furious and threatened to
execute him. Ferdowsi fled Khorasan, having first written a satire on Mahmud,
and spent most of the remainder of his life in exile. Mahmud eventually learned
the truth about the courtier's deception and had him either banished or
executed. By this time, the aged Ferdowsi had returned to Tus. The sultan sent
him a new gift of 60,000 gold pieces but as the caravan bearing the money
arrived in Tus it met a funeral procession: the poet had died from a heart
attack. Works. Ferdowsi's "Shahnameh" is the most popular and influential
national epic in Iran and other Persian-speaking nations. The "Shahnameh" is
the only surviving work by Ferdowsi regarded as indisputably genuine. He may
have written poems earlier in his life but they no longer exist. A narrative
poem, "Yūsof o Zolaykā" ("Joseph and Zuleika"), was once attributed to him
but scholarly consensus now rejects the idea it is his. There has also been
speculation about the satire Ferdowsi allegedly wrote about Mahmud of Ghazni
after the sultan failed to reward him sufficiently. Nezami Aruzi, Ferdowsi's
early biographer, claimed that all but six lines had been destroyed by a well-
wisher who had paid Ferdowsi a thousand dirhams for the poem. Introductions to
some manuscripts of the "Shahnameh" include verses purporting to be the satire.
Some scholars have viewed them as fabricated, others are more inclined to
believe in their authenticity. File:Ferdowsi phoenixferdowsi.jpg|The Simurgh, a
mythical bird from the "Shahnameh". Relief from Ferdowsi's mausoleum File:
Shahnameh - The Div Akvan throws Rustam into the sea.jpg|Scene from the
"Shahnameh": the Akvan Div throws the sleeping Rostam into the sea File:Artaban
and Ardashir.jpg|A scene from the "Shahnameh" depicting the Parthian king
Artaban facing the Sassanid king Ardashir I File:Bathscene.jpg|Bathscene
Influence. Ferdowsi is one of the undisputed giants of the Persian literature.
After Ferdowsi's "Shahnameh" a number of other works similar in nature surfaced
over the centuries within the cultural sphere of the Persian language. Without
exception, all such works were based in style and method on Ferdowsi's
"Shahnameh", but none of them could quite achieve the same degree of fame and
popularity as Ferdowsi's masterpiece. Ferdowsi has a unique place in Persian
history because of the strides he made in reviving and regenerating the Persian
language and cultural traditions. His works are cited as a crucial component in
the persistence of the Persian language, as those works allowed much of the
tongue to remain codified and intact. In this respect, Ferdowsi surpasses
Nizami, Khayyam, Asadi Tusi, and other seminal Persian literary figures in his
impact on Persian culture and language. Many modern Iranians see him as the
father of the modern Persian language. Ferdowsi in fact was a motivation behind
many future Persian figures. One such notable figure was Reza Shah Pahlavi who
established an "Academy of Culture" in Iran, in order to attempt to remove
Arabic and Turkish words from the Persian language, replacing them with
suitable Persian alternatives. In 1934, Reza Shah set up a ceremony in Mashad,
Khorasan celebrating a thousand years of Persian literature since the time of
Ferdowsi, titled "Ferdowsi's Millenary Celebration" inviting notable European
as well as Iranian scholars. Ferdowsi University of Mashhad, is a university
established in 1949 that also takes its name from Ferdowsi.
