Feuillant (political group) The Feuillants () were a political grouping that
emerged during the French Revolution. It came into existence when the Jacobins
split between moderates (Feuillants) who sought to preserve the position of the
king and supported the proposed plan of the National Assembly for a
constitutional monarchy, and radicals (Jacobins) who wished to press for a
continuation of direct democratic action to overthrow Louis XVI. The Feuillant
deputies publicly split with the Jacobins when they published a pamphlet on 16
July 1791, protesting the Jacobin plan to participate in the popular
demonstrations against Louis XVI on the Champs de Mars the following day. The
Feuillants were initially vindicated when the demonstrations devolved into
massacre. Initially the group had 264 ex-Jacobin deputies as members, including
most of the members of the correspondence committee. The group held meetings in
a former monastery of the Feuillant monks on the Rue Saint-Honoré, in Paris,
and came to be popularly called the "Club des Feuillants". They called
themselves the "Amis de la Constitution". The group was led by Antoine Barnave,
Alexandre de Lameth and Adrien Duport. The Feuillant Schism. As the
Constitution of 1791 began to take its final shape, many erstwhile radical
deputies such as Le Chapelier and Barnave wished for the central role played by
such popular societies as the Jacobins early in the French Revolution to come
to an end. The activism of the People had been vital to the preservation of the
Revolution in the early days of the National Assembly, but their purpose had
been fulfilled, and it was time for direct democracy to give way to the
leadership of elected representatives. This conviction was greatly affirmed
with the Champs de Mars Massacre (17 July 1791). Within days, a mass exodus of
moderate deputies abandoned the Jacobin club in favour of a new organisation,
the Feuillant club. This new society would wage a struggle throughout the
summer with the Jacobins for the allegiance of the provincial affiliates and
the Parisian crowds, a contest they would ultimately lose. According to the
Feuillant ethos, popular societies could have no other role than as meetings of
friends to hold private political discussions; their meetings should never step
across the threshold of their assemblies and evolve into concerted public
political action. Le Chapelier, in his capacity as chairman of the
Constitutional Committee, presented to the National Assembly in its final
sessions a law restricting the rights of popular societies to undertake
concerted political action, including the right to correspond with one another.
It passed 30 September 1791. By the virtue of obeying this law, the moderate
Feuillants embraced obsolescence; the radical Jacobins, by ignoring it, emerged
as the most vital political force of the French Revolution. The Ascendency of
the Feuillants. In the wave of revulsion against popular movements that
followed the Champs de Mars Massacre, Antoine Barnave, through his activity on
the Committee of Revisions (charged with separating out the constitutional
decrees from the ordinary legislation of the National Assembly is able to
ingratiate himself and his allies to Louis XVI by securing for the Crown such
powers as appointments of ambassadors, army commanders, and ministers. The king
returns the favour by taking Barnave as his chief advisor. At the opening of
the Legislative Assembly, Louis XVI delivers a speech written by Barnave, and
for the next six months France is governed by what is known as the Feuillant
Ministry. The End of the Feuillants. In March 1792, in retaliation for their
opposition to war with Austria the Feuillant ministers were forced out by the
Girondins. Labelled by their opponents as royalists, they were targeted after
the fall of the monarchy. In August 1792, a list of 841 members was published
and they were arrested and tried for treason. Barnave was guillotined on 29
November 1793. The name survived for a few months as an insulting label for
moderates, royalists and aristocrats. Views. The Feuillant party was formed to
protect a conception of power. Its goals were to neutralize royalists by
gaining the support of the moderate right, to isolate the democrats from the
majority of patriotic deputies, to withstand Jacobin influences, and to
terminate societies that threatened the nation's independence of the National
Assembly. The Feuillant group was against passive citizens being enlisted in
the National Guard. They believed the only way to have a strong army was for it
to be structured. “By favoring elimination of “passive citizens” from the
National Guard (April 27, 1791), remaining silent during the debate on the
right to petition and post bills, opposing the political emancipation of the
blacks (May 11–15, 1791), the triumvirs exhausted their popularity within the
space of a few months”. The group knew if the political emancipation of
blacks was passed the main source of France's income would be lost. The sugar
fields in Saint-Domingue would be taken over and land would also be lost.
