Financial economics Financial economics is the branch of economics concerned
with "the allocation and deployment of economic resources, both spatially and
across time, in an uncertain environment". It is additionally characterised by
its "concentration on monetary activities", in which "money of one type or
another is likely to appear on "both sides" of a trade". The questions within
financial economics are typically framed in terms of "time, uncertainty,
options, and information". The subject is usually taught at a postgraduate
level; see Master of Financial Economics. Subject matter. Financial economics
is the branch of economics studying the interrelation of financial variables,
such as prices, interest rates and shares, as opposed to those concerning the
real economy. Financial economics concentrates on influences of real economic
variables on financial ones, in contrast to pure finance. Financial
Econometrics is the branch of Financial Economics that uses econometric
techniques to parameterise the relationships. Models in financial economics.
Financial economics is primarily concerned with building models to derive
testable or policy implications from acceptable assumptions. Some fundamental
ideas in financial economics are portfolio theory, the Capital Asset Pricing
Model. Portfolio theory studies how investors should balance risk and return
when investing in many assets or securities. The Capital Asset Pricing Model
describes how markets should set the prices of assets in relation to how risky
they are. The Modigliani-Miller Theorem describes conditions under which
corporate financing decisions are irrelevant for value, and acts as a benchmark
for evaluating the effects of factors outside the model that do affect value. A
common assumption is that financial decision makers act rationally (see Homo
economicus; efficient market hypothesis). However, recently, researchers in
experimental economics and experimental finance have challenged this assumption
empirically. They are also challenged, theoretically, by behavioral finance, a
discipline primarily concerned with the limits to rationality of economic
agents. Other common assumptions include market prices following a random walk
or asset returns being normally distributed. Empirical evidence suggests that
these assumptions may not hold and that in practice, traders, analysts and
particularly risk managers frequently modify the "standard models".
