Financial capital Financial capital is money used by entrepreneurs and
businesses to buy what they need to make their products or provide their
services or to that sector of the economy based on its operation, i.e. retail,
corporate, investment banking, etc. Three concepts of capital maintenance
authorized in IFRS. Financial capital or just capital in finance and
accounting, is funds provided by lenders (and investors) to businesses to
purchase real capital equipment for producing goods/services. Real capital or
economic capital comprises physical goods that assist in the production of
other goods and services, e.g. shovels for gravediggers, sewing machines for
tailors, or machinery and tooling for factories. Financial capital generally
refers to saved-up financial wealth, especially that used to start or maintain
a business. A financial concept of capital is adopted by most entities in
preparing their financial reports. Under a financial concept of capital, such
as invested money or invested purchasing power, capital is synonymous with the
net assets or equity of the entity. Under a physical concept of capital, such
as operating capability, capital is regarded as the productive capacity of the
entity based on, for example, units of output per day. Financial capital
maintenance can be measured in either nominal monetary units or units of
constant purchasing power. There are thus three concepts of capital maintenance
in terms of International Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS): (1) Physical
capital maintenance (2) Financial capital maintenance in nominal monetary units
(3) Financial capital maintenance in units of constant purchasing power.
Financial capital is provided by lenders for a price: interest. Also see time
value of money for a more detailed description of how financial capital may be
analyzed. Furthermore, financial capital, is any liquid medium or mechanism
that represents wealth, or other styles of capital. It is, however, usually
purchasing power in the form of money available for the production or
purchasing of goods, etcetera. Capital can also be obtained by producing more
than what is immediately required and saving the surplus. Financial capital has
been subcategorized by some academics as economic or "productive capital"
necessary for operations, signaling capital which signals a company's financial
strength to shareholders, and regulatory capital which fulfills capital
requirements. Fixed capital. This is money which is used to purchase assets
that will remain permanently in the business and help it to make a profit.
Working capital. Working capital is that part of capital invested which is used
for running the business such like money which is used to buy stock, pay
expenses and finance credit. Factors determining working capital requirements.
business policies Instruments. A contract regarding any combination of capital
assets is called a financial instrument, and may serve as a Most indigenous
forms of money (wampum, shells, tally sticks and such) and the modern fiat
money is only a "symbolic" storage of value and not a real storage of value
like commodity money. Own and borrowed capital. Capital contributed by the
owner or entrepreneur of a business, and obtained, for example, by means of
savings or inheritance, is known as own capital or equity, whereas that which
is granted by another person or institution is called borrowed capital, and
this must usually be paid back with interest. The ratio between debt and equity
is named leverage. It has to be optimized as a high leverage can bring a higher
profit but create solvency risk. Own capital. These have preference over the
equity shares. This means the payments made to the shareholders are first paid
to the preference shareholder(s) and then to the equity shareholders. Issuing
and trading. Like money, financial instruments may be "backed" by state
military fiat, credit (i.e. social capital held by banks and their depositors),
or commodity resources. Governments generally closely control the supply of it
and usually require some "reserve" be held by institutions granting credit.
Trading between various national currency instruments is conducted on a money
market. Such trading reveals differences in probability of debt collection or
store of value function of that currency, as assigned by traders. When in forms
other than money, financial capital may be traded on bond markets or
reinsurance markets with varying degrees of trust in the social capital (not
just credits) of bond-issuers, insurers, and others who issue and trade in
financial instruments. When payment is deferred on any such instrument,
typically an interest rate is higher than the standard interest rates paid by
banks, or charged by the central bank on its money. Often such instruments are
called fixed-income instruments if they have reliable payment schedules
associated with the uniform rate of interest. A variable-rate instrument, such
as many consumer mortgages, will reflect the standard rate for deferred payment
set by the central bank prime rate, increasing it by some fixed percentage.
Other instruments, such as citizen entitlements, e.g. "U.S. Social Security",
or other pensions, may be indexed to the rate of inflation, to provide a
reliable value stream. Trading in stock markets or commodity markets is
actually trade in underlying assets which are not wholly financial in
themselves, although they often move up and down in value in direct response to
the trading in more purely financial derivatives. Typically commodity markets
depend on politics that affect international trade, e.g. boycotts and
embargoes, or factors that influence natural capital, e.g. weather that affects
food crops. Meanwhile, stock markets are more influenced by trust in corporate
leaders, i.e. individual capital, by consumers, i.e. social capital or "brand
capital" (in some analyses), and internal organizational efficiency, i.e.
instructional capital and infrastructural capital. Some enterprises issue
instruments to specifically track one limited division or brand. "Financial
futures", "Short selling" and "financial options" apply to these markets, and
are typically pure financial bets on outcomes, rather than being a direct
representation of any underlying asset. Broadening the notion. The relationship
between financial capital, money, and all other styles of capital, especially
human capital or labor, is assumed in central bank policy and regulations
regarding instruments as above. Such relationships and policies are
characterized by a political economy - feudalist, socialist, capitalist, green,
anarchist or otherwise. In effect, the means of money supply and other
regulations on financial capital represent the economic sense of the value
system of the society itself, as they determine the allocation of labor in that
society. So, for instance, rules for increasing or reducing the money supply
based on perceived inflation, or on measuring well-being, reflect some such
values, reflect the importance of using (all forms of) financial capital as a
stable store of value. If this is very important, inflation control is key -
any amount of money inflation reduces the value of financial capital with
respect to all other types. If, however, the medium of exchange function is
more critical, new money may be more freely issued regardless of impact on
either inflation or well-being. Marxian perspectives. It is common in Marxist
theory to refer to the role of "Finance Capital" as the determining and ruling
class interest in capitalist society, particularly in the latter stages.
Valuation. Normally, a financial instrument is priced accordingly to the
perception by capital market players of its expected return and risk. Unit of
account functions may come into question if valuations of complex financial
instruments vary drastically based on timing. The "book value", "mark-to-
market" and "mark-to-future" conventions are three different approaches to
reconciling financial capital value units of account. Economic role. Socialism,
capitalism, feudalism, anarchism, other civic theories take markedly different
views of the role of financial capital in social life, and propose various
political restrictions to deal with that. Finance capitalism is the production
of profit from the manipulation of financial capital. It is held in contrast to
industrial capitalism, where profit is made from the manufacture of goods.
