Finance Finance is the study of how investors allocate their assets over time
under conditions of certainty and uncertainty. A key point in finance, which
affects decisions, is the time value of money, which states that a unit of
currency today is worth more than the same unit of currency tomorrow. Finance
aims to price assets based on their risk level, and expected rate of return.
Finance can be broken into three different sub categories: public finance,
corporate finance and personal finance. Areas of finance. Personal finance.
Questions in personal finance revolve around Personal financial decisions may
involve paying for education, financing durable goods such as real estate and
cars, buying insurance, e.g. health and property insurance, investing and
saving for retirement. Personal financial decisions may also involve paying for
a loan, or debt obligations. Achieving these goals requires projecting what
they will cost, and when you need to withdraw funds. A major risk to the
household in achieving their accumulation goal is the rate of price increases
over time, or inflation. Using net present value calculators, the financial
planner will suggest a combination of asset earmarking and regular savings to
be invested in a variety of investments. In order to overcome the rate of
inflation, the investment portfolio has to get a higher rate of return, which
typically will subject the portfolio to a number of risks. Managing these
portfolio risks is most often accomplished using asset allocation, which seeks
to diversify investment risk and opportunity. This asset allocation will
prescribe a percentage allocation to be invested in stocks, bonds, cash and
alternative investments. The allocation should also take into consideration the
personal risk profile of every investor, since risk attitudes vary from person
to person. Corporate finance. Managerial or corporate finance is the task of
providing the funds for a corporation's activities (for small business, this is
referred to as SME finance). Corporate finance generally involves balancing
risk and profitability, while attempting to maximize an entity's wealth and the
value of its stock, and generically entails three interrelated decisions. In
the first, "the investment decision", management must decide which "projects"
(if any) to undertake. The discipline of capital budgeting is devoted to this
question, and may employ standard business valuation techniques or even extend
to real options valuation; see Financial modeling. The second, "the financing
decision" relates to how these investments are to be funded: capital here is
provided by shareholders, in the form of equity (privately or via an initial
public offering), creditors, often in the form of bonds, and the firm's
operations (cash flow). Short-term funding or working capital is mostly
provided by banks extending a line of credit. The balance between these
elements forms the company's capital structure. The third, "the dividend
decision", requires management to determine whether any unappropriated profit
is to be retained for future investment / operational requirements, or instead
to be distributed to shareholders, and if so in what form. Short term financial
management is often termed "working capital management", and relates to cash-,
inventory- and debtors management. These areas often overlap with the firm's
accounting function, however, financial accounting is more concerned with the
reporting of historical financial information, while these financial decisions
are directed toward the future of the firm. Financial management is duplicate
with the financial function of the Accounting profession. However, financial
accounting is more concerned with the reporting of historical financial
information, while the financial decision is directed toward the future of the
firm. Financial risk management, an element of corporate finance, is the
practice of creating and protecting economic value in a firm by using financial
instruments to manage exposure to risk, particularly credit risk and market
risk. (Other risk types include Foreign exchange, Shape, Volatility, Sector,
Liquidity, Inflation risks, etc.) It focuses on when and how to hedge using
financial instruments; in this sense it overlaps with financial engineering.
Similar to general risk management, financial risk management requires
identifying its sources, measuring it (see: Risk measure: Well known risk
measures), and formulating plans to address these, and can be qualitative and
quantitative. In the banking sector worldwide, the Basel Accords are generally
adopted by internationally active banks for tracking, reporting and exposing
operational, credit and market risks. Financial services. An entity whose
income exceeds its expenditure can lend or invest the excess income. On the
other hand, an entity whose income is less than its expenditure can raise
capital by borrowing or selling equity claims, decreasing its expenses, or
increasing its income. The lender can find a borrower, a financial intermediary
such as a bank, or buy notes or bonds in the bond market. The lender receives
interest, the borrower pays a higher interest than the lender receives, and the
financial intermediary earns the difference for arranging the loan. A bank
aggregates the activities of many borrowers and lenders. A bank accepts
deposits from lenders, on which it pays interest. The bank then lends these
deposits to borrowers. Banks allow borrowers and lenders, of different sizes,
to coordinate their activity. Finance is used by individuals (personal
finance), by governments (public finance), by businesses (corporate finance)
and by a wide variety of other organizations, including schools and non-profit
organizations. In general, the goals of each of the above activities are
achieved through the use of appropriate financial instruments and
methodologies, with consideration to their institutional setting. Finance is
one of the most important aspects of business management and includes decisions
related to the use and acquisition of funds for the enterprise. In corporate
finance, a company's capital structure is the total mix of financing methods it
uses to raise funds. One method is "debt financing", which includes bank loans
and bond sales. Another method is "equity financing" - the sale of stock by a
company to investors, the original shareholders of a share. Ownership of a
share gives the shareholder certain contractual rights and powers, which
typically include the right to receive declared dividends and to vote the proxy
on important matters (e.g., board elections). The owners of both bonds and
stock, may be "institutional investors" - financial institutions such as
investment banks and pension funds¬  or private individuals, called "private
investors" or "retail investors". Public finance. Central banks, such as the
Federal Reserve System banks in the United States and Bank of England in the
United Kingdom, are strong players in public finance, acting as lenders of last
resort as well as strong influences on monetary and credit conditions in the
economy. Capital. Capital, in the financial sense, is the money that gives the
business the power to buy goods to be used in the production of other goods or
the offering of a service. The deployment of capital is decided by the budget.
This may include the objective of business, targets set, and results in
financial terms, e.g., the target set for sale, resulting cost, growth,
required investment to achieve the planned sales, and financing source for the
investment. A budget may be long term or short term. Long term budgets have a
time horizon of 5‚Äì10¬ years giving a vision to the company; short term is an
annual budget which is drawn to control and operate in that particular year.
Budgets will include proposed fixed asset requirements and how these
expenditures will be financed. Capital budgets are often adjusted annually and
should be part of a longer-term Capital Improvements Plan. A cash budget is
also required. The working capital requirements of a business are monitored at
all times to ensure that there are sufficient funds available to meet short-
term expenses. Financial theory. Financial economics. Financial economics is
the branch of economics studying the interrelation of financial variables, such
as prices, interest rates and shares, as opposed to those concerning the real
economy. Financial economics concentrates on influences of real economic
variables on financial ones, in contrast to pure finance. It centres on
decision making under uncertainty in the context of the financial markets, and
the resultant economic and financial models. It essentially explores how
rational investors would apply decision theory to the problem of investment.
Here, the twin assumptions of rationality and market efficiency lead to modern
portfolio theory (the CAPM), and to the Black‚ÄìScholes theory for option
valuation; it further studies phenomena and models where these assumptions do
not hold, or are extended. "Financial economics", at least formally, also
considers investment under "certainty" (Fisher separation theorem, "theory of
investment value", Modigliani-Miller theorem) and hence also contributes to
corporate finance theory. Financial Econometrics is the branch of Financial
Economics that uses econometric techniques to parameterize the relationships
suggested. Although closely related, the disciplines of economics and finance
are distinctive. The ‚Äúeconomy‚Äù is a social institution that organizes a
society‚Äôs production, distribution, and consumption of goods and services,‚Äù
all of which must be financed. Economists make a number of abstract assumptions
for purposes of their analyses and predictions. They generally regard financial
markets that function for the financial system as an efficient mechanism.
Instead, financial markets are subject to human error and emotion. New research
discloses the mischaracterization of investment safety and measures of
financial products and markets so complex that their effects, especially under
conditions of uncertainty, are impossible to predict. The study of finance is
subsumed under economics as financial economics, but the scope, speed, power
relations and practices of the financial system can uplift or cripple whole
economies and the well-being of households, businesses and governing bodies
within them‚Äîsometimes in a single day. Financial mathematics. Financial
mathematics is a field of applied mathematics, concerned with financial
markets. The subject has a close relationship with the discipline of financial
economics, which is concerned with much of the underlying theory. Generally,
mathematical finance will derive, and extend, the mathematical or numerical
models suggested by financial economics. In terms of practice, mathematical
finance also overlaps heavily with the field of computational finance (also
known as "financial engineering"). Arguably, these are largely synonymous,
although the latter focuses on application, while the former focuses on
modeling and derivation ("see: Quantitative analyst"). The field is largely
focused on the modelling of derivatives, although other important subfields
include insurance mathematics and quantitative portfolio problems. See Outline
of finance: Mathematical tools; Outline of finance: Derivatives pricing.
Experimental finance. Experimental finance aims to establish different market
settings and environments to observe experimentally and provide a lens through
which science can analyze agents' behavior and the resulting characteristics of
trading flows, information diffusion and aggregation, price setting mechanisms,
and returns processes. Researchers in experimental finance can study to what
extent existing financial economics theory makes valid predictions, and attempt
to discover new principles on which such theory can be extended. Research may
proceed by conducting trading simulations or by establishing and studying the
behaviour of people in artificial competitive market-like settings. Behavioral
finance. Behavioral Finance studies how the psychology of investors or managers
affects financial decisions and markets. Behavioral finance has grown over the
last few decades to become central to finance. A strand of behavioral finance
has been dubbed Quantitative Behavioral Finance, which uses mathematical and
statistical methodology to understand behavioral biases in conjunction with
valuation. Some of this endeavor has been led by Gunduz Caginalp (Professor of
Mathematics and Editor of Journal of Behavioral Finance during 2001-2004) and
collaborators including Vernon Smith (2002 Nobel Laureate in Economics), David
Porter, Don Balenovich, Vladimira Ilieva, Ahmet Duran). Studies by Jeff Madura,
Ray Sturm and others have demonstrated significant behavioral effects in stocks
and exchange traded funds. Among other topics, quantitative behavioral finance
studies behavioral effects together with the non-classical assumption of the
finiteness of assets. Intangible asset finance. Intangible asset finance is the
area of finance that deals with intangible assets such as patents, trademarks,
goodwill, reputation, etc.
