Fiscal policy Fiscal policy refers to the use of the government budget to
influence economic activity. Stances of fiscal policy. However, these
definitions can be misleading because, even with no changes in spending or tax
laws at all, cyclic fluctuations of the economy cause cyclic fluctuations of
tax revenues and of some types of government spending, altering the deficit
situation; these are not considered to be policy changes. Therefore, for
purposes of the above definitions, "government spending" and "tax revenue" are
normally replaced by "cyclically adjusted government spending" and "cyclically
adjusted tax revenue". Thus, for example, a government budget that is balanced
over the course of the business cycle is considered to represent a neutral
fiscal policy stance. Borrowing. A fiscal deficit is often funded by issuing
bonds, like treasury bills or consols and gilt-edged securities. These pay
interest, either for a fixed period or indefinitely. If the interest and
capital requirements are too large, a nation may default on its debts, usually
to foreign creditors. Public debt or borrowing : it refers to the government
borrowing from the public. Consuming prior surpluses. A fiscal surplus is often
saved for future use, and may be invested in either local currency or any
financial instrument that may be traded later once resources are needed;
notice, additional debt is not needed. For this to happen, the marginal
propensity to save needs to be strictly positive. Economic effects of fiscal
policy. Governments use fiscal policy to influence the level of aggregate
demand in the economy, in an effort to achieve economic objectives of price
stability, full employment, and economic growth. Keynesian economics suggests
that increasing government spending and decreasing tax rates are the best ways
to stimulate aggregate demand, and decreasing spending & increasing taxes after
the economic boom begins. Keynesians argue this method be used in times of
recession or low economic activity as an essential tool for building the
framework for strong economic growth and working towards full employment. In
theory, the resulting deficits would be paid for by an expanded economy during
the boom that would follow; this was the reasoning behind the New Deal.
Governments can use a budget surplus to do two things: to slow the pace of
strong economic growth, and to stabilize prices when inflation is too high.
Keynesian theory posits that removing spending from the economy will reduce
levels of aggregate demand and contract the economy, thus stabilizing prices.
Economists debate the effectiveness of fiscal stimulus. The argument mostly
centers on crowding out, whether government borrowing leads to higher interest
rates that may offset the stimulative impact of spending. When the government
runs a budget deficit, funds will need to come from public borrowing (the issue
of government bonds), overseas borrowing, or monetizing the debt. When
governments fund a deficit with the issuing of government bonds, interest rates
can increase across the market, because government borrowing creates higher
demand for credit in the financial markets. This causes a lower aggregate
demand for goods and services, contrary to the objective of a fiscal stimulus.
Neoclassical economists generally emphasize crowding out while Keynesians argue
that fiscal policy can still be effective especially in a liquidity trap where,
they argue, crowding out is minimal. Some classical and neoclassical economists
argue that crowding out completely negates any fiscal stimulus; this is known
as the Treasury View , which Keynesian economics rejects. The Treasury View
refers to the theoretical positions of classical economists in the British
Treasury, who opposed Keynes' call in the 1930s for fiscal stimulus. The same
general argument has been repeated by some neoclassical economists up to the
present. In the classical view, the expansionary fiscal policy also decreases
net exports, which has a mitigating effect on national output and income. When
government borrowing increases interest rates it attracts foreign capital from
foreign investors. This is because, all other things being equal, the bonds
issued from a country executing expansionary fiscal policy now offer a higher
rate of return. In other words, companies wanting to finance projects must
compete with their government for capital so they offer higher rates of return.
To purchase bonds originating from a certain country, foreign investors must
obtain that country's currency. Therefore, when foreign capital flows into the
country undergoing fiscal expansion, demand for that country's currency
increases. The increased demand causes that country's currency to appreciate.
Once the currency appreciates, goods originating from that country now cost
more to foreigners than they did before and foreign goods now cost less than
they did before. Consequently, exports decrease and imports increase. Other
possible problems with fiscal stimulus include the time lag between the
implementation of the policy and detectable effects in the economy, and
inflationary effects driven by increased demand. In theory, fiscal stimulus
does not cause inflation when it uses resources that would have otherwise been
idle. For instance, if a fiscal stimulus employs a worker who otherwise would
have been unemployed, there is no inflationary effect; however, if the stimulus
employs a worker who otherwise would have had a job, the stimulus is increasing
labor demand while labor supply remains fixed, leading to wage inflation and
therefore price inflation. Fiscal straitjacket. The concept of a fiscal
straitjacket is a general economic principle that suggests strict constraints
on government spending and public sector borrowing, to limit or regulate the
budget deficit over a time period. The term probably originated from the
definition of straitjacket (anything that severely confines, constricts, or
hinders). Various states in the United States have various forms of self-
imposed fiscal straitjackets.
