Fiscal conservatism Fiscal conservatism is a fiscal policy that advocates
avoiding deficit spending. Fiscal conservatives often consider reduction of
overall government spending and national debt as well as ensuring balanced
budget of paramount importance. Free trade, deregulation of the economy, lower
taxes, and other conservative policies are also often but not necessarily
affiliated with fiscal conservatism. United States. Late 18th century. The
Democratic-Republican Party of Thomas Jefferson supported a weak central
government and a more "laissez-faire" approach than that of the Federalist
Party of Jefferson's rival Alexander Hamilton. They opposed Hamilton's plan to
pay off the debts owed by the states for the expense of the American
Revolution, because some of the debt was held by financiers and speculators
(rather than the original holders) and because most of the debt was held by
northern states. Hamilton passed his legislation and set up taxes to pay the
debts. In exchange, he agreed to let Jefferson move the nation's capital to
Washington, D.C. Early 19th century. Jefferson strongly opposed having any
national debt, but he relented in 1803 for the sake of the Louisiana Purchase.
James Madison and James Monroe were elected by the Democratic-Republican Party,
but after the fiscal disasters of the War of 1812, they came to support most
Federalist positions and decided that the nation needed a central bank and a
steady income flow from tariffs. Mid-to-late 19th century. In the mid-19th
century, a new fiscal conservative political party emerged, the Republican
Party. Unlike the modern fiscal conservatives, these fiscal conservatives were
paleoconservative supporters of protectionism and tariffs, similar in some ways
to today's Reform Party. They were also generally supporters of big business
and (internally) laissez-faire economics, although by 1890 they had been
convinced into supporting Sherman Anti-Trust Act and the Interstate Commerce
Commission following massive complaints. Early 20th century. In the early 20th
century fiscal conservatives were often at odds with progressives who desired
economic reform. During the 1920s, President Calvin Coolidge's pro-business
economic policies were credited for the successful period of economic growth
known as the "Roaring Twenties." His actions, however, may have been due more
to a sense of federalism than fiscal conservatism: Robert Sobel notes that "s
Governor of Massachusetts, Coolidge supported wages and hours legislation,
opposed child labor, imposed economic controls during World War I, favored
safety measures in factories, and even worker representation on corporate
boards." Reagan era. Fiscal Conservatism was rhetorically promoted during the
presidency of Ronald Reagan (1981–1989). During Reagan's tenure, income tax
rates of the top personal tax bracket dropped from 70% to 28% in 7 years, while
payroll taxes increased as well as the effective tax rates on the lower two
income quintiles. Real Gross domestic product (GDP) growth recovered strongly
after the 1982 recession and grew during Reagan's remaining years in office at
an annual rate of 3.4% per year. Unemployment peaked at over 10.7% percent in
1982 then dropped during the rest of Reagan's terms, and inflation
significantly decreased. Federal tax receipts nearly doubled from $517 billion
in 1980 to $1,032 billion in 1990. A net job increase of about 16 million also
occurred (about the rate of population growth). According to a United States
Department of the Treasury non-partisan economic study, the major tax bills
enacted under Reagan, as a whole, significantly reduced (~-1% of GDP)
government tax receipts. The Economic Recovery Tax Act of 1981 was a massive
(~-3% of GDP) decrease in revenues (the largest tax cuts ever enacted) By the
end of Reagan's second term the national debt held by the public ballooned from
26 percent of the GDP in 1980 to 41 percent in 1989. By 1988, the debt totaled
$2.6 trillion, in part because of both increased military spending at the end
of the Cold War and according to some, the tax cuts. The country owed more to
foreigners than it was owed, and the United States moved from being the world's
largest international creditor to the world's largest debtor nation. Ross
Perot. In the 1992 Presidential election, Ross Perot, a successful American
businessman, ran as a third-party candidate. Despite significant campaign
stumbles, and the uphill struggles involved in mounting a third-party
candidacy, Perot received 18.9% of the popular vote (the largest percentage of
any third-party candidate in modern history), largely on the basis of his
central platform plank of limited-government, balanced-budget fiscal
conservatism. Clinton era. While the mantle of fiscal conservatism is most
commonly claimed by Republicans and Libertarians, it is also claimed by many
centrist or moderate Democrats who often refer to themselves as "New
Democrats". Former President Bill Clinton, who was a New Democrat and part of
the fiscally conservative Third Way advocating Democratic Leadership Council,
is a prime example of this as his administration along with the Democratic-
majority congress of 1993 passed on a party-line vote the Omnibus Budget
Reconciliation Act of 1993 which cut government spending, created a 36%
individual income tax bracket, raised the top tax bracket, which encompassed
the top 1.2% earning taxpayers, from 31% to 39.6%, and created a 35% income tax
rate for corporations. The 1993 Budget Act also cut taxes for fifteen million
low-income families and 90% of small businesses. Additionally, during the
Clinton years, the PAYGO (pay-as-you-go) system originally introduced with the
passing of the Budget Enforcement Act of 1990 (which required that all
increases in direct spending or revenue decreases be offset by other spending
decreases or revenue increases and was very popular with deficit hawks) had
gone into effect, and was used regularly until the system's expiration in 2002.
In the 1994 midterm elections, Republicans ran on a platform that included
fiscal responsibility drafted by then-Congressman Newt Gingrich called the
Contract with America, which advocated such things as balancing the budget,
providing the president with a line-item veto, and welfare reform. After the
elections gave the Republicans a majority in the House of Representatives,
newly minted Speaker of the House Gingrich pushed aggressively for reduced
government spending, which created a confrontation with the White House that
climaxed in the 1995–1996 government shutdown. After Clinton's re-election in
1996, they were able to cooperate and pass the Taxpayer Relief Act of 1997,
which lowered the top capital gains tax rate from 28% to 20% and the 15% rate
to 10%. After this combination of tax hikes and spending reductions, the United
States was able to reduce the $3.8 trillion public debt by $360 billion and
create the largest federal budget surplus ($236 billion in fiscal year 2000) as
well as the longest period of sustained economic growth in United States
history. However, the claimed surplus was only recorded against public debt
which was calculated with the exclusion of intragovernmental holdings. This
meant that the administration was able to record loans deducted from the social
security trust fund as revenue on budget reports, which accounted for the bulk
of the surplus money. The total national debt (gross federal debt) rose every
year of the Clinton Administration from $4.3 trillion to $5.6 trillion and from
$5.4 trillion to $5.6 trillion over the years where the surplus was claimed.
George W. Bush Era. The Bush administration accounted for the second largest
increase of the Federal debt of any other president in United States history.
In fact, the increase of the Federal debt during Bush's tenure was almost as
much as the entire debt accumulated during the previous 200+ years, totaling
around $5 trillion. However, since taking office, President Barack Obama has
increased the Federal debt by more than $5 trillion. Modern fiscal conservatism
in the United States. Modern fiscal conservatives remain wary of government
spending. They believe strongly in free trade and are committed to lowering the
federal budget, paying off national debt, and acquiring a balanced budget.
Where fiscal conservatism gets more diverse in ideals is what steps should be
taken to balance the budget. Deficit hawks are more willing to increase taxes
in addition to cutting spending to balance the budget than libertarians, who
want to "starve the beast" by cutting taxes for the purpose of decreasing tax
revenue which they hope will cause the government to spend less, and supply-
siders, who believe the best way to gain tax revenue is through deep across-
the-board tax cuts that they believe will end up completely paying for
themselves through the economic growth they cause. American businessman,
politician, and current Mayor of New York City, Michael Bloomberg, considers
himself a fiscal conservative and expressed his definition of the term at the
2007 United Kingdom Conservative Party Conference. United Kingdom. Fiscal
conservatism in the UK was arguably most popular during the premiership of
Margaret Thatcher, who, after a number of years of deficit spending under the
previous Labour government, advocated spending cuts and selective tax increases
to balance the budget. However, despite being elected in 1979, Britain's budget
was not balanced until 1988 – and from 1979 to 1987 the government deficit
exceeded those seen during James Callaghan's time as prime minister. In 2010,
as a result of the deterioration in the UK's public finances caused by the
Late-2000s recession and by the European sovereign debt crisis, the Liberal
Democrat-Conservative Coalition embarked on an austerity programme –
featuring a combination of spending cuts and tax rises – in an attempt to
halve the deficit, and completely eliminate the structural deficit over the
five-year parliament. Australia. Howard Government. Fiscal conservatism become
popular during the Howard government where large importance was placed on first
balancing the budget and then running consistent surpluses to pay down the debt
that had been taken on by Keating Government in response to the early 1990s
recession. In first term of government Howard made large cuts to government
expenditure by laying off employees, and reducing social spending. Throughout
his term of office Howard used the surplus budgets that he achieved to contrast
his economic management to that of the Australian Labor Party. By 2006, the
Howard government paid off the debt held by the Australian national government.
