Foco The foco theory of revolution by way of guerrilla warfare, also known as
focalism ( ), was formulated by French intellectual and government official
Régis Debray, whose main source of inspiration was Marxist revolutionary
Ernesto "Che" Guevara's experiences surrounding his rebel army's victory in the
1959 Cuban Revolution. Its central principle is that vanguardism by cadres of
small, fast-moving paramilitary groups can provide a focus (in Spanish, "foco")
for popular discontent against a sitting regime, and thereby lead a general
insurrection. Although the original approach was to mobilize and launch attacks
from rural areas, many "foco" ideas were adapted into urban guerrilla warfare
movements by the late 1960s. Background. Like other leaders of his time, such
as Mao Zedong, Ho Chi Minh and Amilcar Cabral, Che Guevara believed that people
living in countries still ruled by colonial powers, or living in countries
chained by what he saw as a new form of economic exploitation, could best
defeat what he perceived as colonial powers by taking up arms. Like other
theoreticians, Guevara also believed that armed resistance needed to be built
not by concentrating one's forces in urban centers, but rather through
accumulation of strength in mountainous and rural regions where the enemy's
presence was weakest. Cuban Revolution. "Foquismo", which was formally
theorized by Régis Debray, draws on Ernesto Guevara's experience of the 1959
Cuban Revolution, where a small group of 82 members landed in Cuba on board of
the "Granma", in December 1956, and initiated a guerrilla war in the Sierra
Maestra. During two years, the poorly armed "escopeteros", at times fewer than
200 men, managed to win victories against Batista's army and police force,
which numbered between 30,000 and 40,000 in strength. The small group finally
managed to take Havana after the December 1958 Battle of Santa Clara. This
surprising success led to the "foquismo" theory which, inspired by Mao's
doctrine of people's war, counted on the support of the people to win the war.
But the foquismo theory stated that this popular support would be created
during the armed struggle itself: thus, against predominant Marxist theory,
there was no need to wait for the "objective conditions" of a popular uprising
to engage the last stage of the revolutionary struggle (i.e. armed struggle).
In other words, a small group of revolutionaries was considered to be enough to
jumpstart a revolution since this group could begin the revolutionary struggle
while at the same time developing the conditions necessary for popular support
for the revolution. This theory focused heavily on the notion of vanguardism
and on the moral value of the example. Theory. While focalism drew from
previous Marxist-Leninist ideas, including a unique, adaptive blending of
Stalinist tactics and the Maoist strategy of "protracted people's war", it also
broke with many of the mid-Cold War era's established communist parties.
Despite Nikita Khrushchev's eager support for "wars of national liberation" and
the focalists' own enthusiasm for Soviet patronage, Cuba's own Partido
Socialista Popular had retreated from active confrontation with the Fulgencio
Batista regime, so Castroism/Guevarism substituted the "foquista" militia for
the more traditional vanguard party. Ernesto Che Guevara (French ed.: "Oeuvres"
I, "Petite collection Maspero", 34, 1968, p.32 Guevara added that this theory
was formulated for developing countries, and that the "guerrilleros" had to
look for support among both the workers and the peasants. In power, Castro
sided with the USSR in the 1961 Sino-Soviet split, while Guevara sympathized
with the People's Republic of China. Perhaps accelerated by this divide, the
latter man shifted his energies away from Cuba to adventurism, promoting
guerrilla "focos" overseas. Though this method had triumphed in Cuba, Guevara
saw it subsequently fail in Africa and Latin America. Laurent-Désiré Kabila
put it in practice in Congo. Despite being backed by the Castro regime,
Guevara's attempt to forge an insurgency in Bolivia led to his capture and
subsequent execution in 1967. Foco after Guevara. Guevara's unsuccessful
campaign in Bolivia dampened Cuba's overt support of focoist uprisings
internationally for several years, and many revolutionary movements split into
different factions, particularly New Left, Maoist and/or urban guerrilla
breakaways from previous Moscow-line parties and/or "foco" groups. By the mid-
1970s, however, Cuba revived and further escalated its previous zeal, directly
deploying its military in Africa before the collapse of "détente"—e.g.,
propping up the MPLA guerrillas in Angola—while reinvigorating its insurgent
proxy war policy in the Caribbean region by the end of the decade. ERP. In
Argentina, the People's Revolutionary Army (ERP), led by Roberto Santucho,
attempted to create a "foco" in the Tucumán Province. The attempt failed after
the government of Isabel Perón signed in February 1975 the secret presidential
decree 261, which ordered the army to neutralize and/or annihilate the ERP
insurgency (which was not supported by a foreign power, and also lacked popular
support). "Operativo Independencia" gave power to the Argentine Armed Forces to
"execute all military operations necessary for the effects of neutralizing or
annihilating the action of subversive elements acting in the Province of
Tucumán." General Acdel Vilas immediately deployed over 3,000 soldiers,
including conscripts from the Fifth Infantry Brigade and two companies of elite
commandos. While fighting the guerrillas in the jungle, Vilas concentrated on
uprooting the ERP support network in the towns, using state terror tactics,
inspired by the 1961 Battle of Algiers, later adopted nation-wide, as well as a
civic action campaign. The ERP was quickly defeated, but this military campaign
marked the beginning of the Dirty War in Argentina. Central America. After
victories for a once-divided, recently-reunited Sandinista movement in
Nicaragua and the United Front-style New Jewel Movement in Grenada in 1979,
Castro effectively supported the creation of the FMLN of El Salvador by pushing
for the merge of five other communist factions between December, 1979 and
October, 1980. Similarly, Cuba supported four rival guerrilla groups' decision
to form the URNG coalition of Guatemala in 1982.
