Folkhemmet Folkhemmet (, definite form of "folkhem") is a political concept
that played an important role in the history of the Swedish Social Democratic
Party and the Swedish welfare state. It is also sometimes used to refer to the
long period between 1932-76 when the Social democrats were in power and the
concept was put into practice. Sometimes referred to as "the Swedish Middle
Way", folkhemmet was viewed as midway between capitalism and socialism. The
base of the Folkhem vision is that the entire society ought to be like a small
family, where everybody contributes. The Swedish Social Democrats' successes in
the postwar period is often explained by the fact that the party managed to
motivate major social reforms with the idea of the folkhem and the national
family's joint endeavor. The term is thought to have its roots in Rudolf
Kjellén's vision of a corporatist-styled society based on class collaboration
in the national interest, largely based on Otto von Bismarck's juxtaposing of
conservative stability and continuity to social reforms otherwise associated
with socialist parties, such as universal healthcare and unemployment benefits.
The Social Democratic leaders Ernst Wigforss, an avid keynesian, and Per Albin
Hansson, a social corporatist, are considered the main architects of
folkhemmet, with inspiration from the conservative Kjellén. It was later
developed by the Prime Ministers Tage Erlander and Olof Palme until the Social
Democratic party historically lost power in 1976. Another important proponent
was Hjalmar Branting, who came into contact with the concept while a student at
Uppsala university, and went on to become the first socialist Prime Minister of
Sweden. History. Hansson introduced the concept in 1928, saying that Sweden
should become more like a "good home", this being marked by equality and mutual
understanding. Hansson advocated that the traditional class society should then
be replaced by "the people's home" (folkhemmet). The concept came at a time
when nationalization was being questioned, and marked the party's abandonment
of the notion of class struggle, a concept fundamental to the early Social
Democratic movement. Instead they adapted a planned economy and what would be
called Funktionssocialism, where businesses were controlled through regulations
rather than government ownership. The government would then also have more
control over the individual, however, to the extent required to increase the
wellbeing of citizens. Good and easily available education, even to higher
levels, was considered particularly important for building the new society. As
a result, Sweden became one of the first countries in the world to offer free
education at all levels, including all public universities, along with several
new universities founded during the 1960s. Free universal health care was
provided by the state, enacted in 1947-55, along with numerous other social
services. Myrdal's Influence. During the 1930s social engineering became an
important part of folkhemmet. Alva and Gunnar Myrdal's 1934 book "Kris i
befolkningsfrågan" (partly inspired by Malthusianism and Jean Piaget) inspired
a radical and progressive policy for how to deal with a declining population. A
number of changes took place in this period including expansion of the public
sector, Wigforss' economic policies, Gustav Möller's reform of the pension
system, and Gunnar Myrdal's housing policies. In the 1940s-1950s, old worn down
houses that served as the overcrowded dwellings of the lower class were
demolished. Instead, people were offered modern housing with bathrooms and
windows to let light into every room, so called "funkis" architecture. In the
same way, new housing projects - or "working class suburbs" - were constructed
in the 1960s–1970s to fill the needs of the increasing population in the
Million Programme. Alva and Gunnar Myrdal suggested a series of programs
designed to help families but also regulations in the form of compulsory
sterilization. This was meant primarily to prevent mental illness and disease,
and was thus supported by the government. As in Canada and the US, however,
racial politics also became involved, due to a strong belief in the connection
between race and genetic integrity among leading scientists and those carrying
out the sterilizations. In the later decades it was primarily the mentally ill
who were forcibly sterilized, and around 62.000 individuals were sterilized
over a period of 40 years until 1976. The Swedish state subsequently paid out
damages to those who were sterilized.
