Food politics Food politics are the political aspects of the production,
control, regulation, inspection and distribution of food. The politics can be
affected by the ethical, cultural, medical and environmental disputes
concerning proper farming, agricultural and retailing methods and regulations.
Policy. Government policy now plays a significant role in the production,
safety, and distribution of food. The government can regulate the proper
storage and preparation of foods, and the enforcement of these regulations has
been strongly influenced by public outcry following outbreaks of food
poisoning. As a result the inspection of food has become a function of the
government. Technology. The use of certain technological advances to enhance
the production of food has become a controversial political issue. The
increasing use of factory farming techniques have resulted in criticisms, as
opponents believe these methods increase the risk of foodborne illnesses and
other risks to the food supply as well as severe environmental degradation with
regards to extreme levels of ammonia and greenhouse gases like carbon dioxide
and methane being released. With factory farming (aka Combined Animal Feeding
Operations or CAFOs; or feedlots) many have open air manure lagoons that create
major problems when they often leak or the run-off enters local bodies of
water, sending toxins into the water supply. The introduction of genetically
modified food has likewise become controversial, and there has been much
criticism about the risks of gene transfer and food consumption. Finally, there
are political activist groups who have concerns about the proper handling of
animals, such as the People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals. Security. In
the past, the denial of food deliveries has been used as a weapon in war. For
example, during World War I the blockade of the central powers led to
significant shortages of food. Likewise during both world wars, the German
submarine blockade was intended to starve Britain into submission. Food
security is an important political issue as national leaders attempt to
maintain control of sufficient food supplies for their nation. It can drive
national policy, encourage the use of subsidies to stimulate farming, or even
lead to conflict. Charity. The charitable giving of food exists in a number of
countries; the primary purpose being to provide basic essentials for the
disadvantaged. Some government programs have also been established to assist
with food donations. These programs provide food for school lunch programs, as
well as the elderly. Hunger. Malnutrition and starvation continue to be a
persistent problem in some areas of the world. The effects of low agricultural
output can be exacerbated by internecine struggles, such as the famine
conditions that occurred in Somalia during the 1990s. But even under more
stable conditions, hunger persists in some nations. Images of starvation can
have a powerful influence, leading to charitable and even military
intervention. Retailing. During the late 1990s and early 21st century a
significant amount of discussion and debate has developed surrounding the role
of supermarkets in the retailing of food and the impacts of supermarkets both
on the supply and production of food. Due to the buying power of the large
supermarket chains they can put huge demands on producers, often pushing prices
artificially low, whilst still making large profits on the food themselves with
some products selling at over 400% the price paid to, whilst farmers may only
make 50p profit on each animal produced domestically. This buying power also
allows supermarkets to transcend national boundaries in sourcing food, for
example in the UK where the food market is highly dominated by supermarkets
only 25% of apples sold in supermarkets are produced domestically with out-of-
season cox apples being flown 14,000 miles from New Zealand, despite the UK
being a natural producer of apples. Furthermore due to the national nature of
the supply networks used by supermarkets often involve domestically produced
foodstuffs being transported around the country before being delivered to
retailers, creating a huge impact both on traffic and pollution. References.
Monbiot, G. (2000) "Captive State", Basingstoke: Macmillan, pp. 162-208.
