Forecasting Forecasting is the process of making statements about events whose
actual outcomes (typically) have not yet been observed. A commonplace example
might be estimation of some variable of interest at some specified future date.
Prediction is a similar, but more general term. Both might refer to formal
statistical methods employing time series, cross-sectional or longitudinal
data, or alternatively to less formal judgemental methods. Usage can differ
between areas of application: for example, in hydrology, the terms "forecast"
and "forecasting" are sometimes reserved for estimates of values at certain
specific future times, while the term "prediction" is used for more general
estimates, such as the number of times floods will occur over a long period.
Risk and uncertainty are central to forecasting and prediction; it is generally
considered good practice to indicate the degree of uncertainty attaching to
forecasts. In any case, the data must be up to date in order for the forecast
to be as accurate as possible. Although quantitative analysis can be very
precise, it is not always appropriate. Some experts in the field of forecasting
have advised against the use of mean square error to compare forecasting
methods. Categories of forecasting methods. Qualitative vs. quantitative
methods. Qualitative forecasting techniques are subjective, based on the
opinion and judgment of consumers, experts; appropriate when past data is not
available. It is usually applied to intermediate-long range decisions. Examples
of qualitative forecasting methods are: informed opinion and judgment, the
Delphi method, market research, historical life-cycle analogy. Quantitative
forecasting models are used to estimate future demands as a function of past
data; appropriate when past data are available. The method is usually applied
to short-intermediate range decisions. Examples of quantitative forecasting
methods are: last period demand, simple and weighted moving averages (N-
Period), simple exponential smoothing, multiplicative seasonal indexes. Naïve
approach. Naïve forecasts are the most cost-effective and efficient objective
forecasting model, and provide a benchmark against which more sophisticated
models can be compared. For stable time series data, this approach says that
the forecast for any period equals the previous period's actual value.
Reference class forecasting. Reference class forecasting was developed by
Oxford professor Bent Flyvbjerg to eliminate or reduce bias in forecasting by
focusing on distributional information about past, similar outcomes to that
being forecasted. Daniel Kahneman, Nobel Prize winner in economics, calls
Flyvbjerg's counsel to use reference class forecasting to de-bias forecasts,
"the single most important piece of advice regarding how to increase accuracy
in forecasting.” Time series methods. Time series methods use historical data
as the basis of estimating future outcomes. Causal / econometric forecasting
methods. Some forecasting methods use the assumption that it is possible to
identify the underlying factors that might influence the variable that is being
forecast. For example, including information about weather conditions might
improve the ability of a model to predict umbrella sales. This is a model of
seasonality which shows a regular pattern of up and down fluctuations. In
addition to weather, seasonality can also be due to holidays and customs such
as predicting that sales in college football apparel will be higher during
football season as opposed to the off season. Casual forecasting methods are
also subject to the discretion of the forecaster. There are several informal
methods which do not have strict algorithms, but rather modest and unstructured
guidance. One can forecast based on, for example, linear relationships. If one
variable is linearly related to the other for a long enough period of time, it
may be beneficial to predict such a relationship in the future. This is quite
different from the aforementioned model of seasonality whose graph would more
closely resemble a sine or cosine wave. The most important factor when
performing this operation is using concrete and substantiated data. Forecasting
off of another forecast produces inconclusive and possibly erroneous results.
Judgmental methods. Judgmental forecasting methods incorporate intuitive
judgements, opinions and subjective probability estimates. Artificial
intelligence methods. Often these are done today by specialized programs
loosely labeled Forecasting accuracy. The forecast error is the difference
between the actual value and the forecast value for the corresponding period.
formula_1 where E is the forecast error at period t, Y is the actual value at
period t, and F is the forecast for period t. Business forecasters and
practitioners sometimes use different terminology in the industry. They refer
to the PMAD as the MAPE, although they compute this as a volume weighted MAPE.
For more information see Calculating demand forecast accuracy. Reference class
forecasting was developed to increase forecasting accuracy by framing the
forecasting problem so as to take into account available distributional
information. Daniel Kahneman, winner of the Nobel Prize in economics, calls the
use of reference class forecasting "the single most important piece of advice
regarding how to increase accuracy in forecasting.” Forecasting accuracy, in
contrary to belief, cannot be increased by the addition of experts in the
subject area relevant to the phenomenon to be forecast. See also Applications
of forecasting. The process of climate change and increasing energy prices has
led to the usage of Egain Forecasting of buildings. The method uses forecasting
to reduce the energy needed to heat the building, thus reducing the emission of
greenhouse gases. Forecasting is used in the practice of Customer Demand
Planning in every day business forecasting for manufacturing companies.
Forecasting has also been used to predict the development of conflict
situations. Experts in forecasting perform research that use empirical results
to gauge the effectiveness of certain forecasting models. Research has shown
that there is little difference between the accuracy of forecasts performed by
experts knowledgeable of the conflict situation of interest and that performed
by individuals who knew much less. Similarly, experts in some studies argue
that role thinking does not contribute to the accuracy of the forecast. The
discipline of demand planning, also sometimes referred to as supply chain
forecasting, embraces both statistical forecasting and a consensus process. An
important, albeit often ignored aspect of forecasting, is the relationship it
holds with planning. Forecasting can be described as predicting what the future
"will" look like, whereas planning predicts what the future "should" look like.
There is no single right forecasting method to use. Selection of a method
should be based on your objectives and your conditions (data etc.). A good
place to find a method, is by visiting a selection tree. An example of a
selection tree can be found here. Limitations. As proposed by Edward Lorenz in
1963, long range weather forecasts, those made at a range of two weeks or more,
are impossible to definitively predict the state of the atmosphere, owing to
the chaotic nature of the fluid dynamics equations involved. Extremely small
errors in the initial input, such as temperatures and winds, within numerical
models doubles every five days.
