Foreign policy A country's foreign policy, also called the foreign relations
policy, consists of self-interest strategies chosen by the state to safeguard
its national interests and to achieve its goals within international relations
milieu. The approaches are strategically employed to interact with other
countries. In recent times, due to the deepening level of globalization and
transnational activities, the states will also have to interact with non-state
actors. The aforementioned interaction is evaluated and monitored in attempts
to maximize benefits of multilateral international cooperation. Since the
national interests are paramount, foreign policies are designed by the
government through high-level decision making processes. National interests
accomplishment can occur as a result of peaceful cooperation with other
nations, or through exploitation. Usually, creating foreign policy is the job
of the head of government and the foreign minister (or equivalent). In some
countries the legislature also has considerable oversight. International
relations theory. The sub-discipline that specializes in relations is known as
foreign policy analysis (FPA). FPA contributes to overall communication between
nations. A country's international policy, called the international relations
policy, consists of strategies chosen by the state to safeguard its national
interests and to achieve its goals in international relations. The approaches
are strategically employed to interact with other countries. In recent times,
due to the deepening level of globalization and transnational activities, the
states will also have to interact with non-state actors. The aforementioned
interaction is evaluated and monitored in attempts to maximize benefits of
multilateral international cooperation. Since the national interests are
paramount, foreign policies are designed by the government through high-level
decision making processes. National interests accomplishment can occur as a
result of peaceful cooperation with other nations, or through exploitation,
usually creating foreign policy is the job of the head of government and the
foreign minister (or equivalent). In some countries the legislature also has
considerable oversight. History of Foreign Policy. Aristotle, an ancient Greek
philosopher, described humans as social animals. Therefore, friendships and
relations have existed between humans since the beginning of human interaction.
As the organization developed in human affairs, relations between people also
organized. Foreign policy thus goes back to primitive times. The inception in
human affairs of foreign relations and the need for foreign policy to deal with
them is as old as the organization of human life in groups. The literature from
ancient times, the Bible, the Homeric poems, the histories of Herodotus and
Thucydides, and many others show an accumulation of experience in dealing with
foreigners. The ancient writings (Chinese & Indian) give much evidence of
thought concerned with the management of relations between peoples. Post-
Renaissance medieval period. In medieval Europe, political philosophers like
Machiavelli, Bodin, Grotius, Hobbes, Pufendorf, Hume, and Rousseau underlined
the need for rules to regulate the interaction among emerging sovereign nation
states. In the 18th and 19th centuries Kant, Bentham, Fichte, Hegel, Rank, and
Mill’s political theories also had a bearing on relations between European
states. At that formative stage, however, the concept of international
relations remained an appendage of the general political theory rather than a
distinct subject for study in its own right. In those times foreign relations
were not supposed to be for public consumption. Twentieth century. The global
wars were fought three times in this century. Consequently, international
relations became a public concern as well as an important field of study and
research. After the Second World War, during the 1960s many researchers in the
U.S. particularly, and from other countries in common, brought forth a wealth
of research work and theory. This work was done for international relations and
not for foreign policy as such. Gradually, various theories began to grow
around the international relations, international systems and international
politics but the need for a theory of foreign policy, that is the starting
point in each sovereign state, continued to receive negligible attention. The
reason was that the states used to keep their foreign policies under official
secrecy and it was not considered appropriate for public, as it is considered
today, to know about these policies. This iron-bound secrecy is an essential
part for the framework of foreign policy formulation. The second world war and
its devastation was a great threat for the human survival, revealed to everyone
the importance of international relations. Though foreign policy continued to
remain under-cover, academic work placed international relations in a
structured framework of political science. Graduate and Post-graduate courses
developed. Research was encouraged, and gradually, international relations
became an academic discipline in universities throughout the world. 1. World
war writers who treat international politics and foreign policy as an
indifferent, single field of study. Who recognize foreign policy as a source
rather than the substance of international politics and bring it under study as
a subject. 2. The second group restricts its work to foreign policy making. The
works of second group comes closer to the theory of foreign policy but there is
no attempt to formulate a basic theory of foreign policy. Morgenthau’s works
on principle elements of foreign policy seem to have covered the most ground.
Need for a general theory of foreign policy. McGowan and Shapiro, in their work
on comparative study of foreign policy of different countries, felt that the
lack of a basic theory of foreign policy was particularly disabling, and
pointed out the harmful effect of the absence of a general theory of foreign
policy on the foreign policy literature. The most fundamental question that
arises here is: why do we lack theories of foreign policy? Or why do we need
general theory of foreign policy? • We cannot explain the relationships we
discover, we can make predictions only about the foreign policy behavior. •
We will have to depend on luck and educative guesses to come up with worthwhile
research hypothesis. • Research will become an ad-hoc or unplanned research,
with no justification provided for the selection of cases, no system and no
consistency. • A field without theory is hardly an area of disciplined
scientific inquiry. • A diplomat will likely to have a more complex estimate
or knowledge of other governments. His estimate, however, will certainly be
simplistic and heavily influenced by his own perceptual blinders, leading him
to faulty policy judgments. The need of a theoretical framework of foreign
policy is needed to analyze the day-to-day interactions in international
relations and to compare individual foreign policies. Furthermore, the need for
a theoretical framework for the analysis of foreign policy is not only
academic. It is also political because of the increasing degree of
interdependence and collective global interests. The vast record of empirical
data and research is given academic attention to fit it into the framework of a
general theory of foreign policy. • Collation of systematic empirical studies
with a view to articulating general pro-positions pertaining to state behavior.
• Analysis of foreign policy making with an emphasis on the process itself
and the determinants that influence foreign policy. • Development of a
scientific approache to and model for foreign policy analysis such as the
rational actor, model, domestic, public model etc. • Studies undertaken to
prepare world order models. Grand Strategy. The grand strategy of a state
prescribes how a nation should wield its military instrument to realize its
foreign policy goals. As a result, it is a primary component of a state's
foreign policy and particularly, its ability to reach the goals of that policy.
For example, President Clinton's grand strategy of 'Engagement and Enlargement'
had the United States pursue national security by engaging other states by
enlarging its alliances and international organizations like NATO.
