Foreign policy analysis Foreign policy analysis (FPA) is a branch of political
science dealing with theory development and empirical study regarding the
processes and outcomes of foreign policy. Study. Foreign policy analysis
involves the study of how a state makes foreign policy .As it analyzes the
decision making process, FPA involves the study of both international and
domestic politics. FPA also draws upon the study of diplomacy, war,
intergovernmental organisations, and economic sanctions, each of which are
means by which a state may implement foreign policy. In academia, foreign
policy analysis is most commonly taught within the discipline of public policy
within political science or political studies, and the study of international
relations. FPA can also be considered a sub-field of the study of international
relations, which aims to understand the processes behind foreign policy
decision making. The most prominent scholars in this field of study are Snyder,
Rosenau, and Allison. According to foreignpolicyanalysis.org, "As a field of
study, foreign policy analysis is characterized by its actor-specific focus. In
the simplest terms, it is the study of the process, effects, causes, or outputs
of foreign policy decision-making in either a comparative or case-specific
manner. The underlying and often implicit argument theorizes that human beings,
acting as a group or within a group, compose and cause change in international
politics." Key approaches. Rational actor model. The rational actor model is
based on rational choice theory. The model adopts the state as the primary unit
of analysis, and inter-state relations (or international relations) as the
context for analysis. The state is seen as a monolithic unitary actor, capable
of making rational decisions based on preference ranking and value
maximisation. The rational actor model has been subject to criticism. The model
tends to neglect a range of political variables, of which Michael Clarke
includes: "political decisions, non-political decisions, bureaucratic
procedures, continuations of previous policy, and sheer accident." Bureaucratic
Politics Model. In this model the state is not seen as a monolithic unitary
actor. Instead it is a collection of different bureaucracies vying for
increasing their funding and size. Things are often viewed as a zero sum game
where one bureaucracies' "win" or increasing their level of funding is seen as
a loss for another bureaucracy. Here decisions are made by bureaucracies
competing against each other and suggesting solutions to problems that would
involve using their resources so as to increase their level of importance.
Organizational Process Model. In this model different bureaucracies have
different standard operating procedures. These procedures are made in order to
allow day to day operations to be carried out. Oftentimes an order or decision
will have to work around these standard procedures. It is often exceedingly
difficult for a bureaucracy to do something "out of character" or contrary to
their standard procedures.
