Free migration Free migration or open immigration is the position that people
should be able to migrate to whatever country they choose, free of substantial
barriers. Although the two are not the same issue, free migration is similar in
spirit to the concept of free trade, and both are advocated by free market
economists on the grounds that economics is not a zero-sum game and that free
markets are, in their opinion, the best way to create a fairer and balanced
economic system, thereby increasing the overall economic benefits to all
concerned parties. Many libertarians, liberals, socialists, and Anarchists
advocate open immigration, notwithstanding other noteworthy differences among
these political ideologies. From a Human Rights perspective, free migration may
be seen to complement Article 13 of the Universal Declaration on Human Rights:
(1) Everyone has the right to freedom of movement and residence within the
borders of each state. (2) Everyone has the right to leave any country,
including his own, and to return to his country. Arguments against free
immigration are usually cultural or security related. Some arguments are
nationalistic or what some critics claim to be "xenophobia", or ones similar to
arguments against free trade; for example, protectionism. Specifically, an
influx of cheap labor could easily deflate wages for workers who are already
established in a particular labor market, and have a negative impact on the
standard of living for the more established workers. Other critics of free
immigration are concerned that it would be unfair to current homeowners if an
influx of new residents greatly brought down the property values and
attractiveness of living in that location, or, alternatively, increased the
demand to live in the city so much that the home owner would not be able to
keep up with increased taxes from higher property values. However, free market
economists believe that competition is the essence of a healthy economic
system, and that any short-term negative impact on individual economic factors
that is caused by free immigration is more than justified by the prospects of
long-term growth for the economy as a whole. Other arguments include the
general impact on the environment, infrastructure, population density,
governmental costs, immigrant criminality, incompatible culture of immigrants
and overall quality of life decrease. War-related chaos can lead to the
breakdown of borders and allow for "de facto" free immigration. The natural
attempts to flee strife, or escape a conquering enemy, can quickly lead to
millions of refugees. Even where border controls are in place they can be
overwhelmed by the sheer numbers of people. Once settled into refugee camps,
these reluctant immigrants may take decades to be either repatriated back or
naturalized into their new country. This has been the situation with the
Palestinians in Jordan. During the Cold War, a migration paradox arose in which
some of the communist states forbid emigration, while the "Free World" would
freely accept the defectors. This policy persists for Cubans and the Hmong, who
are both allowed particular forms of free immigration to the United States
based on their automatic refugee status. Until the 20th century, the United
States and Canada had policies that allowed for almost completely open
immigration for Europeans. In the Immigration Act of 1924, the United States
Congress adopted strict immigration controls, especially on those coming from
outside western Europe. These rules were later relaxed in the 1965 Immigration
Reform Act. Open immigration is now allowed within the European Union, the
Nordic Council, the European Free Trade Association (EFTA), the European
Economic Area (EEA), the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS),
the Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS) (with exceptions and restrictions)
and in some bilateral agreements, such the Trans-Tasman Travel Arrangement
between New Zealand and Australia. __NOTOC__
