Freedom Center (mental health organization) Founded by Oryx Cohen and Will
Hall, the Freedom Center is a Northampton, Massachusetts-based support,
activism, and human rights community run by and for people diagnosed with
severe mental illness, such as schizophrenia, bipolar disorder, borderline
personality disorder and obsessive-compulsive disorder. Aims of the Center. The
Freedom Center is part of the international psychiatric survivors movement and
was founded to provide mutual aid and support to people facing emotional
distress who have not been helped by mainstream hospital and professional care.
The Freedom Center works to defy stereotypes of helplessness, break the silence
around psychiatric abuse, expose the corruption of pharmaceutical companies and
work for change in mental health care. Freedom Center exposes psychiatric abuse
experiences locally and challenges the 'disease and disorder' medical model of
mental illness. It favors a recovery model approach and creating dialog that
encourages personal exploration of the uniqueness of individual experiences of
"madness" instead of diagnostic categories. Freedom Center does not present one
interpretation of what gets labeled as "psychosis" or mental illness, and its
members reflect a diversity of explanations, such as trauma and abuse, holistic
health, spirituality, cultural difference, and social oppression. By presenting
the work of journalists, scholars, and scientists such as Elliott Valenstein,
Robert Whitaker, and Paula Caplan at public forums, Freedom Center works to
educate about the lack of scientific consensus behind biological, "chemical
imbalance" and genetic theories of what gets labeled as mental illness. Its
educational work emphasizes the social and political nature of diagnosis, how
medical interpretations are driven by profit and professional power, and how
the biomedical view has limited the range of possibilities for recovery and
often worsened treatment outcomes. Freedom Center has been vocal about the
failure of medication based treatments for many people, and the recurring
trauma that many people experience from their hospitalizations. While working
to create alternatives to mainstream treatments and alert people to the dangers
of medications and hospitalization, Freedom Center welcomes participation by
anyone with mental health experience, including those taking or not taking
medication or those who use hospitalization and therapy. Despite hosting
prominent psychiatrists and welcoming people taking medications, opponents have
sought to discredit the organization as "anti-psychiatry" and "anti-
medication." Viewing current options for treatment as too narrow and "one size
fists all," the Freedom Center has been the first in the Pioneer Valley to
promote a range of holistic therapies for people who have experienced what gets
labeled as "psychosis," including acupuncture, yoga, support groups, hearing
voices groups, writing groups, helping people reduce and come off medications
and working for system-wide change, such as non-hospital programs like Soteria
House and trauma-informed care. The group's support and activism work has
helped pave the way to establishing peer recovery-based alternatives in
Massachusetts, including the Recovery Learning Community. Programs. Freedom
Center seeks to provide people space to find their own pathway to recovery and
let them explore, with support, a variety of wellness resources, which may or
may not include psychiatric medications. The charity has co-published a Harm
Reduction Guide To Coming Off Psychiatric Drugs to help those who want to do
so. The Guide has been published in several languages and widely distributed,
and includes an Editorial Advisory Board of 14 healthcare professionals. The
center undertakes educational work and public events, and hosts a radio show
that is also broadcast globally over the internet. Projects include a weekly
support group, writing group, free community acupuncture clinic, and yoga
class, as well as responding to information and resource requests from around
the local area and beyond. In 2008 it was featured by Forbes business magazine.
