Political freedom Political freedom (also known as political autonomy or
political agency) is a central concept in Western history and political
thought, and one of the most important (real or ideal) features of democratic
societies. It has been described as a relationship free of oppression or
coercion; the absence of disabling conditions for an individual and the
fulfillment of enabling conditions; or the absence of lived conditions of
compulsion, e.g. economic compulsion, in a society. Although political freedom
is often interpreted negatively as the freedom from unreasonable external
constraints on action, it can also refer to the positive exercise of rights,
capacities and possibilities for action, and the exercise of social or group
rights. The concept can also include freedom from "internal" constraints on
political action or speech (e.g. social conformity, consistency, or
"inauthentic" behaviour.) The concept of political freedom is closely connected
with the concepts of civil liberties and human rights, which in democratic
societies are usually afforded legal protection from the state. Views. Various
groups along the political spectrum naturally differ on what they believe
constitutes "true" political freedom. Left wing political philosophy generally
couples the notion of freedom with that of positive liberty, or the enabling of
a group or individual to determine their own life or realize their own
potential. Freedom, in this sense, may include freedom from poverty,
starvation, treatable disease, and oppression, as well as freedom from force
and coercion, from whomever they may issue. Friedrich August von Hayek,
‘Freedom and Coercion’ in David Miller (ed), Liberty (1991) pp. 80, 85-86}}
Many social anarchists see negative and positive liberty as complementary
concepts of freedom. They describe the negative liberty-centric view endorsed
by capitalists as "selfish freedom". Some notable philosophers, such as
Alasdair MacIntyre, have theorized freedom in terms of our social
interdependence with other people. According to political philosopher Nikolas
Kompridis, the pursuit of freedom in the modern era can be broadly divided into
two motivating ideals: freedom as autonomy, or independence; and freedom as the
ability to cooperatively initiate a new beginning. Political freedom has also
been theorized in its opposition to (and a condition of) "power relations", or
the power of "action upon actions," by Michel Foucault. It has also been
closely identified with certain kinds of artistic and cultural practice by
Cornelius Castoriadis, Antonio Gramsci, Herbert Marcuse, Jacques Ranciere, and
Theodor Adorno. Environmentalists often argue that political freedoms should
include some constraint on use of ecosystems. They maintain there is no such
thing, for instance, as "freedom to pollute" or "freedom to deforest" given
that such activities create negative externalities. The popularity of SUVs,
golf, and urban sprawl has been used as evidence that some ideas of freedom and
ecological conservation can clash. This leads at times to serious
confrontations and clashes of values reflected in advertising campaigns, e.g.
that of PETA regarding fur. John Dalberg-Acton stated that "The most certain
test by which we judge whether a country is really free is the amount of
security enjoyed by minorities." History. Hannah Arendt traces the origins of
the concept of freedom to the practice of politics in ancient Greece. According
to her study, the concept of freedom was historically inseparable from
political action. Politics could only be practiced by those who had freed
themselves from the necessities of life, so that they could attend to the realm
of political affairs. According to Arendt, the concept of freedom became
associated with the Christian notion of freedom of the will, or inner freedom,
around the 5th century C.E. and since then, freedom as a form of political
action has been neglected, even though, as she says, freedom is "the raison
d'être of politics." Arendt says that political freedom is historically
opposed to sovereignty or will-power, since in ancient Greece and Rome, the
concept of freedom was inseparable from performance, and did not arise as a
conflict between the "will" and the "self." Similarly, the idea of freedom as
freedom "from" politics is a notion that developed in modern times. This is
opposed to the idea of freedom as the capacity to "begin anew," which Arendt
sees as a corollary to the innate human condition of natality, or our nature as
"new beginnings and hence beginners." In Arendt's view, political action is an
interruption of automatic process, either natural or historical. The freedom to
begin anew is thus an extension of "the freedom to call something into being
which did not exist before, which was not given, not even as an object of
cognition or imagination, and which therefore, strictly speaking, could not be
known."
