French Fifth Republic The Fifth Republic is the fifth and current republican
constitution of France, introduced on 4 October 1958. The Fifth Republic
emerged from the collapse of the French Fourth Republic, replacing the prior
parliamentary government with a semi-presidential system. It is France's third-
longest-enduring political regime, after the pre-Revolutionary Ancien Régime
and the Third Republic. Origins. The trigger for the collapse of the French
Fourth Republic was the Algiers crisis of 1958. France was still a colonial
power, although conflict and revolt had begun the process of decolonisation.
French West Africa, French Indochina, and French Algeria still sent
representatives to the French parliament under systems of limited suffrage in
the French Union. Algeria in particular, despite being the colony with the
largest French population, saw rising pressure for separation from the
Metropole. The situation was complicated by those in Algeria, such as white
settlers, who wanted to stay part of France, so the Algerian War became not
just a separatist movement but had elements of a civil war. Further
complications came when a section of the French army rebelled and openly backed
the "Algérie française" movement to defeat separation. Charles de Gaulle, who
had retired from politics a decade before, placed himself in the midst of the
crisis, calling on the nation to suspend the government and create a new
constitutional system. De Gaulle was carried to power by the inability of the
parliament to choose a government, popular protest, and the last parliament of
the Fourth Republic voting for their dissolution and the convening of a
constitutional convention. (Algeria became independent on 5 July 1962.) The
Fourth Republic suffered from a lack of political consensus, a weak executive,
and governments forming and falling in quick succession since the Second World
War. With no party or coalition able to sustain a parliamentary majority, Prime
Ministers found themselves unable to risk their political position with
unpopular reforms. De Gaulle and his supporters proposed a system of strong
executive presidents elected for seven-year terms. The President under the
proposed constitution would have executive powers to run the country in
consultation with a prime minister whom he would appoint. On 1 June 1958,
Charles de Gaulle was appointed head of the government; on 3 June 1958, a
constitutional law empowered the new government to draft a new Constitution of
France, and another law granted Charles de Gaulle and his cabinet the power to
rule by decree for up to 6 months, except on certain matters related to the
basic rights of citizens (criminal law, etc.). These plans were approved by
more than 80% of those who voted in the referendum of 28 September 1958. The
new constitution was signed into law on 4 October 1958. Since each new
constitution establishes a new republic, France moved from the Fourth to the
Fifth Republic. The new constitution contained transitional clauses (articles
90–92) extending the period of rule by decree until the new institutions were
operating. René Coty stayed president of the Republic until the new president
was proclaimed. On 21 December 1958 Charles de Gaulle was elected President of
France by an electoral college. The provisional constitutional commission,
acting in lieu of the Constitutional Council, proclaimed the results of the
election on 9 January 1959. The new president began his office on that date,
appointing Michel Debré as prime minister. The 1958 constitution also replaced
the French Union with the French Community, which allowed fourteen member
territories (these did not include Algeria) to assert their independence. 1960
became known as the "Year of Africa" because of this wave of newly independent
states. Evolution. The president was initially elected by an electoral college,
but in 1962 de Gaulle proposed that the president be directly elected by the
citizens, and held a referendum on the change. Although the method and intents
of de Gaulle in that referendum were contested by most political groups except
for the Gaullists, the change was approved by the French electorate. The
Constitutional Council declined to rule on the constitutionality of the
referendum. The president is now elected every five years, changed from seven
by a constitutional referendum in 2000, to reduce the probability of
cohabitation due to former differences in the length of terms for the National
Assembly and Presidency. The first round is open to all candidates and will
establish a president if any candidate gets an overall majority. If there is no
winner in the first round, the two candidates with the greatest number of votes
go to a second round. Two major changes occurred in the 1970s regarding
constitutional checks and balances. Traditionally, France operated according to
parliamentary supremacy: no authority was empowered to rule on whether statutes
passed by Parliament respected the constitutional rights of the citizens. In
1971, the Constitutional Council, arguing that the preamble of the Constitution
referenced the rights defined in the 1789 Declaration of the Rights of Man and
of the Citizen and the preamble of the 1946 Constitution, concluded that
statutes must respect these rights and declared partially unconstitutional a
statute because it violated freedom of association. However, only the President
of the Republic, the Prime Minister, and the President of each house of
Parliament could ask for a constitutional review before a statute was signed
into law, which greatly reduced the likelihood of such a review if all these
officeholders happened to be from the same side of politics, which was the case
at the time. In 1974, a constitutional amendment widened this prerogative to 60
members of the National Assembly or 60 members of the Senate. From that date,
the opposition has been able to have controversial new statutes examined for
constitutionality. Fifth Republic: Presidents. Gaullists are in blue,
Socialists in pink, centrists in teal.
