Senate (France) The Senate ( ; ) is the upper house of the Parliament of
France, presided over by a president. The Senate enjoys less prominence than
the lower house, the directly elected National Assembly; debates in the Senate
tend to be less tense and generally enjoy less media coverage. History.
France's first experience with an upper house was under the Directory from 1795
to 1799, when the Council of Ancients was the upper chamber. There were Senates
in both the First and Second Empires (the former being known as the sénat
conservateur, the latter as the French Senate), but these were only nominally
legislative bodies – technically they were not legislative, but rather
advisory bodies on the model of the Roman Senate. With the Restoration in 1814,
a new Chamber of Peers was created, on the model of the British House of Lords.
At first it contained hereditary peers, but following the July Revolution of
1830, it became a body to which one was appointed for life. The Second Republic
returned to a unicameral system after 1848, but soon after the establishment of
the Second French Empire in 1852, a Senate was established as the upper
chamber. In the Fourth Republic, the Senate was replaced by the Council of the
Republic, but its function was largely the same. With the new constitution of
the Fifth Republic enforced on 4 October 1958, the older name of Senate was
restored. In 2011, the Socialist Party won control of the French Senate for the
first time since the foundation of the French Fifth Republic. Composition and
election. Until September 2004, the Senate had 321 senators, each elected to a
nine-year term. That month, the term was reduced to six years, while the number
of senators progressively increased to 348 in 2011, in order to reflect changes
in the country's demographics. Senators were elected in thirds every three
years; this was also changed to one-half of their number every three years.
Senators are elected indirectly by approximately 150,000 officials ("grands
électeurs"), including regional councilors, department councilors, mayors,
city councilors in large towns, and members of the National Assembly. However,
90% of the electors are delegates appointed by councilors. This system
introduces a bias in the composition of the Senate favoring rural areas. As a
consequence, while the political majority changes frequently in the National
Assembly, the Senate has remained politically conservative since the foundation
of the Fifth Republic, much to the displeasure of the Socialists. This has
spurred controversy, especially after the September 2008 senatorial elections
in which the (left-wing) Socialist Party, despite controlling all but two of
France's regions, a majority of départements, and communes representing more
than 50% of the population, still failed to achieve a majority in the Senate.
The Senate has also been accused of being a "refuge" for politicians that have
lost their seats in the National Assembly. Twelve senators are elected to
represent French citizens living outside the Republic. Following a tradition
started by the first National Assembly during the French Revolution, the "left-
wing" parties sit to the left as seen from the president's seat, and the
"right-wing" parties sit to the right, and the seating thus indicates the
political spectrum as represented in the Senate. President. The senators elect
a President from among their members. The current incumbent is Jean-Pierre Bel.
The President of the Senate is, under the constitution of the Fifth Republic,
first in the line of succession—in case of death, resignation or removal from
office (only for health reasons)—to the Presidency of the Republic, becoming
Acting President of the Republic until a new election can be held. This
happened twice for Alain Poher—once at the resignation of Charles de Gaulle
and once at the death of Georges Pompidou. Powers. Under the Constitution, the
Senate has nearly the same powers as the National Assembly. Bills may be
submitted by the administration ("projets de loi") or by either house of
Parliament ("propositions de loi"). Because both houses may amend the bill, it
may take several readings to reach an agreement between the National Assembly
and the Senate. When the Senate and the National Assembly cannot agree on a
bill, the administration can decide, after a procedure called "commission mixte
paritaire", to give the final decision to the National Assembly, whose majority
is normally on the government's side. This does not happen frequently; usually
the two houses eventually agree on the bill, or the administration decides to
withdraw it. However, this power gives the National Assembly a prominent role
in the law-making process, especially since the administration is necessarily
of the same side as the Assembly, for the Assembly can dismiss the
administration through a motion of censure. The power to pass a vote of
censure, or vote of no confidence, is limited. As was the case in the Fourth
Republic's constitution, new cabinets do not have to receive a vote of
confidence. Also, a vote of censure can occur only after 10 percent of the
members sign a petition; if rejected, those members that signed cannot sign
another petition until that session of Parliament has ended. If the petition
gets the required support, a vote of censure must gain an absolute majority of
all members, not just those voting. If the Assembly and the Senate have
politically distinct majorities, the Assembly will in most cases prevail, and
open conflict between the two houses is uncommon. The Senate also serves to
monitor the administration's actions by publishing many reports each year on
various topics. Location. The Senate is housed inside the Luxembourg Palace in
the 6th arrondissement of Paris, and is guarded by Republican Guards. In front
of the building lies the Senate's garden, the Jardin du Luxembourg, open to the
public.
