Friedman rule The Friedman rule is a monetary policy rule proposed by Milton
Friedman. Essentially, Friedman advocated setting the nominal interest rate at
zero. According to the logic of the Friedman rule, the opportunity cost of
holding money faced by private agents should equal the social cost of creating
additional fiat money. It is assumed that the marginal cost of creating
additional money is zero (or approximated by zero). Therefore, nominal rates of
interest should be zero. In practice, this means that the central bank should
seek a rate of deflation equal to the real interest rate on government bonds
and other safe assets, to make the nominal interest rate zero. The result of
this policy is that those who hold money don't suffer any loss in the value of
that money due to inflation. The rule is motivated by long-run efficiency
considerations. This is not to be confused with Friedman's k-percent rule which
advocates a constant yearly expansion of the monetary base. Use in economic
theory. The Friedman rule has been shown to be the welfare maximizing monetary
policy in many economic models of money. It has been shown to be optimal in
monetary economies with monopolistic competition (Ireland, 1996) and, under
certain circumstances, in a variety of monetary economies where the government
levies other distorting taxes. However, there do exist several notable cases
where deviation from the Friedman Rule becomes optimal. These include economies
with decreasing returns to scale; economies with imperfect competition where
the government does not either fully tax monopoly profits or set the tax equal
to the labor income tax; economies with tax evasion; economies with sticky
prices; and economies with downward nominal wage rigidity. While normally
deviations from the Friedman Rule are typically small, if there is a
significant foreign demand for a nations currency, such as in the United
States, the optimal rate of inflation is found to deviate significantly from
what is called for by Friedman Rule in order to extract seigniorage revenue
from foreign residents. In the case of the United States, where over half of
all U.S. dollars are held overseas, the optimal rate of inflation is found to
be anywhere from 2 to 10%, whereas the Friedman Rule would call for deflation
of almost 4%. Recent results have also suggested that in order to achieve the
goal of the Friedman Rule, namely to reduce the opportunity cost and monetary
frictions associated with money, it may not be required that the nominal
interest rate be set at zero. When the effects of financial intermediaries and
credit spreads are taken into account, the welfare optimality implied by the
Friedman Rule can instead be achieved by eliminating the interest rate
differential between the policy nominal interest rate and the interest rate
paid on reserves by assuring that the rates are identical at all times.
