Full-reserve banking Full-reserve banking, also known as 100% reserve banking,
is a banking practice in which the full amount of each depositor's funds are
kept in reserve, as cash or other highly liquid assets. In other words, funds
deposited are not lent out by the bank if the depositor has the legal right to
immediately withdraw their funds. Some proposals for full reserve banking
systems do not place such restrictions on deposits that are not available on
demand, where savers can entrust their money with a bank in time deposits or in
'investment' accounts. Full-reserve banking was practiced historically by the
Bank of Amsterdam and some other early banks but was displaced by fractional
reserve banking after 1800. Proposals for full-reserve banking have been made
by various economists, including Murray N. Rothbard, Irving Fisher, Henry
Simons and Milton Friedman. Currently, proposals for full-reserve banking
receive little mainstream attention or support, though in a 2010 letter, the
Governor of the Bank of England, Mervyn King, indicated that he was sympathetic
to the idea. Debate over full-reserve banking. During the Great Depression,
Chicago economists suggested monetary reforms, including a call to end the
fractional-reserve banking in two 1933 memorandum that came to be known as the
"Chicago plan". After an apparent recovery in the mid-1930s, America was again
in recession and in 1939 economists circulated a draft proposal titled "A
Program for Monetary Reform" calling once more for an end to fractional-reserve
banking. Mainstream economists seldom discuss the merits of full-reserve
banking; some who have examined the issue have argued that the costs and
inconvenience of a full-reserve banking system would outweigh any benefits.
However, monetarist and Nobel Prize winning economist, Milton Friedman once
supported a 100% reserve requirement for checking accounts. And, well known for
his advocacy of simple reforms, economist Laurence Kotlikoff has also called
for an end to fractional-reserve banking. Austrian economists, such as Murray
N. Rothbard and Jörg Guido Hülsmann support full-reserve banking and hold the
view that fractional-reserve banking is fraudulent and inflationary. Following
the recent financial crisis, some economists have suggested that full reserve
banking should be again considered as a serious option. Mainstream economists
generally believe that the costs and inconvenience of full-reserve banking
would outweigh any benefits. Since banks would not receive profits from lending
out deposits, depositors would have to pay banks for keeping their money safe
and providing checking and other banking services. Such a system would be
difficult to implement and would likely be rejected by the public.
Additionally, 100% reserve banking would prevent banks from lending funds
deposited into demand accounts. This would displace lending activity into
unregulated institutions, potentially destabilizing the financial system;
unregulated institutions (such as high-yield debt issuers) would take over the
role of financial intermediation. The case for full reserve. According to
proponents, full reserve banking would also eliminate the need for a lender of
last resort, such as a central bank, which is normally needed to support the
banking system in times of systemic risk or financial contagion, as these
financial risks would not exist in a full-reserve banking environment. This
requires that the resources available to the banks issuing credit money and
demand deposits would be sufficient to convert "all" currency at once if so
required. It was a central component in Social Credit proposals. Were the
United States to adopt full-reserve, all currency would be created by the
federal government, and as a result all seigniorage revenue would also accrue
to the federal government. This is in contrast to the current US system, where
a large proportion of the currency supply is in the form of demand deposits
created by private banks. When the Federal Reserve creates currency and uses it
to buy treasury bills, it collects seigniorage revenue in the form of interest
payments which it then returns to the United States (for example, in 2002 the
United States earned $24.495 billion in this manner). When a private bank
creates currency, the government cannot collect any seigniorage from it. Since
the Federal Reserve has a target for the size of the currency stock, any
currency created by private banks is currency that is not created by the Fed
and thus constitutes lost seigniorage. Some consider this an illegitimate
"privatization" of what should be a public good, with these profits (i.e.
taxes) being retained by the government to finance essential social services
and capital works. According to the Austrian School of economics, full-reserve
banking would eliminate (or at least greatly reduce) the financial risks
associated with bank runs, as the bank would have all the money in reserve
needed to pay depositors, regardless whether depositors actually claimed their
money. Because fractional-reserve banking necessarily increases the money
supply, which according to the Austrian School causes business cycles,
economists from this school consider this aspect of fractional-reserve banking
to have deleterious and destabilizing effects on the economy over time. It is
argued by these economists that, in contrast to fractional-reserve banking,
full-reserve banking "guarantees" a stable money supply, which ensures that the
means of exchange is not debased over time. This improves the efficiency of the
price mechanism, promotes saving and the deferral of consumption, provides much
greater confidence in the financial system and in the integrity of all
commercial transactions and therefore encourages sustainable, non-speculative,
productive investment. Some advocates believe that full-reserve banking should
apply only to demand but not to time deposits. The case against full reserve.
Fractional reserve banking allows for maturity transformation, which mainstream
economists (such as J. Bradford DeLong and Paul Krugman) have argued is an
important function of the financial system. Current examples. There are
currently no examples of full reserve banking with an established history of
operation. However, a variety of organizations aspire to provide full-reserve
banking or claim to do so. Digital gold or silver. Since 1996, a form of
private currency called digital gold currency has been in circulation. Many of
these currency providers claim to act like full-reserve "private banks" with a
one-to-one ratio of the currency they issue and the hard asset, usually gold or
silver, that they store as reserves. The most prominent example is e-gold,
which is encountering various legal issues. Also available are physical gold
exchangers and storage providers, such as BullionVault. Some monetary reformers
believe a new free market will emerge in money production and distribution, as
the Internet allows renewed decentralisation and competition in this area,
eroding the central government's and bankers' old monopoly control of the means
of exchange. Some monetary reformers believe that in a genuine free market,
where government did not impose a monopoly currency on the populace, a
predominantly full-reserve banking system, backed by a gold standard or silver
standard monetary system, would arise spontaneously out of the free market.
Others argue, and cite current digital gold services as examples, that the free
market favors fractional reserve banking and that 100% reserve banking can meet
the needs of only a small, extremely risk-averse, niche market.
