Functionalism (international relations) Functionalism is a theory of
international relations that arose during the inter-War period principally from
the strong concern about the obsolescence of the State as a form of social
organization. Rather than the self-interest of nation-states that realists see
as a motivating factor, functionalists focus on common interests and needs
shared by states (but also by non-state actors) in a process of global
integration triggered by the erosion of state sovereignty and the increasing
weight of knowledge and hence of scientists and experts in the process of
policy-making (Rosamond, 2000). Its roots can be traced back to the liberal/
idealist tradition that started with Kant and goes as far as Woodrow Wilson's
"Fourteen Points" speech. (Rosamond, 2000) Functionalism is a pioneer in
globalisation theory and strategy. States had built authority structures upon a
principle of territorialism. State-theories were built upon assumptions that
identified the scope of authority with territory (Held 1996, Scholte: 1993,
2000, 2001), aided by methodological territorialism (Scholte 1993).
Functionalism proposed to build a form of authority based in functions and
needs, which linked authority with needs, scientific knowledge, expertise and
technology, i.e. it provided a supraterritorial concept of authority. The
functionalist approach excludes and refutes the idea of state power and
political influence (realist approach) in interpreting the cause for such
proliferation of international organizations during the inter-war (which was
characterized by nation-state conflict) and the subsequent years. According to
functionalism, international integration - the collective governance and
'material interdependence' (Mitrany, 1933:101) between states - develops its
own internal dynamic as states integrate in limited functional, technical, and/
or economic areas. International agencies would meet human needs, aided by
knowledge and expertise. The benefits rendered by the functional agencies would
attract the loyalty of the populations and stimulate their participation and
expand the area of integration. There are strong assumptions underpinning
functionalism: 1) That the process of integration takes place within a
framework of human freedom, 2) That knowledge and expertise are currently
available to meet the needs for which the functional agencies are built. 3)
That states will not sabotage the process. Neofunctionalism. Neofunctionalism
reintroduced territorialism in the functional theory and downplayed its global
dimension. Neofunctionalism is simultaneously a theory and a strategy of
regional integration, building on the work of David Mitrany. Neofunctionalists
focused their attention in the process of integration among states, i.e.
regional integration. Initially, states integrate in limited functional or
economic areas. Thereafter, partially integrated states experience increasing
momentum for further rounds of integration in related areas. This "invisible
hand" of integration phenomenon was termed "spill-over." by the
neofunctionalist school. Although integration can be resisted, it becomes
harder to stop integration's reach as it progresses. According to
neofunctionalists, there are two kinds of spillover: functional and political.
Functional spillover is the interconnection of various "economic" sectors or
issue-areas, and the integration in one policy-area spilling over into others.
Political spillover is the creation of supranational governance models, as far-
reaching as the European Union, or as voluntary as the United Nations. One of
its protagonists was Ernst B. Haas, a US-political scientist. Jean Monnet's
approach to European integration, which aimed at integrating individual sectors
in hopes of achieving spill-over effects to further the process of integration,
is said to have followed the neofunctional school's tack. Unlike previous
theories of integration, neofunctionalism declared to be non-normative and
tried to describe and explain the process of regional integration based on
empirical data. Integration was regarded as an inevitable process, rather than
a desirable state of affairs that could be introduced by the political or
technocratic elites of the involved states' societies. Its strength however was
also its weakness: While it understood that regional integration is only
feasible as an incremental process, its conception of integration as a linear
process made the explanation of setbacks impossible. Functional Cooperation and
Functional International Organization. The objective of functionalism towards
global peace is achieved through functional cooperation by the work of
international organizations (including intergovernmental and non-governmental
organizations). The activities of functional international organizations
involve taking actions on practical and technical problems rather than those of
military and political nature. They are also non-controversial politically and
involve a common interest to solve international problems that could best be
tackled in a transnational manner. According to David Mitrany, dealing with
functional matters provides the actors in the international community the
opportunity to successfully cooperate in a non-political context, which might
otherwise be harder to achieve in a political context. Further development
would lead to a process called “autonomous development” towards
multiplication, expansion, and deepening of functional international
organizations. Ideally, this would ultimately result in an international
government. Functionalists in this manner assume that cooperation in a non-
political context would bring international peace. Eradication of existent non-
political, non-military global problems, which Functionalists consider to be
the very origin of conflict within the global community, is what they aim to
pursue. However, critics point out some limitations of functionalist
assumption: 1. In practice, dealing with functional matters does not nessarily
and always facilitate cooperation. 2. Its simplified assumption overlooks
different causes of state conflict. The proliferation of functional
international organizations has occurred without adequate reorganization and
coordination efforts due to a lack of central global governance to ensure
accountability of such organizations. As a result, a pattern of
decentralization could be observed among functional international organizations
to the present day. For example, the League of Nations’ effort to coordinate
functional international organizations in the field of social and economic
cooperation through establishment of UN Economic and Social Council has been
futile. As a result, the idea of decentralization prevails to the present day
except in cases of special cooperative relationships between Economic and
Social Council and some functional organizations. Subsequently, summits such as
the World Summit for Social Development in 1995, The Millennium Summit in 2000
and World Summit on Sustainable Development in 2002 were held to address and
coordinate functional cooperation, especially regarding the social and economic
aspects. Substantive functions of functional international organizations
include human rights, international communication, health, the law of the sea,
the environment, education and information, international relief programs,
refugee support, and economic development.
