Funky Dragon Funky Dragon () is the Children and Young People's Assembly for
Wales. It is a peer-led organization which provides opportunities for young
people up to the age of 25 to have their voices heard on issues that affect
them. It works closely with the Welsh Assembly Government and youth forums run
by unitary authorities, enabling it to influence decision making at different
political levels. Mission statement. Funky Dragon is a peer-led organization.
It aims to give 0– to 25-year-olds the opportunity to get their voices heard
on issues that affect them. It was created by young people of Wales and the
Welsh Assembly Government in order to help under-25s in Wales attain their
rights under Article 12 of the UNCRC Funky Dragon’s main tasks are to make
sure that the views of children and young people are heard, particularly by the
Welsh Assembly Government, and to support participation in decision-making at
national level. Grand Council. The Grand Council is the main body of Funky
Dragon, and comprises 100 young people: 4 from each of the 22 unitary
authorities in Wales and 12 co-option seats for other organizations. The co-
option seats are available for election at Funky Dragon's annual general
meeting, usually held in July. The seats are detailed as follows. Local
Authority Wide Forums. Statutory Sector – 22 places. Voluntary Sector - 22
places. School Councils - 22 places. Equality - 22 places. The term local
authority-wide forum is used as some forums representing the geographical area
of a local authority are either independent or are supported by an agency other
than the Local Authority such as the Prince's Trust or the Children’s
Society. Each Local Authority Wide Forum is offered four places for young
people. See above for the breakdown. It is up to each forum to democratically
elect their representatives. Representatives are asked to commit to a 2-year
term with the Grand Council. Lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgendered
Disability Young carers Looked after Black and minority ethnic Homeless Been in
the juvenile justice system Long term health problems (not disabled) AGM. Every
year Grand Council representatives get the chance to meet with Assembly
Ministers to question them on issues that are affecting young people across
Wales. During the meetings, the young people are able to follow up on any
issues talked of in a previous meeting and use the time to get to know the
Ministers better! The questions are decided by the grand council, youth forums,
specific interest groups and any other groups of young people wishing to ask a
question and get an answer from Assembly Members. Past Ministers who have
attend the meetings include Jane Davidson, Minister for Education Lifelong
Learning and Skills and Jane Hutt, Minister for Assembly Business Equalities
and Children The Funky Dragon AGM happens once a year in the Welsh Assembly's
building in Cardiff Bay. The Grand Council and young people from across Wales
are able to come together and discuss their views/opinions and then question
Ministers during Question Time. The Grand Council members meet Ministers and
Officials to discuss how young people from all over Wales can effect change at
a national level. Time is then spent in the Assembly chamber to complete
elections, declaration of accounts and any other business. Funky Dragon has
become known for its 'Funky Dragon does the Oscars' award ceremony in the
evening, recognizing the hard work and achievements of Grand Council
Representatives Sub-Groups. Each of the Sub-Groups has an Assembly Member
responsible for the development of every area - included here are articles,
reports, documents, proposals, committee minutes for each sub-group area.
[http://www.wales.gov.uk] Each Sub-Group area has 2 Grand Council
representatives as Co-Chairs within Funky Dragon, and it is their duty to take
forward the ideas discussed throughout the year at Grand Council residentials
and the Annual General Meeting (AGM). Our Rights Our Story (OROS). Our Rights
Our Story is a report which was written by a steering group on behalf of the
grand council. It was to inform the United Nations Convention on the Rights of
a Child, how the rights of children in Wales are granted. In February 2006
Funky Dragon received funding to carry out the biggest piece of research into
the views of young people in Wales. The project was steered by Grand Council
members from Funky Dragon who were involved in developing the questions and
activities, recruiting staff and analysing the results of the work. The views
of over 12,000 young people were gathered through a national survey, workshops
and interviews with special interest groups, and additional funding was
received earlier this year for extra research into the views of over 2,500
children aged 7–10 (a separate report, Why do people’s ages go up not down?
was produced). Our Rights, Our Story focused on specific areas of children’s
rights •Education •Health •Information •Participation •Special
Interest Groups •Increasing children and young people’s awareness that they
have rights •The need for schools to offer guidance and support for young
people to help them develop their opinions •Being listened to more by the
government •For under 11’s to have a greater say in decisions affecting
them. ‘Our Rights, Our Story’ has been submitted to the UNCRC in June 2008,
alongside the Welsh Assembly Government report and the alternative NGO report,
Stop, look, listen. more information can be found on the funky dragon website
