Galicianism (Galicia) Galicianism is a political ideology of nationalist
character whose objective is the defence of Galicia and its culture by the
means of the establishment and strengthening of its own institutions. Origins.
The concept of Galicianism first appeared in the mid-nineteenth century. At
that time in history it was initially known as "provincialism". Soon it was
referred to as regionalism. This was a reaction to the increased centralization
of the Spanish State (following the French model of nation state) which
attempted to eradicate internal administrative, and to some point cultural,
differences within the country. The term Galicianism as such was coined after
the establishment of the "Irmandades da Fala" (Brotherhoods of the Galician
Language), in 1916, and the apparition of modern Galician nationalism. The
"Irmandades da Fala" was an organization hosting members from both the lower-
middle-class and intellectuals. This organization was led by Antón Vilar
Ponte. Within the next decade (1920s), this organization was strengthened by
two groups: the nationalists, led by the "Partido Galeguista" (Galicianist
Party) of Castelao, and the federalist republicans of ORGA. ORGA was directed
by Santiago Casares and Antón Vilar. Republic and Civil War. In 1931, with the
coming of the Spanish Second Republic, a number of drafts for a Statute of
Autonomy were prepared by the Galicianists. The final version was approved in
December 1932 at the Municipal Assembly of the Galician capital, Santiago de
Compostela. The Statute of Autonomy was approved by referendum on 28 June 1936,
and later ratified by the Spanish Parliament in 1937. However, the Spanish
Civil War and the subsequent dictatorship put an end to the prospect of
autonomy. At the end of the war (1936) many Galicianists were either executed
or had to leave for exile. Galicianism during the dictatorship (1939–77).
Galicianism during Franco's dictatorship was forbidden and severely persecuted.
The foundation of the Editorial Galaxia in 1950 - a publishing house promoting
Galician culture and Galician language - was a visible act of resistance.
Clandestine organizations supporting the cause of Marxism (as an opposition to
the right wing dictator) flourished in the 1950s and 1960s following the
example of Editorial Galaxia and taking advantage of a timid relaxation of the
dictatorial regime. Those new organizations and movements openly labelled
themselves as nationalist, seeing themselves as the natural heirs of the early
Galicianists (for example the Galician People's Union (UPG) was founded by some
old Galicianists among other new members). All those organizations would claim
Castelao's classic work "Sempre en Galiza" (1944) as the ideological
cornerstone for Galician contemporary nationalism and even for their own
foundational principles. Contemporary Galicianism. With the end of the Franco's
dictatorship in 1977 and the passing of a new constitution in 1978, Galicianism
was further strengthened up to the point that today the vast majority of
political forces in Galicia call themselves Galicianist, whether they are
nationalist or not, left wing or right wing. For example, unlike in other
Spanish autonomous communities, the conservative People's Party of Galicia
includes Galicianism (seen as strong regionalism) as one of its ideological
principles. Even the Spanish Socialist Workers' Party has a strong regional
flavour in Galicia, not to mention the actual main Galician nationalist party,
the Galician Nationalist Bloc (BNG). A possible explanation for this is that
Galician identity is so embedded in Galicians that any political party willing
to participate in elections must at least show some degree of interest in the
promotion of Galicianism, although this may range greatly from moderate
regionalism to outright claims for independence.
