Gandhian economics Gandhian economics is a school of economic thought based on
the socio-economic principles expounded by Indian leader Mohandas Gandhi. It is
largely characterised by its affinity to the principles and objectives of
nonviolent humanistic socialism, but with a rejection of violent class war and
promotion of socio-economic harmony. Gandhi's economic ideas also aim to
promote spiritual development and harmony with a rejection of materialism. The
term "Gandhian economics" was coined by J. C. Kumarappa, a close supporter of
Gandhi. Gandhi's economic ideas. Gandhi's thinking on socia-secular issues was
greatly influenced by the American writer Henry David Thoreau. Throughout his
life, Gandhi sought to develop ways to fight India's extreme poverty,
backwardness and socio-economic challenges as a part of his wider involvement
in the Indian independence movement. Gandhi's championing of "Swadeshi" and
non-cooperation were centred on the principles of economic self-sufficiency.
Gandhi sought to target European-made clothing and other products as not only a
symbol of British colonialism but also the source of mass unemployment and
poverty, as European industrial goods had left many millions of India's
workers, craftsmen and women without a means of living. By championing homespun
"khadi" clothing and Indian-made goods, Gandhi sought to incorporate peaceful
civil resistance as a means of promoting national self-sufficiency. Gandhi led
farmers of Champaran and Kheda in a "satyagraha" (civil disobedience and tax
resistance) against the mill owners and landlords supported by the British
government in an effort to end oppressive taxation and other policies that
forced the farmers and workers and defend their economic rights. A major part
of this rebellion was a commitment from the farmers to end caste discrimination
and oppressive social practices against women while launching a co-operative
effort to promote education, health care and self-sufficiency by producing
their own clothes and food. Gandhi and his followers also founded numerous
"ashrams" in India (Gandhi had pioneered the "ashram" settlement in South
Africa). The concept of an "ashram" has been compared with the commune, where
its inhabitants would seek to produce their own food, clothing and means of
living, while promoting a lifestyle of self-sufficiency, personal and spiritual
development and working for wider social development. The "ashrams" included
small farms and houses constructed by the inhabitants themselves. All
inhabitants were expected to help in any task necessary, promoting the values
of equality. Gandhi also espoused the notion of "trusteeship," which centred on
denying material pursuits and coveting of wealth, with practitioners acting as
"trustees" of other individuals and the community in their management of
economic resources and property. Contrary to many Indian socialists and
communists, Gandhi was averse to all notions of class warfare and concepts of
class-based revolution, which he saw as causes of social violence and
disharmony. Gandhi's concept of egalitarianism was centred on the preservation
of human dignity rather than material development. Some of Gandhi's closest
supporters and admirers included industrialists such as Ghanshyamdas Birla,
Ambalal Sarabhai, Jamnalal Bajaj and J. R. D. Tata, who adopted several of
Gandhi's progressive ideas in managing labour relations while also personally
participating in Gandhi's ashrams and socio-political work. Gandhian economics
and ethics. Gandhian economics do not draw a distinction between economics and
ethics. Economics that hurts the moral well-being of an individual or a nation
is immoral, and therefore sinful. The value of an industry should be gauged
less by the dividends it pays to shareholders than by its effect on the bodies,
soul and spirits of the people employed in it. In essence, supreme
consideration is to be given to man than to money. In fact, the first basic
principle of Gandhi’s economic thought is a special emphasis on ‘plain
living’ which helps in cutting down your wants and being self-reliant.
Accordingly, increasing consumer appetite is likened to animal appetite which
goes the end of earth in search of their satisfaction. Thus a distinction is to
be made between 'Standard of Living' and 'Standard of Life', where the former
merely states the material and physical standard of food, cloth and housing. A
higher standard of life, on the other hand could be attained only if, along
with material advancement, there was a serious attempt to imbibe cultural and
spiritual values and qualities. Social justice and equality. Gandhi has often
quoted that if mankind was to progress and to realize the ideals of equality
and brotherhood, it must act on the principle of paying the highest attention
to the prime needs of the weakest sections of the population. Therefore any
exercise on economic planning on a national scale would be futile without
uplifting these most vulnerable sections of the society in a direct manner. In
the ultimate analysis, it is the quality of the human being that has to be
raised, refined and consolidated. In other words, economic planning is for the
citizen, and not the citizen for national planning. Everybody should be given
the right to earn according to his capacity using just means. he was poor. Non-
violent rural economy. Gandhian economics places importance to means of
achieving the aim of development and this means must be non-violent, ethical
and truthful in all economic spheres. In order to achieve this means he
advocated trusteeship, decentralization of economic activities, labour
intensive technology and priority to weaker sections. Gandhi claims that to be
non-violent an Individual needs to have a rural mindedness. It also helps in
thinking of our necessities of our household in terms of rural mindedness. The
revival of the economy is made possible only when it is free from exploitation,
so according to Gandhi industrialization on a mass-scale will lead to passive
or active exploitation of the people as the problem of competition and
marketing comes in. Gandhi believes that for an economy to be self-contained,
it should manufacture mainly for its use even if that necessitates the use of
modern machines and tools, provided it is not used as a means of exploitation
of others. Environmentalism. Several of Gandhi's followers developed a theory
of environmentalism. J. C. Kumarappa was the first, writing a number of
relevant books in the 1930s and 1940s. He and Mira Behan argued against large-
scale dam-and-irrigation projects, saying that small projects were more
efficacious, that organic manure was better and less dangerous than man-made
chemicals, and that forests should be managed with the goal of water
conservation rather than revenue maximization. The Raj and the Nehru
governments paid them little attention. Guha calls Kumarappa, "The Green
Gandhian," portraying him as the founder of modern environmentalism in India.
Concept of socialism. Gandhian economics brings a socialist perspective of
overall development and tries to redefine the outlook of socialism. Gandhi
espoused the notion of “trusteeship” which centered on denying material
pursuits and coveting of wealth, with practitioners acting as “trustees” of
other individuals and the community in their management of economic resources
and property. Under the Gandhian economic order, the character of production
will be determined by social necessity and not by personal greed. The path of
socialism should only be through non-violence and democratic method and any
recourse to class-war and mutual hatred would prove to be suicidal.
Implementation in India. During India's freedom struggle as well as after
India's independence in 1947, Gandhi's advocacy of homespun "khadi" clothing,
the "khadi" attire (which included the Gandhi cap) developed into popular
symbols of nationalism and patriotism. India's first prime minister, Jawaharlal
Nehru totally differed with Gandhi, even before independence and partition of
India. Gandhi did not participate in celebration of Indian independence, he was
busy controlling the post partition communal violence. Gandhian activists such
as Vinoba Bhave and Jayaprakash Narayan were involved in the "Sarvodaya"
movement, which sought to promote self-sufficiency amidst India's rural
population by encouraging land redistribution, socio-economic reforms and
promoting cottage industries. The movement sought to combat the problems of
class conflict, unemployment and poverty while attempting to preserve the
lifestyle and values of rural Indians, which were eroding with
industrialisation and modernisation. "Sarvodaya" also included "Bhoodan", or
the gifting of land and agricultural resources by the landlords (called
"zamindars") to their tenant farmers in a bid to end the medieval system of
"zamindari". Bhave and others promoted "Bhoodan" as a just and peaceful method
of land redistribution in order to create economic equality, land ownership and
opportunity without creating class-based conflicts. "Bhoodan" and "Sarvodaya"
enjoyed notable successes in many parts of India, including Maharashtra,
Gujarat, Karnataka and Uttar Pradesh. Bhave would become a major exponent of
discipline and productivity amongst India's farmers, labourers and working
classes, which was a major reason for his support of the controversial Indian
Emergency (1975–1977). Jayaprakash Narayan also sought to use Gandhian
methods to combat organised crime, alcoholism and other social problems. Modern
interpretations. The proximity of Gandhian economic thought to socialism has
also evoked criticism from the advocates of free-market economics. To many,
Gandhian economics represent an alternative to mainstream economic ideologies
as a way to promote economic self-sufficiency without an emphasis on material
pursuits or compromising human development. Gandhi's emphasis on peace,
"trusteeship" and co-operation has been touted as an alternative to competition
as well as conflict between different economic and income classes in societies.
Gandhian focus on human development is also seen as an effective emphasis on
the eradication of poverty, social conflict and backwardness in developing
nations.
