Gastald A gastald (Latin "gastaldus" or "castaldus", Italian "gastaldo" or
"guastaldo") was a Lombard official in charge of some portion of the royal
demesne (a "gastaldia" or "castaldia") with civil, martial, and judicial
powers. By the "Edictum Rothari" of 643, the gastalds were given the civil
authority in the cities and the reeves the like authority in the countryside.
Under the Lombard dominion, territories were delimited by "giudicati" or
"judgments" among the several " gastaldi". From the immediate region of Parma
and of Piacenza, numerous such "giudicati" survive, which cover the range of
Lombard rule. The documents follow the same formalized structure, of which one
between the gastaldo Daghiberto and the "gastaldo" Immo was adjudged by
Adaloald, at Ticino, November 615. As paid officials with direct allegiance to
the roving Lombard kings, whose seat was nominally at Pavia, the "gastaldi"
were often in conflict with the dukes, the great Lombard territorial magnates
who pursued policies of autonomy. By the 9th century, the powers of the
"gastaldi" had devolved to largely administrative ones. The title gradually
disappeared over the final century of Lombard power, surviving only in a few
instances, especially in the Mezzogiorno, where ducal Lombard power continued
for another two hundred years, for example at Capua, which was included in the
Lombard Duchy of Benevento and where the count's title remained "gastaldo" as
late as the 9th century, when Gastaldo Landulfo began strenuously to establish
his independence. About 1200, in his "Magna derivationes", Uguccione of Pisa
included "gastradeus" a copyist's slip for "gastaldeus" given the meaning
""rector loci"", the "administrator of a place". In Milan, the institution of
"gastaldi" endured within the cathedral chapter until the close of the Middle
Ages. In the Arsenal of Venice, the "gastaldi" endured to the arrival of
Napoleon, in the form of confraternities of craftsmen in the shipyards; the
sign of the carpenters' guild, painted under the direction of "Misier" Zacharia
d'Antonio in 1517 and renewed in 1753, under the "gastaldia" of Francesco
Zanotto "gastaldo" and company, is in the Museum of Venetian History, Venice.
In Old High German, "gastaldus" came to denote a steward. "Castaldy" appears in
Middle English" with an abstract meaning of "stewardship"; the specific
function, however, remained foreign to Anglo-Saxon or Norman institutions.
