Gaullism Gaullism () is a French political ideology based on the thought and
action of Resistance leader then President Charles de Gaulle. Doctrine. Foreign
policy. The main theme of de Gaulle's foreign policy was national independence,
and maintaining as much control as possible of as many of France's colonies as
possible (cf. de Gaulle's policy on Indochina) with, as some practical
consequences, some degree of opposition to international organizations such as
NATO or the European Economic Community. The basic tenets were that France
should not have to rely on any foreign country for its survival (thus the
creation of the French nuclear deterrent) and that France should refuse
subservience to any foreign power, be it the United States or the Soviet Union.
One can also cite what foreign observers dubbed the policies of "grandeur",
that is, the insistence that France be a major power in the world scene and
that military and economic forces be established to back this claim. In that
respect, Gaullism significantly influenced the foreign policy of France in the
subsequent decades, even after Gaullists were nominally no longer in power.
Foreign critics, particularly in the United Kingdom and the United States,
criticized de Gaulle's policy "of "grandeur"". A major point of friction was de
Gaulle's decision to withdraw France from the integrated military command of
NATO (but not from NATO itself) and to expel NATO from its headquarters at
Fontainebleau. De Gaulle refused to allow foreign troops on French soil if
these troops were not under French command, a move that greatly angered the
United States, which had troops in France at the time and expected French
military and foreign policies to be aligned with its own. Domestic policies.
One may also cite social conservatism, and economic "dirigisme" and
"volontarisme" (namely the defense of spatial planning, economic planning, and
Keynesianism) as parts of the Gaullist ideology, but these are not necessarily
accepted by all who called themselves Gaullists. Gaullism is generally
considered a right-wing ideology, but there have also been left-wing Gaullists,
the differences between the two consisting of differing social and economic
policies. Gaullism has sometimes been characterized as a form of populism,
since de Gaulle relied heavily on his personal charisma. That is, de Gaulle
preferred a direct relationship with the people to parliamentary politics; to
some extent, he was scornful of politicians and political games. He resigned
after failing to obtain a majority in a constitutional referendum on a reform
of the French Senate. One particularity of Gaullism is the French embrace of
nuclear energy as a means of energy and national independence. This emerged
after the 1973 oil crisis in the "messmer plan" of Gaullist prime minister
Pierre Messmer. Between 1974 and 1990 France installed 56 nuclear reactors.
Political group. The "Gaullists" as a political group used to refer to the
Union of Democrats for the Republic. Since de Gaulle's death, and the break-up
of the UDR, the exact meaning of Gaullism has become somewhat unclear. In
1980s-1990s usage, "Gaullism", or "Neo-Gaullism", referred to the Rally for the
Republic (now integrated into the Union for a Popular Movement), the centre-
right party founded by Jacques Chirac. Chirac has, in the past, adopted both
"dirigiste" and "laissez-faire" approaches to economics; he later took on a
pro-European stance after having famously denounced Europeanism in the Call of
Cochin. For these reasons, some on the right, such as Charles Pasqua, denounced
Chirac and his party as not being true Gaullists. Former President Nicolas
Sarkozy's Union for a Popular Movement is the current heir of Gaullism. Before
the rightward shift of Gaullism in the 1980s,especially with the rallying of
the RPR and the UMP to economic liberalism and the European federalist project,
many objections have been formed,committed to the independence of
France,calling for a more social Gaullism and close to the project of General
de Gaulle. This is particularly the case with Philippe Séguin, who opposed the
Maastricht Treaty in 1992 and more recently with MP Nicolas Dupont-Aignan, who
founded his own party, Arise the Republic (DLR) which seems to be the closest
to the original Gaullism. There are people on the political left who also call
themselves Gaullists. Even Socialist president François Mitterrand, who
denounced de Gaulle's way of ruling as a permanent coup d'état, was very
intent on keeping the nuclear deterrent and asserting France's independence.
Germany. The expression "Gaullist" has also been used in the politics of the
Federal Republic of Germany in the 1950s and 1960s. In the governing Christian
Democratic party some wanted to strengthen the ties with the United States, the
"Atlantiker" (Atlanticians), others wanted to build up a European
counterweight, with the help of France, the Gaullists. The most notable
Gaullist was chancellor Konrad Adenauer, an outstanding "Atlantiker" his
minister of foreign affairs, Schröder. A typical "Atlantiker" was Protestant
and believed in free market economy, a typical "Gaullist" was Catholic and
tended toward Rhine Capitalism with its more regulated markets and state
intervention. A problem to the Gaullists has been that their concept of foreign
relationships was based on a strong European integration, which needed support
from France. French president Charles de Gaulle actually was reluctant to give
more power to European institutions and advocated instead a less tight "Europe
of the nations". After de Gaulle's retreat in 1969 and the end of Christian
Democratic government in Germany the same year, the distinction lost its
prominence. Anyway, even Gaullists always believed that the relationship to the
United States was in general the most important.
