LGBT rights by country or territory Laws affecting lesbian, gay, bisexual, and
transgender (LGBT) people vary greatly by country or territory—everything
from legal recognition of same-sex marriage or other types of partnerships, to
the death penalty as punishment for same-sex romantic/sexual activity or
identity. LGBT rights are human rights and civil rights. LGBT rights laws
include, but are not limited to, the following: government recognition of same-
sex relationships (such as via same-sex marriage or civil unions), LGBT
adoption, recognition of LGBT parenting, anti-bullying legislation and student
non-discrimination laws to protect LGBT children and/or students, immigration
equality laws, anti-discrimination laws for employment and housing, hate crime
laws providing enhanced criminal penalties for prejudice-motivated violence
against LGBT people, equal age of consent laws, and laws related to sexual
orientation and military service. Anti-LGBT laws include, but are not limited
to, the following: sodomy laws penalizing consensual same-sex sexual activity
with fines, jail terms, or the death penalty, anti-'lesbianism' laws, and
higher ages of consent for same-sex activity. In 2011, the United Nations Human
Rights Council passed its first resolution recognizing LGBT rights, which was
followed up with a report from the UN Human Rights Commission documenting
violations of the rights of LGBT people, including hate crime, criminalization
of homosexuality, and discrimination. Following up on the report, the UN Human
Rights Commission urged all countries, which had not yet done so, to enact laws
protecting basic LGBT rights. History of LGBT-related laws. Ancient India.
Throughout Hindu and Vedic texts there are many descriptions of saints,
demigods, and even the Supreme Lord transcending gender norms and manifesting
multiple combinations of sex and gender. There are several instances in ancient
Indian epic poetry of same sex depictions and unions by gods and goddesses.
There are several stories of depicting love between same sexes especially among
kings and queens. Kamasutra, the ancient Indian treatise on love talks about
feelings for same sexes. Transsexuals are also venerated e.g. Lord Vishnu as
Mohini and Lord Shiva as Ardhanarishwara (which means half woman). Ancient
Israel and the Near East. The ancient Law of Moses (the Torah) forbids men
lying with men (intercourse) in Leviticus 18 and gives a story of attempted
homosexual rape in Genesis in the story of Sodom and Gomorrah, the cities being
soon destroyed after that. The death penalty was prescribed. Middle Assyrian
Law Codes dating 1075 BC states: "If a man have intercourse with his brother-
in-arms, they shall turn him into a eunuch. Ancient Rome. The "conquest
mentality" of the ancient Romans shaped Roman homosexual practices. In the
Roman Republic, a citizen's political liberty was defined in part by the right
to preserve his body from physical compulsion or use by others; for the male
citizen to submit his body to the giving of pleasure was considered servile. As
long as a man played the penetrative role, it was socially acceptable and
considered natural for him to have same-sex relations, without a perceived loss
of his masculinity or social standing. The bodies of citizen youths were
strictly off-limits, and the "Lex Scantinia" imposed penalites on those who
committed a sex crime "(stuprum)" against a freeborn male minor. Acceptable
same-sex partners were males excluded from legal protections as citizens:
slaves, male prostitutes, and the "infames", entertainers or others who might
be technically free but whose lifestyles set them outside the law. "Homosexual"
and "heterosexual" were thus not categories of Roman sexuality, and no words
exist in Latin that would precisely translate these concepts. A male citizen
who willingly performed oral sex or received anal sex was disparaged, but there
is only limited evidence of legal penalties against these men, who were
presumably "homosexual" in the modern sense. In courtroom and political
rhetoric, charges of effeminacy and passive sexual behaviors were directed
particularly at "democratic" politicians "(populares)" such as Julius Caesar
and Mark Antony. Roman law addressed the rape of a male citizen as early as the
2nd century BC, when a ruling was issued in a case that may have involved a man
of same-sex orientation. It was ruled that even a man who was "disreputable and
questionable" had the same right as other citizens not to have his body
subjected to forced sex. A law probably dating to the dictatorship of Julius
Caesar defined rape as forced sex against "boy, woman, or anyone"; the rapist
was subject to execution, a rare penalty in Roman law. A male classified as
"infamis", such as a prostitute or actor, could not as a matter of law be
raped, nor could a slave, who was legally classified as property; the slave's
owner, however, could prosecute the rapist for property damage. In the Roman
army of the Republic, sex among fellow soldiers violated the decorum against
intercourse with citizens and was subject to harsh penalties, including death,
as a violation of military discipline. The Greek historian Polybius (2nd
century BC) lists deserters, thieves, perjurers, and "those who in youth have
abused their persons" as subject to the "fustuarium", clubbing to death.
Ancient sources are most concerned with the effects of sexual harassment by
officers, but the young soldier who brought an accusation against his superior
needed to show that he had not willingly taken the passive role or prostituted
himself. Soldiers were free to have relations with their male slaves; the use
of a fellow citizen-soldier's body was prohibited, not homosexual behaviors per
se. By the late Republic and throughout the Imperial period, there is
increasing evidence that men whose lifestyle marked them as "homosexual" in the
modern sense served openly. Although Roman law did not recognize marriage
between men, and in general Romans regarded marriage as a heterosexual union
with the primary purpose of producing children, in the early Imperial period
some male couples were celebrating traditional marriage rites. Juvenal remarks
with disapproval that his friends often attended such ceremonies. The emperor
Nero had two marriages to men, once as the bride (with a freedman Pythagoras)
and once as the groom. His consort Sporus appeared in public as Nero's wife
wearing the regalia that was customary for the Roman empress. Apart from
measures to protect the prerogatives of citizens, the prosecution of
homosexuality as a general crime began in the 3rd century of the Christian era
when male prostitution was banned by Philip the Arab. By the end of the 4th
century, after the Roman Empire had come under Christian rule, passive
homosexuality was punishable by burning. "Death by sword" was the punishment
for a "man coupling like a woman" under the Theodosian Code. Under Justinian,
all same-sex acts, passive or active, no matter who the partners, were declared
contrary to nature and punishable by death. Feudal Japan. In feudal Japan,
homosexuality was recognized, between equals (bi-do), in terms of pederasty
(wakashudo), and in terms of prostitution. The Samurai period was one in which
homosexuality was seen as particularly positive. In Japan, the younger partner
in a pederastic relationship was expected to make the first move; the opposite
was true in ancient Greece. Homosexuality was later briefly criminalized due to
Westernization. China. Laws prohibiting homosexuality were also passed in
China. (China neither adopted an Abrahamic religion nor was colonized, except
for Hong Kong and Macau which were colonized with Victorian era social mores
and maintain separate legal system from the rest of China.) Homosexuality was
not decriminalized there until 1997. Prior to 1997, homosexual in mainland
China was found guilty included in a general definition under the vague
vocabulary of hooliganism, there are no specifically anti-homosexual laws.
LGBT-related laws by country or territory. In modern times nine countries have
no official heterosexist discrimination. They are Argentina, Belgium, Canada,
Iceland, Netherlands, Norway, Sweden, South Africa, and Spain. This full non-
discrimination includes the rights of marriage and adoption. Portugal has also
marriage rights for same-sex couples but this right does not include same-sex
adoption. The Canadian Blood Services’ policy indefinitely defers any man who
has sex with another man, even once, since 1977. In the U.S., mandated by
federal law (), the U.S. armed forces’ policy on homosexuality in the
military, commonly known as Don’t ask, don’t tell, prohibited coming out
("a statement that a member is homosexual or bisexual" or anything that would
reveal sexual orientation, i.e. talking about a boyfriend, girlfriend, or
attractions) because it was considered tantamount to "a propensity or intent to
engage in homosexual acts". More than 13,500 service members were discharged
from the military under the 1993 law. However, the policy was repealed by
Congress in December 2010. In the Senate, repeal passed by a majority of
63–33, including six Republicans voting in favour of gays serving openly in
the military. The repeal was effective September 20th, 2011. Also in the U.S.,
LGBT people face different laws for certain medical procedures than other
groups. For example, gay men have been prohibited from giving blood since 1983,
and George W. Bush's FDA guidelines barred them from being sperm donors as of
2005, even though all donated sperm is screened for sexually-transmitted
diseases.
