General election In a parliamentary system, a general election is an election
in which all or most members of a given political body are chosen. The term is
usually used to refer to elections held for a nation's primary legislative
body, as distinguished from by-elections and local elections. In presidential
systems, the term refers to a regularly-scheduled election where both the
president, and either "a class" of or all members of the national legislature
are elected at the same time. A general election day may also include elections
for local officials. The term originates in the United Kingdom general
elections for the House of Commons. In the United Kingdom. The term general
election in the United Kingdom often refers to the election of Members of
Parliament (MPs) to the House of Commons. These must be held every five years,
but may be held more often at the discretion of the British Prime Minister. The
term may of course also be used to refer to an election to any democratically
elected body in which all of the members are up for election. Section 2 of the
Scotland Act 1998, for example, specifically refers to ordinary elections to
the Scottish Parliament as general elections. General elections in Britain
traditionally take place on a Thursday; the last general election not on a
Thursday was that of 1931. The five year limit on the time of a Parliament can
be varied by an Act of Parliament. This was done during both World Wars; the
Parliament elected in December 1910 was prolonged to November 1918, and that
elected in November 1935 lasted until June 1945. The House of Lords has an
absolute vote on any Bill to extend the life of Parliament. In Hong Kong.
According to the territory's "Legislative Council Ordinance", fixed term
elections are defined as general elections, as opposed to by-elections. In
India. General elections in India are the largest exercise of democracy in the
World. In 2004, Indian elections covered an electorate larger than 670 million
people—over twice that of the next largest, the European Parliament
elections—and declared expenditure has trebled since 1989 to almost $300
million, using more than 1 million electronic voting machines. The Election
Commission of India coordinates the elections, which owing to the huge size of
the electorate is conducted in a phased manner. In General Elections, the
candidates are elected for the Lok Sabha and they are called MP's (Member of
Parliament). They are held every 5 years. Japan. See Elections in Japan.
American usage. In U.S. politics, general elections occur every four years and
include the presidential election. Some parallels can be drawn between the
general election in parliamentary systems and the biennial elections
determining all House seats, although there is no analogue to "calling early
elections" in the U.S., and the members of the elected U.S. Senate face
elections of only one-third at a time at two year intervals including during a
general election. In the State of Louisiana the expression "general election"
means the runoff election which occurs between the two highest candidates as
determined by the jungle primary.
