George Allen (U.S. politician) George Felix Allen (born March 8, 1952) is a
former United States Senator from Virginia, and the son of former NFL head
coach George Allen. Allen served Virginia in the state legislature, as the 67th
Governor, and in both bodies of the U.S. Congress, winning election to the
Senate in 2000. Allen's re-election in the 2006 race seemed likely until he was
accused of using a racist epithet when referring to a staffer of his opponent,
Democrat Jim Webb. Allen lost the election to Webb by fewer than 10,000 votes.
Allen now serves on the Reagan Ranch Board of Governors of Young America's
Foundation where he is a Reagan Ranch Presidential Scholar. Allen was the
Republican candidate in the 2012 election for the Senate, which he lost to Tim
Kaine. Early life, education, and early law career (1952-1982). Allen was born
in Whittier, California. Allen's father, George Herbert Allen, was a legendary
NFL coach who was inducted into the Pro Football Hall of Fame in 2002. During
the 2006 senatorial campaign it was revealed that Allen's mother, Henrietta
Lumbroso, was born to Sephardic Jewish parents in Tunisia. He has a younger
sister, Jennifer, an author and correspondent for NFL Network, and two
brothers, including Bruce Allen, the current general manager of the Washington
Redskins and former general manager of the Tampa Bay Buccaneers. He and his
family lived there until 1957. They moved to the suburbs of Chicago after
George Sr. got a job with the Chicago Bears. Then, the family moved back to
Southern California (Palos Verdes) in 1966 after Allen's father was named head
coach of the Los Angeles Rams. Allen graduated in 1970 from Palos Verdes High
School, where he was a member of the falconry club and the car club. He was
also quarterback of the varsity football team. Allen attended the University of
California, Los Angeles, for a year. His father had in the meantime taken over
the head coaching duties with the Washington Redskins in 1970 and the younger
Allen transferred to the University of Virginia, in 1971, where he received a
B.A. degree with distinction in history in 1974. He was class president in his
fourth year at UVA. After graduating, Allen completed a Juris Doctor degree
from the University of Virginia School of Law in 1977. In 1976 he was the
chairman of the "Young Virginians for Ronald Reagan". Virginia House of
Delegates (1982-1991). Elections. Allen's first race for the Virginia House of
Delegates was in 1979, two years after he graduated from law school. He placed
third in a field of four candidates. Allen states that he lost because he
wasn't himself and was listening to the advice of his campaign manager who
suggested he wear wingtips instead of his usual cowboy boots. He ran again in
1983 with the cowboy boots and won the election, defeating incumbent Democrat
James B. Murray, whose 24th district was eliminated after redistricting. Peter
T. Way, then named Paul Harris, succeeded Allen. The seat he held was the same
one held by Thomas Jefferson. Tenure. He was a delegate from 1983 to 1991. He
lived in Charlottesville and represented parts of Albemarle County and Nelson
County. Allen was a strong advocate for the death penalty, and actively
supported expanding it in Virginia. For several years in a row, Allen
introduced a bill that would add murder in commission of an attempted robbery
to the list. Each year, the bill died in the House Courts of Justice Committee.
Allen would continue to collect newspaper clippings for his file and followed
every murder in the state. Allen supported a statewide referendum on whether or
not to create a state lottery system. In 1986, he proposed a referendum that
would allow assets of illegal drug dealers to go to law enforcement. U.S. House
of Representatives (1991-1993). Elections. Incumbent Republican U.S.
Congressman D. French Slaughter, Jr., of Virginia's 7th congressional district,
decided to resign because of a series of strokes. Allen faced Slaughter's
cousin, Kay Slaughter, who was also a Charlottesville City Councilman. Allen
defeated her 64%-36%. In the 1990s round of redistricting, Allen's district,
which stretched from the fringes of the Washington suburbs to Charlottesville
and included much of the Shenandoah Valley, was eliminated, even though
Virginia gained a congressional seat as a result of the 1990 Census. While
Republicans claim the principal factor in redistricting were partisanship of
the Democratic controlled Virginia General Assembly, available new GIS
technology were forecasting likely election behavior of some hypothetical
districts. The Justice Department had a mandate to create a black-majority
district in accordance with the Voting Rights Act. Allen's district was
eliminated as a result. While his home in Earlysville was placed in the 5th
District of Lewis F. Payne, Jr., most of his district was placed in the newly
redrawn Virginia's 10th congressional district, represented by fellow
Republican Frank Wolf. Allen moved to Mount Vernon and prepared to challenge
Wolf in a primary. state Republican leaders had let it be known that he could
not expect any support for his planned run for governor in 1993 if he made such
a challenge. Allen decided not to run in either the 5th, nor the 10th. After
Democrat U.S. Congressman James Olin of the Virginia's 6th congressional
district decided to retire, there was speculation Allen could run there.
However, he decided not to move his family and run in the 6th district either.
Virginia Governor (1994-1998). In November 1993, Allen was elected the 67th
Governor of Virginia, serving from 1994 to 1998. His opponent in the 1993
election, Attorney General Mary Sue Terry, had an early 29-point lead in public
opinion polls and a million-dollar fundraising advantage. However, Allen struck
a hot button with voters across party and racial lines with his campaign
proposal to abolish parole. This response to a surge of crime in the state
connected with voters, in contrast to Terry's proposal to increase gun control
as a remedy. Allen overcame the deficit and won with 58.3% of the vote, the
largest margin (+17.4 points) since Albertis S. Harrison Jr. defeated H. Clyde
Pearson with a margin of +27.7 points in 1961. Allen could not run for re-
election because Virginia's constitution does not allow a governor to succeed
himself; Virginia is the only state that has such a provision. Welfare reform.
During his 1993 campaign for Governor, Allen vowed to reform Virginia's welfare
system, stating that "Our obligation as a society is to provide a hand up to
those in need, rather than a handout ...Welfare is not to be a permanent status
for anyone in life." At the time welfare caseloads climbed 36 percent from 1988
while one out of twelve Virginians were receiving food stamps. In March 1995,
after an overwhelmingly bipartisan vote of support, Allen signed his welfare
reform bill propelling Virginia ahead of the national welfare reform effort,
Among the key provisions outlined in the bill, the Virginia Initiative for
Employment Not Welfare (VIEW) limited Temporary Assistance to Needy Families
(TANF) benefits for welfare recipients to two years while recipients are
required to work within ninety days of receiving benefits. Following VIEW's
implementation, welfare caseloads decreased 33 percent, from 73,926 families in
March 1995 to 49,609 families in July 1997. In areas where VIEW existed for
twelve months, 74 percent were employed versus only 31 percent nationally.
According to the Virginia Department of Health and Human Resource's 1996 annual
report, VIEW saved taxpayers 24 million dollar in its first year of existence;
with an addition to federal welfare money, the savings total over the following
two years comes to just over $70¬ million (December 19, 1995) "Savings
Estimated On Welfare Reform," Richmond Times Dispatch. pg. A14.) The Allen
Administration's welfare reform law also addressed concerns over single-parent
recipients of welfare requiring mothers to name the child's father and provide
three additional pieces of information to help locate the non-custodial parent
or face loss of all TANF benefits. Since 1995, Virginia has achieved a 98.5
percent rate of paternity identification, the highest in the country. By
removing the incentive to break up families, the Allen welfare reform allowed
two parent households the same time to receive benefits as single parents.
Because this law reversed the incentive of being a single parent TANF cases
represented by two parent households increased by over 180 percent. Truth-in-
sentencing. In November 1993, Allen‚Äôs campaign promise to abolish parole for
violent criminals helped drive him to a landslide victory after trailing from a
33 percent point deficit in the polls to Democrat Mary Sue Terry,
Notwithstanding a Democratic Party majority, Truth-in-sentencing (TIS) and
abolition of parole were ultimately passed in a Special Session of the General
Assembly with the House voting 89‚Äì7 and the Senate voting 34‚Äì4 in favor of
the measure. On January 1, 1995, Allen‚Äôs central campaign promise became a
reality when TIS and abolition of parole went into effect. According to the
law, prison sentences increased for offenders without prior convictions for
violent crimes by 125 percent, 300 percent for those with a prior felony
conviction that originally had a maximum penalty of less than 40 years, and 500
percent for those with a felony conviction of a violent crime that originally
had a minimum penalty of more than 40 years. Between 1994 and 1995, statistics
show on average that first degree murders with violent records went from
serving 15 years to 46 years. In 1993, nearly half of all offenders released
from prison were re-arrested for a new crime within 3 years. TIS ensured that
inmates serve a minimum of 85 percent of their sentence. As a result of TIS,
first degree murderers went from serving 29.3 percent of imposed sentence to 91
percent. While parole was eliminated for repeat violent offenders convicted
after January 1, 1995, parole remained in effect for individuals incarcerated
prior to TIS reform resulting in a rapid decline in the parole grant rate from
46 percent in 1991 to 5 percent in 1998. Standards of learning. In June 1995,
the Virginia Board of Education adopted Governor Allen‚Äôs Commission on
Champion Schools recommendation for statewide standardized tests for academic
accountability. The Board of Education voted in favor of implementing the
Standards of Learning (SOLs) which measures student achievements and ensures
accountability for schools in the core subjects of English, mathematics,
history, economics, and science. The commission also recommended the creation
of an annual ‚Äòreport card‚Äô to grade each public school's performance
stating that: ‚ÄúIf Virginia‚Äôs youngsters can‚Äôt make the grade, then
neither should their schools‚Äù (2)(9). Experts suggested that in order to
improve the quality of learning, a school should emphasize academic goals and
effective leadership. By using measurement through tests, the state, teachers,
and parents can monitor the effectiveness of schools teaching the basic
fundamental subjects (1). Allen‚Äôs legislation used public data of SOLs test
scores along with school attendance and drop-out rates to ensure that
unsatisfactory schools are accountable by the threat of state takeover through
court action. Initially, Allen succeeded in keeping Virginia‚Äôs educational
reform independent from federal funding by using a line-item veto in the
state‚Äôs budget, a power granted to Virginia governors. Allen argued that
federal funding would force the Commonwealth to adhere to federal regulation,
therefore, restricting the freedom of Virginia to craft its own high academic
standards education plan. Despite Allen‚Äôs efforts to keep Virginia
independent from federal education funds, the Virginia Board of Education
applied for federal funds through the program Goals 2000. During Allen‚Äôs
tenure as Governor, the American Federation of Teachers rated the SOLs
‚Äúexemplary‚Äù in the four core subjects. Virginia water toxin cover-up. In
1994, Allen's administration eliminated Virginia's water toxins monitoring
program. The Virginia Toxics Database, which was maintained by the program and
contained important baseline toxicity levels for Virginia waters, was locked
away in a safe during Allen's term as Governor. Scientists and government
agencies were denied access to the data by Allen's Department of Environment
Quality. Reporting by "The Roanoke Times" spurred Virginia legislators to call
for an investigation by the Joint Legislative Audit and Review Commission. The
1999 investigation found that documents from the database were destroyed and
that the concealed data included information on high levels of PCBs in Virginia
waterways, including the Rappahannock River. A report by the Chesapeake Bay
Foundation found that the DEQ had withheld knowledge of high mercury
concentrations in the Shenandoah River. Return to the private sector (1998-
2001). McGuireWoods. In February 1998, Allen became a Richmond-based partner at
the law firm McGuire Woods Battle & Boothe (now McGuireWoods LLP), as head of
its business expansion and relocation team. At the time, Allen said "I think
it's healthy to get out of government. If you stay in too long, you lose track
of reality and the real world." According to a disclosure form Allen filed on
May 12, 2000, he was paid $450,000 by the firm between January 1999 and April
2000. Xybernaut. While out of office, Allen became a director at two Virginia
high-tech companies and advised a third, all government contractors that he had
assisted while governor. In mid-1998, Allen joined the board of Xybernaut, a
company selling mobile, flip-screen computers. The firm never made a profit ‚Äì
it posted 33 consecutive quarterly losses after it went public in 1996. In
September 1999, Allen and the rest of the company's board dismissed the
company's accounting firm, PricewaterhouseCoopers, which had issued a report
with a "going concern" paragraph that questioned the company‚Äôs financial
health. Allen made almost no money from the stock, according to his
communications director, John Reid. According to the "Associated Press", Allen
steered compensation from his board service, other than stock options, to his
law firm. He was granted options worth $1.5¬ million at their peak. Allen
listed them on his disclosure forms for 2002 and 2003, but never exercised
them. Commonwealth Biotechnologies. Allen joined Commonwealth's board of
directors about two months after leaving the governor's office in January 1998.
"I learned a lot on their board and enjoyed working with 'em, and they seem to
be doing all right, I guess," Allen said in October 2006. Commonwealth granted
Allen options on 15,000 shares of company stock at $7.50 a share in May 1999.
Allen steered other compensation from his board service to his law firm,
McGuire Woods. As of late 2006, Allen had not cashed in any options; the stock
as of that date was well under $5 per share, making the options valueless for
the moment. Commonwealth reported its first full year of profitability in 2005.
Com-Net Ericsson. Allen became a member of the advisory board of Com-Net
Ericsson in February 2000. The advisory board's responsibility was to meet at
least twice a year and provide advice and service. Allen terminated his service
on the board before the end of 2000. He was paid approximately $300,000 for his
services. U.S. Senate (2001-2007). Elections. Allen ran for the U.S. Senate and
defeated Democratic incumbent U.S. Senator Chuck Robb 52%-48%. He was the only
Republican to unseat a Democratic incumbent that year. Allen's term in the
Senate expired in January 2007. He sought re-election in 2006. Allen won the
Republican nomination on August 11, 2006, and faced two opponents in the
general election: the Democratic Party nominee, former Secretary of the Navy
James H. Webb, and Gail Parker, a retired Air Force officer and retired
civilian Pentagon budget analyst who ran on the Independent Green Party ballot
line. Allen ran a campaign that appealed to cultural, hard right-wing
conservatives. During the campaign the Marshall-Newman Amendment was also on
the ballot. Sidarth is of Indian ancestry, but was born and raised in Fairfax
County, Virginia. Allen's "Macaca moment" quickly went viral and, virtually
overnight, it became the hot topic on all of the network and cable television
news shows. Webb won by approximately a third of a percent ‚Äì 8,805 votes ‚Äì
but it wasn't until November 9, 2006 that Allen finally held a press conference
in Alexandria, Virginia announcing he had conceded the race to now Senator
Elect, James Webb, and would not seek a recount. Tenure.
Co-authored the Internet Tax Nondiscrimination Act, which extends the ban on
various Internet taxes until 2007 In 2002, Allen co-sponsored, together with
Senators Ron Wyden and Joe Lieberman, bipartisan legislation that promoted
nanotechnology research and development in the United States. The 21st century
Nanotechnology Research & Development Act was signed into law by President Bush
on December 3, 2003. The Act launched the National Nanotechnology Program, to
establish goals, priorities, and metrics for evaluation of federal
nanotechnology research and development, investment in federal nanotech
research and development programs, and provide for interagency coordination of
federal nanotechnology activities. The National Nanotechnology Program, the
single largest federally-funded, multi-agency scientific research initiative
since the space program in the 1960s, got $3.63¬ billion of funding over the
period of four years. Allen was the founding Chair of the Congressional
Nanotechnology Caucus. In 2009, he joined the board of the company Nano Risk
Assessment, Inc. Committee assignments. Allen was a member of the Commerce,
Science and Transportation Committee, the Small Business and Entrepreneurship
Committee, the Foreign Relations Committee and the Energy and Natural Resources
Committee. Allen was appointed in the last Congress to serve as the chairman of
the High Tech Task Force. Allen was elected as a member of the Senate
Republican leadership as Chairman of the National Republican Senatorial
Committee in 2002, and oversaw a net gain of four seats for the Republicans in
the 2004 Senate elections. His successor as NRSC chair was Senator Elizabeth
Dole. Dole was chairman of the NRSC in 2006, when Allen was defeated for re-
election by Jim Webb. Post-Senate career (2007‚àípresent). Political ambitions.
Prior to his loss to Webb in the November 2006 senatorial election, Allen had
traveled a number of times to Iowa (the first state with a presidential caucus)
and New Hampshire (the first state with a presidential primary). He had been
widely assumed to be preparing a run for president. In a survey of 175
Washington insiders by "National Journal", released in April 2005, Allen was
the frontrunner for the Republican nomination for the 2008 presidential
election. In an insider survey by "National Journal" a year later, in May 2006,
Allen had dropped to second place, and John McCain held a 3-to-1 lead over
Allen. After the November 2006 election, it was widely assumed that Allen was
no longer a viable candidate for the Republican nomination, principally because
of the damage caused by the incidents that caused his double-digit lead in the
polls to turn to a narrow defeat that contributed to the Republicans' loss of
control of the Senate. On December 10, 2006, Allen gave an interview in which
he stated that he would not seek the 2008 nomination. In October 2007, the
campaign of GOP presidential candidate Fred Thompson announced that Allen was
one of three national co-chairs for the 2008 presidential campaign. That month,
Allen declined to speculate on his political future. Commenting on the 2009
governor's race in Virginia, Allen not only said that he had made no decisions
but that "Susan and I have listened to a lot of people encouraging us to do
that." On January 8, 2008, Allen said that he would not run for governor in
2009, but later left open the possibility of challenging Democratic Senator
Webb in 2012. Political activism. In March 2007, Allen became a Reagan Scholar
with Young America's Foundation. He is also the President of George Allen
Strategies, a lobbying and consulting firm based in Alexandria, Virginia, a
position he had held since July 2007. Between January 2010 and August 2011, he
was paid $347,000 by the firm. In 2009, Allen started the American Energy
Freedom Center, a non-profit conservative think tank that is a project of the
Institute for Energy Research. He was paid $20,000 to be the center's chairman
in 2010; he ceased his affiliation with the organization in December of that
year. In May 2010, Regnery Press published Allen's first book, "What Washington
Can Learn From the World of Sports", in which he drew parallels and contrasts
between two of the nation‚Äôs favorite passions. Allen suggested that
government needed to look no further than the football field, baseball diamond,
or basketball court to solve today's pressing problems because, in sports,
teamwork is essential, cheating is frowned upon, and the rules don‚Äôt change.
2012 U.S. Senate election. On January 24, 2011, Allen officially announced,
through a video on his campaign website, that he was running for the Republican
nomination for the U.S. Senate, to reclaim the seat held by Senator Jim Webb,
who defeated Allen on November 2006. As of January 2011, the only other
announced Republican candidate was Virginia Tea Party leader Jamie Radtke. In
the June Republican primary, George Allen took the party's nod winning more
than 65% of the vote, defeating Jamie Radtke (23%), Robert G. Marshall (7%) and
E.W. Jackson (5%). In February 2011, Webb announced he was not running for
reelection. Allen faced former Virginia state governor Tim Kaine in the
November 2012 general election, and was defeated more heavily than in the 2006
race against Webb.
