George Lakoff George P. Lakoff (, born May 24, 1941) is an American cognitive
linguist and professor of linguistics at the University of California,
Berkeley, where he has taught since 1972. Although some of his research
involves questions traditionally pursued by linguists, such as the conditions
under which a certain linguistic construction is grammatically viable, he is
most famous for his ideas about the centrality of metaphor to human thinking,
political behavior and society. He is particularly famous for his association
with the concept of the embodied mind, which he has written about in relation
to mathematics. In recent years he has applied his work to the realm of
politics, exploring this in his books. He is a member of the scientific
committee of the Fundacion IDEAS, Spain's Socialist Party's think tank. He was
the founder of the now defunct progressive think tank the Rockridge Institute.
Reappraisal of metaphor. Lakoff's claim that Chomsky asserts independence
between syntax and semantics has been rejected by Chomsky, who has given
examples from within his work where he talks about the relationship between his
semantics and syntax. Chomsky goes further and claims that Lakoff has
"virtually no comprehension of the work he is discussing" (the work in question
being Chomsky's). His differences with Chomsky contributed to fierce,
acrimonious debates among linguists that have come to be known as the
"linguistics wars". Lakoff's original thesis on conceptual metaphor was
expressed in his book with Mark Johnson entitled "Metaphors We Live By" in
1980. Metaphor has been seen within the Western scientific tradition as purely
a linguistic construction. The essential thrust of Lakoff's work has been the
argument that metaphors are primarily a conceptual construction, and indeed are
central to the development of thought. He says, "Our ordinary conceptual
system, in terms of which we both think and act, is fundamentally metaphorical
in nature." Non-metaphorical thought is for Lakoff only possible when we talk
about purely physical reality. For Lakoff the greater the level of abstraction
the more layers of metaphor are required to express it. People do not notice
these metaphors for various reasons. One reason is that some metaphors become
'dead' and we no longer recognize their origin. Another reason is that we just
don't "see" what is "going on". For Lakoff, the development of thought has been
the process of developing better metaphors. The application of one domain of
knowledge to another domain of knowledge offers new perceptions and
understandings. Lakoff's theory has applications throughout all academic
disciplines and much of human social interaction. Lakoff has explored some of
the implications of the embodied mind thesis in a number of books, most written
with coauthors. Embodied mind. When Lakoff claims the mind is "embodied", he is
arguing that almost all of human cognition, up through the most abstract
reasoning, depends on and makes use of such concrete and "low-level" facilities
as the sensorimotor system and the emotions. Therefore embodiment is a
rejection not only of dualism vis-a-vis mind and matter, but also of claims
that human reason can be basically understood without reference to the
underlying "implementation details". Lakoff offers three complementary but
distinct sorts of arguments in favor of embodiment. First, using evidence from
neuroscience and neural network simulations, he argues that certain concepts,
such as color and spatial relation concepts (e.g. "red" or "over"; see also
"qualia"), can be almost entirely understood through the examination of how
processes of perception or motor control work. Second, based on cognitive
linguistics' analysis of figurative language, he argues that the reasoning we
use for such abstract topics as warfare, economics, or morality is somehow
rooted in the reasoning we use for such mundane topics as spatial
relationships. (See conceptual metaphor.) Finally, based on research in
cognitive psychology and some investigations in the philosophy of language, he
argues that very few of the categories used by humans are actually of the
black-and-white type amenable to analysis in terms of necessary and sufficient
conditions. On the contrary, most categories are supposed to be much more
complicated and messy, just like our bodies. "We are neural beings," Lakoff
states, "Our brains take their input from the rest of our bodies. What our
bodies are like and how they function in the world thus structures the very
concepts we can use to think. We cannot think just anything — only what our
embodied brains permit." Lakoff believes consciousness to be neurally embodied,
however he explicitly states that the mechanism is not just neural computation
alone. Using the concept of disembodiment, Lakoff supports the physicalist
approach to the afterlife. If the soul can not have any of the properties of
the body, then Lakoff claims it can not feel, perceive, think, be conscious, or
have a personality. If this is true, then Lakoff asks what would be the point
of the afterlife? Many scientists share the belief that there are problems with
falsifiability and foundation ontologies purporting to describe "what exists",
to a sufficient degree of rigor to establish a reasonable method of empirical
validation. But Lakoff takes this further to explain why hypotheses built with
complex metaphors cannot be directly falsified. Instead, they can only be
rejected based on interpretations of empirical observations guided by other
complex metaphors. This is what he means when he says, in "The Embodied Mind",
that falsifiability itself can never be established by any reasonable method
that would not rely ultimately on a shared human bias. The bias he's referring
to is the set of conceptual metaphors governing how people interpret
observations. Lakoff is, with coauthors Mark Johnson and Rafael E. Núñez, one
of the primary proponents of the embodied mind thesis. Lakoff discussed these
themes in his 2001 Gifford Lectures at the University of Glasgow, published as
"The Nature and Limits of Human Understanding". Others who have written about
the embodied mind include philosopher Andy Clark (See his Being There),
philosopher and neurobiologists Humberto Maturana and Francisco Varela and his
student Evan Thompson (See Varela, Thompson & Rosch's "The Embodied Mind"),
roboticists such as Rodney Brooks, Rolf Pfeifer and Tom Ziemke, the physicist
David Bohm (see his "Thought As A System"), Ray Gibbs (see his "Embodiment and
Cognitive Science"), John Grinder and Richard Bandler in their neuro-linguistic
programming, and Julian Jaynes. All of these writers can be traced back to
earlier philosophical writings, most notably in the phenomenological tradition,
such as Maurice Merleau-Ponty and Heidegger. The basic thesis of "embodied
mind" is also traceable to the American contextualist or pragmatist tradition,
notably John Dewey in such works as Art As Experience. Mathematics. According
to Lakoff, even mathematics is subjective to the human species and its
cultures: thus "any question of math's being inherent in physical reality is
moot, since there is no way to know whether or not it is." By this, he is
saying that there is nothing outside of the thought structures we derive from
our embodied minds that we can use to "prove" that mathematics is somehow
beyond biology. Lakoff and Rafael E. Núñez (2000) argue at length that
mathematical and philosophical ideas are best understood in light of the
embodied mind. The philosophy of mathematics ought therefore to look to the
current scientific understanding of the human body as a foundation ontology,
and abandon self-referential attempts to ground the operational components of
mathematics in anything other than "meat". Mathematical reviewers have
generally been critical of Lakoff and Núñez, pointing to mathematical errors.
(Lakoff claims that these errors have been corrected in subsequent printings.)
Their book has yet to elicit much of a reaction from philosophers of
mathematics, although the book can be read as making strong claims about how
that philosophy should proceed. The small community specializing in the
psychology of mathematical learning, to which Núñez belongs, is paying
attention. Lakoff has also claimed that we should remain agnostic about whether
math is somehow wrapped up with the very nature of the universe. Early in 2001
Lakoff told the American Association for the Advancement of Science (AAAS):
"Mathematics may or may not be out there in the world, but there's no way that
we scientifically could possibly tell." This is because the structures of
scientific knowledge are not "out there" but rather in our brains, based on the
details of our anatomy. Therefore, we cannot "tell" that mathematics is "out
there" without relying on conceptual metaphors rooted in our biology. This
claim bothers those who believe that there really is a way we could "tell". The
falsifiability of this claim is perhaps the central problem in the cognitive
science of mathematics, a field that attempts to establish a foundation
ontology based on the human cognitive and scientific process. Political
significance and involvement. Lakoff's application of cognitive linguistics to
politics, literature, philosophy and mathematics has led him into territory
normally considered basic to political science. Lakoff has publicly expressed
both ideas about the conceptual structures that he views as central to
understanding the political process, and some of his particular political
views. He almost always discusses the latter in terms of the former. "Moral
Politics" (1996, revisited in 2002) gives book-length consideration to the
conceptual metaphors that Lakoff sees as present in the minds of American
"liberals" and "conservatives". The book is a blend of cognitive science and
political analysis. Lakoff makes an attempt to keep his personal views confined
to the last third of the book, where he explicitly argues for the superiority
of the liberal vision. Lakoff argues that the differences in opinions between
liberals and conservatives follow from the fact that they subscribe with
different strength to two different metaphors about the relationship of the
state to its citizens. Both, he claims, see governance through metaphors of the
family. Conservatives would subscribe more strongly and more often to a model
that he calls the "strict father model" and has a family structured around a
strong, dominant "father" (government), and assumes that the "children"
(citizens) need to be disciplined to be made into responsible "adults"
(morality, self-financing). Once the "children" are "adults", though, the
"father" should not interfere with their lives: the government should stay out
of the business of those in society who have proved their responsibility. In
contrast, Lakoff argues that liberals place more support in a model of the
family, which he calls the "nurturant parent model", based on "nurturant
values", where both "mothers" and "fathers" work to keep the essentially good
"children" away from "corrupting influences" (pollution, social injustice,
poverty, etc.). Lakoff says that most people have a blend of both metaphors
applied at different times, and that political speech works primarily by
invoking these metaphors and urging the subscription of one over the other.
Lakoff further argues that one of the reasons liberals have had difficulty
since the 1980s is that they have not been as aware of their own guiding
metaphors, and have too often accepted conservative terminology framed in a way
to promote the strict father metaphor. Lakoff insists that liberals must cease
using terms like "partial birth abortion" and "tax relief" because they are
manufactured specifically to allow the possibilities of only certain types of
opinions. "Tax relief" for example, implies explicitly that taxes are an
affliction, something someone would want "relief" from. To use the terms of
another metaphoric worldview, Lakoff insists, is to unconsciously support it.
Liberals must support linguistic think tanks in the same way that conservatives
do if they are going to succeed in appealing to those in the country who share
their metaphors. Lakoff has distributed some much briefer political analyses
via the Internet. One article distributed this way is "Metaphor and War: The
Metaphor System Used to Justify War in the Gulf", in which Lakoff argues that
the particular conceptual metaphors used by the first Bush administration to
justify American involvement in the Gulf ended up either obscuring reality, or
putting a spin on the facts that was accommodating to the administration's case
for military action. Between 2003 and 2008, Lakoff was involved with a
progressive think tank, the Rockridge Institute, an involvement that follows in
part from his recommendations in "Moral Politics". Among his activities with
the Institute, which concentrates in part on helping liberal candidates and
politicians with re-framing political metaphors, Lakoff has given numerous
public lectures and written accounts of his message from "Moral Politics." In
2008, Lakoff joined Fenton Communications, the nation's largest public interest
communications firm, as a Senior Consultant. One of his political works, "Don't
Think of an Elephant! Know Your Values and Frame the Debate", self-labeled as
"the Essential Guide for Progressives", was published in September 2004 and
features a foreword by former Democratic presidential candidate Howard Dean.
Disagreement with Steven Pinker. In 2006 Steven Pinker wrote an unfavorable
review of Lakoff's book "Whose Freedom? The Battle over America's Most
Important Idea". Pinker's review was published in "The New Republic". Pinker
argued that Lakoff's propositions are unsupported and his prescriptions a
recipe for electoral failure. He wrote that Lakoff was condescending and
deplored Lakoff's "shameless caricaturing of beliefs" and his "faith in the
power of euphemism". Pinker portrayed Lakoff's arguments as "cognitive
relativism, in which mathematics, science, and philosophy are beauty contests
between rival frames rather than attempts to characterize the nature of
reality". Lakoff wrote a rebuttal to the review stating that his position on
many matters is the exact reverse of what Pinker attributes to him. Lakoff
explicitly rejected, for example, the cognitive relativism and faith in
euphemism described above, arguing in favor of a deeper understanding of
rationality that discards the modal logic conceptualization of rational thought
in favor of the better supported frame interpretation. Works. Published by:
Springer
