Gerard Toal Gerard Toal (; born 1962 in the Republic of Ireland) is Professor
of Government and International Affairs and Director of the Government and
International Affairs program, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State
University, National Capital Region campus. Toal grew up in the border region
of Ireland, in the village of Smithborough, County Monaghan. He received a B.A.
in History and Geography from National University of Ireland, Maynooth with
First Class Honours in 1982. He obtained a M.A. in Geography from the
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign in 1984 and a Ph.D. in Political
Geography from Syracuse University in 1989. John O'Loughlin in Illinois and
John A. Agnew in Syracuse, were his academic advisors. Following his Ph D, Toal
was hired in 1989 as Assistant Professor of Geography at Virginia Tech in
Blacksburg where he worked for ten years before moving to the Washington DC
region to establish what became the Government and International Affairs
program in the School of Public and International Affairs. Toal’s research
specializations include critical geopolitics, nationalism, political geography,
post-Communism, and globalization. He conducts research in Washington DC,
Bosnia-Herzegovina and on the Caucasus region. Ó Tuathail has been a key
figure in establishing "Critical Geopolitics" as a domain of research within
political geography and international relations. He is one of the contemporary
geographers featured in the book "Key Thinkers in Space and Place". He had
authored, co-authored and/or edited seven books. His current book is "Bosnia
Remade: Ethnic Cleansing and Its Reversal", co-authored with Dr Carl Dahlman
(Associate Professor of Geography at Miami University in Ohio). It examines how
wartime ethnic cleaning and a post-war displaced person returns process
transformed the character of three towns in Bosnia. Professor Toal is an
associate editor for the academic journals "Geopolitics" and "Eurasian
Geography and Economics", and serves on the editorial board of "Political
Geography" and "Nationalities Papers". Toal has held fellowships at the
Copenhagen Peace Research Institute, and the Center for International Studies
at the University of Southern California. In 2005 he testified before the
United States Congress on political developments in Bosnia-Herzegovina. He
lives in Washington DC with his wife and two daughters.
