German student movement The German student movement (also called 68er-Bewegung,
movement of 1968, or soixante-huitaires) was a protest movement that took place
during the late 1960s in West Germany. It was largely a reaction against the
perceived authoritarianism and hypocrisy of the German government and other
Western governments, and the poor living conditions of students. A wave of
protests—some violent—swept West Germany, fueled by violent over-reaction
by the police and encouraged by contemporary protest movements across the
world. Following more than a century of conservatism among German students, the
German student movement also marked a significant major shift to the left and
radicalisation of student politics. Early stages of the movement. In 1966, for
the first time in fifteen years, the German economy went into recession and the
FDP finally withdrew from Ludwig Erhard's CDU/CSU/FDP coalition government.
With the forming of the CDU/CSU/SPD coalition government under Kurt Georg
Kiesinger the voice of the opposition within the Bundestag was seriously
weakened. This led some students to conclude that this encouraged authoritarian
and anti-democratic attitudes in government and therefore justified and indeed
necessitated the transfer of opposition from parliament to bodies outside it.
At the same time, the shock of realising that the "Wirtschaftswunder" could not
last forever led many in the student body, influenced by Marxist economic
theory, to believe that the economic wealth of the nation, instead of improving
the standard of living of the working class, would destroy it and lead to an
ever-growing gap between the rich and the poor. The first goal was the source
of all the others and thus the most important in their minds. To summarise, the
students rejected traditional, parliamentary decision making-processes, social
injustice and the inequalities of wealth. They felt the need to overcome and
change these things. The past. To the students, the German chapter of Fascism
was not yet closed. Many former Nazis were still working for the government or
at the universities (in fact, then-Chancellor Kurt Georg Kiesinger had formerly
been a member of the NSDAP) and the newly-formed right-wing National Democratic
Party of Germany (NPD) was attracting more and more voters. In addition to that
the students had to deal with the fact that they were identified as Germans and
blamed for the crimes committed by their parents’ generation. The students
did not want to be held responsible for their parents’ deeds. But their
parents acted as if it were no concern of theirs; when the students tried to
show the public that the anti-fascist idea of the constitution was not yet
established in German society, the government and the press felt extremely
offended, feeling they had formed a democratic society and did not want it to
be attacked. Reforming the universities. To support its new economic policies
the government wanted to change the universities, producing graduates faster by
introducing a time limit on courses and limiting the number of students. The
students, however, did not want to adjust to the needs of the economy and the
government. In fact, they wanted to adjust the universities to their own
wishes. They wanted more rights in the running of universities, better-equipped
workplaces and the expulsion of the professors who had been active during the
Nazi period. The university boards did not react to the students' protest and
introduced the time limit for studying. When this time limit was introduced at
the Free University of Berlin during the summer holidays of 1966 the students
were not there, and so were unable to protest against it; instead, the first
big sit-in of the German student movement happened when they returned after the
holidays, with about 4,000 participants. The events at the Free University of
Berlin are representative of the events at all universities in Germany, as the
same events were quickly repeated elsewhere. The war in Vietnam and political
suppression. Through their increasing interest in politics the students quickly
engaged in discussions concerning the war in Vietnam. They formed the opinion
that the United States had no right to fight in Vietnam, not only because of
the victims but mainly because of what they saw as an imperialistic foreign
policy. The government, however, had to back the USA since they were still
watching over Germany after World War Two. For this reason, university boards
put a ban on political activities by students (e.g. discussions) at the
universities. They explained this act by saying that science should always be
neutral. This was the same explanation the professors had used to justify their
behaviour during the Third Reich. The students wanted to be able to act
politically, not only because of the war in Vietnam, but to protest against the
horrible conditions in the Third World as students and not only as individuals.
Emergency Acts. The students were strongly opposed to the German Emergency Acts
which were due to be passed, which would allow the government to limit civil
rights in the case of an emergency. Among other things, they would allow the
government to restrict freedom of movement and to limit privacy and
confidentiality of telecommunications correspondence. Action and reaction. By
the year 1966 the number of students which were interested in the conflict
between the students and the authorities had increased. Many of those who had
not been interested before became at least passively interested by now. This
newly-formed public took part in the demonstrations, sit-ins and other protest
actions arranged by the students and their organizations (e.g. the
Sozialistischer Deutscher Studentenbund). The government tried to fight the
situation by decreasing the funds for universities and student organizations
and by turning public opinion against the students with the help of the press.
The view that students should study and not demonstrate grew stronger. The
students were also repressed in the streets by the police. Yet, the more
pressure the government put on the students, the more they came together. On
June 2, 1967 the conflict would finally escalate. Students had organized
demonstrations against the official visit by the Shah of Iran. In their
opinion, the German government was demonstrating a positive attitude towards a
dictatorial government that was suppressing and torturing its own people.
During the first demonstration in front of the Opera House, which the Shah was
visiting, the police of Berlin and the Iranian service attacked the protestors.
In the turmoil, the unarmed student Benno Ohnesorg was shot in the head from
behind by Polizeiobermeister (Police Sergeant) Karl-Heinz Kurras and killed.
The following days saw many demonstrations throughout the whole republic
against police brutality. The students in Berlin, however, were anxious and in
a desperate situation. The police were preventing them from gathering in
public, the universities had submitted their authority to the government and
the press wrote that the students were the brutal and aggressive component of
the demonstrations and that they had provoked the death of Benno Ohnesorg. Even
though there were some students groups supporting the idea of a violent
revolution the protesting students were mostly peaceful. For the following days
the students took over control of the Free University of Berlin. Finally being
able to meet again, they used the time to discuss and reflect on the events of
the past days. The revolt continues. The spirit of the students in Berlin
spread across the whole country. In autumn 1967 there were organized protest
groups at nearly all universities in Germany. In the following months some of
the largest and most brutal demonstrations in the history of the German
republic happened. The press, especially the tabloid "Bild-Zeitung" newspaper
was telling the public what to think about those protesters. Its publisher,
Axel Springer, did not publish any positive articles about the students.
Springer supported the government and was spreading the government's views
among its readers. At Easter 1968, there was an attempted assassination of one
of the most important members of the SDS, Rudi Dutschke. The students were
outraged because the “Springer” press and the government had named Rudi
Dutschke their “public enemy”. Overnight students all over Germany
organized actions to block the delivery of the "Bild-Zeitung" by building
blockades and protesting in front of “Springer” buildings. During these
actions about 400 students were injured and two died. Rudi Dutschke died in
1979 of the late after-effects of his injury. The climax and the decline. The
revolt against the government reached its climax in May 1968. Students,
schoolchildren and members of workers' unions formed a group of 80,000 people
who demonstrated in the capital Bonn against the emergency legislature. Even
though the students mobilized as many people as possible to support their
actions they could not stop the Bundestag from passing the new law. This
failure marks the beginning of the end for the student movement. The former
union of many small student groups representing different theories on the same
topics was falling apart because they were blaming other groups' theories and
thinking for the failure of the whole movement. This meant that the students
were not working together anymore but against each other. By the end of the
year even the SDS, the strongest of all student organizations, was falling into
pieces. The effect. Although the students failed to overthrow the status quo,
the effects of the student movement are still visible today because the
movement did change things in Germany. Another side effect of the student
movement was the emancipation of women in Germany. Through their political work
women came to the opinion that they were being suppressed by a patriarchal
society and that they thus had to change this condition. In addition to that
the student movement brought up many theories on education and the raising of
children which have influenced the modern forms of these processes. These
changes and the huge influence on culture and art were probably the most
important effects of the student movement. An indirect effect was the "radical
decree" which was passed in the year 1972. It allowed the government to prevent
the employment of people in the public services if there were grounds to
believe that they did not support the free and democratic principles
(freiheitliche demokratische Grundordnung) outlined in the constitution
(Grundgesetz). Under the decree, which gradually fell into desuetude after
1976, around 3.5 million individuals were investigated and 10,000 refused
employment (fewer than 0.3%); 130 were dismissed. The student movement,
although it failed to achieve its main goals, brought many new and important
elements to German society and culture which influence the country even today.
A number of ministers in the Gerhard Schröder government were student
activists back in the 1960s and early 1970s. It is widely believed that the
conservatism of Pope Benedict XVI stems from his reaction to student protests
at the University of Tübingen in 1968, when he served as a professor of
theology.
