Girondist The Girondists (in French: Girondins, and sometimes Brissotins) were
a political faction in France within the Legislative Assembly and the National
Convention during the French Revolution. They campaigned for the end of the
monarchy but then resisted the spiraling momentum of the Revolution. They came
into conflict with The Mountain (Montagnards, a more radical faction within the
Jacobin Club). This conflict eventually led to the fall of the Girondists and
their mass execution, the beginning of the Reign of Terror. The Girondists were
a group of loosely-affiliated individuals rather than an organised political
party, and the name was at first informally applied because the most prominent
exponents of their point of view were deputies to the States-general from the
department of Gironde in southwest France. The famous painting "Death of Marat"
depicts the revenge killing of radical journalist (and denouncer of the
Girondists) Jean-Paul Marat by Girondist sympathizer, Charlotte Corday. Some
prominent Girondists were Jacques Pierre Brissot, Jean Marie Roland and his
wife Madame Roland. They had an ally in American Founding Father Thomas Paine.
Brissot and Madame Roland were executed with the guillotine and Jean Roland
(who was in hiding) committed suicide when he learned what had transpired.
Paine was arrested and imprisoned but narrowly escaped execution. Rise. Twelve
deputies represented the départment of the Gironde in Paris; six men hold the
distinction of having sat in both the Legislative Assembly and the National
Convention for this départment. These were five lawyers: Pierre Victurnien
Vergniaud, Marguerite Élie Guadet, Armand Gensonné, Jean Antoine Laffargue de
Grangeneuve and Jean Jay (also a Protestant pastor), and one tradesman Jean
François Ducos. In the Legislative Assembly, these represented a compact body
of opinion which, though not as yet definitely republican, was considerably
more advanced than the moderate royalism of the majority of the Parisian
deputies. Associated with these views was a group of deputies from elsewhere,
of whom the most notable were the Marquis de Condorcet, Claude Fauchet, Marc
David Lasource, Maximin Isnard, the Comte de Kersaint, Henri Larivière, and,
above all, Jacques Pierre Brissot, Jean Marie Roland and Jérôme Pétion,
elected mayor of Paris in succession to Jean Sylvain Bailly on 16 November
1791. Madame Roland, whose salon became their gathering-place, had a powerful
influence on the spirit and policy of the Girondists. But the party cohesion
they possessed was due to the energy of Brissot, who came to be regarded as
their mouthpiece in the Assembly and in the Jacobin Club. Hence the name
"Brissotins", coined by Camille Desmoulins, which was sometimes substituted for
that of "Girondins", sometimes closely coupled with it. These first came into
use strictly as party designations after the assembling of the National
Convention (20 September 1792), to which a large proportion of the deputies
from the Gironde who had sat in the Legislative Assembly were returned. Both
names appeared as terms of opprobrium in speeches by the orators of the Jacobin
Club, who freely denounced "the Royalists, the Federalists, the Brissotins, the
Girondins and all the enemies of the democracy" (FA Aulard, "La société des
Jacobins, Recueil de documents" (6 volumes, Paris, 1889, etc., V. 531)). In the
Legislative Assembly, the Girondists represented the principle of democratic
revolution within and of patriotic defiance to the European powers. They were
all-powerful in the Jacobin Club, where Brissot's influence had not yet been
ousted by Robespierre, and they did not hesitate to use this advantage to stir
up popular passion and intimidate those who sought to stay the progress of the
Revolution. They compelled the king in 1792 to choose a ministry composed of
their partisans—among them Roland, Charles François Dumouriez, Étienne
Clavière and Joseph Marie Servan de Gerbey; and they forced the declaration of
war against Habsburg Austria. In all this there was no apparent line of
cleavage between "La Gironde" and The Mountain. Montagnards and Girondists
alike were fundamentally opposed to the monarchy; both were democrats as well
as republicans; both were prepared to appeal to force in order to realise their
ideals; despite being accused of "federalism", the Girondists desired as little
as the Montagnards to break up the unity of France. Yet from the first the
leaders of the two parties stood in avowed opposition, in the Jacobin Club as
in the Assembly. Temperament largely accounts for the party dividing line. The
Girondists were radicals, "doctrinaires" and theorists rather than men of
action. They initially encouraged the armed petitions but then were dismayed
when this led to the "émeute" (riot) of June 20. Jean Marie Roland is typical
of their spirit, turning the Ministry of the Exterior into a publishing office
for tracts on the civic virtues, while in the provinces riotous mobs were
burning the châteaux unchecked. Girondists did not share the ferocious
fanaticism or the ruthless opportunism of the future Montagnard organisers of
the Reign of Terror. As the Revolution developed, the Girondists often found
themselves opposing its results; the overthrow of the monarchy on 10 August
1792 and the September Massacres of 1792 occurred while they still nominally
controlled the government, but the Girondists tried to distance themselves from
the results of the September massacre. With the advent of the National
Convention (22 September 1792), the core of like-minded deputies from the
Gironde expanded, as Boyer-Fonfrède, Lacaze, and Bergoeing joined five of the
six stalwarts of the Legislative Assembly (Jean Jay, the Protestant pastor,
having drifted to the Montagnard faction). Their numbers were increased by the
return to national politics by former National Constituent Assembly deputies
such as Rabaut Saint-Étienne, Pétion, and Kervélégan, as well as some
newcomers as British-American writer Thomas Paine, and popular journalist Jean
Louis Carra. Fall. The Girondists proposed suspending the king and summoning of
the National Convention; but they had agreed not to overthrow the monarchy
until Louis XVI had become impervious to their counsels. Once the republic was
established, they were anxious to stop the revolutionary movement which they
had helped to set in motion. The revolution had failed to deliver the immediate
gains that had been promised, and this made it difficult for the Girondists to
easily draw it to a close in the minds of the public. Moreover, the
"Septembriseurs"—Robespierre, Danton, Marat and their lesser
satellites—realised that not only their influence but their safety depended
on keeping the Revolution alive. Robespierre, who hated the Girondists, had
proposed to include them in the proscription lists of September 1792; The
Mountain Club to a man desired their overthrow. A group including some
Girondists prepared a draft constitution, known as the Girondin constitutional
project, which was presented to the National Convention in early 1793. Thomas
Paine was one of the signers of this proposal. The crisis came in March 1793.
The Girondists, who had a majority in the Convention, controlled the executive
council and filled the ministry, believed themselves invincible. Their orators
had no serious rivals in the hostile camp; their system was established in the
purest reason. But the Montagnards made up by their fanatical, or desperate,
energy and boldness for what they lacked in talent or in numbers. This was
especially fruitful because while the largest groups in the convention were the
Jacobins and Brissotins, uncommitted delegates accounted for almost half the
total number. The more radical Jacobins' rhetoric had behind them the
revolutionary Commune, the Sections (mass assemblies in districts) and the
National Guard of Paris, and they had gained control of the Jacobin club, where
Brissot, absorbed in departmental work, had been superseded by Robespierre. At
the trial of Louis XVI, most Girondists had voted for the "appeal to the
people", and so laid themselves open to the charge of "royalism"; they
denounced the domination of Paris and summoned provincial levies to their aid,
and so fell under suspicion of "federalism", though they rejected Buzot's
proposal to transfer the Convention to Versailles. They strengthened the
revolutionary Commune by first decreeing its abolition but withdrawing the
decree at the first sign of popular opposition. In the suspicious temper of the
times, this vacillating policy was doubly fatal. Marat never ceased his
denunciations of the "faction des hommes d'Etat" ("faction of the men of the
State"), by which France was being betrayed to her ruin, and his cry of "Nous
sommes trahis!" ("We are betrayed!") was re-echoed from group to group in the
streets of Paris. The growing hostility of Paris to the Girondists received a
fateful demonstration by the election, on 15 February 1793, of the bitter ex-
Girondist Jean-Nicolas Pache (1746–1823) to the mayoralty. Pache had twice
been minister of war in the Girondist government; but his incompetence had laid
him open to strong criticism, and on 4 February 1793 he had been replaced as
minister of war by a vote of the Convention. This was enough to secure him the
votes of the Paris electors when he was elected mayor ten days later. The
Mountain was strengthened by the accession of a significant ally whose one idea
was to use his new power to revenge himself on his former colleagues. Mayor
Pache, with "procureur" of the Commune Pierre Gaspard Chaumette, and deputy
"procurer" Jacques René Hébert, controlled the armed militias of the 48
revolutionary Sections of Paris, and prepared to turn this weapon against the
Convention. The abortive "émeute" of 10 March warned the Girondists of their
danger, and they responded with defensive moves including the appointment of
the Commission of Twelve on 18 May, the arrest of Marat and Hébert, and other
precautionary measures. They unintentionally increased the prestige of their
most vocal and bitter critic, Marat, by prosecuting him before the
Revolutionary Tribunal, where his acquittal was a foregone conclusion (April,
1793). The ominous threat by Girondist leader Maximin Isnard, uttered on 25
May, to "march France upon Paris" were instead met by Paris marching hastily
upon the Convention. The Girondist role in the government was undermined by the
popular uprisings of 27 and 31 May, and, finally, on 2 June 1793, François
Hanriot, head of the Paris National Guards, purged the Convention of the
Girondists. (see Days of 31 May and 2 June 1793). Reign of Terror. The fateful
list drawn up by Commandant-General of the Parisian National Guard, François
Hanriot, (with help from Marat), and endorsed by a decree of the intimidated
Convention, included 22 Girondist deputies and 10 of the 12 members of the
Commission of Twelve, who were ordered to be detained at their lodgings "under
the safeguard of the people". Some submitted, among them Gensonné, Guadet,
Vergniaud, Pétion, Birotteau and Boyer-Fonfrède. Others, including Brissot,
Louvet, Buzot, Lasource, Grangeneuve, Larivière and Bergoing, escaped from
Paris and, joined later by Guadet, Pétion and Birotteau, set to work to
organise a movement of the provinces against the capital. This attempt to stir
up civil war determined the wavering and frightened Convention. On 13 June
1793, it voted that the city of Paris had deserved well of the country, and
ordered the imprisonment of the detained deputies, the filling up of their
places in the Assembly by their "suppleants", and the initiation of vigorous
measures against the movement in the provinces. The assassination of Marat by
Charlotte Corday (13 July 1793) only served to increase the unpopularity of the
Girondists and to seal their fate. The excuse for the Terror that followed was
the imminent peril of France, menaced on the east by the advance of the armies
of the First Coalition (Austria, Prussia and Great Britain), on the west by the
Royalist insurrection of La Vendée, and the need for preventing at all costs
the outbreak of another civil war. On 28 July 1793, a decree of the Convention
proscribed 21 deputies as traitors and enemies of their country. They were
Antiboul, Boilleau the younger, Boyer-Fonfrêde, Brissot, Carra, Duchastel, the
younger Ducos, Dufriche de Valazé, Duprat, Fauchet, Gardien, Gensonné,
Lacaze, Lasource, Lauze-Deperret, Lehardi, Lesterpt-Beauvais, the elder
Minvielle, Sillery, Vergniaud and Viger, of whom five were deputies from the
Gironde. Those were sent to trial. Another 39 were included in the final "acte
d'accusation", accepted by the Convention on 24 October 1793, which stated the
crimes for which they were to be tried as their perfidious ambition, their
hatred of Paris, their "federalism" and, above all, their responsibility for
the attempt of their escaped colleagues to provoke civil war. Trial of
Girondists (1793). The trial of the 21, began before the Revolutionary Tribunal
on 24 October 1793. The verdict was a foregone conclusion. On 31 October, they
were borne to the guillotine in five tumbrils, the corpse of Dufriche de
Valazé—who had killed himself—was carried with them. They met death with
great courage, singing the refrain "Plutôt la mort que l'esclavage" ("rather
death than slavery"). Of those who escaped to the provinces, after wandering
about singly or in groups, most were either captured and executed or committed
suicide. They included Barbaroux, Buzot, Condorcet, Grangeneuve, Guadet,
Kersaint, Pétion, Rabaut de Saint-Etienne and Rebecqui. Roland had killed
himself at Rouen on 15 November 1793, a week after the execution of his wife. A
very few escaped, including Jean-Baptiste Louvet de Couvrai, whose "Mémoires"
give a thrilling picture of the sufferings of the fugitives. Girondists as
martyrs. The survivors of the party made an effort to re-enter the Convention
after the fall of Robespierre on 27 July 1794, but it was not until 5 March
1795 that they were formally reinstated. On October 3 of the same year (11
Vendémiaire, year III) a solemn "fête" in honour of the Girondist "martyrs of
liberty" was celebrated in the Convention.
