Glamourbomb A glamourbomb is an act aimed at challenging or altering
perceptions—in particular, expanding the target's view of reality, with the
hope of encouraging belief in magic, and/or magical beings such as fairies,
nature spirits, etc. The people who engage in glamourbombing are quite
varied—many are members of the Otherkin subculture, while others are
practitioners of various forms of magic or neopaganism (particularly of those
traditions with an appreciation for chaos and the Trickster archetype, such as
Discordians and chaos magicians), or simply individuals drawn to the imagery
and mythology of faerie and the desire to foster a more magical world. The term
glamourbomb (sometimes written as two words, i.e. "glamour bomb") was coined in
the late 1990s, as part of a discussion on a mailing list called Darkfae-L,
which was geared toward people interested in magic, fairy lore, and other
related forms of esotericism. The word "glamour" is used in its older sense, as
a reference to magic (based on the archaic word "grammarye)," particularly
magic focussed on altering perceptions, which is also commonly associated with
fairies. The "bomb" reference was meant to suggesting a style of ambush, a
half-jesting resemblance to terrorism: "Something dropped unexpectedly in one's
midst, rapid disassembly... in this case, disassembly of assumptions, habits,
pretensions, and rigid attitudes." However, similar acts had been taking place
long before the word was coined. Most glamourbombing is performed anonymously
or in disguise, so as to keep the focus on the act itself, and not the actor.
In many cases, the effect of the act would also be lessened if its origin were
known. The intent is to cause people to believe they have experienced something
magical, to cause them to question the boundaries of their concept of reality,
not to impress them with one's own creativity. The intent can be to inspire
feelings of awe and wonder, happiness, or fear, as long as it in some way
challenges the boundaries of the real and the ordinary. There are a number of
cultural precedents and related concepts that may have provided some of the
inspiration for the phenomenon of glamourbombing. There are clear parallels to
performance art and street theatre, and the focus of altering perceptions and
causing people to question their preconceptions is similar in many ways to the
intent of culture jamming, though with a spiritual/magical rather than
political motive. Another related concept, explicitly cited as the direct
inspiration of glamourbombing, is Hakim Bey's notion of "Poetic Terrorism".
Anne Herbert's admonition to "practice random kindness and senseless acts of
beauty" could also be seen as related, though it is worth noting that glamour
bombs are not always intended to be kind or beautiful, and may in some
instances be startling or disturbing. The case of the Cottingley Fairies could
be said to be one of the earliest instances of glamourbombing, though it took
place long before the term itself was coined. The movie "Amelie" is also
popular with glamourbombers, although the intent of the protagonist's acts of
mischief is not overtly magical.
