Glenn W. Smith Glenn W. Smith (born September 30, 1953 in Houston, Texas) is an
author, activist and political consultant. Biography. Smith was a journalist
for the "Houston Chronicle" from 1979 to 1985 and the "Houston Post" from 1985
to 1988. He covered state and national political affairs before leaving
journalism to work for then-Texas Lt. Gov. Bill Hobby in early 1988. He
subsequently worked for the late U.S. Senator Lloyd Bentsen, and managed Ann
Richards' 1990 primary victory in her successful campaign for Governor of
Texas. Throughout the 1990s Smith designed public affairs campaigns for a
variety of state and national clients. A managing director of Public
Strategies, Inc., he wrote and produced award-winning communications for
broadcast and direct mail, and designed communications strategies for business,
universities, activist groups, and progressive candidates. Smith left Public
Strategies in 2001 and launched his own company, Affinity Dynamics, Inc. ADI
provides strategic media, advertising and communications consulting to a
variety of non-governmental organizations, businesses, political campaigns and
advocacy groups. In 2003 Smith managed MoveOn.org's campaign against Tom
DeLay's mid-decade congressional redistricting. In 2004, Smith helped found
Texans for Truth, a 527 organization that promoted fair, open elections and
raised questions about George W. Bush's service in the National Guard during
the Vietnam War. Smith has taught "religion and politics" at the Starr King
School for the Ministry in Berkeley, California. He sponsored and organized
national events with progressive religious leaders, including events
challenging the Right Wing's "Justice Sunday" rallies in 2005, a celebration of
Dr. Martin Luther King at Riverside Church in New York City, and "Freedom and
Faith" bus tours throughout the northeast and mid-west. Smith is the author of
"The Politics of Deceit" (2004) and "Unfit Commander" (2004). He is director of
the Texas Progress Council, a progressive think tank in Austin, and was a
senior fellow at George Lakoff's Rockridge Institute in Berkeley.
