Global citizens movement In most discussions, the global citizens movement is a
socio-political process rather than a political organization or party
structure. The term is often used synonymously with the anti-globalization
movement or the global justice movement. Colloquially the term is also used in
this imprecise manner. Global citizens movement has been used by activists to
refer to a number of organized and overlapping citizens groups who seek to
influence public policy often with the hope of establishing global solidarity
on an issue. Such efforts include advocacy on ecological sustainability,
corporate responsibility, social justice and similar progressive issues. In
theoretical discussions of social movements, global citizens movement refers to
a complex and unprecedented phenomena made possible by the unique subjective
and objective conditions of the planetary phase of civilization. The term is
used to distinguish the latent potential for a profound shift in values among
an aware and engaged citizenry from existing transnational citizens movements
which tend to focus on specific issues (such as the anti-war movement).
Background. The concept of "global citizenship" first emerged among the Greek
Cynics in the 4th Century BCE (9.6 ky), who coined the term “cosmopolitan”
– meaning "citizen of the world". The Roman Stoics later elaborated on the
concept. The contemporary concept of cosmopolitanism, which proposes that all
individuals belong to a single moral community, has gained a new salience as
scholars examine the ethical requirements of the planetary phase of
civilization. The idea that today’s objective and subjective conditions have
increased the latency for an emergent global civic identity has been argued by
the authors of the Global Scenario Group’s final report Great Transition: the
Promise and Lure of the Times Ahead. Similar arguments for the existence of a
latent pool of tens of millions of people ready to identify around new values
of earth consciousness have been put forth by such authors as Paul Raskin (see
World Lines: Pathways, Pivots, and the Global Future), Paul H. Ray (see
Cultural Creatives), and David Korten (see Great Turning). Organizations, such
as Oxfam International believe that a global citizens movement rooted in social
and economic justice is emerging and is necessary for ending global poverty.
Visions of a Global Citizens Movement. In the last chapter of his book, "Red
Sky at Morning", Gus Speth describes the potential for a new type of social
movement composed of "we the people, as citizens" rooted in the principles of
the Earth Charter to lead the transition in consciousness and values necessary
for the emergence of a new planetary civilization. Orion Kriegman, author of
Dawn of the Cosmopolitan: The Hope of a Global Citizens Movement, states,
“Transnational corporations, governments, and non-governmental organizations
(NGOs) remain powerful global actors, but all of these would be deeply
influenced by a coherent, worldwide association of millions of people who call
for priority to be placed on new values of quality of life, human solidarity,
and environmental sustainability.” Kriegman distinguishes this “coherent,
worldwide association of millions” from the existing fragmented social
movements active in the World Social Forum. These movements tend to be issue-
specific – focused on labor, environment, human rights, feminist issues,
indigenous struggles, poverty, AIDS, and numerous other interrelated but
“siloed” efforts. Coherence among these movements would require a reframing
of their work under the rubric of the struggle for a socially just and
ecologically sustainable global society and the establishment of an
institutional structure to defend the rights of humanity, future generations,
and the biosphere. Kriegman asserts, “The upsurge of civil society activity,
in the form of NGOs and social movements, over the past few decades can be
understood as an early manifestation of the latency in the global system, and
at the same time this transnational activity helps deepen the latency. However,
existing social movements have not found a way to effectively balance the
creative tension between pluralism and coherence to provide a collective
framework for theory and action. Without a shared framework, it is hard to
imagine how the latent potential would coalesce into a global systemic
movement. The development of a shared framework will depend on new forms of
leadership to facilitate engaged dialogue inclusive of diverse voices.”
Critiques of a Global Citizens Movement. The major critique of the notion of a
global citizens movement centers on the potential for the emergence of
solidarity on issues at the global level. Nationalism, racism, and the
dominance of the Westphalian state system are considered antithetical to the
adoption of a global civic identity. However, some scholars point out that the
historical emergence of nationalism must have felt just as improbable in a time
of warring city-states, and yet in retrospect it appears inevitable. A more
radical critique stems from the arguments put forth by Michael Hardt and
Antonio Negri in their book Multitude and enshrines Foucault’s notion of a
“plurality of resistance” as the only legitimate path forward. This
argument asserts that an organized movement among the vast multitude is both
undesirable and impossible. Instead of leadership and organizational
structures, Hardt and Negri put faith in the emergence of spontaneous coherence
due to increasing self-organized networks among various autonomous resistance
movements. They critique the notion that there could be legitimate leaders,
democratically chosen through a formal network of grassroots structures, acting
on behalf of a big-tent pluralistic association of global citizens to directly
confront the entrenched power of transnational corporations and state
governments. However, it remains unclear how a network of autonomous movements
would differ in practice from the vision of an authentic global citizens
movement. References. Florini, A. 2000. The Third Force: The Rise of
Transnational Civil Society. New York: Carnegie Endowment. ISBN 0-87003-180-
5 Gelder, Melinda. 2006. Meeting the Enemy, Becoming a Friend. Boulder: Bauu
Press. ISBN 0-9721349-5-6 Kriegman, Orion and Great Transition Initiative.
2006. "Global citizens movement." Encyclopedia of Earth. Eds. Cutler J.
Cleveland. (Washington, D.C.: Environmental Information Coalition, National
Council for Science and the Environment). Mayo, Marjorie. 2005. Global
Citizens: Social Movements and the Challenge of Globalization. New York:
Palgrave Macmillan. ISBN 978-1-84277-138-9 Raskin, P., T. Banuri, G. Gallopín,
P. Gutman, A. Hammond, R. Kates, and R. Swart. 2002. The Great Transition: The
Promise and the Lure of the Times Ahead. Boston, MA: Tellus Institute. Smith,
Jackie. 2007. Social Movements for Global Democracy. Themes in Global Social
Change. Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University Press. ISBN 978-0-8018-8744-4
