Global Environment and Trade Study The Global Environment & Trade Study (GETS)
was a non-profit research institute established in 1994 to study the complex
linkages between international trade and environmental sustainability. GETS
supported numerous research projects on the legal, economic, and ecological
aspects of trade and environment. GETS was centered at Yale University. GETS
also studied the expanding role of civil society in global governance. In 2004,
the GETS Board decided that a sufficient amount had been accomplished over the
decade, and that it was time to terminate the project. Major Accomplishments.
GETS had four major accomplishments: Board Members and Staff. The founders of
GETS were: James Cameron, Steve Charnovitz, Daniel Esty, and Mark
Ritchie.1995–86 Biennial Report, ibid, pp. 6–7. In 2000, Monica Araya
[http://www.monica-araya.com] joined the GETS Board and focused on environment,
trade and investment issues in developing countries. Some staff associated with
GETS included Orin Kirshner, who served as Executive Director from 2001–2003,
Beatrice Chaytor, Hari Osofsky, and John Wickham. Institutional Participation
and Collaboration. GETS had three major participating institutions—the
Foundation for International Environmental Law and Development (located in
London), the Institute for Agriculture and Trade Policy (located in
Minneapolis), and the Yale Center for Environmental Law & Policy (located in
New Haven) In addition, GETS collaborated with numerous research institutes in
developed and developing countries. Conferences. GETS held policy conferences
or workshops in Cancun, Geneva, London, Miami, New York, Seattle, Tokyo, and
Washington. GETS also held a major Conference in Singapore in June 1996 co-
sponsored with the National University of Singapore. At the end of that
Conference, the co-chairs (Tommy Koh, Dan Esty, and James Cameron) issued a
statement with several recommendations, many of which were adopted by the WTO,
other international organizations, and governments in subsequent years.
Funding. The major funders of GETS included: the Ford Foundation, the U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency, the Netherlands Ministry of Housing, Spatial
Planning and the Environment, the German-Marshall Fund, the John D. & Catherine
T. MacArthur Foundation, the Center for Global Partnership/Japan Foundation,
the Pew Charitable Trusts, and the Rockefeller Brothers Fund. Commentary. A
retrospective on competitiveness and the Council's work was recently written by
Martin Neil Baily and Robert Z. Lawrence. Publications. "Achieving Harmony in
Trade and Environment," http://www.gets.org/pages/harmony/.
