Golden Liberty Golden Liberty (; , ), sometimes referred to as Golden Freedoms,
Nobles' Democracy or Nobles' Commonwealth ( or "Złota wolność szlachecka", )
refers to a unique aristocratic political system in the Kingdom of Poland and
later, after the Union of Lublin (1569), in the Polish-Lithuanian Commonwealth.
Under that system, all nobles ("szlachta"), regardless of economic status, were
considered to have equal legal status and enjoyed extensive legal rights and
privileges. The nobility controlled the legislature (Sejm — the Polish
Parliament) and the Commonwealth's elected king. Development. This political
system, unique within Europe, stemmed from the consolidation of power by the
szlachta (noble class) over other social classes and over the political system
of monarchy. In time, the szlachta accumulated enough privileges (such as those
established by the Nihil novi Act of 1505, King Henry's Articles of 1573 and
later through various Pacta conventa) that no monarch could hope to break the
szlachta's grip on power. The political doctrine of the Commonwealth of Both
Nations was: "our state is a republic under the presidency of the King".
Chancellor Jan Zamoyski summed up this doctrine when he said that ""Rex regnat
et non gubernat"" ("The King reigns but does not govern"). The Commonwealth had
a parliament, the Sejm, as well as a "Senat" and an elected king. The king was
obliged to respect citizens' rights specified in King Henry's Articles as well
as in "pacta conventa" negotiated at the time of his election. The monarch's
power was limited, in favor of the sizable noble class. Each new king had to
subscribe to King Henry's Articles, which were the basis of Poland's political
system (and included almost unprecedented guarantees of religious tolerance).
Over time, King Henry's Articles were merged with the pacta conventa, specific
pledges agreed to by the king-elect. From that point, the king was effectively
a partner with the noble class and was constantly supervised by a group of
senators. Assessment. The "Golden Liberty" was a unique and controversial
feature of Poland's political system. It was an exception, characterized by a
strong aristocracy and a feeble king, in an age when absolutism was developing
in the principal countries of Europe ― an exception, however, characterized
by a striking similarity to certain modern values. At a time when most European
countries were headed toward centralization, absolute monarchy and religious
and dynastic warfare, the Commonwealth experimented with decentralization,
confederation and federation, democracy, religious tolerance and even pacifism.
Since the Sejm usually vetoed a monarch's plans for war, this constitutes a
notable argument for the democratic peace theory. This system was a precursor
of the modern concepts of broader democracy and constitutional monarchy as well
as federation. The szlachta citizens of the Commonwealth praised the right of
resistance, the social contract, the liberty of the individual, the principle
of government by consent, the value of self-reliance ― all widespread
concepts found in the modern, liberal democracies. Just as liberal democrats of
the 19th and 20th century, the Polish noblemen were concerned about the power
of the state. The Polish noblemen were strongly opposed to the very concept of
the authoritarian state. Perhaps the closest parallels to Poland's 'Noble
Democracy' can be found outside Europe altogether ― in America ― among the
slave-owning aristocracy of The South, where slave-owning democrats and
founding fathers of the USA such as Thomas Jefferson or George Washington had
many values in common with the reformist noblemen of the Commonwealth. Others
however criticize the Golden Liberty, pointing out it was limited only to the
nobility, excluding peasants or townsfolk and gave no legal system to grant
freedom and liberty to the majority of the population, failing them by failing
to protect them from the excesses of the nobility, resulting in the slow
development of cities and the second serfdom among the peasants. The
Commonwealth was called "Noble's Paradise", sometimes ― "the Jewish
Paradise", but also "Purgatory for the Townsfolk (Burghers)" and "Hell for the
Peasants". And even among the nobility ("szlachta"), the Golden Liberty became
abused and twisted by the most powerful of them (magnates). However, one should
note that this “"the Jewish Paradise, but also Purgatory for the Townsfolk
and Hell for the Peasants"” was first said by a 20th century Jewish-German
novelist Alfred Döblin, not by the people of that time, and it should be
evaluated whether this really reflects the fact of the age. In fact it is also
true that a number of Russian peasants fled from their brutal lords to settle
in liberal Poland, which is a typical example of counterevidence to the "Hell
for the Peasants" claim. In its extreme the Golden Liberty has been criticized
as being responsible for "civil wars and invasions, national weakness,
irresolution, and poverty of spirit". Failing to evolve into the "modern"
system of an absolutist and national monarchy, the Commonwealth suffered a
gradual decline down to the brink of anarchy, through liberum veto and other
abuses of the system. With majority of szlachta, believing that they live in
the perfect state, too few questioned the Golden Liberty and the Sarmatism
philosophy, until it was too late. With szlachta refusing to pay taxes for a
larger and modern army, and magnates bribed by foreign powers paralyzing the
Commonwealth political system, the Commonwealth was unable to keep up with its
increasingly militarized and efficient (through bureaucratization) neighbors,
becoming a tempting target for foreign aggression. It was eventually
partitioned and annexed by stronger absolutist neighboring countries in the
late-18th-century partitions of Poland. Similar systems. Golden Liberty created
a state that was unusual for its time, although somewhat similar political
systems existed in the contemporary city-states like the Republic of Venice.
(interestingly both states were styled the "Most Serene Republic.") A similar
fate was averted by Italy; first due to a secular inability of the kings of
France and Spain, and the Papacy, to come to terms on how to divide the
country, then through the reaction against Habsburg domination which, as late
as 1861, finally aligned most of the country's states in support of a national
monarchy under King Victor Emmanuel II of the House of Savoy, hitherto king of
Sardinia. Notably, neither the Republic of Venice nor Italy had a "liberum
veto" among their institutions. Proverb. —literally, In Poland to these days
it means that there is no man that a freeman (a better, philosophical meaning
of 'szlachcic') would think of as a superior.
