Good (economics) In economics, a good is something that is intended to satisfy
some wants or needs of a consumer and thus has economic utility. It is normally
used in the plural form—"goods"—to denote tangible commodities such as
products and materials. Although in economic theory, all goods are considered
tangible, in reality certain classes of goods, such as information, only are in
intangible forms. For example, among other goods an "apple" is a tangible
object, while "news" belongs to an intangible class of goods and can be
perceived only by means of an instrument such as print, broadcast or computer.
Goods are contrasted with services, which are intangible commodities. Utility
characteristics of goods. Goods may increase or decrease their utility directly
or indirectly and may be described as having marginal utility. Some things are
useful, but not scarce enough to have monetary value, such as the Earth's
atmosphere, these are referred to as 'free goods'. In economics, a bad is the
opposite of a good. Ultimately, whether an object is a good or a bad depends on
each individual consumer and therefore, it is important to realize that not all
goods are good all the time and not all goods are goods to all people. Types of
goods. Goods' diversity allows of their classification into different
categories based on distinctive characteristics, such as tangibility and
(ordinal) relative elasticity. A tangible good like an apple differs from an
intangible good like information due to the impossibility of a person to
physically hold the latter, whereas the former occupies physical space.
Intangible goods differ from services in that final (intangible) goods are
transferable and can be traded, whereas a service cannot. Price elasticity also
differentiates types of goods. An elastic good is one for which there is a
relatively large change in quantity due to a relatively small change in price,
and therefore is likely part of a family of substitute goods; for example, as
pen prices rise, consumers might buy more pencils instead. An inelastic good is
one for which there are few or no substitutes, such as tickets to major
sporting events, original works by famous artists, and prescription medicine
such as Insulin. Complimentary goods are generally more inelastic than goods in
a family of substitutes. For example, if a rise in the price of beef results in
a decrease in the quantity of beef demanded, it is likely that the quantity of
hamburger buns demanded will also drop, despite no change in buns' prices. This
is because hamburger buns and beef (in Western culture) are complimentary
goods. It is important to note that goods considered compliments and/or
substitutes are relative associations and should not be understood in a vacuum.
The degree to which a good is a substitute or a compliment depends on its
relationship to other goods, rather than an intrinsic characteristic, and can
be measured as cross elasticity of demand by employing statistical techniques
such as covariance and correlation. The following chart illustrates the
classification of goods according to their excludability and rivalrousness.
Trading of goods. Goods are capable of being physically delivered to a
consumer. Goods that are economic intangibles can only be stored, delivered,
and consumed by means of media. Goods, both tangibles and intangibles, may
involve the transfer of product ownership to the consumer. Services do not
normally involve transfer of ownership of the service itself, but may involve
transfer of ownership of goods developed by a service provider in the course of
the service. For example, distributing electricity among consumers is a service
provided by an electric utility company. This service can only be experienced
through the consumption of electrical energy, which is available in a variety
of voltages and, in this case, is the "economic goods" produced by the electric
utility company . While the service (namely, distribution of electrical energy)
is a process that remains in its entirety in the ownership of the electric
service provider, the goods (namely, electric energy) is the object of
ownership transfer. The consumer becomes electric energy owner by purchase and
may use it for any lawful purposes just like any other goods.
