Goulash Communism Goulash Communism (Hungarian: "gulyáskommunizmus") or
Kadarism (after János Kádár) refers to the variety of communism as practised
in the Hungarian People's Republic from the 1960s until the collapse of
Communism in Hungary in 1989. With elements of free market economics, as well
as an improved human rights record, it represented a quiet reform and deviation
from the Stalinist principles applied on Hungary in the previous decade. The
name is a semi-humorous metaphor derived from "goulash", a popular Hungarian
dish. As goulash is made with an assortment of unlike ingredients, it
represents how Hungarian communism was a mixed ideology and no longer strictly
adhering to Stalinist interpretations as in the past. Sometimes described as
"the happiest barrack in the socialist camp," Hungary in this particular period
enjoyed many amenities not available to other socialist states in the Eastern
bloc. Origins. In 1962, six years after the Hungarian Revolution of 1956, the
8th Congress of the Hungarian Socialist Workers' Party declared the period of
"consolidation of socialism" after 1956 to be over and that the "foundations
for the establishment of a socialist society" had been achieved which enabled a
general amnesty of most people sentenced in connection with 1956. The party,
under János Kádár, gradually curbed some of the excesses of the secret
police, and introduced a relatively liberal cultural and economic course aimed
at overcoming the post-1956 hostility toward the Kádár government. In 1966,
the Central Committee approved the "New Economic Mechanism" which eased foreign
trade restrictions, gave limited freedom to the workings of the market, and
allowed a limited number of small businesses to operate in the services sector.
Though liberal in comparison to Stalinist socialism, the first relaxation of
economic control was far from posing the same threat of the 1956 reforms.
Official policy employed different methods of administering the collectives,
leaving the pace of mechanization up to each cooperative. Additionally, rather
than enforcing the system of compulsory crop deliveries and of workdays credit
the collectivizers used monthly cash wages. Later in the ‘60s, cooperatives
were permitted to enter into related and then general auxiliary businesses such
as food processing, light industry, and service industry. Ideology. Goulash
Communism showed a far greater concern for public opinion and an increased
focus on the present (rather than future) material well-being of the citizens
than had been the case in the period preceding 1956. It provided a wider
latitude for dissent than was the case in the rest of the Soviet bloc (in the
words of Kádár, "who is not against us is with us"), modified the role of the
Communist Party in the development of socialism (now interpreted as "serving"
rather than "commanding"), reduced the formality of relations between the party
and the populace at large, increased the scope of societal self-expression and
self-management, and refined the guiding Marxist-Leninist ideology with
modified means of dissemination. Marxist-Leninist ideology is invoked in the
desire to reform as seen in Imre Nagy’s 'Reform Communism' (1955-6). He
argues that Marxism is a “science that cannot remain static but must develop
and become more perfect”. He attributes Marx to having created a method,
meant to guide yet not entirely encompass socialism or its development. “The
theory of Marx - as Lenin stated – gives general guiding principles, which
must be utilized in Britain in another fashion than in France, in France
differently than…”. This interpretation was not shared by the Soviet
leadership, Nikita Khrushchev’s response to Hungary in 1956 and Leonid
Brezhnev’s to Czechoslovakia in 1968 and the resulting Brezhnev Doctrine
stating that though “each socialist country had the right to determine the
concrete form of its development along the path of socialism by taking account
of the specific nature of their national conditions… the Soviet Union would
not tolerate deviation from the principles of socialism and the restoration of
capitalism”. The result was a regime far more humane than other Communist
regimes—and certainly more so than the first seven years of undisguised
Communist rule in Hungary. Generally, Hungarians had much more freedom to
speak, write and travel than their counterparts in the Soviet bloc. For
instance, samizdat publications were tolerated to some extent, and
conversations with foreigners didn't attract much official scrutiny. However,
while Kádár's regime was not nearly as repressive as most of its
counterparts, it wasn't a liberal one either. The Communist Party still
retained a monopoly of power, with the National Assembly being little more than
a rubber stamp. The media, while having somewhat more latitude than in other
Communist regimes, were still subjected to fairly onerous restrictions. The
secret police operated with somewhat more restraint than in other Communist
states, but were still a feared tool of control. Economy. Hungary's economic
resources were mobilized to better satisfy consumer demand by providing a more
extensive assortment of consumer goods. Some economic reform measures were
introduced to integrate limited market mechanisms into the framework of the
planned socialist economy. An unfortunate result of this policy were rising
economic stresses and high indebtedness which became evident by the late 1980s.
Yet these economic crises were prevalent throughout the collapsing communist
world. Hungary’s mild diversity left it slightly better equipped. Being a
comparatively well-organized country in the East bloc, Hungary was the
destination for tourists from other communist nations, for whom visits to the
West were much more difficult. Queues for groceries, for instance, were
virtually non-existent, unlike in other communist countries in the 1960s and
1970s. Transition to capitalism. Since 1989, after the general disintegration
of communist control in Central Europe, Hungary has adopted a Western-style
multiparty political system and introduced thorough reforms aimed at
establishing a capitalist market economy, enabling European Union membership
and integration into a global market economy.
