Government in exile A government in exile is a political group which claims to
be a country's legitimate government, but is unable to exercise legal power and
instead resides in a foreign country. Governments in exile usually plan to one
day return to their native country and regain formal power. A government in
exile differs from a rump state in the sense that a rump state controls at
least part of its former territory. For example, during World War I, nearly all
of Belgium was occupied by Germany, but Belgium and its allies held on to a
small slice in the country's west. A government in exile, conversely, has lost
all its territory. Governments in exile frequently occur during wartime
occupation, or in the aftermath of a civil war, revolution, or military coup.
For example, during German expansion in World War II, some European governments
sought refuge in the United Kingdom, rather than face destruction at the hands
of Nazi Germany. A government in exile may also form from widespread belief in
the illegitimacy of a ruling government.For instance, the Syrian National
Council was formed as a result of the Syrian Civil War, which sought to end the
rule of the ruling Ba'ath Party. The effectiveness of a government in exile
depends primarily on the amount of external support it can receive, either from
foreign governments or from the population of its own country. Some governments
in exile develop into a formidable force, posing a serious challenge to the
incumbent regime of the country, while others are maintained chiefly as a
symbolic gesture. The phenomenon of a government in exile predates formal use
of the term. In periods of monarchical government, exiled monarchs or dynasties
sometimes set up exile courts—as the House of Stuart did when driven from
their throne by Oliver Cromwell and at the Glorious Revolution, or the House of
Bourbon did during the French Revolution and the rule of Napoleon. With the
spread of constitutional monarchy, monarchical governments in exile started to
include a prime minister. Activities. In cases where a host country holds a
large expatriate population from a government in exile's home country, or an
ethnic population from that country, the government in exile might come to
exercise some administrative functions within such a population. For example,
the WWII Provisional Government of Free India had such authority among the
ethnically Indian population of British Malaya, with the consent of the then
Japanese military authorities. Current governments in exile. Governments in
exile may have little or no recognition from other states. Some exiled
governments have some characteristics in common with rump states. Such disputed
or partially in exile cases are noted in the tables below. Deposed governments
of current states. These governments in exile were created by deposed
governments or rulers who continue to claim legitimate authority of the state
they once controlled. Exiled governments of non-self-governing or occupied
territories. These governments in exile are governments of non-self-governing
or occupied territories. They claim legitimate authority over a territory they
once controlled, or claim legitimacy of a post-decolonization authority. The
claim may stem from an exiled group's election as a legitimate government. The
United Nations recognizes the right of self-determination for the population of
these territories, including the possibility of establishing independent
sovereign states. Deposed governments of subnational territories. These
governments in exile claim legitimacy of autonomous territories of another
state and have been created by deposed governments or rulers, who and do not
claim independence as a separate state. Alternative governments of current
states. These governments have been created in exile by political organisations
and opposition parties, aspire to become actual governing authorities or claim
to be legal successors to previously deposed governments, and have been created
as alternatives to incumbent governments. Alternative separatist governments of
current subnational territories. These governments have been created in exile
by political organisations, opposition parties, and separatist movements, and
desire to become the governing authorities of their territories as independent
states, or claim to be the successor to previously deposed governments, and
have been created as alternatives to incumbent governments. Exiled Governments
with ambiguous status. These governments have ties to the area(s) they
represent, but their claimed status and/or stated aims are sufficiently
ambiguous that they could fit into other categories. Past governments in exile.
Sovereign Military Order of Malta. The Sovereign Military Order of Malta may be
considered a case of a government in exile, since it is without territory but
recognised as a sovereign government by numerous sovereign countries. However,
it does not claim to be a sovereign state, rather a "sovereign subject" of
international law. In addition, it no longer claims jurisdiction over Malta,
and recognises and maintains diplomatic relations with the Republic of Malta.
World War II. Other exiled leaders in Britain in this time included King Zog of
Albania and Emperor Haile Selassie of Ethiopia. The Provisional Government of
Free India (1943–45) was established by Indian nationalists in exile during
the war; unlike most other governments in exile in this war, it was allied to
the Axis and claimed power over an Allied (specifically, British) territory. A
Bulgarian government in exile and Vichy France were also allied with the Axis.
The Danish exception. The Occupation of Denmark (9 April 1940) was administered
mainly by the German Foreign Office, contrary to other occupied lands that were
under military or civilian administration. Denmark did not establish a
government in exile, although there was an Association of Free Danes
established in London. King Christian X and his government remained in Denmark,
and functioned comparatively independently for the first three years of German
occupation. Meanwhile, Iceland, Greenland and the Faroe Islands were occupied
by the Allies, and effectively separated from the Danish crown. (See British
occupation of the Faroe Islands, Iceland during World War II, and History of
Greenland during World War II.) Persian Gulf War. Following the Iraqi invasion
and occupation of Kuwait on August 2, 1990, Sheikh Jaber Al-Ahmad Al-Jaber Al-
Sabah and senior members of his government fled to Saudi Arabia, where they set
up a government-in-exile operating out of a luxury hotel in Dhahran. The
Kuwaiti government in exile was far more affluent than most other such
governments, having full disposal of the very considerable Kuwaiti assets in
western banks—of which it made use to conduct a massive propaganda campaign
denouncing the Iraqi occupation and mobilising public opinion in the West in
favor of war with Iraq. In March 1991, following the American victory in the
Persian Gulf War, the Sheikh and his government were able to return to Kuwait.
