Government-granted monopoly In economics, a government-granted monopoly (also
called a "de jure monopoly") is a form of coercive monopoly by which a
government grants exclusive privilege to a private individual or firm to be the
sole provider of a good or service; potential competitors are excluded from the
market by law, regulation, or other mechanisms of government enforcement. As a
form of coercive monopoly, government-granted monopoly is contrasted with a
"non-coercive monopoly" or an "efficiency monopoly", where there is no
competition but it is not forcibly excluded. Amongst forms of coercive monopoly
it is distinguished from government monopoly or state monopoly (in which
"government agencies" hold the legally enforced monopoly rather than private
individuals or firms) and from government-sponsored cartels (in which the
government forces "several independent" producers to partially coordinate their
decisions through a centralized organization). Advocates for government-granted
monopolies often claim that they ensure a degree of public control over
essential industries, without having those industries actually run by the
state. Opponents often criticize them as political favors to corporations.
Government-granted monopolies may be opposed by those who would prefer free
markets as well as by those who would prefer to replace private corporations
with public ownership. Under mercantilist economic systems, European
governments with colonial interests often granted large and extremely lucrative
monopolies to companies trading in particular regions, such as the Dutch East
India Company. Today, government-granted monopolies may be found in public
utility services such as public roads, mail, water supply, and electric power,
as well as certain specialized and highly regulated fields such as education
and gambling. In many countries lucrative natural resources industries,
especially the petroleum industry, are controlled by government-granted
monopolies. Franchises granted by governments to operate public transit through
public roads are another example. Through the "Rules of The Supreme Court of
Arizona", the government grants exclusive privilege to "active member of the
State Bar of Arizona" to be the sole providers in the "practice of law".
Patent. A patent is a set of exclusive rights granted by a state or national
government to an inventor or his/her assignee for a limited period of time in
exchange for a public disclosure of an invention. The procedure for granting
patents, the requirements placed on the patentee, and the extent of the
exclusive rights vary widely between countries according to national laws and
international agreements. Typically, however, a patent application must include
one or more claims defining the invention which must be new, inventive, and
useful or industrially applicable. In many countries, certain subject areas are
excluded from patents, such as business methods and mental acts. The exclusive
right granted to a patentee in most countries is the right to prevent others
from making, using, selling, or distributing the patented invention without
permission. Trademark. A trademark or trade mark is a distinctive sign or
indicator used by an individual, business organization, or other legal entity
to identify that the products or services to consumers with which the trademark
appears originate from a unique source, and to distinguish its products or
services from those of other entities. Trademarks can act as a form of consumer
protection that lowers the transaction costs between a buyer and seller who are
not personally acquainted. Directly mandated. Governments have granted
monopolies to forms of copy prevention. In the Digital Millennium Copyright
Act, for example, the proprietary Macrovision copy prevention technology is
required for analog video recorders. Though other forms of copy prevention
aren't prohibited, requiring Macrovision effectively gives it a monopoly and
prevents more effective copy prevention methods from being developed.
Criticism. Opponents of government-granted monopoly often point out that such a
firm is able to set its pricing and production policies without fear of
breeding potential competition. They argue that this causes inefficiencies in
the market place, such as unnecessarily high prices to consumers for the good
or service being supplied (government-imposed price caps might avert this
problem, however, it is still possible that competition would supply the good
or service at a lower price). One historical example of this is the government-
granted monopoly in steamboat traffic operated by Robert Fulton. The New York
legislature granted Fulton the privilege to be the sole provider of all
steamboat traffic for thirty years. Competition was forbidden by law. Thomas
Gibbons, a steamboat entrepreneur, hired Cornelius Vanderbilt to ferry
passengers for a cheaper fare in defiance of the law in an attempt to compete
with Fulton for about six months. In 1824, in Gibbons v. Ogden, the Supreme
Court struck down Fulton's government-granted monopoly ruling that states
cannot legally regulate interstate commerce. Steamboat fares almost immediately
dropped from seven to three dollars after the decision and traffic increased
dramatically. Fulton was unable to successfully compete with the low fares
offered by Gibbons and Vanderbilt, which resulted in his bankruptcy. ("The Myth
of the Robber Barrons", by Burton W. Folsom Jr.)
