Government debt Government debt (also known as public debt, national debt) is
the debt owed by a central government. (In the U.S. and other federal states,
"government debt" may also refer to the debt of a state or provincial
government, municipal or local government.) By contrast, the annual "government
deficit" refers to the difference between government receipts and spending in a
single year, that is, the increase of debt over a particular year. Government
debt is one method of financing government operations, but it is not the only
method. Governments can also create money to monetize their debts, thereby
removing the need to pay interest. But this practice simply reduces government
interest costs rather than truly canceling government debt. Governments usually
borrow by issuing securities, government bonds and bills. Less credit worthy
countries sometimes borrow directly from a supranational organization (e.g. the
World Bank) or international financial institutions. As the government draws
its income from much of the population, government debt is an indirect debt of
the taxpayers. Government debt can be categorized as internal debt (owed to
lenders within the country) and external debt (owed to foreign lenders).
Sovereign debt usually refers to government debt that has been issued in a
foreign currency. Another common division of government debt is by duration
until repayment is due. Short term debt is generally considered to be for one
year or less, long term is for more than ten years. Medium term debt falls
between these two boundaries. A broader definition of government debt may
consider all government liabilities, including future pension payments and
payments for goods and services the government has contracted but not yet paid.
Government and sovereign bonds. A government bond is a bond issued by a
national government. Such bonds are often denominated in the country's domestic
currency. Government bonds are sometimes regarded as risk-free bonds, because
national governments can raise taxes or reduce spending up to a certain point;
in many cases they "print more money" to redeem the bond at maturity. Most
developed country governments are prohibited by law from printing money
directly, that function having been relegated to their central banks. However,
central banks may buy government bonds in order to finance government spending,
thereby monetizing the debt. Bonds issued by national governments in foreign
currencies are normally referred to as sovereign bonds. Investors in sovereign
bonds denominated in foreign currency have the additional risk that the issuer
may be unable to obtain foreign currency to redeem the bonds. In the 2010 Greek
debt crisis, for example, the debt is held by Greece in Euros, and one proposed
solution (advanced notably by World Pensions Council (WPC) financial
economists) is for Greece to go back to issuing its own Drachma. 1. Primary
Market:"' Government Bonds are often issued via auctions at Stock Exchanges.
There are several different methods of issuing such as Auctions, Guarantee,
Combined Auction and Guarantee, and others. There are two main depository
types: Book-Entry and Certificate. There are two different methods of the
payments: at the beginning and at the end. There are two types of interest
rates: Fixed and Floating. d. Pre-listing 2. Secondary Market:"' The G-bonds
are traded at Stock Exchanges. Unlikely equity system, the bond secondary
market uses a completely different system with different method of trading.
Most of the system is real time trading. At the secondary market, each bond
will be assigned with very own bond code (ISIN code). There are two types of
trading: Outright and Repos. Municipal, provincial, or state bonds. Municipal
bonds, "munis" in the United States, are debt securities issued by local
governments (municipalities). Denominated in reserve currencies. Governments
often borrow money in a currency in which the demand for debt securities is
strong. An advantage of issuing bonds in a currency such as the US dollar, the
pound sterling, or the euro is that many investors wish to invest in such
bonds. Countries such as the United States, Germany, Italy and France have only
issued in their domestic currency (or in the Euro in the case of Euro members).
Relatively few investors are willing to invest in currencies that do not have a
long track record of stability. A disadvantage for a government issuing bonds
in a foreign currency is that there is a risk that it will not be able to
obtain the foreign currency to pay the interest or redeem the bonds. In 1997
and 1998, during the Asian financial crisis, this became a serious problem when
many countries were unable to keep their exchange rate fixed due to speculative
attacks. Risk. Lending to a national government in the country's own sovereign
currency is often considered "risk free" and is done at a so-called "risk-free
interest rate." This is because, up to a point, the debt and interest can be
repaid by raising tax receipts (either by economic growth or raising tax
rates), a reduction in spending, or failing that by simply printing more money.
It is widely considered that this would increase inflation and reduce the value
of the invested capital. This has happened many times throughout history, and a
typical example of this is provided by Weimar Germany of the 1920s which
suffered from hyperinflation due to its government's inability to pay the
national debt deriving from the costs of World War I. In practice, the market
interest rate tends to be different for debts of different countries. An
example is in borrowing by different European Union countries denominated in
euros. Even though the currency is the same in each case, the yield required by
the market is higher for some countries' debt than for others. This reflects
the views of the market on the relative solvency of the various countries and
the likelihood that the debt will be repaid. A politically unstable state is
anything but risk-free as it may—being sovereign—cease its payments.
Examples of this phenomenon include Spain in the 16th and 17th centuries, which
nullified its government debt seven times during a century, and revolutionary
Russia of 1917 which refused to accept the responsibility for Imperial Russia's
foreign debt. Another political risk is caused by external threats. It is
mostly uncommon for invaders to accept responsibility for the national debt of
the annexed state or that of an organization it considered as rebels. For
example, all borrowings by the Confederate States of America were left unpaid
after the American Civil War. On the other hand, in the modern era, the
transition from dictatorship and illegitimate governments to democracy does not
automatically free the country of the debt contracted by the former government.
Today's highly developed global credit markets would be less likely to lend to
a country that negated its previous debt, or might require punishing levels of
interest rates that would be unacceptable to the borrower. U.S. Treasury bonds
denominated in U.S. dollars are often considered "risk free" in the U.S. This
disregards the risk to foreign purchasers of depreciation in the dollar
relative to the lender's currency. In addition, a risk-free status implicitly
assumes the stability of the US government and its ability to continue
repayments during any financial crisis. Lending to a national government in a
currency other than its own does not give the same confidence in the ability to
repay, but this may be offset by reducing the exchange rate risk to foreign
lenders. On the other hand, national debt in foreign currency cannot be
disposed of by starting a hyperinflation; and this increases the credibility of
the debtor. Usually small states with volatile economies have most of their
national debt in foreign currency. For countries in the Eurozone, the euro is
the local currency, although no single state can trigger inflation by creating
more currency. Lending to a local or municipal government can be just as risky
as a loan to a private company, unless the local or municipal government has
sufficient power to tax. In this case, the local government could to a certain
extent pay its debts by increasing the taxes, or reduce spending, just as a
national one could. Further, local government loans are sometimes guaranteed by
the national government, and this reduces the risk. In some jurisdictions,
interest earned on local or municipal bonds is tax-exempt income, which can be
an important consideration for the wealthy. Clearing and defaults. Public debt
clearing standards are set by the Bank for International Settlements, but
defaults are governed by extremely complex laws which vary from jurisdiction to
jurisdiction. Globally, the International Monetary Fund can take certain steps
to intervene to prevent anticipated defaults. It is sometimes criticized for
the measures it advises nations to take, which often involve cutting back on
government spending as part of an economic austerity regime. In triple bottom
line analysis, this can be seen as degrading capital on which the nation's
economy ultimately depends. Those considerations do not apply to private debts,
by contrast: credit risk (or the consumer credit rating) determines the
interest rate, more or less, and entities go bankrupt if they fail to repay.
Governments cannot really go bankrupt (and suddenly stop providing services to
citizens), thus a far more complex way of managing defaults is required.
Smaller jurisdictions, such as cities, are usually guaranteed by their regional
or national levels of government. When New York City declined into what would
have been a bankrupt status during the 1960s (had it been a private entity), by
the early 1970s a "bailout" was required from New York State and the United
States. In general, such measures amount to merging the smaller entity's debt
into that of the larger entity and thereby giving it access to the lower
interest rates the larger entity enjoys. The larger entity may then assume some
agreed-upon oversight in order to prevent recurrence of the problem. Structure.
In the dominant economic policy generally ascribed to theories of John Maynard
Keynes, sometimes called Keynesian economics, there is tolerance for fairly
high levels of public debt to pay for public investment in lean times, which,
if boom times follow, can then be paid back from rising tax revenues. As this
theory gained global popularity in the 1930s, many nations took on public debt
to finance large infrastructural capital projects — such as highways or large
hydroelectric dams. It was thought that this could start a virtuous cycle and a
rising business confidence since there would be more workers with money to
spend. Some have argued that the greatly increased military spending of World
War II really ended the Great Depression. Of course, military expenditures are
based upon the same tax (or debt) and spend fundamentals as the rest of the
national budget, so this argument does little to undermine Keynesian theory.
Indeed, some have suggested that significantly higher national spending
necessitated by war essentially confirms the basic Keynesian analysis (see
Military Keynesianism). Nonetheless, the Keynesian scheme remained dominant,
thanks in part to Keynes' own pamphlet "How to Pay for the War", published in
the United Kingdom in 1940. Since the war was being paid for, and being won,
Keynes and Harry Dexter White, Assistant Secretary of the United States
Department of the Treasury, were, according to John Kenneth Galbraith, the
dominating influences on the Bretton Woods agreements. These agreements set the
policies for the Bank for International Settlements (BIS), International
Monetary Fund (IMF), and World Bank, the so-called "Bretton Woods
Institutions", launched in the late 1940s for the last two (the BIS was founded
in 1930). These are the dominant economic entities setting policies regarding
public debt. Due to its role in setting policies for trade disputes, the World
Trade Organization also has immense power to affect foreign exchange relations,
as many nations are dependent on specific commodity markets for the balance of
payments they require to repay debt. Scale. Global debt is of great concern
since interest payments can often place great demands on governments and
individuals. This has led to calls for universal debt relief for poorer
countries. A less extreme and more innovative measure would be to permit civil
society groups in every nation to buy the debt in exchange for minority equity
positions in community organizations. Even in dictatorships, the combination of
banks and civil society power could force land reform and overthrow
unaccountable governments, since the people and banks would be aligned against
the oppressive government. Using a debt to GDP ratio is one of the most
accepted measures of assessing a nation's debt. For example, in theory one of
the criteria of admission to the European Union's Euro currency is that a
country's debt should not exceed 60% of that country's GDP. The debt of the
United States over time is documented online at the Department of the
Treasury's website TreasuryDirect. Problems. Sovereign debt problems have been
a major public policy issue since World War II, including the treatment of debt
related to that war, the developing country "debt crisis" in the 1980s, and the
shocks of the 1998 Russian financial crisis and Argentina's default in 2001.
Not all developing countries have been affected to the same extent. For example
Yugoslavia had low government debt (perhaps because it was unable to borrow on
world markets) until its breakup and the coming of democracy, when the new
national governments started to borrow money from the IMF. Croatia has a
government debt of $47 billion today while the whole of Yugoslavia (six times
as many people as Croatia) in 1980 had debt of $14 billion. Implicit debt.
Government "implicit" debt is the promise by a government of future payments
from the state. Usually this refers to long term promises of social payments
such as pensions and health expenditure; not promises of other expenditure such
as education or defense (which are largely paid on a "quid pro quo" basis to
government employees and contractors). A problem with these implicit government
insurance liabilities is that it is hard to cost them accurately, since the
amounts of future payments depend on so many factors. First of all, the social
security claims are not "open" bonds or debt papers with a stated time frame,
"time to maturity", "nominal value", or "net present value". In the United
States, as in most other countries, there is no money earmarked in the
government's coffers for future social insurance payments. This insurance
system is called PAYGO (pay-as-you-go). Alternative social insurance strategies
might have included a system that involved save and invest. Furthermore,
population projections predict that when the "baby boomers" start to retire,
the working population in the United States, and in many other countries, will
be a smaller percentage of the population than it is now, for many years to
come. This will increase the burden on the country of these promised pension
and other payments - larger than the 65 percent of GDP that it is now. The
"burden" of the government is what it spends, since it can only pay its bills
through taxes, debt, and increasing the money supply (government spending = tax
revenues + change in government debt held by public + change in monetary base
held by the public). "Government social benefits" paid by the United States
government during 2003 totaled $1.3 trillion. In 2010 the European Commission
required EU Member Countries to publish their debt information in standardized
methodology, explicitly including debts that were previously hidden in a number
of ways to satisfy minimum requirements on local (national) and European
(Stability and Growth Pact) level.
