Government simulation game A government simulation or political simulation is a
game that attempts to simulate the government and politics of all or part of a
nation. These games may include geopolitical situations (involving the
formation and execution of foreign policy), the creation of domestic political
policies, or the simulation of political campaigns. They differ from the genre
of classical wargames due to their discouragement or abstraction of military or
action elements. Background. Games based on geopolitics and elections existed
long before the emergence of personal computers and their ability to quickly
process large amounts of statistical data. One of the earliest such games was
"The Game of Politics", created by Oswald Lord in 1935 which remained in print
until 1960. In 1954, the board game "Diplomacy" was created, which differs from
other wargames in that it features a "negotiation" phase during which players
reach agreements with other players, and then execute military moves
simultaneously. National politics has remained a vital area of board gaming,
with products such as the 1986 board game "Die Macher" featuring elections in
Germany, and "Wreck the Nation" which satirizes the politics of the United
States under the Bush administration. After enjoying years as a play-by-mail
game, "Diplomacy" was one of the first games to move to take advantage of e-
mail, and continues to be a popular email game as of 2007. Computer gaming. As
computers became more sophisticated, games in this genre moved beyond e-mail to
more complex simulations. One of the earliest titles in this genre was "Balance
of Power", designed by Chris Crawford and published in 1985. This game features
conflict at the height of the Cold War, using political and policy decisions to
shape outcomes rather than warfare. In "Balance of Power", any armed conflict
between the player and the opponent superpower results in a nuclear war, which
is considered a loss condition. Other Cold War era games included "" created by
Virgin Interactive, Spectrum Holobyte's "Crisis in the Kremlin" and virtually
unknown "Hidden Agenda". "Conflict" simulated a hypothetical situation in 1997
in which the player assumed the role of the Israeli Prime Minister and was
obligated to employ various diplomatic and covert directives to defeat its
rival nations. Surrounded by hostile nations, the player was restrained by a
very limited military force and was thereby encouraged to employ peaceful means
to remain in power until he acquired more advanced weapons systems and power.
In "Crisis in the Kremlin", the user could play as the protege of any of the
following Soviet politicians: Mikhail Gorbachev of the reformist faction; Yegor
Ligachev, leader of the hardline faction; and Boris Yeltsin, who was the
prevalent figure of the nationalist faction. The player could use the
simulation to test certain strategies to lead the failing Soviet Union into a
new era of prosperity or force its dissolution and integration into the new
world order. This game introduced the concept of budget management, citizen and
faction satisfaction as well as multiple economic values and political
spectrum. In "Hidden Agenda" the user takes the role of the president of
Chimerica, a fictional post-revolutionary Central American country, trying to
juggle international relations and the needs of the country's citizens. Early
political simulation games were intended more for education than entertainment.
In 1987, "On the Campaign Trail" was developed as a tool at Kent State
University's political campaign management program, and engaged students in
decision-making regarding the campaigns for United States Senate elections
between 1970 and 1986. Subsequently, a commercial market developed for packaged
games involving elections and campaigns. The 1992 game "Power Politics" (and,
before it, 1981's President Elect) focused on domestic United States political
campaigns (but not the running of the country upon election). In 1996, this was
adapted to the "Doonesbury Election Game", designed by Randy Chase (who also
did Power Politics) and published by Mindscape, in which players conducted a
campaign with the assistance of a pool of advisors selected from characters in
the "Doonesbury" comic strip. A successor entitled "Power Politics III" was
released in 2005. In 2004, Stardock published "Political Machine", in which the
player steers a candidate through a 41-week election cycle for United States
President, developing policies and tailoring talk show appearances and speech
content. The game is heavily tied to modern polling methods, using real-time
feedback for how campaign strategy impacts polling numbers. In 2006,
TheorySpark released "President Forever 2008 + Primaries", an election
simulation game that allows the player to realistically control an entire
election campaign through both the Primaries and General Election. "President
Forever 2008 + Primaries" itself a follow-up to the highly successful general
election sim "President Forever", released in 2004 Some games in the genre
involve enacting policies and budget decisions to sway voters. One such game is
"Democracy", published in 2005 by Positech Games. In "Democracy", players make
decisions during each turn regarding which policies to support. As turns
progress, the player views how their favorability rating changes amongst
certain types of voters. Candidates make promises before each election, and
failure to follow through can result in lower support during the player's
reelection campaign. Another is Commander in Chief, produced by Eversim,
boasting an array of choices for domestic policy and decisions. Another such
game is Tropico. There can also be found games that puts the player in the seat
of a state leader, such as SuperPower, and its sequel, SuperPower 2, whose
goals are to produce economic stability and prosperity, but the game mainly
revolves around foreign policies, with the abilities to interact with other
countries in many ways. The game includes a great number of real-life treaties
that influence countries. Online games. Web-based games such as NationStates
and CyberNations allow players to manage the day-to-day decisions of individual
governments, and compete against rival nations. Less formally structured games
are also played out in internet forums, where players manage governments and
nations according to a set of agreed rules, such as the MOCpages-based 21st
Century World group. In forum-based simulation games players register, apply
for an open nation an avatar (administrator), and then send news article
actions which help shape their policies, and aspects such as realism and
cooperation are highly promoted. Other web based games simulate the politics of
one specific nation. Players on such games play as fictional politicians and
participate in debates, media activity, and simulated elections. Related games.
Other construction and management simulations require government management.
For example, city-building games such as the "SimCity" series of games
developed and published by Maxis simulates the experience of being a mayor.
"SimCity" features a real-time environment in which the player can create zones
for city development, build roads, power and water utilities, and watch as
their city develops based on their decisions. The game was originally published
in 1989 and as of 2003 was in its fourth major release. Strategy games
frequently make use of government management challenges. 4X games require the
management of a government, be it tribal or interstellar. This includes tasks
such as building infrastructure and conducting trade. "Galactic Civilizations
II" requires players to manage their approval rating to keep their political
party in power. Domestic policy is sometimes abstracted with more emphasis on
international conflict. For example, the "Civilization" series gives players
total control over resources, and radically restructuring an empire is a matter
of clicking a "revolution!" button. Other strategy games focus on government
management to varying degrees. For instance, in the "Hearts of Iron" games (set
in World War II) the civilian population is only a factor with partisans and
manpower, whereas in "" a player must not only 'hobnob' and conquer, but
implement the Second Industrial Revolution while warding off (ushering in) real
political revolutions such as the upheavals of 1848 and communist revolt.
Another politically connected game is "Tropico". Government and politics have
also been incorporated into adventure games. "A Mind Forever Voyaging",
published by Infocom in 1985, was an interactive fiction game in which the
player controlled a sentient computer capable of experimenting with potential
future scenarios based on varying public policy decisions. Newsweek said of the
game, "It isn't '1984,' but in some ways it is even scarier." Training and
education. Beyond entertainment, these games have practical applications in
training and education of government personnel. Training simulations have been
created for subjects such as managing law enforcement policies (such as racial
profiling), the simulation of a military officer's career, and hospital
responses to emergency situations.
