Grapus Grapus was a collective of graphic artists, working together between
1970 and 1991, which sought to combine excellence of design with a social
conscience. History. The group was founded in France in 1970 by Pierre Bernard,
who had studied with the Polish poster designer Henryk Tomaszewski; François
Miehe; and Gérard Paris-Clavel, who had met during the student movement of May
1968 and were influenced by the subversive ideas and practices of the
Situationist International. Alex Jordan and Jean-Paul Bachollet joined the
group in 1975. After Miehe’s departure in 1978, the core of the group found
its equilibrium. The group's members were all members of the Communist party,
and the group maintained an explicit political, social and cultural engagement.
They at first rejected assignments with commercial and government clients,
instead working with experimental theatre groups, progressive town councils,
the Communist Party itself, the Communist trade union CGT, educational causes,
and social institutions. Even in later years, when the staff had grown to 20,
operating in three distinct groups, they signed all of their work simply
“Grapus.” Grapus wore its Marxist heritage proudly, remaining devoted to
the plebeian immediacy of posters, leaflets and bumper stickers. Among its
recurring elements of style are the use of handwritten text, the use of an
extensive symbolic vocabulary (e.g. hand, foot, moon, sun), and the convergence
of diverse techniques (e.g. drawing, painting, photography, text), a technique
known as “"detournement", the rerouting of a message through acts of visual
vandalism.” Beginning in 1978, Grapus gained exposure in important
exhibitions in Paris (Musée de l'Affiche); Amsterdam (Stedelijk Museum);
Aspen, Colorado; and Montréal (Musée d'art contemporain). In 1990, after
receiving the French "Grand prix national des arts graphiques", the collective
faced a difficult ideological test when they had the opportunity to design the
visual identity of the Louvre Museum. Bernard was in favor of taking the
assignment, believing that design for cultural institutions could be a tool for
social change. His partners wanted to design exclusively for social causes,
found the Louvre to be elitist, and believed that taking the job would
compromise their convictions. As a result, the collective decided to part ways
in January 1991. Bernard, however, remains committed to a conception of design
as a powerful tool for social commitment: "The dissemination of public graphic
design to the most socially and/or culturally deprived, is one of the means to
achieve the desired aims of community and social justice." After Grapus. The
group's original members have maintained their principles in their work. Pierre
Bernard, along with Dirk Behage and Fokke Draaijer, founded the "Atelier de
Création Graphique" (ACG). They took the Louvre job and, among other works,
designed the identity for the national parks of France, and signage for the
"Centre Pompidou". The ACG works in the areas of publishing, publicity and
signage, as well as creating visual identity. Pierre Bernard has been a member
of the "Alliance Graphique Internationale" since 1987, received the Erasmus
Prize in 2006, and teaches graphic design in Paris at the "École nationale
supérieure des arts décoratifs" (ENSAD). Gérard Paris-Clavel joined with
Vincent Perrottet to begin the studio "les Graphistes Associés". Shortly
thereafter, he left and formed the group "Ne Pas Plier" (“do not bend”),
which broke with the traditional conception of a graphic studio by refusing
“corporate” work, allying itself instead with sociologists, social workers,
laborers, and other workers for public education. Alex Jordan founded the
studio "Nous Travaillons Ensemble" (NTE: “we work together”) with Ronit
Meirovitz and Anette Lenz, with whom he had worked within Grapus. They intended
to pursue a seamless continuation of the Grapus approach, without being
constricted by a paralyzing ideology. Since its creation in 1986, NTE has
worked in partnership with the photographers’ association "le bar Floréal",
and has also collaborated on numerous works with the multidisciplinary
organization "la Forge".
