Green politics Green politics is a political ideology that aims for the
creation of an ecologically sustainable society rooted in environmentalism,
social liberalism, and grassroots democracy. It began taking shape in the
western world in the 1970s; since then Green parties have developed and
established themselves in many countries across the globe, and have achieved
some electoral success. The political term "Green", a translation of the German
"Grün", was coined by die Grünen, a Green party formed in the late 1970s. The
term "political ecology" is sometimes used in Europe and in academic circles,
but in the latter has come to represent an interdisciplinary field of study.
Supporters of Green politics, called Greens, share many ideas with the ecology,
conservation, environmentalism, feminism, and peace movements. In addition to
democracy and ecological issues, green politics is concerned with civil
liberties, social justice, nonviolence and tends to support social
progressivism. The party's platform is largely considered left in the political
spectrum. However, as the 'Green' ideology expanded, there also came into
separate existence green movements on the political right in the form of green
conservatism and eco-capitalism. The Green ideology has connections with
various other ecocentric political ideologies, including ecosocialism,
ecoanarchism, ecofeminism and ecofascism, but to what extent these can be seen
as forms of Green politics is a matter of debate. History. Influences.
Adherents to green politics tend to consider it to be part of a 'higher'
worldview and not simply a political ideology. Green politics draws its ethical
stance from a variety of sources, from the values of indigenous peoples, to the
ethics of Gandhi, Spinoza and Uexküll. These people influenced green thought
in their advocacy of long-term "seventh generation" foresight, and on the
personal responsibility of every individual to make moral choices. Of course,
unease about adverse consequences of human actions on nature predates the
modern concept of “environmentalism". Social commentators as far apart as
ancient Rome and China complained of air, water and noise pollution. The
philosophical roots of environmentalism can be traced back to enlightenment
thinkers such as Rousseau in France and, later, the author and naturalist
Thoreau in America. Organised environmentalism began in late 19th Century
Europe and the United States as a reaction to the Industrial Revolution with
its emphasis on unbridled economic expansion. “Green politics” first began
as conservation movements, such as the Sierra Club, founded in San Francisco in
1892. Left-green platforms of the form that make up the green parties today
draw terminology from the science of ecology, and policy from environmentalism,
deep ecology, feminism, pacifism, anarchism, libertarian socialism, social
democracy, eco-socialism, and social ecology. In the 1970s, as these movements
grew in influence, green politics arose as a new philosophy which synthesized
their goals. In some far-right and fascist parties, nationalism has on occasion
been tied into a sort of green politics which promotes environmentalism as a
form of pride in the "motherland" according a minority of authors. Early
development. In June 1970 in the Netherlands a group called Kabouters won 5 of
the 45 seats on the Amsterdam Gemeenteraad (City Council), as well as two seats
each on councils in The Hague and Leeuwarden and one seat apiece in Arnhem,
Alkmaar and Leiden. The Kabouters were an outgrowth of Provo’s environmental
White Plans and they proposed “Groenen Planen” (“Green Plans”). The
first political party to be created with its basis in environmental issues was
the United Tasmania Group, founded in Australia in March 1972 to fight against
deforestation and the creation of a dam that would damage Lake Pedder; whilst
it only gained three percent in state elections, it had, according to Derek
Wall, "inspired the creation of Green parties all over the world." In May 1972,
a meeting at Victoria University of Wellington, New Zealand, launched the
"Values Party", the world's first countrywide green party to contest
Parliamentary seats nationally. A year later in 1973, Europe's first green
party, the UK's Ecology Party, came into existence. The German Green Party was
not the first Green Party in Europe to have members elected nationally but the
impression was created that they had been, because they attracted the most
media attention: The German Greens, contended in their first national election
in 1980. They started as a provisional coalition of civic groups and political
campaigns which, together, felt their interests were not expressed by the
conventional parties. After contesting the 1979 Euro elections they held a
conference which identified Four Pillars of the Green Party which all groups in
the original alliance could agree as the basis of a common Party platform:
welding these groups together as a single Party. This statement of principles
has since been utilised by many Green Parties around the world. It was this
party that first coined the term "Green" ("Grün" in German) and adopted the
sunflower symbol. In the 1983 federal election, the Greens won 27 seats in the
Bundestag. Further developments. The first Canadian foray into green politics
took place in the Maritimes when 11 independent candidates (including one in
Montreal and one in Toronto) ran in the 1980 federal election under the banner
of the Small Party. (Current Green Party of Canada leader Elizabeth May was the
instigator and one of the candidates). Inspired by Schumacher's Small is
Beautiful, the Small Party candidates ran for the expressed purpose of putting
forward an anti-nuclear platform in that election. It was not registered as an
official party, but some participants in that effort went on to form the Green
Party of Canada in 1983 (the Ontario Greens and British Columbia Greens were
also formed that year). In Finland, in 1995, the Green League became the first
European Green Party to form part of a state-level Cabinet. The German Greens
followed, forming a government with the Social Democratic Party of Germany (the
"Red-Green Alliance") from 1998 to 2005. In 2001, they reached an agreement to
end reliance on nuclear power in Germany, and agreed to remain in coalition and
support the German government of Chancellor Gerhard Schröder in the 2001
Afghan War. This put them at odds with many Greens worldwide, but demonstrated
that they were capable of difficult political tradeoffs. In Latvia, Indulis
Emsis, leader of the Green Party and part of the Union of Greens and Farmers,
an alliance of a Nordic agrarian party and the Green Party, was Prime Minister
of Latvia for ten months in 2004, making him the first Green politician to lead
a country in the history of the world. In the German state of Baden-
Württenburg, the Green Party is the leader of the coalition with the Social
Democrats since the Baden-Württemberg state election, 2011. Core tenets.
According to Derek Wall, a prominent British Green proponent, there are four
pillars that define Green politics: ecology, social justice, grassroots
democracy and non-violence. Economics. Green economics focuses on the
importance of the health of the biosphere to human well-being. Consequently,
most Greens distrust conventional capitalism, as it tends to emphasize economic
growth while ignoring ecological health; the "full cost" of economic growth
often includes damage to the biosphere, which is unacceptable according to
green politics. Green economics considers such growth to be "uneconomic
growth"— material increase that nonetheless lowers overall quality of life.
Some Greens refer to productivism, consumerism and scientism as "grey", as
contrasted with "green", economic views. "Grey" implies age, concrete, and
lifelessness. Therefore, adherents to green politics advocate economic policies
designed to safeguard the environment. Greens want governments to stop
subsidizing companies that waste resources or pollute the natural world,
subsidies that Greens refer to as "dirty subsidies". Some currents of green
politics place automobile and agribusiness subsidies in this category, as they
may harm human health. On the contrary, Greens look to a green tax shift that
will encourage both producers and consumers to make ecologically friendly
choices. Green economics is on the whole anti-globalist. Economic globalization
is considered a threat to well-being, which will replace natural environments
and local cultures with a single trade economy, termed the global economic
monoculture. Since green economics emphasizes biospheric health, an issue
outside the traditional left-right spectrum, different currents within green
politics incorporate ideas from socialism and capitalism. Greens on the Left
are often identified as Eco-socialists, who merge ecology and environmentalism
with socialism and Marxism and blame the capitalist system for environmental
degradation, social injustice, inequality and conflict. Eco-capitalists, on the
other hand, believe that the free market system, with some modification, is
capable of addressing ecological problems. This belief is documented in the
business experiences of eco-capitalists in the book, "The Gort Cloud" that
describes the gort cloud as the green community that supports eco-friendly
businesses. Participatory democracy. Since the beginning, green politics has
emphasized local, grassroots-level political activity and decision-making.
According to its adherents, it is crucial that citizens play a direct role in
the decisions that influence their lives and their environment. Therefore,
green politics seeks to increase the role of deliberative democracy, based on
direct citizen involvement and consensus decision making, wherever it is
feasible. Green politics also encourages political action on the individual
level, such as ethical consumerism, or buying things that are made according to
environmentally ethical standards. Indeed, many green parties emphasize
individual and grassroots action at the local and regional levels over
electoral politics. Historically, green parties have grown at the local level,
gradually gaining influence and spreading to regional or provincial politics,
only entering the national arena when there is a strong network of local
support. In addition, many Greens believe that governments should not levy
taxes against strictly local production and trade. Some Greens advocate new
ways of organizing authority to increase local control, including urban
secession and bioregional democracy. Other issues. Green politics on the whole
is opposed to nuclear power and the buildup of persistent organic pollutants,
supporting adherence to the precautionary principle, by which technologies are
rejected unless they can be proven to not cause significant harm to the health
of living things or the biosphere. In Germany and Sweden programs have been
initiated to shut down all nuclear plants (known as nuclear power phase-out).
But, on 5 February 2009, the Swedish Government announced an agreement allowing
for the replacement of existing reactors, effectively ending the phase-out
policy. And, on 6 September 2010, the German Federal Environment Norbert
Röttgen and the Economy Ministers Rainer Brüderle announced an agreement for
12 more years operation of 17 nuclear plants. In the spirit of nonviolence,
Green politics opposes the War on Terrorism and the curtailment of civil
rights, focusing instead on nurturing deliberative democracy in war-torn
regions and the construction of a civil society with an increased role for
women. Although Greens in the United States "call for an end to the 'War on
Drugs'" and "for decriminalization of victimless crimes", they also call for
developing "a firm approach to law enforcement that directly addresses violent
crime, including trafficking in hard drugs". Green platforms generally favor
tariffs on fossil fuels, restricting genetically modified organisms, and
protections for ecoregions or communities. In keeping with their commitment to
the preservation of diversity, greens are often committed to the maintenance
and protection of indigenous communities, languages, and traditions. An example
of this is the Irish Green Party's commitment to the preservation of the Irish
Language. Organization. Local movements. Green ideology emphasizes
participatory democracy and the principle of "thinking globally, acting
locally". As such, the ideal Green Party is thought to grow from the bottom up,
from neighborhood to municipal to (eco-)regional to national levels. The goal
is rule by a consensus decision making process. Strong local coalitions are
considered a pre-requisite to higher-level electoral breakthroughs.
Historically, the growth of Green parties has been sparked by a single issue
where Greens can appeal to ordinary citizens' concerns. In Germany, for
example, the Greens' early opposition to nuclear power won them their first
successes in the federal elections. Global organization. There is a growing
level of global cooperation between Green parties. Global gatherings of Green
Parties now happen. The first Planetary Meeting of Greens was held 30–31 May
1992, in Rio de Janeiro, immediately preceding the United Nations Conference on
Environment and Development held there. More than 200 Greens from 28 nations
attended. The first formal Global Greens Gathering took place in Canberra, in
2001, with more than 800 Greens from 72 countries in attendance. The second
Global Green Congress was held in São Paulo, Brazil, in May 2008, when 75
parties were represented. Global Green networking dates back to 1990. Following
the Planetary Meeting of Greens in Rio de Janeiro, a Global Green Steering
Committee was created, consisting of two seats for each continent. In 1993 this
Global Steering Committee met in Mexico City and authorized the creation of a
Global Green Network including a Global Green Calendar, Global Green Bulletin,
and Global Green Directory. The Directory was issued in several editions in the
next years. In 1996, 69 Green Parties from around the world signed a common
declaration opposing French nuclear testing in the South Pacific, the first
statement of global greens on a current issue. A second statement was issued in
December 1997, concerning the Kyoto climate change treaty. At the 2001 Canberra
Global Gathering delegates for Green Parties from 72 countries decided upon a
Global Greens Charter which proposes six key principles. Over time, each Green
Party can discuss this and organize itself to approve it, some by using it in
the local press, some by translating it for their web site, some by
incorporating it into their manifesto, some by incorporating it into their
constitution. This process is taking place gradually, with online dialogue
enabling parties to say where they are up to with this process. The Gatherings
also agree on organizational matters. The first Gathering voted unanimously to
set up the "Global Green Network" (GGN). The GGN is composed of three
representatives from each Green Party. A companion organization was set up by
the same resolution: "Global Green Coordination" (GGC). This is composed of
three representatives from each Federation (Africa, Europe, The Americas, Asia/
Pacific, see below). Discussion of the planned organization took place in
several Green Parties prior to the Canberra meeting. The GGC communicates
chiefly by email. Any agreement by it has to be by unanimity of its members. It
may identify possible global campaigns to propose to Green Parties world wide.
The GGC may endorse statements by individual Green Parties. For example, it
endorsed a statement by the US Green Party on the Israel-Palestine conflict.
Thirdly, Global Green Gatherings are an opportunity for informal networking,
from which joint campaigning may arise. For example, a campaign to protect the
New Caledonian coral reef, by getting it nominated for World Heritage Status: a
joint campaign by the New Caledonia Green Party, New Caldonian indigenous
leaders, the French Green Party, and the Australian Greens. Another example
concerns Ingrid Betancourt, the leader of the Green Party in Colombia, the
Green Oxygen Party ("Partido Verde Oxigeno"). Ingrid Betancourt and the party's
Campaign Manager, Claire Rojas, were kidnapped by a hard-line faction of FARC
on 7 March 2002, while travelling in FARC-controlled territory. Betancourt had
spoken at the Canberra Gathering, making many friends. As a result, Green
Parties all over the world have organized, pressing their governments to bring
pressure to bear. For example, Green Parties in African countries, Austria,
Canada, Brazil, Peru, Mexico, France, Scotland, Sweden and other countries have
launched campaigns calling for Betancourt's release. Bob Brown, the leader of
the Australian Greens, went to Colombia, as did an envoy from the European
Federation, Alain Lipietz, who issued a report. The four Federations of Green
Parties issued a message to FARC. Global Green meetings. Separately from the
Global Green Gatherings, "Global Green Meetings" take place. For instance, one
took place on the fringe of the World Summit on Sustainable Development in
Johannesberg. Green Parties attended from Australia, Taiwan, Korea, South
Africa, Mauritius, Uganda, Cameroon, Republic of Cyprus, Italy, France,
Belgium, Germany, Finland, Sweden, Norway, the USA, Mexico and Chile. The
Global Green Meeting discussed the situation of Green Parties on the African
continent; heard a report from Mike Feinstein, former Mayor of Santa Monica,
about setting up a web site of the GGN; discussed procedures for the better
working of the GGC; and decided two topics on which the Global Greens could
issue statements in the near future: Iraq and the 2003 WTO meeting in Cancun.
Green federations. The European Federation of Green Parties formed itself as
the European Green Party on 22 February 2004, in the run-up to European
Parliament elections in June 2004, a further step in trans-national
integration. Currents. Green politics is usually said to include the green
anarchism, eco-anarchism, anti-nuclear and peace movements – although these
often claim not to be aligned with any party. Some claim it also includes
feminism, pacifism and the animal rights movements. Some Greens support policy
measures to empower women, especially mothers; to oppose war and de-escalate
conflicts and stop proliferating technologies useful in conflict or likely to
lead to conflict, and Great Ape personhood. Greens on the Left adhere to eco-
socialism, an ideology that combines ecology, environmentalism, socialism and
Marxism to criticise the capitalist system as the cause of ecological crises,
social exclusion, inequality and conflict. Green Parties are not eco-socialist
but some Green Parties around the world have or have had a significant Eco-
socialist membership. This has led some on the right to refer to Greens
disparagingly as "watermelons"green on the outside, red on the inside. Despite
this stereotype, some centrist Greens follow more geo-libertarian views which
emphasize natural capitalismand shifting taxes away from value created by labor
or service and charging instead for human consumption of the wealth created by
the natural world. Greens may view the processes by which living beings compete
for mates, homes, and food, ecology, and the cognitive and political sciences
very differently. These differences tend to drive debate on ethics, formation
of policy, and the public resolution of these differences in leadership races.
There is no single "Green Ethic".
