Green anarchism Green anarchism, or ecoanarchism, is a school of thought within
anarchism which puts a particular emphasis on environmental issues. An
important early influence was the thought of the American and his book
"Walden". In the late 19th century there emerged anarcho-naturism as the fusion
of anarchism and naturist philosophies within individualist anarchist circles
in France, Spain and Portugal. Some contemporary green anarchists can be
described as anarcho-primitivists (or anti-civilization anarchists), though not
all green anarchists are primitivists. Likewise, there is a strong critique of
modern technology among green anarchists, though not all reject it entirely.
Important contemporary currents are anarcho-primitivism and social ecology.
Background. Henry David Thoreau. Anarchism started to have an ecological view
mainly in the writings of American anarchist and transcendentalist Henry David
Thoreau. In his book "Walden" he advocates simple living and self-sufficiency
among natural surroundings in resistance to the advancement of industrial
civilization. "Many have seen in Thoreau one of the precursors of ecologism and
anarcho-primitivism represented today in John Zerzan. For George Woodcock this
attitude can be also motivated by certain idea of resistance to progress and of
rejection of the growing materialism which is the nature of American society in
the mid XIX century." Several anarchists, including Herbert Read, Ethel Mannin,
and Paul Goodman, also held proto-environmental views linked to their
anarchism. Mannin's 1944 book "Bread and Roses: A Utopian Survey and Blue-
Print" has been described by anarchist historian Robert Graham as setting forth
"an ecological vision in opposition to the prevailing and destructive
industrial organization of society". Anarcho-naturism. In the late 19th century
Anarchist naturism appeared as the union of anarchist and naturist
philosophies. Mainly it had importance within individualist anarchist circles
in Spain, France, Portugal, and Cuba. Important influences were Henry David
Thoreau, Leo Tolstoy and Elisee Reclus. Anarcho-naturism advocated
vegetarianism, free love, nudism and an ecological world view within anarchist
groups and outside them. Anarcho-naturism promoted an ecological worldview,
small ecovillages, and most prominently nudism as a way to avoid the
artificiality of the industrial mass society of modernity. Naturist
individualist anarchists saw the individual in his biological, physical and
psychological aspects and tried to eliminate social determinations."EL
NATURISMO LIBERTARIO EN LA PENÍNSULA IBÉRICA (1890-1939)" by Josep Maria
Rosell] Important promoters of this were Henri Zisly and Emile Gravelle who
collaborated in "La Nouvelle Humanité" followed by "Le Naturien", "Le
Sauvage", "L'Ordre Naturel", & "La Vie Naturelle" Their ideas were important in
individualist anarchist circles in France but also in Spain where Federico
Urales (pseudonym of Joan Montseny), promotes the ideas of Gravelle and Zisly
in "La Revista Blanca" (1898–1905). "Many have seen in Thoreau one of the
precursors of ecologism and anarcho-primitivism represented today in John
Zerzan. For George Woodcock this attitude can be also motivated by certain idea
of resistance to progress and of rejection of the growing materialism which is
the nature of American society in the mid XIX century." John Zerzan himself
included the text "Excursions" (1863) by Thoreau in his edited compilation of
anti-civilization writings called "Against civilization: Readings and
reflections" from 1999. This relationship between anarchism and naturism was
quite important at the end of the 1920s in Spain. "The linking role played by
the ‘Sol y Vida’ group was very important. The goal of this group was to
take trips and enjoy the open air. The Naturist athenaeum, ‘Ecléctico’, in
Barcelona, was the base from which the activities of the group were launched.
First "Etica" and then "Iniciales", which began in 1929, were the publications
of the group, which lasted until the Spanish Civil War. We must be aware that
the naturist ideas expressed in them matched the desires that the libertarian
youth had of breaking up with the conventions of the bourgeoisie of the time.
That is what a young worker explained in a letter to ‘Iniciales’ He writes
it under the odd pseudonym of ‘silvestre del campo’, (wild man in the
country). “I find great pleasure in being naked in the woods, bathed in light
and air, two natural elements we cannot do without. By shunning the humble
garment of an exploited person, (garments which, in my opinion, are the result
of all the laws devised to make our lives bitter), we feel there no others left
but just the natural laws. Clothes mean slavery for some and tyranny for
others. Only the naked man who rebels against all norms, stands for anarchism,
devoid of the prejudices of outfit imposed by our money-oriented society.”"
This ecological tendency in spanish anarchism was strong enough as to call the
attention of the CNT–FAI in Spain. So Daniel Guérin in "Anarchism: From
Theory to Practice" reports how "Spanish anarcho-syndicalism had long been
concerned to safeguard the autonomy of what it called "affinity groups." There
were many adepts of naturism and vegetarianism among its members, especially
among the poor peasants of the south. Both these ways of living were considered
suitable for the transformation of the human being in preparation for a
libertarian society. At the Saragossa congress the members did not forget to
consider the fate of groups of naturists and nudists, "unsuited to
industrialization." As these groups would be unable to supply all their own
needs, the congress anticipated that their delegates to the meetings of the
confederation of communes would be able to negotiate special economic
agreements with the other agricultural and industrial communes. On the eve of a
vast, bloody, social transformation, the CNT did not think it foolish to try to
meet the infinitely varied aspirations of individual human beings."
Contemporary developments. Contemporary Green anarchism incorporates a set of
related political theories that is derived from or inspired by philosophical
and social movements such as Anarcho-primitivism, Eco-socialism, Deep Ecology,
Social Ecology, Feminism, Egoism, Post- and Anti-leftists, Situationists,
Surrealism, Neo-Luddism and anti-industrialism. Although green anarchism
develops themes present in the political action of the Luddites and the
writings of Jean-Jacques Rousseau, when primitivism emerged it was influenced
more directly by the works of theorists such as the Frankfurt School Marxists
Theodor Adorno and Herbert Marcuse; anthropologists Marshall Sahlins and
Richard Borshay Lee; and others such as Lewis Mumford, Jean Baudrillard and
Gary Snyder. Many advocates of Green anarchism and primitivism consider Fredy
Perlman as the modern progenitor of their views. Notable contemporary writers
espousing green anarchism include those critical of technology such as Derrick
Jensen, George Draffan, and John Zerzan; the techno-positive Murray Bookchin;
and others including Alan Carter. Anarcho-primitivism. Anarcho-primitivism is
an anarchist critique of the origins and progress of civilization. According to
anarcho-primitivism, the shift from hunter-gatherer to agricultural subsistence
gave rise to social stratification, coercion, and alienation. Anarcho-
primitivists advocate a return to non-"civilized" ways of life through
deindustrialisation, abolition of the division of labour or specialization, and
abandonment of large-scale organization technologies. There are other non-
anarchist forms of primitivism, and not all primitivists point to the same
phenomenon as the source of modern, civilized problems. Anarcho-primitivists
are often distinguished by their focus on the praxis of achieving a feral state
of being through "rewilding". Social ecology and communalism. Social ecology is
closely related to the work and ideas of Murray Bookchin and influenced by
anarchist Peter Kropotkin. Social ecologists assert that the present ecological
crisis has its roots in human social problems, and that the domination of
human-over-nature stems from the domination of human-over-human. Bookchin later
developed a political philosophy to complement social ecology which he called
"Communalism" (spelled with a capital "C" to differentiate it from other forms
of communalism). While originally conceived as a form of Social anarchism, he
later developed Communalism into a separate ideology which incorporates what he
saw as the most beneficial elements of Anarchism, Marxism, syndicalism, and
radical ecology. Politically, Communalists advocate a network of directly
democratic citizens' assemblies in individual communities/cities organized in a
confederal fashion. This method used to achieve this is called Libertarian
Municipalism which involves the establishment of face-to-face democratic
institutions which are to grow and expand confederally with the goal of
eventually replacing the nation-state. Unlike anarchists, Communalists are not
opposed to taking part in parliamentary politics -especially municipal
elections- as long as candidates are libertarian socialist and anti-statist in
outlook. Economically, Communalism favours the abolition of markets and money
and the transition to an economy similar to libertarian communism and according
to the principle "from each according to ability, to each according to need."
Vegan anarchism. Veganarchism or vegan anarchism, is the political philosophy
of veganism (more specifically animal liberation and earth liberation) and
anarchism, creating a combined praxis that's designed to be a means for social
revolution. This encompasses viewing the state as unnecessary and harmful to
animals, both human and non-human, whilst practising a vegan lifestyle. It is
either perceived as a combined theory, or that both philosophies are
essentially the same. It is further described as an anti-speciesist perspective
on green anarchism, or an anarchist perspective on animal liberation.
Veganarchists typically view oppressive dynamics within society to be
interconnected, from statism, racism and sexism to human supremacy and redefine
veganism as a radical philosophy that sees the state as harmful to animals.
Ideologically, it is a "human, animal, and Earth liberation" movement that is
fought as part of the same struggle. Those who believe in veganarchy can be
either against reform for animals or for it, although do not limit goals to
changes within the law. Criticisms. Civilization. The green anarchist critique
focuses on the institutions of domination that make up society, all grouped
under the broad term "civilization". Such institutions include the state,
capitalism, industrialism, globalization, domestication, patriarchy, science,
technology, and/or work. These institutions, according to green anarchists, are
inherently destructive and exploitative (to humans and the environment) –
therefore, they cannot be reformed into anything better. This movement
generally rejects furthering their cause through current political lines,
favoring direct and autonomous action, sabotage, insurrection, bioregionalism,
and reconnecting with the wild to create meaningful change. Civilization is
taken to be the totality of institutions (described above) that are responsible
for the destruction of human freedom and the environment. Physically,
civilization is demarcated by the domestication of plants, animals, and humans
(though its beginning has been traced back through time, language, art, and
symbolic culture – see John Zerzan). Agriculture introduced the concept of a
surplus along with the conditions for the rise of these institutions. Before
agriculture, humans often lived as autonomous bands of hunter-gatherers.
Essentially, hunter-gatherers are perceived to be part of human anarchist
ancestry since all humans practised that mode of life for around two million
years. Civilization is often seen as more of a paradigm of systems rather than
a tangible thing, and one that places human beings above and outside of the
natural world. This is seen as the first step towards, and justification for,
the destruction of nature (humans included). Technology. Technology is seen as
a system rather than a specific physical tool. Technology, it is argued,
requires the exploitation of the environment through the creation and
extraction of resources, and the exploitation of people through labor, work,
and slavery, industrialism, specialization and the division of labor. There is
no "neutral" form of technology as things are always created in a certain
context with certain aims and functions. Green technology is rejected as an
attempt to reform this exploitative system, merely changing it on the surface
to make it seem environmentally friendly, despite sustained levels of human and
natural exploitation. In place of modern technology, green anarchists favor
small-scale technology, using more sustainable and local resources. Solutions.
Many green anarchists argue that small eco-villages (of no more than a few
hundred people) are a scale of human living preferable to civilization, and
that infrastructure and political systems should be re-organized to ensure that
these are created. Green Anarchists assert that social organizations must be
designed to work "with" natural forces, rather than against. Many green
anarchists consider traditional forms of social organization such as the
village, band, or tribe to be preferred units of human life, not for some Noble
Savage concept of spiritual superiority, but because these social organizations
appear to work better than civilization. Family is considered to be more
important to many green anarchists than work roles. Green anarchist philosophy
can be explained as an interpretation of anthropological and biological truths,
or natural laws. Some green anarchists advocate a process of 'rewilding' and a
return to nomadic hunter-gatherer lifestyles while other green anarchists only
wish to see an end to industrial society and do not necessarily oppose
domestication or agriculture. Key theorists in the former category include
Derrick Jensen and John Zerzan while the 'Unabomber' Theodore Kaczynski belongs
in the latter, though the boundaries are blurred at times, both Jensen and
Zerzan making positive references to some forms of permaculture. Other green
anarchists, mainly techno-positivists, propose other forms of organizations
like arcology or technates. Many green anarchists choose to focus not on
philosophical issues for a future society, but on the defense of the earth and
social revolution in the present. Resisting systems in the present, and
creating alternative, sustainable ways of living are often deemed more
important than protesting. Direct action. Some Green Anarchists engage in
direct action, (not to be confused with ecoterrorism). Organizing themselves
through groups like Earth First!, Root Force, or more drastically, the Earth
Liberation Front (ELF), Earth Liberation Army (ELA) and Animal Liberation Front
(ALF). They may take direct action against what they see as systems of
oppression, such as the logging industry, the meat and dairy industries, animal
testing laboratories, genetic engineering facilities and, more rarely,
government institutions. Such actions are usually, though not always, non-
violent, with groups such as The Olga Cell attempting assassinations of nuclear
scientists, and other related groups sending letterbombs to nano tech and
nuclear tech-related targets. Though not necessarily Green anarchists,
activists have used the names Animal Rights Militia, Justice Department and
Revolutionary Cells among others, to claim responsibility for openly violent
attacks. Convictions. Rod Coronado is an eco-anarchist and is an unofficial
spokesperson for the Animal Liberation Front and Earth Liberation Front. On
February 28, 1992, Coronado carried out an arson attack on research facilities
at Michigan State University (MSU), and released mink from a nearby research
farm on campus, an action claimed by the ALF, and for which Coronado was
subsequently convicted. In 1997, the editors of "Green Anarchist" magazine and
two British supporters of the Animal Liberation Front were tried in connection
with conspiracy to incite violence, in what came to be known as the GANDALF
trial. Green anarchist Tre Arrow was sought by the FBI in connection with an
ELF arson on April 15, 2001 at Ross Island Sand and Gravel in Portland,
torching three trucks amounting of $200,000 in damage. Another arson occurred a
month later at Ray Schoppert Logging Company in Estacada, Oregon, on June 1,
2001 against logging trucks and a front loader, resulting in $50,000 damage.
Arrow was indicted by a federal grand jury in Oregon and charged with four
felonies for this crime on October 18, 2002. On March 13, 2004, after fleeing
to British Columbia, he was arrested in Victoria for stealing bolt cutters and
was also charged with being in Canada illegally. He was then sentenced on
August 12, 2008 to 78 months in federal prison for his part in the arson and
conspiracy ELF attacks in 2001. In January 2006, Eric McDavid, a green
anarchist, was convicted of conspiring to use fire or explosives to damage
corporate and government property. On March 8, he formally declared a hunger
strike due to the jail refusing to provide him with vegan food. He has been
given vegan food off and on since. In September 2007, he was convicted on all
counts after the two activists he conspired with pled guilty testified against
him. An FBI confidential source named "Anna" was revealed as a fourth
participant, in what McDavid's defense argued was entrapment. In May 2008, he
was sentenced to nearly 20 years in prison. On March 3, 2006, a federal jury in
Trenton, New Jersey convicted six members of SHAC, including green-anarchist
Joshua Harper, for "terrorism and Internet stalking", according to the "New
York Times", finding them guilty of using their website to "incite attacks" on
those who did business with Huntingdon Life Sciences HLS. In September 2006,
the SHAC 7 received jail sentences of 3 to 6 years.
