Greenpeace Greenpeace is a non-governmental environmental organization with
offices in over forty countries and with an international coordinating body in
Amsterdam, the Netherlands. Greenpeace states its goal is to "ensure the
ability of the Earth to nurture life in all its diversity" and focuses its
campaigning on world wide issues such as global warming, deforestation,
overfishing, commercial whaling and anti-nuclear issues. Greenpeace uses direct
action, lobbying and research to achieve its goals. The global organization
does not accept funding from governments, corporations or political parties,
relying on 2.9 million individual supporters and foundation grants. Greenpeace
is a founding member of the INGO Accountability Charter; an international non-
governmental organization that intends to foster accountability and
transparency of non-governmental organizations. Greenpeace evolved from the
peace movement and anti-nuclear protests in Vancouver, British Columbia, in the
early 1970s. On September 15, 1971, the newly founded Don't Make a Wave
Committee sent a chartered ship, "Phyllis Cormack", renamed "Greenpeace" for
the protest, from Vancouver to oppose United States testing of nuclear devices
in Amchitka, Alaska. The Don't Make a Wave Committee subsequently adopted the
name Greenpeace. In a few years, Greenpeace spread to several countries and
started to campaign on other environmental issues such as commercial whaling
and toxic waste. In the late 1970s, the different regional Greenpeace groups
formed Greenpeace International to oversee the goals and operations of the
regional organizations globally. Greenpeace received international attention
during the 1980s when the French intelligence agency bombed the "Rainbow
Warrior" in Auckland's Waitemata Harbour, one of the most well-known vessels
operated by Greenpeace, killing one individual. In the following years,
Greenpeace evolved into one of the largest environmental organizations in the
world. Greenpeace is known for its direct actions and has been described as the
most visible environmental organization in the world. Greenpeace has raised
environmental issues to public knowledge, and influenced both the private and
the public sector. Greenpeace has also been a source of controversy; its
motives and methods have received criticism and the organization's direct
actions have sparked legal actions against Greenpeace activists. History.
Origins. In the late 1960s, the U.S. had plans for an underground nuclear
weapon test in the tectonically unstable island of Amchitka in Alaska. Because
of the 1964 Alaska earthquake, the plans raised some concerns of the test
triggering earthquakes and causing a tsunami. Anti-nuclear activists protested
against the test on the border of the U.S. and Canada with signs reading "Don't
Make A Wave. It's Your Fault If Our Fault Goes". The protests did not stop the
U.S. from detonating the bomb. While no earthquake or tsunami followed the
test, the opposition grew when the U.S. announced they would detonate a bomb
five times more powerful than the first one. Among the opposers were Jim
Bohlen, a veteran who had served the U.S. Navy, Irving Stowe and Dorothy Stowe,
who had recently become Quakers. As members of the Sierra Club Canada, they
were frustrated by the lack of action by the organization. From Irving Stowe,
Jim Bohlen learned of a form of passive resistance, "bearing witness", where
objectionable activity is protested simply by mere presence. Jim Bohlen's wife
Marie came up with the idea to sail to Amchitka, inspired by the anti-nuclear
voyages of Albert Bigelow in 1958. The idea ended up in the press and was
linked to The Sierra Club. The Sierra Club did not like this connection and in
1970 The Don't Make a Wave Committee was established for the protest. Early
meetings were held in the Shaughnessy home of Robert Hunter and his wife Bobbi
Hunter. Subsequently the Stowe home at 2775 Courtenay St. became the HQ. The
first office was opened in a backroom, storefront on Cypress and Bwy SE corner
in Kitsilano, (Vancouver) before moving to West 4th at Maple (see below). There
is some debate as to who are the actual founders of The Don't Make a Wave
Committee. Researcher Vanessa Timmer has referred the early members as "an
unlikely group of loosely organized protestors". According to the current
Greenpeace web page, the founders were Dorothy and Irving Stowe, Marie and Jim
Bohlen, Ben and Dorothy Metcalfe, and Robert Hunter. The book "The Greenpeace
Story" states that the founders were Irving Stowe, Jim Bohlen and Paul Cote, a
law student and peace activist. An interview with Dorothy Stowe, Dorothy
Metcalfe, Jim Bohlen and Robert Hunter identifies the founders as Paul Cote,
Irving and Dorothy Stowe and Jim and Marie Bohlen. Paul Watson, who also
participated in the anti-nuclear protests, maintains that he also was one of
the founders. Another early member, Patrick Moore also has stated that he was
one of the founders. Greenpeace used to list Moore among "founders and first
members" of The Don't Make a Wave Committee but has later stated that while
Moore was a significant early member, he was not a founder. According to
Moore's own letter he applied to the already existing organization in March
1971. Irving Stowe arranged a benefit concert (supported by Joan Baez) that
took place on October 16, 1970 at the Pacific Coliseum in Vancouver. The
concert created the financial basis for the first Greenpeace campaign.
Amchitka, the 1970 concert that launched Greenpeace has been published by
Greenpeace in November 2009 on CD and is also available as mp3 download via the
Amchitka concert website. Using the money raised with the concert, the Don't
Make a Wave Committee chartered a ship, the "Phyllis Cormack" owned and sailed
by John Cormack. The ship was renamed "Greenpeace" for the protest after a term
coined by activist Bill Darnell. In the fall of 1971 the ship sailed towards
Amchitka and faced the U.S. Coast Guard ship "Confidence" which forced the
activists to turn back. Because of this and the increasingly bad weather the
crew decided to return to Canada only to find out that the news about their
journey and reported support from the crew of the "Confidence" had generated
sympathy for their protest. After this Greenpeace tried to navigate to the test
site with other vessels, until the U.S. detonated the bomb. The nuclear test
was criticized and the U.S. decided not to continue with their test plans at
Amchitka. In 1972, The Don't Make a Wave committee changed their official name
to "Greenpeace Foundation". While the organization was founded under a
different name in 1970 and was officially named Greenpeace in 1972, the
organization itself dates its birth to the first protest of 1971. Greenpeace
also states that "there was no single founder, and the name, idea, spirit,
tactics, and internationalism of the organization all can be said to have
separate lineages". As Rex Weyler put it in his chronology, "Greenpeace", in
1969, Irving and Dorothy Stowe's "quiet home on Courtenay Street would soon
become a hub of monumental, global significance". Some of the first Greenpeace
meetings were held there, and it served as the first office of the Greenpeace
Foundation. After the office in the Stowe home, (and after the first concert
fund-raiser) Greenpeace functions moved to other private homes and held public
meetings weekly on Wednesday nights at the Kitsilano Neighborhood House before
settling, in the fall of 1974, in a small office shared with the SPEC
environmental group, at 2007 W. 4th Avenue, at Maple Street, across from the
Bimini neighbourhood pub. The address of this office has since been changed to
2009 W. 4th Avenue. The building still exists, and the office is up the stair
at the “2009” door. First campaigns after Amchitka. After the nuclear tests
at Amchitka were over, Greenpeace moved its focus to the French atmospheric
nuclear weapons testing at the Moruroa Atoll in French Polynesia. The young
organization needed help for their protests and were contacted by David
McTaggart, a former businessman living in New Zealand. In 1972 the yacht
"Vega", a ketch owned by David McTaggart, was renamed "Greenpeace III" and
sailed in an anti-nuclear protest into the exclusion zone at Moruroa to attempt
to disrupt French nuclear testing. This voyage was sponsored and organized by
the New Zealand branch of the Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament. The French Navy
tried to stop the protest in several ways, including assaulting David
McTaggart. McTaggart was supposedly beaten to the point that he lost sight in
one of his eyes. Luckily, one of McTaggart's crew members photographed the
incident and went public. After the assault was publicized, France announced it
would stop the atmospheric nuclear tests. In the mid-1970s some Greenpeace
members started an independent campaign, Project Ahab, against commercial
whaling, since Irving Stowe was against Greenpeace focusing on other issues
than nuclear weapons. After Irving Stowe died in 1975, Phyllis Cormack left
from Vancouver to face Soviet whalers on the coast of California. Greenpeace
activists disrupted the whaling by going between the harpoons and the whales,
and the footage of the protests spread across the world. Later in the 1970s the
organization widened its focus to include toxic waste and commercial seal
hunting. Organizational development. Greenpeace evolved from a group of
Canadian protesters into a less conservative group of environmentalists who
were more reflective of the counterculture and hippie youth movements of the
1960s and 1970s. The social and cultural background from which Greenpeace
emerged heralded a period of de-conditioning away from old world antecedents
and sought to develop new codes of social, environmental and political
behavior. Historian Frank Zelko has commented that "unlike Friends of the
Earth, for example, which sprung fully formed from the forehead of David
Brower, Greenpeace developed in a more evolutionary manner." In the mid-1970s
independent groups using the name Greenpeace started springing up world wide.
By 1977 there were 15 to 20 Greenpeace groups around the world. At the same
time the Canadian Greenpeace office was heavily in debt. Disputes between
offices over fund-raising and organizational direction split the global
movement as the North American offices were reluctant to be under the authority
of the Vancouver office and its president Patrick Moore. After the incidents of
Moruroa, David McTaggart had moved to France to battle in court with the French
state and helped to develop the cooperation of European Greenpeace groups.
David McTaggart lobbied the Canadian Greenpeace Foundation to accept a new
structure which would bring the scattered Greenpeace offices under the auspices
of a single global organization. The European Greenpeace paid the debt of the
Canadian Greenpeace office and on October 14, 1979, Greenpeace International
came into existence. Under the new structure, the local offices would
contribute a percentage of their income to the international organization,
which would take responsibility for setting the overall direction of the
movement with each regional office having one vote. Some Greenpeace groups,
namely London Greenpeace (dissolved in 2001) and the US-based Greenpeace
Foundation (still operational) however decided to remain independent from
Greenpeace International. Priorities and campaigns. Climate and energy.
Greenpeace was one of the first parties to formulate a sustainable development
scenario for climate change mitigation, which it did in 1993. According to
sociologists Marc Mormont and Christine Dasnoy, Greenpeace played a significant
role in raising public awareness of global warming in the 1990s. The
organization has also focused on CFCs, because of both their global warming
potential and their effect on the ozone layer. Greenpeace was one of the
leading participants advocating early phase-out of ozone depleting substances
in the Montreal Protocol. In the early 1990s, Greenpeace developed a CFC-free
refrigerator technology, "Greenfreeze" for mass production together with the
refrigerator industry. United Nations Environment Programme awarded Greenpeace
for "outstanding contributions to the protection of the Earth's ozone layer" in
1997. In 2007 one third of the world's total production of refrigerators were
based on Greenfreeze technology, with over 200 million units in use. Currently
Greenpeace considers global warming to be the greatest environmental problem
facing the Earth. Greenpeace calls for global greenhouse gas emissions to peak
in 2015 and to decrease as close to zero as possible by 2050. For this
Greenpeace calls for the industrialized countries to cut their emissions at
least 40% by 2020 (from 1990 levels) and to give substantial funding for
developing countries to build a sustainable energy capacity, to adapt to the
inevitable consequences of global warming, and to stop deforestation by 2020.
Together with EREC, Greenpeace has formulated a global energy scenario, "Energy
where 80% of the world's total energy is produced with renewables, and the
emissions of the energy sector are decreased by over 80% of the 1990 levels by
2050. Using direct action, Greenpeace has protested several times against coal
by occupying coal power plants and blocking coal shipments and mining
operations, in places such as New Zealand, Svalbard, Australia, and the United
Kingdom. Greenpeace is also critical of extracting petroleum from oil sands and
has used direct action to block the oil sand operations at Athabasca, Canada.
Kingsnorth court case. In October 2007, six Greenpeace protesters were arrested
for breaking in to the Kingsnorth power station, climbing the 200 metre
smokestack, painting the name Gordon on the chimney, and causing an estimated
£30,000 damage. At their subsequent trial they admitted trying to shut the
station down, but argued that they were legally justified because they were
trying to prevent climate change from causing greater damage to property
elsewhere around the world. Evidence was heard from David Cameron's environment
adviser Zac Goldsmith, climate scientist James E. Hansen and an Inuit leader
from Greenland, all saying that climate change was already seriously affecting
life around the world. The six activists were acquitted. It was the first case
where preventing property damage caused by climate change has been used as part
of a "lawful excuse" defense in court. Both The Daily Telegraph and The
Guardian described the acquittal as embarrassment to the Brown Ministry. In
December 2008 "The New York Times" listed the acquittal in its annual list of
the most influential ideas of the year. "Go Beyond Oil". As part of their
stance on the subject of renewable energy, Greenpeace have launched the "Go
Beyond Oil" campaign. The campaign is focused on slowing, and eventually
ending, the world's consumption of oil; with activist activities taking place
against companies that pursue oil drilling as a venture. Much of the activities
of the "Go Beyond Oil" campaign have been focused on drilling for oil in the
Arctic and areas affected by the Deepwater Horizon disaster. The activities of
Greenpeace in the arctic have mainly involved the Edinburgh-based oil and gas
exploration company, Cairn Energy; and range from protests at the Cairn
Energy's headquarters to scalling their oil rigs in an attempt to halt the
drilling process. The "Go Beyond Oil" campaign also involves applying political
pressure on the governments who allow oil exploration in their territories;
with the group stating that one of the key aims of the "Go Beyond Oil" campaign
is to "work to expose the lengths the oil industry is willing to go to squeeze
the last barrels out of the ground and put pressure on industry and governments
to move beyond oil." Nuclear power. Greenpeace views nuclear power as a
relatively minor industry with major problems, such as environmental damage and
risks from uranium mining, nuclear weapons proliferation, and unresolved
questions concerning nuclear waste. The organization argues that the potential
of nuclear power to mitigate global warming is marginal, referring to the IEA
energy scenario where an increase in world's nuclear capacity from 2608 TWh in
2007 to 9857 TWh by 2050 would cut global greenhouse gas emissions less than 5%
and require 32 nuclear reactor units of 1000MW capacity built per year until
2050. According to Greenpeace the slow construction times, construction delays,
and hidden costs, all limit the mitigation potential of nuclear power. This
makes the IEA scenario technically and financially unrealistic. They also argue
that binding massive amounts of investments on nuclear energy would take
funding away from more effective solutions. Greenpeace views the construction
of Olkiluoto 3 nuclear power plant in Finland as an example of the problems on
building new nuclear power. Anti-nuclear advertisement. In 1994, Greenpeace
published an anti-nuclear newspaper advert which included a claim that nuclear
facilities Sellafield would kill 2,000 people in the next 10 years, and an
image of a hydrocephalus-affected child said to be a victim of nuclear weapons
testing in Kazakhstan. Advertising Standards Authority viewed the claim
concerning Sellafield unsubstantiated, and ASA did not accept that the child's
condition was caused by radiation. This resulted in banning of the advert.
Greenpeace did not admit fault, stating that a Kazakhstan doctor had said that
the child's condition was due to nuclear testing. Adam Woolf from Greenpeace
also stated that, "fifty years ago there were many experts who would be lined
up and swear there was no link between smoking and bad health." The UN has
estimated that the nuclear weapon tests in Kazakhstan caused about 100,000
people to suffer over three generations. Press release blunder. In
Philadelphia, in 2006, Greenpeace issued a press release that said "In the
twenty years since the Chernobyl tragedy, the world's worst nuclear accident,
there have been nearly IN ALARMIST AND ARMAGEDDONIST FACTOID HERE," The final
report warned of plane crashes and reactor meltdowns. According to a Greenpeace
spokesman, the memo was a joke that was accidentally released. EDF spying
conviction. In 2011, a French court fined Électricité de France (EDF) €1.5m
and jailed two senior employees for spying on Greenpeace, including hacking
into Greenpeace's computer systems. Greenpeace was awarded €500,000 in
damages. Although EDF claimed that a security firm had only been employed to
monitor Greenpeace, the court disagreed, jailing the head and deputy head of
EDF's nuclear security operation for three years each. Two employees of the
security firm, Kargus, run by a former member of France's secret services,
received sentences of three and two years respectively. Forest campaign.
Greenpeace aims at protecting intact primary forests from deforestation and
degradation with the target of zero deforestation by 2020. Greenpeace has
accused several corporations, such as Unilever, Nike, KFC, KitKat and
McDonald's of having links to the deforestation of the tropical rainforests,
resulting in policy changes in several of the companies under criticism.
Greenpeace, together with other environmental NGOs, also campaigned for ten
years for the EU to ban import of illegal timber. The EU decided to ban illegal
timber on July 2010. As deforestation contributes to global warming, Greenpeace
has demanded that REDD (Reduced Emission from Deforestation and Forest
Degradation) should be included in the climate treaty following the Kyoto
treaty. Another Greenpeace movement concerning rainforest is discouraging palm
oil industries. The movement has been the most active in Indonesia where
already 6 million hectares are used for palm oil plantation and has plans for
another 4 million hectares by 2015. Acknowledging that mass production of palm
oil may be disastrous on biodiversity of forests, Greenpeace is actively
campaigning against the production, urging the industries and the government to
turn to other forms of energy resources. One of the positive results of the
campaign was GAR(Golden Agri-Resources), the world's second largest palm oil
production company, deciding to commit itself to forest conservation. The
company signed an agreement which prevents the company from developing
plantations in areas where large amounts of carbon are locked up. Removal of
ancient tree. In June 1995, Greenpeace took a trunk of a tree from the forests
of the proposed national park of Koitajoki in Ilomantsi, Finland and put it on
display at exhibitions held in Austria and Germany. Greenpeace said in a press
conference that the tree was originally from a logged area in the ancient
forest which was supposed to be protected. Metsähallitus accused Greenpeace of
theft and said that the tree was from a normal forest and had been left
standing because of its old age. Metsähallitus also said that the tree had
actually crashed over a road during a storm. The incident received publicity in
Finland, for example in the large newspapers "Helsingin Sanomat" and "Ilta-
Sanomat". Greenpeace replied that the tree had fallen down because the
protective forest around it had been clearcut, and that they wanted to
highlight the fate of old forests in general, not the fate of one particular
tree. Greenpeace also highlighted that Metsähallitus admitted the value of the
forest afterwards as Metsähallitus currently refers to Koitajoki as a
distinctive area because of its old growth forests. 'Tokyo Two'. In 2008, two
Greenpeace anti-whaling activists, Junichi Sato and Toru Suzuki, stole a case
of whale meat from a delivery depot in Aomori prefecture, Japan. Their
intention was to expose what they considered embezzlement of the meat collected
during whale hunts. After a brief investigation of their allegations was ended,
Sato and Suzuki were arrested and charged with theft and trespass. Amnesty
International said that the arrests and following raids on Greenpeace Japan
office and homes of five of Greenpeace staff members were aimed at intimidating
activists and non-governmental organizations. They were convicted of theft and
trespass in September 2010 by the Aomori district court. Genetically modified
organisms (GMOs). Greenpeace has also supported the rejection of GM food from
the US in famine-stricken Zambia as long as supplies of non-genetically
engineered grain exist, stating that the US "should follow in the European
Union's footsteps and allow aid recipients to choose their food aid, buying it
locally if they wish. This practise can stimulate developing economies and
creates more robust food security", adding that, "if Africans truly have no
other alternative, the controversial GE maize should be milled so it can't be
planted. It was this condition that allowed Zambia's neighbours Zimbabwe and
Malawi to accept it." After Zambia banned all GM food aid, the former
agricultural minister of Zambia criticized, "how the various international NGOs
that have spoken approvingly of the government's action will square the body
count with their various consciences." Concerning the decision of Zambia,
Greenpeace has stated that, "it was obvious to us that if no non-GM aid was
being offered then they should absolutely accept GM food aid. But the Zambian
government decided to refuse the GM food. We offered our opinion to the Zambian
government and, as many governments do, they disregarded our advice."
Greenpeace on golden rice. Greenpeace opposes the planned use of golden rice, a
variety of "Oryza sativa" rice produced through genetic engineering to
biosynthesize beta-carotene, a precursor of pro-vitamin A in the edible parts
of rice. According to Greenpeace, golden rice has not managed to do anything
about malnutrition for 10 years during which alternative methods are already
tackling malnutrition. The alternative proposed by Greenpeace is to discourage
mono-cropping and to increase production of crops which are naturally nutrient-
rich (containing other nutrients not found in golden rice in addition to beta-
carotene). Greenpeace argues that resources should be spent on programs that
are already working and helping to relieve malnutrition. The Golden Rice
Project acknowledges that, "While the most desirable option is a varied and
sufficient diet, this goal is not always achievable, at least not in the short
term." The renewal of these concerns coincided with the publication of a paper
in the journal "Nature" about a version of golden rice with much higher levels
of beta carotene. This "golden rice 2" was developed and patented by Syngenta,
which provoked Greenpeace to renew its allegation that the project is driven by
profit motives. Dr. C.S. Prakash, who is the director of the Center for Plant
Biotechnology Research at Tuskegee University and is president of the
AgBioWorld Foundation expressed the opinion that, "condemned biotechnology as
something that is purely for profit, that is being pursued only in the West,
and with no benefits to the consumer. Golden Rice proves them wrong, so they
need to discredit it any way they can." Although Greenpeace had stated that
efficiency was its primary concern, as early as 2001, statements from March and
April 2005 also continued to express concern over human health and
environmental safety Greenpeace has opposed releasing golden rice to fields as
opposed to farming in greenhouses, which according to golden rice developer
Ingo Potrykus, limits the amount of material needed for human safety testing.
Toxics. In July 2011, Greenpeace released its Dirty Laundry report accusing
some of the world's top fashion and sportswear brands of releasing toxic waste
into China's rivers. The report profiles the problem of water pollution
resulting from the release of toxic chemicals associated with the country's
textile industry. Investigations focused on wastewater discharges from two
facilities in China; one belonging to the Youngor Group located on the Yangtze
River Delta and the other to Well Dyeing Factory Ltd. located on a tributary of
the Pearl River Delta. Scientific analysis of samples from both facilities
revealed the presence of hazardous and persistent hormone disruptor chemicals,
including alkylphenols, perfluorinated compounds and perfluorooctane sulfonate.
The report goes on to assert that the Youngor Group and Well Dyeing Factory
Ltd. - the two companies behind the facilities - have commercial relationships
with a range of major clothing brands, including Abercrombie & Fitch, Adidas,
Bauer Hockey, Calvin Klein, Converse (shoe company), Cortefiel, H&M, Lacoste,
Li Ning (company), Metersbonwe Group, Nike, Phillips-Van Heusen and Puma AG.
Organizational structure. Governance. Greenpeace consists of "Greenpeace
International" (officially Stichting Greenpeace Council) based in Amsterdam,
Netherlands, and 28 regional offices operating in 45 countries. The regional
offices work largely autonomously under the supervision of Greenpeace
International. The executive director of Greenpeace is elected by the board
members of Greenpeace International. The current director of Greenpeace
International is Kumi Naidoo and the current Chair of the Board is Brazilian
Ana Toni. Greenpeace has a staff of 2,400 and 15,000 volunteers globally. Each
regional office is led by a regional executive director elected by the regional
board of directors. The regional boards also appoint a trustee to The
Greenpeace International Annual General Meeting, where the trustees elect or
remove the board of directors of Greenpeace International. The role of the
annual general meeting is also to discuss and decide the overall principles and
strategically important issues for Greenpeace in collaboration with the
trustees of regional offices and Greenpeace International board of directors.
Funding. receives its funding from individual supporters and foundations.
Greenpeace screens all major donations in order to ensure it does not receive
unwanted donations. The organization does not accept money from governments,
intergovernmental organizations, political parties or corporations in order to
avoid their influence. Donations from foundations which are funded by political
parties or receive most of their funding from governments or intergovernmental
organizations are rejected. Foundation donations are also rejected if the
foundations attach unreasonable conditions, restrictions or constraints on
Greenpeace activities or if the donation would compromise the independence and
aims of Greenpeace. Since in the mid-1990s the number of supporters started to
decrease, Greenpeace pioneered the use of face-to-face fundraising where
fundraisers actively seek new supporters at public places, subscribing them for
a monthly direct debit donation. In 2008, most of the €202.5 million received
by the organization was donated by about 2.6 million regular supporters, mainly
from Europe. In September 2003, the Public Interest Watch (PIW) complained to
the Internal Revenue Service, claiming that Greenpeace USA tax returns were
inaccurate and in violation of the law. PIW charged that Greenpeace was using
non-profit donations for advocacy instead of charity and educational purposes.
PIW asked the IRS to investigate the complaint. Greenpeace rejected the
accusations and challenged PIW to disclose its funders, a request rejected by
then-Executive Director of PIW, Mike Hardiman, because PIW does not have 501c3
tax exempt status like Greenpeace does in the U.S. The IRS conducted an
extensive review and concluded in December 2005 that Greenpeace USA continued
to qualify for its tax-exempt status. In March 2006 "The Wall Street Journal"
reported that PIW had been funded by ExxonMobil prior to PIW's request to
investigate Greenpeace. Ships. Since Greenpeace was founded, seagoing ships
have played a vital role in its campaigns. Now that the "Rainbow Warrior III"
has been completed, the group has three ocean-going ships, the "Esperanza",
"Arctic Sunrise" and "Rainbow Warrior III". First "Rainbow Warrior". In 1978,
Greenpeace launched the original "Rainbow Warrior", a , former fishing trawler
named for the Cree legend that inspired early activist Robert Hunter on the
first voyage to Amchitka. Greenpeace purchased the "Rainbow Warrior"
(originally launched as the "Sir William Hardy" in 1955) at a cost of £40,000.
Volunteers restored and refitted it over a period of four months. First
deployed to disrupt the hunt of the Icelandic whaling fleet, the "Rainbow
Warrior" would quickly become a mainstay of Greenpeace campaigns. Between 1978
and 1985, crew members also engaged in direct action against the ocean-dumping
of toxic and radioactive waste, the Grey Seal hunt in Orkney and nuclear
testing in the Pacific. Japan's Fisheries Agency has labeled Greenpeace ships
as "anti-whaling vessels" and "environmental terrorists". In May 1985, the
vessel was instrumental for 'Operation Exodus', the evacuation of about 300
Rongelap Atoll islanders whose home had been contaminated with nuclear fallout
from a US nuclear test two decades ago which had never been cleaned up and was
still having severe health effects on the locals. Later in 1985 the "Rainbow
Warrior" was to lead a flotilla of protest vessels into the waters surrounding
Moruroa atoll, site of French nuclear testing. The sinking of the Rainbow
Warrior occurred when the French government secretly bombed the ship in
Auckland harbour on orders from François Mitterrand himself. This killed Dutch
freelance photographer Fernando Pereira, who thought it was safe to enter the
boat to get his photographic material after a first small explosion, but
drowned as a result of a second, larger explosion. The attack was a public
relations disaster for France after it was quickly exposed by the New Zealand
police. The French Government in 1987 agreed to pay New Zealand compensation of
NZ$13 million and formally apologised for the bombing. The French Government
also paid ₣2.3 million compensation to the family of the photographer. Second
"Rainbow Warrior". In 1989 Greenpeace commissioned a replacement vessel, also
named the Rainbow Warrior (also referred as "Rainbow Warrior II"), which was
retired from service on the 16th of August 2011 to be replaced by the third
Rainbow Warrior. In 2005 the "Rainbow Warrior II" ran aground on and damaged
the Tubbataha Reef in the Philippines while inspecting the reef for coral
bleaching. Greenpeace was fined US$7,000 for damaging the reef and agreed to
pay the fine saying they felt responsible for the damage, although Greenpeace
stated that the Philippines government had given it outdated charts. The park
manager of Tubbataha appreciated the quick action Greenpeace took to assess the
damage to the reef. Other vessels. Along with the "Rainbow Warriors",
Greenpeace has had several other ships in its service: MV "Sirius", MV "Solo",
MV "Greenpeace", MV "Arctic Sunrise" and MV "Esperanza", the last two being in
service today. Reactions and responses to Greenpeace activities. Lawsuits have
been filed against Greenpeace for lost profits, reputation damage and
"sailormongering". In 2004 it was revealed that the Australian government was
willing to offer a subsidy to Southern Pacific Petroleum on the condition that
the oil company would take legal action against Greenpeace, which had
campaigned against the Stuart Oil Shale Project. Some corporations, such as
Royal Dutch Shell, BP and Électricité de France have reacted to Greenpeace
campaigns by spying on Greenpeace activities and infiltrating Greenpeace
offices. Greenpeace activists have also been targets of phone tapping, death
threats, violence and even state terrorism in the case of bombing of the
"Rainbow Warrior". Criticism. Early Greenpeace member Canadian ecologist
Patrick Moore left the organization in 1986 when it, according to Moore,
decided to support a universal ban on chlorine in drinking water. Moore has
argued that Greenpeace today is motivated by politics rather than science and
that none of his "fellow directors had any formal science education". Bruce
Cox, Director of Greenpeace Canada, responded that Greenpeace has never
demanded a universal chlorine ban and that Greenpeace does not oppose use of
chlorine in drinking water or in pharmaceutical uses, adding that "Mr. Moore is
alone in his recollection of a fight over chlorine and/or use of science as his
reason for leaving Greenpeace." Paul Watson, an early member of Greenpeace has
said that Moore "uses his status as a so-called co-founder of Greenpeace to
give credibility to his accusations. I am also a co-founder of Greenpeace and I
have known Patrick Moore for 35 years.[...] Moore makes accusations that have
no basis in fact" although Greenpeace themselves have vehemently denied
Watson's claim of being a Greenpeace Founder. A French journalist under the pen
name Olivier Vermont wrote in his book "La Face cachée de Greenpeace" ("The
Hidden Face of Greenpeace") that he had joined Greenpeace France and had worked
there as a secretary. According to Vermont he found misconduct, and continued
to find it, from Amsterdam to the International office. Vermont said he found
classified documents according to which half of the organization's € 180
million revenue was used for the organization's salaries and structure. He also
accused Greenpeace of having unofficial agreements with polluting companies
where the companies paid Greenpeace to keep them from attacking the company's
image. Animal protection magazine "Animal People" reported in March 1997 that
Greenpeace France and Greenpeace International had sued Olivier Vermont and his
publisher Albin Michel for issuing "defamatory statements, untruths,
distortions of the facts and absurd allegations". Writing in "Cosmos",
journalist Wilson da Silva reacted to Greenpeace's destruction of a genetically
modified wheat crop in Ginninderra as another sign that the organization has
"lost its way" and had degenerated into a "sad, dogmatic, reactionary phalanx
of anti-science zealots who care not for evidence, but for publicity". Local
greenpeaces. Greenpeace India. Greenpeace India has been working on various
issues related to the environment since 2001.There work in India is focused on
four broad campaigns namely, stop climate change, sustainable agriculture,
preserving the oceans and preventing another nuclear catastrophe. Over the
years Greenpeace India has built a strong base of supporters spread across the
country. Greenpeace Chile. In Chile, the organization is affiliated as
"Greenpeace Chile" was founded in 1981 and is a government recognized NGO
there. Greenpeace East Asia. Greenpeace East Asia's first China office was
opened in Hong Kong in 1997. Headquartered in Beijing, the office now campaigns
in Mainland China, Hong Kong, Taiwan and South Korea. Greenteams. Greenpeace
supports small local groups of youths and children who want to join or found a
"Greenteam", by providing them with free info materials and mentoring.
