Green fleets Green Fleets is a result-oriented awareness campaign to reduce
carbon emissions, plant trees to guard the present, and promote new technology
to protect the future. Green Fleets. Besides the cost, fleet vehicles represent
a significant source of pollution. Additionally, every gallon of gasoline or
diesel fuel burned releases about 22 pounds of carbon dioxide (CO2), the major
pollutant causing global warming. In response to this issue, several local
governments have set up fleet policies using the green fleet process as a
start. Some local governments that have followed this process are: Denver,
Alachua, Ann Arbor, Michigan, Arcata, Arlington, Fort Collins, Los Angeles,
Madison, Sacramento, San Francisco, Santa Monica, and Seattle, Washington. The
steps of greening your fleet. First conduct an inventory of the fleet, include
the type of vehicle, how many there are of each type, and type and quantity of
fuel they use. Second set realistic goals for reducing fuel use, criteria air
pollutants, and carbon dioxide emissions for the fleet. Third there are cost
effective and practical measures that can "green" your fleet. Like purchasing
fuel efficient, alternatively fueled, and electric vehicles. Also you could
eliminate fleet vehicles. Many cities and counties have more vehicles than they
need in their fleets. By taking these steps Green Fleet can help reduce
greenhouse gas pollution, improve air quality, and save money. A Few Things You
Can Do To Green Your fleet. Downsize vehicle. In many local governments sedans
are assigned to staff, even though they could probably use a smaller car.
Matching duty requirements of staff to the smallest possible vehicle for the
task is a critical component of a Green Fleets program. Maximize efficiency. An
important step is to ensure that regular maintenance is performed on vehicles.
Oil should be changed regularly and tires should be kept at the correct
pressure at all times. Optimize vehicle use. Plan task efficiently so multiple
task can be done in one trip. Car pool with others. Use bike, transit, or walk
whenever possible.
