Growth accounting Growth accounting is a procedure used in economics to measure
the contribution of different factors to economic growth and to indirectly
compute the rate of technological progress, measured as a residual, in an
economy. This methodology was introduced by Robert Solow in 1957 Growth
accounting decomposes the growth rate of economy's total output into that which
is due to increases in the amount of factors used - usually the increase in the
amount of capital and labor - and that which cannot be accounted for by
observable changes in factor utilization. The unexplained part of growth in GDP
is then taken to represent increases in productivity (getting more output with
the same amounts of inputs) or a measure of broadly defined technological
progress. The technique has been applied to virtually every economy in the
world and a common finding is that observed levels of economic growth cannot be
explained simply by changes in the stock of capital in the economy or
population and labor force growth rates. Hence, technological progress plays a
key role in the economic growth of nations, or the lack of it. Example. As an
abstract example consider an economy whose total output (GDP) grows at 3% per
year. Over the same period its capital stock grows at 6% per year and its labor
force by 1%. The contribution of the growth rate of capital to output is equal
to that growth rate weighted by the share of capital in total output and the
contribution of labor is given by the growth rate of labor weighted by labor's
share in income. If capital's share in output is 1/3, then labor's share is 2/
3 (assuming these are the only two factors of production). This means that the
portion of growth in output which is due to changes in factors is .06*(1/
3)+.01*(2/3)=.027 or 2.7%. This means that there is still 0.3% of the growth in
output that cannot be accounted for. This remainder is the increase in the
productivity of factors that happened over the period, or the measure of
technological progress during this time. Technical derivation. formula_1 where
Y is total output, K is the stock of capital in the economy, L is the labor
force (or population) and A is a "catch all" factor for technology, role of
institutions and other relevant forces which measures how productively capital
and labor are used in production. formula_2 formula_3 where MPK denotes the
extra units of output produced with an additional unit of capital and
similarly, for MPL. Wages paid to labor are denoted by w and the rate of profit
or the real interest rate is denoted by r. Note that the assumption of perfect
competition enables us to take prices as given. For simplicity we assume unit
price (i.e. P =1), and thus quantities also represent values in all equations.
If we totally differentiate the above production function we get; formula_4
formula_6 formula_7 formula_9 formula_14 formula_20 formula_21 which states
that the rate of technological growth is that part of the growth rate of per
capita income which is not due to the (weighted) growth rate of capital per
person.
