Guevarism Guevarism is a theory of communist revolution and a military strategy
of guerrilla warfare associated with Marxist revolutionary Ernesto "Che"
Guevara, one of the leading figures of the Cuban Revolution. During the Cold
War, the United States and Soviet Union clashed in a series of proxy wars,
especially in the developing nations of the Third World, including many
decolonization struggles. Overview. After the 1959 triumph of the Cuban
insurrection led by a militant "foco" under Fidel Castro, his Argentina-born,
cosmopolitan and Marxist-Leninist colleague Guevara parlayed his ideology and
experiences into a model for emulation (and at times, direct military
intervention) around the globe. While exporting one such "focalist" revolution
to Bolivia, leading an armed vanguard party there in October 1967, Guevara was
captured and executed, becoming a martyr to both the World Communist Movement
and the New Left. His ideology promotes exporting revolution to any country
whose leader is supported by the United States and has fallen out of favor with
its citizens. Guevara talks about how constant guerrilla warfare taking place
in non-urban areas can overcome leaders. He introduces three points that are
representative of his ideology as a whole: that the people can win with proper
organization against a nation's army; that the conditions that make a
revolution possible can be put in place by the popular forces; and that the
popular forces always have an advantage in a non urban setting. Guevara had a
particularly keen interest in guerrilla warfare, with a dedication to "foco"
techniques, also known as "focalism" (or ""foquismo"" in Spanish): vanguardism
by small armed units, frequently in place of established communist parties,
initially launching attacks from rural areas to mobilize unrest into a popular
front against a sitting regime. Despite differences in approach--emphasizing
guerrilla leadership and audacious raids that engender general uprising, rather
than consolidating political power in military strongholds before expanding to
new ones--Che Guevara took great inspiration from the Maoist notion of
"protracted people's war" and sympathized with Mao Zedong's People's Republic
of China in the Sino-Soviet split. This controversy may partly explain his
departure from Castro's pro-Soviet Cuba in the mid-1960s. Guevara also drew
direct parallels with his contemporary communist comrades in the Viet Cong,
exhorting a multi-front guerrilla strategy to create "two, three, many
Vietnams." In Guevara's final years, after leaving Cuba, he advised communist
paramilitary movements in Africa and Latin America, including a young Laurent
Kabila, future ruler of Zaire/DR Congo. Finally, while leading a small "foco"
band of guerrilla cadres in Bolivia, Che Guevara was captured and killed. His
death, and the short-term failure of his Guevarist tactics, may have
interrupted the component guerrilla wars within the larger Cold War for a time,
and even temporarily discouraged Soviet and Cuban sponsorship for "foquismo".
The emerging communist movements and other fellow traveler radicalism of the
time, however, either switched to urban guerrilla warfare before the end of the
1960s, and/or soon revived the rural-based strategies of both Maoism and
Guevarism, tendencies that escalated worldwide throughout the 1970s, by and
large with the support from the communist states and the Soviet empire in
general and Cuba's Castro regime in particular. Another proponent of Guevarism
was the French intellectual Régis Debray, who could be seen as attempting to
establish a coherent, unitary theoretical framework on these grounds. Debray
has since broken with this. Criticism. It was criticized from a revolutionary
anarchist perspective by Abraham Guillén, one of the leading tacticians of
urban guerrilla warfare in Uruguay and Brazil. Guillen claimed that cities are
a better ground for the guerrilla than the countryside (Guillen was a veteran
of the Spanish Civil War). He criticized Guevarist movements of national
liberation (like the Uruguayan Tupamaros, one of the many groups that he helped
as a military advisor) for trying to impose a dictatorship instead of self-
management.
