Gun control Gun control is any law, policy, practice, or proposal designed to
restrict or limit the possession, production, importation, shipment, sale, and/
or use of guns or other firearms by private citizens. Most commonly the guns in
question are personal firearms, typically handguns and long guns. Gun control
laws and policy vary greatly around the world. Some countries, such as the
United Kingdom, have very strict limits on gun possession while others, such as
the United States, have relatively modest limits. In some countries, the topic
remains a source of intense debate with proponents generally arguing the
dangers of widespread gun ownership, and opponents generally arguing individual
rights of self-protection as well as individual liberties in general.
Arguments. Several studies have examined the correlations between rates of gun
ownership and gun-related, as well as overall, homicide and suicide rates
within various jurisdictions around the world. Martin Killias, in a 1993 study
covering 21 countries, found that there were significant correlations between
gun ownership and gun-related suicide and homicide rates. There was also a
significant though lesser correlation between gun ownership and total homicide
rates. A later study published by Killias in 2001, based on a larger sample of
countries, reported that, while there was a strong correlation between gun-
related homicide of women and gun-related assaults against women, this was not
the case for similar crimes against men and that "interestingly, no significant
correlations with total suicide or homicide rates were found, leaving open the
question of possible substitution effects." In short, there was no significant
correlation between national gun ownership rates and the total number of people
murdered or the total number who killed themselves. This study therefore did
not even find a simple correlation between gun rates and rates of total
homicide or suicide, never mind causality. A study by Rich et al. on suicide
rates in Toronto and Ontario and psychiatric patients from San Diego reached
the conclusion that increased gun restrictions, while reducing suicide-by-gun,
resulted in no net decline in suicides, because of substitution of another
method‚Äînamely leaping. Killias argues against the theory of complete
substitution, citing a number of studies that have indicated, in his view
"rather convincingly", that suicidal candidates far from always turn to another
means of suicide if their preferred means is not at hand. More extensive
studies, however, covering far more areas and controlling for the effects of
many more other gun laws, found that gun control laws generally have no
detectable effect on total suicide rates. Resisting governance. Advocates for
gun rights often claim that past totalitarian regimes passed gun control
legislation, which was later followed by confiscation, with Fascist Italy and
Nazi Germany during World War II, as well as some communist states being cited
as examples. Location and capture of firearms registration records has also
long been a standard doctrine taught to military intelligence officers, and was
widely practiced by German and Soviet troops during World War II in the
countries they invaded. The Battles of Lexington and Concord, sometimes known
as the Shot heard 'round the world, in 1775, were started in part because
General Gage sought to carry out an order by the British government to disarm
the populace. Gun control opponents often cite the example of the Nazi regime,
claiming that once the Nazis had taken and consolidated their power, they
proceeded to implement gun control laws to disarm the population and wipe out
the opposition, and the genocide of disarmed Jews, gypsies, and other
"undesirables" followed. Historians have pointed out that the preceding
democratic Weimar Republic already had restrictive gun laws, which were
actually liberalised by the Nazis when they came to power. According to the
Weimar Republic 1928 "Law on Firearms & Ammunition", firearms acquisition or
carrying permits were ‚Äúonly to be granted to persons of undoubted
reliability, and‚Äîin the case of a firearms carry permit‚Äîonly if a
demonstration of need is set forth.‚Äù The Nazis replaced this law with the
"Weapons Law" of March 18, 1938, which was very similar in structure and
wording, but relaxed gun control requirements for the general population. This
relaxation included the exemption from regulation of all weapons and ammunition
except handguns, the extension of the range of persons exempt from the permit
requirement, and the lowering of the age for acquisition of firearms from 20 to
18. It did, however, prohibit manufacturing of firearms and ammunition by Jews.
Shortly thereafter, in the additional "Regulations Against Jews' Possession of
Weapons" of November 11, 1938, Jews were forbidden from possession of any
weapons at all. Soviet Russia and the Soviet Union did not abolish personal gun
ownership during the initial period from 1918 to 1929, and the introduction of
gun control in 1929 coincided with the beginning of the repressive Stalinist
regime. However, guns has also been used to instate authoritarian regimes into
control, such as following the Afghan civil war ultimately leading to the
establishment of Islamic Emirate of Afghanistan under Taliban control. Fidel
Castro leading the Cuban revolution is another such example. Self-defense. In
an extensive series of studies of large, nationally representative samples of
crime incidents, criminologist Gary Kleck found that crime victims who defend
themselves with guns are less likely to be injured or lose property than
victims who either did not resist, or resisted without guns. This was so, even
though the victims using guns typically faced more dangerous circumstances than
other victims. The findings applied to both robberies and assaults. Other
research on rape indicated that although victims rarely resisted with guns,
those using other weapons were less likely to be raped, and no more likely to
suffer other injuries besides rape itself, than victims who did not resist, or
resisted without weapons. There is no evidence that victim use of a gun for
self-protection provokes offenders into attacking the victim or results in the
offender taking the gun away and using it against the victim. A recent study
from the University of Philadelphia suggests that victims in possession of
firearms is 4.5 times more likely to be shot and 4.2 times more likely to be
killed than those unarmed. This finding, however, says nothing about the
effectiveness of defensive gun use since the researchers did not actually study
any such uses. Their finding apparently only confirmed the well-known fact that
people who anticipate that they are likely to become crime victims in the
future are more likely to acquire and carry guns for self-protection
997 Targeting Guns, pp.¬ 74‚Äì81; Kleck, Kovandzic, Saber, and Hauser, 2011
Journal of Criminal Justice 39(4):312-319>. Thus, it was not necessarily gun
possession that caused an increased risk of assault; rather, a pre-existing
higher risk of assault increased the likelihood of victim gun possession. Kleck
found, in his own national survey, and in other surveys with smaller sample
sizes, that the numbers of defensive uses of guns by crime victims each year
are substantially larger than the largest estimates of the number of crimes
committed of offenders using guns. However, the authors of two surveys that
asked about both defensive gun use and criminal gun use claimed that their
results indicated that more people report being victims of gun crimes than have
used a gun in self-defense. It was later found, however, that the authors used
confusing and unorthodox wordings of the key questions, which artificially
reduced the number of respondents reporting a defensive gun use Anti-gun
scholar David Hemenway and other researchers at the Harvard Injury Control
Research Center (HICRC) have claimed that the frequency of use of guns for
self-defense has been vastly overestimated, and is, in fact, much lower than
claimed by Kleck and others. These claims, however, were almost entirely based
on one-sided speculations about purported flaws in surveys, addressing only
minor sources of over-estimation while systematically ignoring well-documented
sources of underestimation Kleck and Kates, Armed, pp.¬ 229‚Äì267 Two national
random-digit-dial surveys directed by the HICRC report that most gun use
claimed to be self-defensive, in fact, represents likely illegal use of guns in
escalating arguments and that guns used in the home are mostly used to
intimidate spouses or relatives rather than to respond to crime. Due to the
flaws in question wording and sequencing, however, these findings cannot be
given serious weight. The wording of questions made it impossible to
distinguish cases of criminals on the receiving end of a legitimate defensive
gun from cases of criminal assault with a gun. The results of these two surveys
were also directly contradicted by a much larger-scale national survey that did
not suffer from these flaws in question wording Kleck and Kates 2001,
pp.¬ 264‚Äì267 Several further HICRC studies using data from surveys of
detainees in prisons and interviews with prison physicians report that very few
criminals are actually shot while committing crimes (confirming the findings of
Kleck and Gertz 1995 Journal of Criminal Law & Criminology 86(1):150-187, esp.
pp.¬ 173‚Äì174 and that those criminals who are shot are typically shot as
victims of crime themselves (in incidents unrelated to the crimes that lead to
their incarceration) and not by law abiding citizens. The economist John Lott,
in his book More Guns, Less Crime, states that laws which make it easier for
law-abiding citizens to get a permit to carry a gun in public places, cause
reductions in crime. Lott's results suggest that allowing law-abiding citizens
to carry concealed firearms deters crime because potential criminals do not
know who may or may not be carrying a firearm. Lott's data came from the FBI's
crime statistics from all 3,054 US counties. Lott's conclusions have been
challenged by other researchers. The efficacy of gun control legislation at
reducing the availability of guns has been challenged by, among others, the
testimony of criminals that they do not obey gun control laws, and by the lack
of evidence of any efficacy of such laws in reducing violent crime. The most
thorough analysis of the impact of gun control laws, by Kleck, covered 18 major
types of gun control and every major type of violent crime or violence
(including suicide), and found that gun laws generally had no significant
effect on violent crime rates or suicide rates. Studies by Arthur Kellermann
and Matthew Miller found that keeping a gun in the home was associated with an
increased risk of suicide. Other studies, however, found no association between
gun ownership and suicide  Miller, Marv. 1978. ‚ÄúGeriatric suicide.‚Äù The
Gerontologist 18:488-495; Bukstein, O. G., David A. Brent, Joshua A. Perper,
Grace Moritz, Marianne Baugher, Joy Schweers, Claudia Roth, and L. Balach.
1993. "Risk factors for completed suicide among adolescents with a lifetime
history of substance abuse: a case-control study." Acta Psychiatrica
Scandanavia 88:403-408; Beautrais, Annette L., Peter R. Joyce, and Roger T.
Mulder. 1996. ‚ÄúAccess to firearms and the risk of suicide.‚Äù Australian and
New Zealand Journal of Psychiatry 30:741-748; Conwell, Yeates, Kenneth Connor,
and Christopher Cox. 2002. ‚ÄúAccess to firearms and risk for suicide in
middle-aged and older adults.‚Äù American Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry 10:
407-416 females. In other countries, other methods of suicide are used at even
higher rates than the U.S., so gun availability may affect the method used but
not overall suicide rates. However, the higher suicide rates in countries such
as Japan may be explained by cultural factors irrelevant to the issue of the
relationship between guns and suicide in the US. University of Chicago
economist Steven Levitt argues in his paper, "Understanding Why Crime Fell in
the 1990s: Four Factors that Explain the Decline and Six that Do not", that
available data indicate that neither stricter gun control laws nor more liberal
concealed carry laws have had any significant effect on the decline in crime in
the 1990s. While the debate remains hotly disputed, it is therefore not
surprising that a comprehensive review of published studies of gun control,
released in November 2004 by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention,
was unable to determine any reliable statistically significant effect resulting
from such laws, although the authors suggest that further study may provide
more conclusive information. Forty-four U.S. states have passed "shall issue"
concealed carry legislation of one form or another. In these states, law-
abiding citizens (usually after giving evidence of completing a training
course) may carry handguns on their person for self-protection. Other states
and some cities such as New York may issue permits. Only Illinois, and the
District of Columbia have explicit legislation forbidding personal carry.
Vermont, Arizona, and Alaska do not require permits to carry concealed weapons,
although Alaska retains a shall-issue permit process for reciprocity purposes
with other states. Similarly, Arizona retains a shall-issue permit process,
both for reciprocity purposes and because permit holders are allowed to carry
concealed handguns in certain places (such as bars and restaurants that serve
alcohol) that non-permit holders are not. Many supporters of gun-rights
consider self-defense to be a fundamental and inalienable human right and
believe that firearms are an important tool in the exercise of this right. They
consider the prohibition of an effective means of self-defense to be unethical.
For instance, in Thomas Jefferson‚Äôs "Commonplace Book," a quote from Cesare
Beccaria reads, "laws that forbid the carrying of arms ... disarm only those
who are neither inclined nor determined to commit crimes ... Such laws make
things worse for the assaulted and better for the assailants; they serve rather
to encourage than to prevent homicides, for an unarmed man may be attacked with
greater confidence than an armed man." Domestic violence. Gun control advocates
claim that the strongest evidence linking availability of guns to injury and
mortality rates comes in studies of domestic violence, most often referring to
the series of studies by Arthur Kellermann. In response to public suggestions
by some advocates of firearms for home defense, that homeowners were at high
risk of injury from home invasions and would be wise to acquire a firearm for
purposes of protection, Kellermann investigated the circumstances surrounding
all in-home homicides in three cities of about half a million population each
over five years, and found that the risk of a homicide was in fact slightly
higher in homes where a handgun was present, rather than lower. From the
details of the homicides he concluded that the risk of a crime of passion or
other domestic dispute ending in a fatal injury was much higher when a gun was
readily available (essentially all the increased risk being in homes where a
handgun was kept loaded and unlocked), compared to a lower rate of fatality in
domestic violence not involving a firearm. This increase in mortality, he
postulated, was large enough to overwhelm any protective effect the presence of
a gun might have by deterring or defending against burglaries or home
invasions, which occurred much less frequently. The increased risk averaged
over all homes containing guns was similar in size to that correlated with an
individual with a criminal record living in the home, but substantially less
than that associated with demographic factors known to be risks for violence,
such as renting a home versus ownership, or living alone versus with others.
Other scholars, however, believe that Kellermann misinterpreted his findings.
Kleck showed that no more than a handful of the homicides that Kellermann
studied were committed with guns belonging to the victim or members of his or
her household, and thus it was implausible that victim household gun ownership
contributed to their homicide. Instead, the association that Kellermann found
between gun ownership and victimization merely reflected the widely accepted
notion that people who live in more dangerous circumstances are more likely to
be murdered, but also were more likely to have acquired guns for self-
protection prior to their death. Other critics of Kellermann's work and its use
by advocates of gun control point out that since it deliberately ignores crimes
of violence occurring outside the home (Kellermann states at the outset that
the characteristics of such homicides are much more complex and ambiguous, and
would be virtually impossible to classify rigorously enough), it is more
directly a study of domestic violence than of gun ownership. Kellermann does in
fact include in the conclusion of his 1993 paper several paragraphs referring
to the need for further study of domestic violence and its causes and
prevention. Researchers John Lott, Gary Kleck and many others dispute
Kellermann's work. Kleck found that the vast majority of defensive gun uses do
not involve the defender killing or even nonfatally wounding the offender.
Armed forces' reserves and reservist training. In several countries, such as in
Finland, firearm politics and gun control are directly linked on the armed
forces' reserves and reservist training. This is especially true in countries
which base their armies on conscription; since every able-bodied citizen is
basically a soldier, they are expected to be able to handle the gun reasonably,
and be able to practice for the time of need. Switzerland is a noted example of
a country in which, due to the country's conscription and militia traditions,
firearm possession is widespread. Owing to Switzerland's history, all able-
bodied male Swiss citizens aged between 21 and 50 (55 for officers) are issued
assault rifles and ammunition in order to perform their annual military
obligations. Some authors argue that Switzerland's militia tradition of "every
man a soldier" contributed to the preservation of its neutrality during the
Second World War, when it was not invaded by Nazi Germany because the military
cost to the Nazis would have been too high. However, this claim has been
disputed by historians who cite the existence of detailed invasion plans, which
rated the overall Swiss defense capacity as low. Civil rights. Some see gun
ownership as a civil right. This view is common in the United States where the
Second Amendment to the United States Constitution guarantees the right of
citizens to keep and bear arms. The Fourteenth Amendment protects gun owners
when it states, "No state shall make or enforce any law which shall abridge the
privileges or immunities of citizens of the United States..." This view is less
common throughout the rest of the world. Jeff Snyder is a spokesman for the
view that gun possession is a civil right, and that therefore arguments about
whether gun restrictions reduce or increase violent crime are beside the point:
"I am not here engaged in...recommending...policy prescriptions on the basis of
the promised or probable results crime...Thus these essays are not
fundamentally about guns at all. They are, foremost, about...the kind of people
we intend to be...and the ethical and political consequences of decisions
control firearms." He terms the main principle behind gun control "the
instrumental theory of salvation:" that, lacking the ability to change the
violent intent in criminals, we often shift focus to the instrument in an
attempt to "limit our ability to hurt ourselves, and one another." His work
discusses the consequences that flow from conditioning the liberties of all
citizens upon the behavior of criminals. Some of the earliest gun-control
legislation at the state level were the "black codes" that replaced the "slave
codes" after the Civil War, attempting to prevent blacks' having access to the
full rights of citizens, including the right to keep and bear arms. Laws of
this type later used racially neutral language to survive legal challenge, but
were expected to be enforced against blacks rather than whites. A favorite
target of gun control is so-called "junk guns," which are generally cheaper and
therefore more accessible to the poor. However, some civil rights organizations
favor tighter gun regulations. In 2003, the NAACP filed suit against 45 gun
manufacturers for creating what it called a "public nuisance" through the
"negligent marketing" of handguns, which included models commonly described as
Saturday night specials. The suit alleged that handgun manufacturers and
distributors were guilty of marketing guns in a way that encouraged violence in
black and Hispanic neighborhoods. "The gun industry has refused to take even
basic measures to keep criminals and prohibited persons from obtaining
firearms," NAACP President/CEO Kweisi Mfume said. "The industry must be as
responsible as any other and it must stop dumping firearms in over-saturated
markets. The obvious result of dumping guns is that they will increasingly find
their way into the hands of criminals." The NAACP lawsuit was dismissed in
2003. It, and several similar suits‚Äîsome brought by municipalities seeking
re-imbursement for medical costs associated with criminal shootings‚Äîwere
portrayed by gun-rights groups as "nuisance suits," aimed at driving gun
manufacturers (especially smaller firms) out of business through court costs
alone, as damage awards were not expected. These suits prompted the passage of
the Protection of Lawful Commerce in Arms Act in October, 2005. Civic duty.
Some proponents of private gun ownership argue that an armed citizens' militia
can help deter crime and tyranny, as police are primarily a reactive force
whose main loyalty is to the government which pays their wages. The Militia
Information Service (MIS) contends that gun ownership is a civic duty in the
context of membership in the militia, much like voting, neither of which they
believe should be restricted to government officials in a true democracy. MIS
also states that the people need to maintain the power of the sword so they can
fulfil their duty, implicit in the social contract, to protect the rights and
liberties of their fellow citizens, much as individual citizens have a legal
and ethical duty to protect dependents under their care, such as a child,
elderly parent, or disabled spouse. Statistics. Private ownership. According to
statistics available from the Centers of Disease Control and Prevention, of
nearly 31,000 firearm-related deaths in 2005, suicides account for 55 percent
of deaths in the United States whereas homicides account for 40 percent of
deaths, accidents account for three percent, and the remaining two percent were
legal killings. While many shootings occur in the course of a mutual argument
of passion, others occur where a partner or family member of a "romantic" or
familial relationship, who is an ongoing victim of domestic physical abuse or
sexual abuse, uses the force of a firearm in self-defense action against a
perpetrator who also happens to be known to or related to the victim. As a
corollary, in such policy advertising campaigns, the comparison of "domestic"
gun casualties is usually not accompanied by murder and assault prosecution
numbers stemming from the shootings occurring in that context. In many of the
latter cases, the victim firing in self-defense is frequently a woman or youth
victim of a more physically powerful abuser. In those situations gun rights
advocates argue that the firearm arguably becomes an equalizer against the
lethal and disabling force frequently exercised by the abusers. Many gun
control opponents point to statistics in advertising campaigns purporting that
"approximately 9 or so children are killed by people discharging firearms every
day across the US," and argue that this statistic is seldom accompanied by a
differentiation of those children killed by individuals from unintentional
discharges and stray bullets, and of those "children," under the age of
majority‚Äîwhich is 18-21 in the U.S.‚Äîwho are killed while acting as
aggressors in street gang related mutual combat or while committing crimes,
many of which are seen as arising from the War on Drugs. There is further
controversy regarding courts, trials, and the resulting sentences of these
mostly "young men" as adults despite them not having reached the age of
consent. Gun safety and gun laws. In an argument against gun control, the
National Center for Policy Analysis, a non-profit conservative think tank,
reported the following statistics. History. Gun control in the United States.
Before the American Civil War ended, state slave codes prohibited slaves from
owning guns. After slavery in the U.S. was abolished, states persisted in
prohibiting Black people from owning guns under laws renamed Black Codes. The
United States Congress overrode most portions of the Black Codes by passing the
Civil Rights Act of 1866. The legislative histories of both the Civil Rights
Act and the Fourteenth Amendment, as well as The Special Report of the Anti-
Slavery Conference of 1867, are replete with denunciations of those particular
statutes that denied blacks equal access to firearms. After the adoption of the
Fourteenth Amendment to the U.S. Constitution in 1878, most states turned to
"facially neutral" business or transaction taxes on handgun purchases. However,
the intention of these laws was not neutral. An article in Virginia's official
university law review called for a "prohibitive tax...on the privilege" of
selling handguns as a way of disarming "the son of Ham," whose "cowardly
practice of 'toting' guns has been one of the most fruitful sources of crime...
Let a negro board a railroad train with a quart of mean whiskey and a pistol in
his grip and the chances are that there will be a murder, or at least a row,
before he alights." Thus, many Southern States imposed high taxes or banned
inexpensive guns in order to price destitute individuals out of the gun market.
Gun control in Australia. In response to the Port Arthur massacre in 1996, gun
law proposals developed from the report of the 1988 National Committee on
Violence were adopted under a National Firearms Agreement. This was necessary
because the Australian Constitution does not give the Commonwealth power to
enact gun laws. The National Firearms Agreement banned all semi-automatic
rifles and all semi-automatic and pump-action shotguns, and created a tightly
restrictive system of licensing and ownership controls. Because the Australian
Constitution prevents the taking of property without just compensation the
Federal Government introduced the Medicare Levy Amendment Act 1996 that
provided the revenue for the National Firearms Program through a one-off 0.2%
increase in the Medicare levy. Known as the gun buy-back scheme, it started
across the country on the 1 October 1996 and concluded on the 30 September 1997
to purchase and destroy all semi-automatic rifles including .22 rimfires, semi-
automatic shotguns and pump-action shotguns. The buyback was predicted to cost
A$500 million and had wide community support. In 2002, the Monash University
shooting led the federal government to urge state governments to again review
handgun laws, and, as a result, amended legislation was adopted in all states
and territories. Changes included a 10-round magazine capacity limit, a calibre
limit of not more than .38¬ inches (9.65¬ mm), a barrel length limit of not
less than 120¬ mm (4.72¬ inches) for semi-automatic pistols and 100¬ mm
(3.94¬ inches) for revolvers, and even stricter probation and attendance
requirements for sporting target shooters. In the state of Victoria A$21
million compensation was paid for confiscating 18,124 target pistols, and
15,184 replacement pistols were imported. . One government policy was to
compensate shooters for giving up the sport. Approximately 25% of pistol
shooters took this offer, and relinquished their licences and their right to
own pistols for sport for five years. There is contention over the effects of
the gun control laws in Australia, with some researchers reporting significant
drops in gun-related crime, and others reporting no significant effect in gun
related or overall crime rates.
