Hacktivism Hacktivism (a portmanteau of "hack" and "activism") is the use of
computers and computer networks as a means of protest to promote political
ends. The term was first coined in 1996 by a member of the Cult of the Dead Cow
hacker collective named Omega. If "hacking" as "illegally breaking into
computers" is assumed, then "hacktivism" could be defined as "the use of legal
and/or illegal digital tools in pursuit of political ends". These tools include
web site defacements, redirects, denial-of-service attacks, information theft,
web site parodies, virtual sit-ins, typosquatting and virtual sabotage. If
"hacking" as "clever computer usage/programming" is assumed, then "hacktivism"
could be understood as the writing of code to promote political ideology:
promoting expressive politics, free speech, human rights, and information
ethics through software development. Acts of hacktivism are carried out in the
belief that proper use of code will be able to produce similar results to those
produced by regular activism or civil disobedience. Overview. Hacktivist
activities span many political ideals and issues. Freenet is a prime example of
translating political thought (anyone should be able to speak) into code.
Hacktivismo is an offshoot of Cult of the Dead Cow; its beliefs include access
to information as a basic human right. The loose network of programmers,
artists and radical militants 1984 network liberty alliance is more concerned
with issues of free speech, surveillance and privacy in an era of increased
technological surveillance. Hacktivism is a controversial term, and since it
covers a range of passive to active and non-violent to violent activities, it
can often be construed as cyberterrorism. It was coined to describe how
electronic direct action might work toward social change by combining
programming skills with critical thinking. Others use it as practically
synonymous with malicious, destructive acts that undermine the security of the
Internet as a technical, economic, and political platform. Essentially, the
controversy reflects two divergent philosophical strands within the hacktivist
movement. One strand thinks that malicious cyber-attacks are an acceptable form
of direct action. The other strand thinks that all protest should be peaceful,
refraining from destruction. As a principle of political activism, reality
hacking takes advantage of the insight of linguists and sociologists who argue
that post-twentieth-century popular culture in the advanced world has become
particularly impervious to either positive or negative rethinking of community.
Negative assertions about community—in the form of negative news stories and
mass political protests—tend to fall on ears overloaded by daily tragedy in
the news, even when the causes and facts they relate are valid and deserving.
Positive reimaginings of community—in the form of utopian havens, alternative
religious or political structures, or idealistic protest against the status
quo—equally tend to fall upon unbelieving ears of busy individuals who have
already accepted the standards, sacrifices, and limits of the reality in which
they normally operate. As an alternative to these dead ends of twentieth-
century political activism, reality hacking tries to capture the attention of
individuals in their normal course of regular information consumption. It may
involve attracting mass media attention to an attention-getting fringe
political issue more liable to generate rethinking of cultural norms than
standard debates to which the public has already become jaded. Or it may
involve harnessing the means of information dissemination itself, using online
information sources to disseminate alternative definitions of commonly accepted
facts. Controversy. Some people describing themselves as hacktivists have taken
to defacing websites for political reasons, such as attacking and defacing
government websites as well as web sites of groups who oppose their ideology.
Others, such as Oxblood Ruffin (the "foreign affairs minister" of Cult of the
Dead Cow and Hacktivismo), have argued forcefully against definitions of
hacktivism that include web defacements or denial-of-service attacks. Within
the hacking community, those who carry out automated attacks are generally
known as script kiddies. Critics suggest that DoS attacks are an attack on free
speech; that they have unintended consequences; that they waste resources; and
that they could lead to a "DoS war" that nobody will win. In 2006, Blue
Security attempted to automate a DoS attack against spammers; this led to a
massive DoS attack against Blue Security which knocked them, their old ISP and
their DNS provider off the internet, destroying their business. Following
denial-of-service attacks by Anonymous on multiple sites, in reprisal for the
apparent suppression of Wikileaks, John Perry Barlow, a founding member of the
EFF, said "I support freedom of expression, no matter whose, so I oppose DDoS
attacks regardless of their target... they're the poison gas of cyberspace...".
Depending on who is using the term, hacktivism can be a politically
constructive form of anarchic civil disobedience or an undefined anti-systemic
gesture; it can signal anticapitalist or political protest; it can denote anti-
spam activists, security experts, or open source advocates. Critics of
hacktivism fear that the lack of a clear agenda makes it a politically immature
gesture, while those given to conspiracy theory hope to see in hacktivism an
attempt to precipitate a crisis situation online. Elements of hacktivism. A
Haction usually has the following elements. Notable hacktivist events.  Related
notions. Media hacking. "Media hacking" refers to the usage of various
electronic media in an innovative or otherwise abnormal fashion for the purpose
of conveying a message to as large a number of people as possible, primarily
achieved via the World Wide Web. A popular and effective means of media hacking
is posting on a blog, as one is usually controlled by one or more independent
individuals, uninfluenced by outside parties. The concept of social
bookmarking, as well as Web-based Internet forums, may cause such a message to
be seen by users of other sites as well, increasing its total reach. Media
hacking is commonly employed for political purposes, by both political parties
and political dissidents. A good example of this is the 2008 US Election, in
which both the Democratic and Republican parties used a wide variety of
different media in order to convey relevant messages to an increasingly
Internet-oriented audience. At the same time, political dissidents used blogs
and other social media like Twitter in order to reply on an individual basis to
the Presidential candidates. In particular, sites like Twitter are proving
important means in gauging popular support for the candidates, though the site
is often used for dissident purposes rather than a show of positive support.
Mobile technology has also become subject to media hacking for political
purposes. SMS has been widely used by political dissidents as a means of
quickly and effectively organising smart mobs for political action. This has
been most effective in the Philippines, where SMS media hacking has twice had a
significant impact on whether or not the country's Presidents are elected or
removed from office. Reality hacking. "Reality hacking" is a term used to
describe any phenomenon which emerges from the nonviolent use of illegal or
legally ambiguous digital tools in pursuit of politically, socially or
culturally subversive ends. These tools include website defacements, URL
redirections, denial-of-service attacks, information theft, web-site parodies,
virtual sit-ins, and virtual sabotage. Art movements such as Fluxus and
Happenings in the 1970s created a climate of receptibility in regard to loose-
knit organizations and group activities where spontaneity, a return to
primitivist behavior, and an ethics where activities and socially engaged art
practices became tantamount to aesthetic concerns. The conflation of these two
histories in the mid-to-late 1990s resulted in cross-overs between virtual sit-
ins, electronic civil disobedience, denial-of-service attacks, as well as mass
protests in relation to groups like the International Monetary Fund and the
World Bank. The rise of collectivies, net.art groups, and those concerned with
the fluid interchange of technology and real life (often from an environmental
concern) gave birth to the practice of "reality hacking". The 1999 science
fiction-action film "The Matrix" is most responsible for popularizing the
simulation hypothesis—the suggestion that reality is in fact a simulation of
which those affected by the simulants are generally unaware—and "reality
hacking" as reading and understanding the code which represents the activity of
the simulated reality environment but also modifying it in order to bend the
laws of physics within simulated reality. Reality hacking as a mystical
practice is explored in the Gothic-Punk aesthetics-inspired White Wolf urban
fantasy role-playing game "". In this game, the Reality Coders (also known as
Reality Hackers or Reality Crackers) are a faction within the Virtual Adepts, a
secret society of mages whose magick revolves around digital technology. They
are dedicated to bringing the benefits of cyberspace to real space. To do this,
they had to identify, for lack of a better term, the "source code" that allows
our Universe to function. And that is what they have been doing ever since.
Coders infiltrated a number of levels of society in order to gather the
greatest compilation of knowledge ever seen. One of the Coders' more overt
agendas is to acclimate the masses to the world that is to come. They spread
Virtual Adept ideas through video games and a whole spate of "reality shows"
that mimic virtual reality far more than "real" reality. The Reality Coders
consider themselves the future of the Virtual Adepts, creating a world in the
image of visionaries like Grant Morrison or Terence McKenna. In a location-
based game (also known as a pervasive game), reality hacking refers to tapping
into phenomena that exist in the real world, and tying them into the game story
universe. Reality hacking relies on tweaking the every-day communications most
easily available to individuals with the purpose of awakening the political and
community conscience of the larger population. The term first came into use
among New York and San Francisco artists, but has since been adopted by a
school of political activists centered around culture jamming. In the video
game , the player fights multiple criminal gangs, including a gang of
hacktivists.
