Hacktivismo Hacktivismo is an offshoot of CULT OF THE DEAD COW (cDc), whose
beliefs include access to information as a basic human right. It was founded in
1999. The group's beliefs are described fully in The Hacktivismo Declaration,
which seeks to apply the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights to the Internet. Oxblood
Ruffin, the director of Hacktivismo, has argued forcefully against definitions
of hacktivism that include web defacements or denial-of-service attacks.
Hacktivismo has also authored its own software license agreement, the
Hacktivismo Enhanced-Source Software License Agreement (HESSLA). The HESSLA
prohibits use or modification that would violate human rights or introduce
features that spy on the user. Connection to cDc. In 1999 CULT OF THE DEAD COW
(cDc), a loose network of individuals, announced the formation of Hacktivismo.
The group set to explore ways of preventing censorship of the Internet. In
particular Hacktivismo focused on firewalls or censoring mechanisms of national
governments. Press releases made it clear that cDc and Hacktivismo were
different groups; however Hacktivismo was also described as "special operations
group" of cDc. A press release in early 2002 described Hacktivismo as "an
international cadre of hackers founded by the cDc's Oxblood Ruffin". The
Hacktivismo Declaration. The Hacktivismo Declaration recognizes "the importance
to fight against human rights abuses with respect to reasonable access to
information on the Internet" and calls upon the hacker community to "study ways
and means of circumventing state sponsored censorship of the internet" and
"implement technologies to challenge information rights violations". The
Hacktivismo Declaration does however recognize that the right to freedom of
expression is subject to limitations, stating "we recognized the right of
governments to forbid the publication of properly categorized state secrets,
child pornography, and matters related to personal privacy and privilege, among
other accepted restrictions." However, the Hacktivismo Declaration states "but
we oppose the use of state power to control access to the works of critics,
intellectuals, artists, or religious figures." Projects. Camera/Shy. Camera/Shy
was the first Hacktivismo project released. It debuted in 2002 at the H.O.P.E.
2k2 convention in New York City. Written by The Pull, Camera/Shy is a
steganographic tool that scans for and delivers decrypted content directly from
the world wide web. It is a stand-alone, Internet Explorer-based web browser.
It interprets and displays hidden information stored in the junk bits in GIF
files. The Six/Four System. The Six/Four System was written by Mixter. The
software is a censorship resistant network proxy. It works by using "trusted
peers" to relay network connections over SSL encrypted links. As an example,
the distribution includes a program which will act as a web proxy, but where
all of the connections will be hidden until they reach the far end trusted
peer. Hacktivismo and the cDc further gained notoriety in 2003 when the Six/
Four System became the first product of a hacker group to receive approval from
the United States Department of Commerce for export of strong encryption.
ScatterChat. ScatterChat is an encrypted instant messaging client based on
Gaim. It was written by J. Salvatore Testa II and released at the H.O.P.E.
Number Six conference in New York City on July 22, 2006. The source code is
available, licensed under the HESSLA. It provides encryption as well as
integrated onion routing with Tor, and secure file transfers. Scatterchat's
security features include immunity from replay attacks and limited resistance
to traffic analysis. Various flaws in the software have been elaborated by
researchers. Torpark. XeroBank Browser (formerly known as Torpark) is a variant
of the Portable Firefox web browser with Tor built into it. XeroBank is
intended for use on portable media such as a USB flash drive but it can also be
used on any hard disk drive. cDc/Hacktivismo co-released v.1.5.0.7 along with
Steve Topletz on September 19, 2006.
