Haldane principle In British research policy, the Haldane principle is the idea
that decisions about what to spend research funds on should be made by
researchers rather than politicians. It is named after Richard Burdon Haldane,
who in 1904 and from 1909 to 1918 chaired committees and commissions which
recommended this policy. The 1904 committee recommended the creation of the
University Grants Committee which has evolved via the Universities Funding
Council into the current higher education funding councils Higher Education
Funding Council for England, Scottish Funding Council and Higher Education
Funding Council for Wales. In 1918 Haldane's committee produced the 'Haldane
Report'. The report suggested that research required by government departments
could be separated into that required by specific departments and that which
was more general. It recommended that departments should oversee the specific
research but the general research should be under the control of autonomous
Research Councils, which would be free from political and administrative
pressures that might discourage research in certain areas. The principle of the
autonomy of the research councils is now referred to as the Haldane Principle.
The first research council to be created as a result of the Haldane Report was
the Medical Research Council. The principle has remained enshrined in British
Government policy, but has been criticised and altered over the years. In 1939
J.D. Bernal argued that social good was more important than researchers'
freedom in deciding the direction of research. Solly Zuckerman criticised it in
1971 for its artificial separation of basic and applied science, and the
consequent elevation of the status of the former. A major revision to the
application of the Haldane Principle in British research funding came in the
early 1970s with the Rothschild Report of 1971, and its implementation which
transferred about 25% of the then Research Council funds, and the decisions on
the research to be funded with them, back to government departments. There is
currently a debate about the extent to which the principle is still applied in
practice.
