Handover In cellular telecommunications, the term handover or handoff refers to
the process of transferring an ongoing call or data session from one channel
connected to the core network to another. In satellite communications it is the
process of transferring satellite control responsibility from one earth station
to another without loss or interruption of service. Handover or handoff.
American English use the term "handoff", and this is most commonly used within
some American organizations such as 3GPP2 and in American originated
technologies such as CDMA2000. In British English the term "handover" is more
common, and is used within international and European organisations such as
ITU-T, IETF, ETSI and 3GPP, and standardised within European originated
standards such as GSM and UMTS. The term handover is more common than handoff
in academic research publications and literature, while handoff is slightly
more common within the IEEE and ANSI organisations. Purpose. The most basic
form of handover is when a phone call in progress is redirected from its
current cell (called "source") to a new cell (called "target"). In terrestrial
networks the source and the target cells may be served from two different cell
sites or from one and the same cell site (in the latter case the two cells are
usually referred to as two "sectors" on that cell site). Such a handover, in
which the source and the target are different cells (even if they are on the
same cell site) is called "inter-cell" handover. The purpose of inter-cell
handover is to maintain the call as the subscriber is moving out of the area
covered by the source cell and entering the area of the target cell. A special
case is possible, in which the source and the target are one and the same cell
and only the used channel is changed during the handover. Such a handover, in
which the cell is not changed, is called "intra-cell" handover. The purpose of
intra-cell handover is to change one channel, which may be interfered or fading
with a new clearer or less fading channel. Comparison of handovers. An
advantage of the hard handover is that at any moment in time one call uses only
one channel. The hard handover event is indeed very short and usually is not
perceptible by the user. In the old analog systems it could be heard as a click
or a very short beep, in digital systems it is unnoticeable. Another advantage
of the hard handoff is that the phone's hardware does not need to be capable of
receiving two or more channels in parallel, which makes it cheaper and simpler.
A disadvantage is that if a handover fails the call may be temporarily
disrupted or even terminated abnormally. Technologies, which use hard
handovers, usually have procedures which can re-establish the connection to the
source cell if the connection to the target cell cannot be made. However re-
establishing this connection may not always be possible (in which case the call
will be terminated) and even when possible the procedure may cause a temporary
interruption to the call. One advantage of the soft handovers is that the
connection to the source cell is broken only when a reliable connection to the
target cell has been established and therefore the chances that the call will
be terminated abnormally due to failed handovers are lower. However, by far a
bigger advantage comes from the mere fact that simultaneously channels in
multiple cells are maintained and the call could only fail if all of the
channels are interfered or fade at the same time. Fading and interference in
different channels are unrelated and therefore the probability of them taking
place at the same moment in all channels is very low. Thus the reliability of
the connection becomes higher when the call is in a soft handover. Because in a
cellular network the majority of the handovers occur in places of poor
coverage, where calls would frequently become unreliable when their channel is
interfered or fading, soft handovers bring a significant improvement to the
reliability of the calls in these places by making the interference or the
fading in a single channel not critical. This advantage comes at the cost of
more complex hardware in the phone, which must be capable of processing several
channels in parallel. Another price to pay for soft handovers is use of several
channels in the network to support just a single call. This reduces the number
of remaining free channels and thus reduces the capacity of the network. By
adjusting the duration of soft handovers and the size of the areas, in which
they occur, the network engineers can balance the benefit of extra call
reliability against the price of reduced capacity. Possibility of handover.
While theoretically speaking soft handovers are possible in any technology,
analog or digital, the cost of implementing them for analog technologies is
prohibitively high and none of the technologies that were commercially
successful in the past (e.g. AMPS, TACS, NMT, etc.) had this feature. Of the
digital technologies, those based on FDMA also face a higher cost for the
phones (due to the need to have multiple parallel radio-frequency modules) and
those based on TDMA or a combination of TDMA/FDMA, in principle, allow not so
expensive implementation of soft handovers. However, none of the 2G (second-
generation) technologies have this feature (e.g. GSM, D-AMPS/IS-136, etc.). On
the other hand, all CDMA based technologies, 2G and 3G (third-generation), have
soft handovers. On one hand, this is facilitated by the possibility to design
not so expensive phone hardware supporting soft handovers for CDMA and on the
other hand, this is necessitated by the fact that without soft handovers CDMA
networks may suffer from substantial interference arising due to the so-called
"near-far" effect. In all current commercial technologies based on FDMA or on a
combination of TDMA/FDMA (e.g. GSM, AMPS, IS-136/DAMPS, etc.) changing the
channel during a hard handover is realised by changing the pair of used
transmit/receive frequencies. Implementations. For the practical realisation of
handoffs in a cellular network each cell is assigned a list of potential target
cells, which can be used for handing-off calls from this source cell to them.
These potential target cells are called "neighbours" and the list is called
"neighbour list". Creating such a list for a given cell is not trivial and
specialised computer tools are used. They implement different algorithms and
may use for input data from field measurements or computer predictions of radio
wave propagation in the areas covered by the cells. During a call one or more
parameters of the signal in the channel in the source cell are monitored and
assessed in order to decide when a handover may be necessary. The downlink
(forward link) and/or uplink (reverse link) directions may be monitored. The
handover may be requested by the phone or by the base station (BTS) of its
source cell and, in some systems, by a BTS of a neighbouring cell. The phone
and the BTSs of the neighbouring cells monitor each other others' signals and
the best target candidates are selected among the neighbouring cells. In some
systems, mainly based on CDMA, a target candidate may be selected among the
cells which are not in the neighbour list. This is done in an effort to reduce
the probability of interference due to the aforementioned near-far effect. In
analog systems the parameters used as criteria for requesting a hard handover
are usually the "received signal power" and the "received signal-to-noise
ratio" (the latter may be estimated in an analog system by inserting additional
tones, with frequencies just outside the captured voice-frequency band at the
transmitter and assessing the form of these tones at the receiver). In non-CDMA
2G digital systems the criteria for requesting hard handover may be based on
estimates of the received signal power, bit error rate (BER) and block error/
erasure rate (BLER), received quality of speech (RxQual), distance between the
phone and the BTS (estimated from the radio signal propagation delay) and
others. In CDMA systems, 2G and 3G, the most common criterion for requesting a
handover is Ec/Io ratio measured in the pilot channel (CPICH) and/or RSCP. In
CDMA systems, when the phone in soft or softer handoff is connected to several
cells simultaneously, it processes the received in parallel signals using a
rake receiver. Each signal is processed by a module called "rake finger". A
usual design of a rake receiver in mobile phones includes three or more rake
fingers used in soft handoff state for processing signals from as many cells
and one additional finger used to search for signals from other cells. The set
of cells, whose signals are used during a soft handoff, is referred to as the
"active set". If the search finger finds a sufficiently-strong signal (in terms
of high Ec/Io or RSCP) from a new cell this cell is added to the active set.
The cells in the neighbour list (called in CDMA "neighbouring set") are checked
more frequently than the rest and thus a handoff with a neighbouring cell is
more likely, however a handoff with others cells outside the neighbor list is
also allowed (unlike in GSM, IS-136/DAMPS, AMPS, NMT, etc.). Reasons for
failure. There are occurrences where a handoff is unsuccessful. Lots of
research was conducted regarding this. In the late 80's the main reason was
found out. Because frequencies cannot be reused in adjacent cells, when a user
moves from one cell to another, a new frequency must be allocated for the call.
If a user moves into a cell when all available channels are in use, the
user’s call must be terminated. Also, there is the problem of signal
interference where adjacent cells overpower each other resulting in receiver
desensitization. Vertical handover. There are also inter-technology handovers
where a call's connection is transferred from one access technology to another,
e.g. a call being transferred from GSM to UMTS or from CDMA IS-95 to cdma2000.
The 3GPP UMA/GAN standard enables GSM/UMTS handoff to Wi-Fi and vice-versa.
Handoff Prioritization. Different systems have different methods for handling
and managing handoff request. Some systems handle handoff in same way as they
handle new originating call. In such system the probability that the handoff
will not be served is equal to blocking probability of new originating call.
But if the call is terminated abruptly in the middle of conversation then it is
more annoying than the new originating call being blocked .So in order to avoid
this abrupt termination of ongoing call handoff request should be given
priority to new call this is called as handoff prioritization. There are two
techniques for this. !) Guard Channel Concept: In this technique, a fraction of
the total available channel in a cell is reserved exclusively for handoff
request from ongoing calls which may be handed off into the cell. 2) Queuing:
Queuing of handoffs is possible because there is a finite time interval between
the time the received signal level drops below handoff threshold and the time
the call is terminated due to insufficient signal level. The delay size is
determined from the traffic pattern of a particular service area. Inter and
Intra System Handoff. Inter System Handoff: • If during ongoing call mobile
unit moves from one cellular system to a different cellular system which is
controlled by different MTSO, a handoff procedure which is used to avoid
dropping of call is referred as Inter System Handoff. • An MTSO engages in
this handoff system. When a mobile signal becomes weak in a given cell and MTSO
can not find other cell with in its system to which it can transfer the call
then it uses Inter system handoff. • Before implementation of Inter System
Handoff MTSO compatibility must be checked and in Inter System Handoff local
call may become long distance call. Intra System Handoff: • If during ongoing
call mobile unit moves from one cellular system to adjacent cellular system
which is controlled by same MTSO, a handoff procedure which is used to avoid
dropping of call is referred as Intra System Handoff. • An MTSO engages in
this handoff system. When a mobile signal becomes weak in a given cell and MTSO
find other cell with in its system to which it can transfer the call then it
uses Intra system handoff. • In Intra System Handoff local calls always
remain local call only since after handoff also the call is handled by same
MTSO.
