Happiness economics Happiness economics is the quantitative study of happiness,
positive and negative affect, well-being, quality of life, life satisfaction
and related concepts, typically combining economics with other fields such as
psychology and sociology. It typically treats such happiness-related measures,
rather than wealth, income or profit, as something to be maximized. The field
has grown substantially since the late 20th century, for example by the
development of methods, surveys and indices to measure happiness and related
concepts. Metrology. Given its very nature, reported happiness is subjective.
It is difficult to compare one person’s happiness with another. It can be
especially difficult to compare happiness across cultures. However, many
happiness economists believe they have solved this comparison problem. Cross-
sections of large data samples across nations and time demonstrate consistent
patterns in the determinants of happiness. Happiness is typically measured
using subjective measures - e.g. surveys - and/or objective measures. One
concern has always been the accuracy and reliability of people’s responses to
happiness surveys. Objective measures such as lifespan, income and education,
are often used as well as or instead of subjectively reported happiness, though
this assumes that they generally produce happiness, which while plausible may
not necessarily be the case. The terms quality of life or well-being are often
used to encompass these more objective measures. Some scientists claim that
happiness can be measured both subjectively and objectively by observing the
joy center of the brain lit up with advanced imaging, although this raises
philosophical issues, for example about whether this can be treated as more
reliable than reported subjective happiness. Micro-econometric happiness
equations have the standard form: formula_1. In this equation formula_2 is the
reported well-being of individual formula_3 at time formula_4, and formula_5 is
a vector of known variables, which include socio-demographic and socioeconomic
characteristics. Determinants. Maslow's hierarchy of needs. Abraham Maslow
theorized that human happiness is the outcome of meeting a set of needs. He
listed these in order of priority, leading to a pyramid called Maslow's
hierarchy of needs. The set of needs includes physiological, safety, love/
belonging, esteem, and self-actualization needs. These needs can be used as a
basis for evaluating the overall happiness level of individuals.that is for a
person to have happiness her or his needs have to be satified first (N Gurts).
Money. GDP and GNP. Typically national financial measures, such as GDP and GNP,
have been used as a measure of successful policy. Although on average richer
nations tend to be happier than poorer nations, some studies have indicated
that beyond an average GDP per capita of about $15,000 (most of the world's
nations have less than this), the average income in a nation makes little
difference to the average self-reported happiness. Other economists have
disputed the accuracy of these studies, finding a logarithmic correlation
between GDP per capita and self-reported happiness. Also, some have pointed out
that since life expectancy has continued to increase in nations wealthier than
this, often partly attributed to economic growth, Happy Life Years have
continued to increase. Individual income. Historically, economists have said
that well-being is a simple function of income. However, it has been found that
once wealth reaches a subsistence level, its effectiveness as a generator of
well-being is greatly diminished. This paradox has been referred to as the
Easterlin paradox and may result from a "hedonic treadmill." This means that
aspirations increase with income; after basic needs are met, relative rather
than absolute income levels influence well-being. Happiness economists hope to
change the way governments view well-being and how to most effectively govern
and allocate resources given this paradox. However, other research suggests
that no paradox exists, and happiness is linearly related to the logarithm of
absolute (real, PPP-adjusted) income, with little or no relative income
component . Money correlates with happiness, but the rate diminishes with more
money. In 2010, Daniel Kahneman and Angus Deaton found that higher earners
generally reported better life satisfaction, but people's day-to-day emotional
well-being only rose with earnings until a threshold annual income of $75,000.
Gregg Easterbrook claims that even though wealth, or economic surplus, is more
common today than in 1950, people are still as happy (or unhappy) as they were
60 years ago. In polls taken by the National Opinion Research Center, about 1/
3 Americans said they were really happy in 1950, since then the polls have been
taken periodically, and the results have stayed about the same since then.
Wealth has not been making people happier. This is because after the basics for
survival are taken care of, money cannot bring people any more happiness than
they would experience without it. Other factors have been suggested as making
people happier than money. A short term course of psychological therapy is 32
times more cost effective at increasing happiness than simply increasing
income. One study, when corrected for social status, showed no correlation
between income and happiness. Social security. Professor Ruut Veenhoven showed
that social security payments do not seem to add to happiness. This may be due
to the fact that non-self-earned income (e.g., from a lottery) does not add to
happiness in general either. Happiness may be the mind's reward to a useful
action. However, Johan Norberg of CIS, a free enterprise economy think tank,
presents a hypothesis that as people who think that they themselves control
their lives are more happy, paternalist institutions may decrease happiness. An
alternative perspective focuses on the role of the welfare state as an
institution that improves quality of life not only by increasing the extent to
which basic human needs are met, but also by promoting greater control of one's
life by limiting the degree to which individuals find themselves at the mercy
of impersonal market forces that are indifferent to the fate of individuals.
This is the argument suggested by the U.S. political scientist Benjamin
Radcliff, who has presented a series of papers in peer reviewed scholarly
journals demonstrating that a more generous welfare state contributes to higher
levels of life satisfaction, and does so to rich and poor alike. Employment.
Work is important to happiness. It creates a sense of purpose, beneficial
relationships with co-workers, and also earns money. Losing one's job can be a
great source of unhappiness. Relationships and children. Relationships,
particularly those with women, are important to the happiness of both sexes.
Research has examined the paradox of women’s declining relative well-being,
which is found across various datasets and measures of subjective well-being,
and which is pervasive across demographic groups and industrialized countries.
Relative declines in female happiness have eroded a gender gap in happiness in
which women in the 1970s typically reported higher subjective well-being than
did men. Children tend to decrease parental happiness, at least until they
leave home, although in terms of a broader life narrative the opposite may be
true. Some research shows that at some ages (toddlers and teenagers) they
decrease parental happiness, whereas at others they increase it, averaging out
to no overall change. Married people are happier, but it is unclear if this is
due to the marriage or if happy people are more likely to marry. Freedom and
control. There is a significant correlation between feeling in control of one's
own life and happiness levels. A study conducted at the University of Zurich
suggested that democracy and federalism bring well-being to individuals. It
concluded that the more direct political participation possibilities available
to citizens raises their subjective well-being. Two reasons were given for this
finding. First, a more active role for citizens enables better monitoring of
professional politicians by citizens, which leads to greater satisfaction with
government output. Second, the ability for citizens to get involved in and have
control over the political process, independently increases well-being.
According to a free market think tank Cato Institute, higher economic freedom,
as measured by both the Heritage and the Fraser indices, correlates strongly
with higher self-reported happiness. Leisure. The amount of spare time people
have, as well as their control over how much spare time they have, correlates
with happiness. Whereas leisure pursuits increase happiness, watching
television is an anomaly, as it seems to correlate with lower happiness. This
may be because people who watch a lot of television are lacking in better
sources of happiness, such as relationships and other leisure pursuits; that
is, people watch television if they don't have anything better to do. Health.
Happiness appears to be inversely related to levels of stress, allergy, asthma
and other chronic conditions. Happiness in Asia. Happiness for Asians with
strong oriental influence is strongly linked to home ownership. Owning an
apartment or house is a form of material stability that allows one to further
pursue other interests in life without worrying about the roof over the head.
The lack of generous social benefits in Asia is one possible factor that
explains the need for a property as a form of social security. Indices. The
idea that happiness is important to a society is not new. Thomas Jefferson put
the “pursuit of happiness” on the same level as life and liberty in the
United States Jeremy Bentham believed that public policy should attempt to
maximize happiness, and he even attempted to estimate a "hedonic calculus".
Many other prominent economists and philosophers throughout history, including
Aristotle, incorporated happiness into their work. The Satisfaction with Life
Index is an attempt to show the average self-reported happiness in different
nations. This is an example of a recent trend to use direct measures of
happiness, such as surveys asking people how happy they are, as an alternative
to traditional measures of policy success such as GDP or GNP. Some studies
suggest that happiness can be measured effectively. The Inter-American
Development Bank (IDB), published in November 2008 a major study on happiness
economics in Latin America and the Caribbean ("Beyond Facts: Measuring Quality
of Life", http://www.iadb.org/idbdocs/1776308.pdf). There are also several
examples of measures that includes self-reported happiness as one variable.
Happy Life Years, a concept brought by Dutch sociologist Ruut Veenhoven,
combines self-reported happiness with life expectancy. The Happy Planet Index
combines it with life expectancy and ecological footprint. Gross national
happiness (GNH) is a concept introduced by the King of Bhutan in 1972 as an
alternative to GDP. Several countries have already developed or are in the
process of developing such an index. Bhutan’s index has led that country to
limit the amount of deforestation it will allow and to require that all
tourists to its nation must spend US$200 Allegedly, extensive tourism and
deforestation lead to unhappiness. After the military coup of 2006, Thailand
also instituted an index. The stated promise of the new Prime Minister Surayud
Chulanont is to make the Thai people not only richer but happier as well. Much
like GDP results, Thailand releases monthly GNH data. The Thai GNH index is
based on a 1-10 scale with 10 being the most happy. As of May 13, 2007, the
Thai GNH measured 5.1 points. The index uses poll data from the population
surveying various satisfaction factors such as, security, public utilities,
good governance, trade, social justice, allocation of resources, education and
community problems. Australia, China, France and the United Kingdom are also
coming up with indexes to measure national happiness. North Korea also
announced an international Happiness Index in 2011 through Korean Central
Television. North Korea itself came in second, behind #1 China.Canada released
the Canadian Index of Wellbeing (CIW) in 2011 to track changes in wellbeing.
The CIW has adopted the following working definition of wellbeing: The presence
of the highest possible quality of life in its full breadth of expression
focused on but not necessarily exclusive to: good living standards, robust
health, a sustainable environment, vital communities, an educated populace,
balanced time use, high levels of democratic participation, and access to and
participation in leisure and culture Ecuador's and Bolivia's new constitutions
state the indigenous concept of "good life" ("buen vivir" in Spanish, "sumak
kawsay" in Quichua, and "suma qamaña" in Aymara) as the goal of sustainable
development. Neo-classical economics. Under neo-classical economic theory
happiness, subjectively defined, has long been the standard of measurement used
interchangeably with utility as well as the general welfare. Modern classical
economics no longer attempts to quantify happiness or satisfaction through
measurements in consumption and profits. Instead, modern neoclassical framework
argue that individual's preference is revealed through choice. Therefore, if an
individual decided to purchase an apple over orange, the satisfaction one
derived from apple is revealed to be greater than an orange. Similarly, modern
economics also consider that work/leisure balance is also matter of individual
choice. The idea that modern neoclassical economics define happiness on the
basis of consumption is widely disputed. The basis of utility has been defined
as revealed preference. The assumption within neoclassic economics that
satisfactions are highly subjective found expression in the work of Vilfredo
Pareto, whose definition of optimal allocation in the nineteenth century was a
crucial contribution that allowed further development of the mathematical
precision of the discipline. Pareto argued that because satisfactions are
subjective, we cannot know for certain that we have increased the amount of
satisfaction in the system if we take a dollar from a billionaire and give it
to a starving person to buy food; for all we know, the billionaire might have
derived as much satisfaction from that dollar as the starving person does in
spending it on food. This counter-intuitive result is the cornerstone of Pareto
Optimality: a system is in Pareto Optimality when no one can be made better off
(in their own estimation) without making someone worse off (in their own
estimation). In practice, "better off" and "worse off" are defined by
consumption: by definition, it is always better to consume more. Thus, Pareto
Optimality led to the bias in standard economics toward perpetual growth
models—models that are increasingly being called into question, as being
impractical (and dangerously destructive) in a finite world (see, for instance,
limits to growth). Criticism. The most fundamental criticism of happiness
economics lies in its dependence on the concept of cardinal utility -- that is,
that personal preferences are measurable and comparable in an objective fashion
by an outside observer. Cardinal utility is, however, a discredited and largely
discarded concept in economics. Some have suggested that establishing happiness
as a metric is only meant to serve political goals. Recently there has been
concern that happiness research could be used to advance authoritarian aims. As
a result, some participants at a happiness conference in Rome have suggested
that happiness research should not be used as a matter of public policy but
rather used to inform individuals. In addition, survey findings can lead to
subjective interpretations. For example, a happiness study conducted in Russia
during the 1990s indicated that as unemployment grew, the well-being of both
those employed and unemployed rose. The interpretation of this could be that it
resulted from diminished expectations and respondents who were less critical of
their own situation when many around them were unemployed, or it could be
interpreted as being the result of everyone benefitting from the unpaid work
that the unemployed were able to do for their families and communities with
their increased time resource.
