Haringey Solidarity Group Haringey Solidarity Group or HSG are a loose
collective of anarchists, socialists, and community activists based in the
Borough of Haringey, London. Aims. HSG state that "We do not want to just
become the new set of leaders!" The group aims to support local community
struggles and hopes that other community groups will support them, this is the
source of the word within their name. The group aims to practice, encourage and
support self-organised struggles by ordinary people within Haringey, against
bosses, local councils, or multi-national corporations. HSG also want to
encourage other communities to organise themselves too, and Dave Morris a
member of HSG has stated: "I want to see an independent residents' group in
every street, a solidarity group in every workplace, and an anti-authoritarian/
anti-capitalist organisation in every borough and town" History. HSG were
formed out of the remains of the Haringey Anti Poll Tax Union, after the poll
tax was defeated. "Originally set up to fight the poll tax, they decided to
carry on after the tax was defeated." Initial hopes for several groups across
the Borough proved to be unsustainable and after three years the groups were
combined into one group. "In April 1991 we had the first meeting as Haringey
Solidarity Group and by January 1992 we had formed three separate groups around
the borough in Tottenham, Green Lanes, and Wood Green. Not being able to
sustain three separate groups we all came back together as HSG in September
1994. " Activities. Members of HSG are active in their residents associations ,
anti-fascism, and Haringey Against ID, anti billboards, anti debt campaigns,
and various other antis. HSG continues to encourage tenants and workers self
organisation throughout the borough, and have supported various workers
struggles in the Borough of Haringey and beyond, including the 1995 JJ Foods
Strike. HSG members are also involved in organising free community festivals,
the monthly Haringey Independent Cinema, and many other social events. Dave
Morris and Helen Steel of the McLibel case are both involved with HSG.
