Harris–Todaro model The Harris–Todaro model, named after John R. Harris and
Michael Todaro, is an economic model developed in 1970 and used in development
economics and welfare economics to explain some of the issues concerning rural-
urban migration. The main assumption of the model is that the migration
decision is based on expected income differentials between rural and urban
areas rather than just wage differentials. This implies that rural-urban
migration in a context of high urban unemployment can be economically rational
if expected urban income exceeds expected rural income. Overview. In the model,
an equilibrium is reached when the expected wage in urban areas (actual wage
adjusted for the unemployment rate), is equal to the marginal product of an
agricultural worker. The model assumes that unemployment is non-existent in the
rural agricultural sector. It is also assumed that rural agricultural
production and the subsequent labor market is perfectly competitive. As a
result, the agricultural rural wage is equal to agricultural marginal
productivity. In equilibrium, the rural to urban migration rate will be zero
since the expected rural income equals the expected urban income. However, in
this equilibrium there will be positive unemployment in the urban sector.
Formalism. At equilibrium, The with random matching of workers to available
jobs, the ratio of available jobs to total job seekers gives the probability
that any person moving from the agricultural sector to the urban sector will be
able to find a job. As a result, in equilibrium, the agricultural wage rate is
equal to the expected urban wage rate, which is the urban wage multiplied by
the employment rate. Conclusions. Rural to urban migration causes overcrowding
and unemployment in cities as migration rates exceed urban job creation rates,
with many people ending up in unproductive or underproductive employment in the
informal sector. However, even though this migration creates unemployment and
induces informal sector growth, this behavior is economically rational and
utility-maximizing in the context of the Harris–Todaro model. As long as the
migrating economic agents have complete and accurate information concerning
rural and urban wage rates and probabilities of obtaining employment, they will
make an expected income-maximizing decision. Limitations. One limitation of
this model is that it assumes potential migrants are risk neutral, as in they
are indifferent between a certain expected rural income and an uncertain
expected urban income of the same magnitude. This assumption's reflection of
economic realities is questionable; poor migrants will likely be risk averse
and require a significantly greater expected urban income to migrate. However,
the Harris–Todaro model can be adjusted to reflect risk aversion through
alteration of the expected urban income calculation. When the model assumes
risk aversion instead of risk neutrality, the results are virtually identical.
