Public diplomacy (Israel) Public diplomacy in Israel (also hasbara)
( "hasbará", "explaining") refers to public relations efforts to disseminate
information about Israel. The term is used by the Israeli government and its
supporters to describe efforts to explain government policies and promote
Israel in the face of negative press, and to counter what they see as
"delegitimisation" of Israel around the world. "Hasbara" means "explanation",
and is also a euphemism for propaganda. Meaning of the term. While "hasbara"
literally means "explanation", its exact import in its current usage is
debated. Gideon Meir has said that there is no "real, precise" translation of
the word "hasbara" in English or any other language, and has characterized it
as public diplomacy, an action undertaken by all governments around the world
with the growing importance of what Harvard professor Joseph Nye termed soft
power. Gary Rosenblatt describes it as "advocacy". "Hasbara" has been described
as "pro-Israel propaganda," but while "propaganda strives to highlight the
positive aspects of one side of a conflict, "hasbara" seeks to explain actions,
whether or not they are justified." Historian Giora Goodman considers "hasbara"
to mean "propaganda" in practice, explaining  History. The early mentions of
the term "hasbara" in English mainstream print media date from the late 1970s
and describe "hasbara" as “overseas image-building.” According to the
Washington Post, this work "is called hasbara when the purpose is to reshape
public opinion abroad.” In the early 1980s, hasbara was defined as a "public
relations campaign," In Newsweek it was described as “explaining.” In 1986,
the New York Times reported that a program for “communicating defense
goals” was started in the late 1970s, and a 1984 implementation of a
“Hasbara Project” to “train foreign-service officers in communications by
placing them with American companies.” Carl Spielvogel, chairman of Backer &
Spielvogel, traveled to Israel to advise the government on communicating its
defense goals. The trip led to the Hasbara Project, an internship program
established to train foreign-service officers in communications by placing them
with American companies. Shmuel Katz's book "", published in 1973, was
described as “an encyclopedic source-book for those involved in Israel's
"hasbara" (public relations) effort.” In 1977, Prime Minister Menachem Begin
named Katz "Adviser to the Prime Minister of Information Abroad." In May 1992,
the Jerusalem Post reported that American Jewish leaders hardly reacted to news
that the Foreign Ministry's hasbara department would be eliminated as part of a
sweeping reorganization of the ministry. Malcolm Hoenlein noted there had been
talk of streamlining the ministry's hasbara functions for some time. He said
that merging the hasbara department's functions with those of the press
department did not portend any downgrading in the priority the Likud government
gives to hasbara abroad. Abe Foxman, reacted similarly, saying he was "not
distressed or disturbed", and noted that disseminating hasbara has always been
the responsibility of every Foreign Ministry staff officer, especially those
working abroad; if eliminating one department means everyone will assume
greater responsibility for his or her own efforts in distributing hasbara, then
he is all in favor. It also reported that personnel in foreign hasbara
departments would be shifted to press departments, which is where much of the
work currently done by hasbara officials properly belongs. He explained that
Israel's efforts to provide hasbara abroad would focus on media communications.
In 2001, Shmuel Katz published a retrospective of Israeli hasbara efforts and
said that the task of Israel's hasbara "must be tackled not by occasional
sudden sallies but by a separate permanent department in the government."
Sharon did increase hasbara efforts, but did not create a cabinet-level
ministry for that purpose. Also in 2001, the Israeli Foreign Affairs Ministry,
the diplomatic arm of the Government of Israel, was an original co-sponsor of
the Hasbara Fellowships activities of Aish HaTorah. The Jewish Agency for
Israel, Department for Jewish Zionist Education, operates a campaign calle
"Hasbara, Israeli Advocacy, Your Guide to the Middle East Conflict". A similar
advocacy campaign on Wikipedia was later launched by the CAMERA in May 2008; it
resulted in administrative action by the encyclopedia, and several editors were
banned. In 2002, the Israeli State Comptroller's office issued a report
critical of Israel's PR efforts, "A lack of an overall strategic public
relations conception and objective" and lack of coordination between the
various organizations were mentioned. Funding levels are modest; the Ministry
of Foreign Affairs spent about US$8.6 million on these efforts in 2002, and the
Government Press Office was only budgeted at US$100,000. In 2008, Yarden
Vatikay was appointed to coordinate Israel’s domestic and foreign media
policy. In 2009, Israel's foreign ministry organized volunteers to add pro-
Israeli commentary on news websites. In July 2009, it was announced that the
Israeli Foreign Ministry would assemble an "internet warfare" squad to spread a
pro-Israel message on various websites, with funding of 600,000 shekels (c
$150,000). A 2010 report produced for the Israeli cabinet by the Reut
Institute, and cited by the newspaper "Haaretz", exemplifies the common Israeli
view that "hasbara" efforts are needed to respond to what it describes as a
diffuse "delegitimization network" of anti-Israel activists. As "Haaretz" put
it, "The network's activists - 'delegitimizers' the report dubs them - are
relatively marginal: young people, anarchists, migrants and radical political
activists." The newspaper also cites the report as saying this network promotes
pro-Palestinian activities in Europe as "trendy," and calls for it to be
monitored by Israeli intelligence services, and for the cabinet to treat the
network as a strategic threat. It concludes that Israel was not prepared to
meet the threat posed by this diffuse network, and that a counter-effort must
be more vigorously undertaken to respond to its activities. Hasbara advocate
Neil Lazarus says that what he calls "low budget, grassroots Hasbara 2.0" has
come of age, and commends web sites that keep track of what supporters see as
anti-Israel media bias, and that promote e-mail campaigns on behalf of Israel.
He observes that "Israel’s hasbara seems to be becoming more dynamic, as the
Diaspora takes responsibility", and that, "Even day schools and MASA programs
have been conscripted to the task." Methods. The Israel Citizens Information
Council (ICIC) says its purpose is "to assist efforts to explain Israeli life
from the vantage point of the average Israeli citizen. Towards that end, the
ICIC enlists Israelis from all walks of life to participate in its various
projects ... One of our major activities is the production of special
Powerpoint presentations which we post on our website. These presentations
review specific aspects and issues related to Israel and the Middle East." Some
"hasbara" experts study methods used by Palestinian activists and offer advice
on how to respond. Describing demonstrators as "youths," for example, creates a
different impression from calling them "children." They draw attention to the
subtle differences of meaning between words such as demonstration and riot,
terror organization and Palestinian political organization. They advise against
name calling and point scoring. Edward Said wrote that hasbara methods used
during the Second Intifada included lunches and free trips for influential
journalists; seminars for Jewish university students; invitations to
congressmen; pamphlets and donation of money for election campaigns; telling
photographers and writers what to photograph or write about; lecture and
concert tours by prominent Israelis; frequent references to the Holocaust;
advertisements in the newspapers attacking Arabs and praising Israel.
