Hauser's law Hauser's law is the proposition that, in the United States,
federal tax revenues since World War II have always been approximately equal to
19.5% of GDP, regardless of wide fluctuations in the marginal tax rate.
Historically, since the end of World War II, federal tax receipts as a
percentage of gross domestic product averaged 17.9%, with a range from 14.4% to
20.9% between 1946 - 2007. History. The proposition was first put forward in
1993 by William Kurt Hauser, a San Francisco investment economist, who wrote,
"No matter what the tax rates have been, in postwar America tax revenues have
remained at about 19.5% of GDP." Hauser cited Arthur Laffer's concept of the
Laffer curve in his original article. While the two concepts are similar,
Hauser's law was put forward as an empirical observation whereas the Laffer
curve was thought of theoretically. In a May 20, 2008 editorial by David
Ranson, the Wall St. Journal published a graph purportedly showing that even
though the top marginal tax rate of federal income tax had varied between a low
of 28% to a high of 91%, between 1950 and 2007, federal tax revenues had
remained close to 19.5% of GDP. The editorial went on to say, "The economics of
taxation will be moribund until economists accept and explain Hauser's law. For
progress to be made, they will have to face up to it, reconcile it with other
facts, and incorporate it within the body of accepted knowledge." From fiscal
year 1946 to fiscal year 2007, federal tax receipts as a percentage of gross
domestic product averaged 17.9%, with a range from 14.4% to 20.9%. 2009 tax
collections, at 15% of GDP, were the lowest level of the past 50 years and 4.5
percentage points lower than Hauser's law suggests. The Heritage Foundation has
stated that the recent world economic recession pushed receipts to a level
significantly below the historical average. Commentary and criticism.
Forbes.com columnist Daniel J. Mitchell has argued that Hauser's Law has been
observed due to the fact that the U.S. does not have a national sales tax and
instead collects taxes in a federalist system, in contrast to many other
Western nations. He also stated that the U.S. has an inherently more
progressive system as well. Thus, he concluded that the Law represents a socio-
political policy trend rather than a true economic law and that the trend could
change rapidly if value-added taxes are imposed at the federal level. Economist
Mike Kimel, writing for the Angry Bear website, has stated that Hauser's Law is
misleading as it sweeps large differences under the table. He wrote that tax
revenue is higher in the years following a tax increase and lower in the years
following a tax cut. He defined the time periods 1951-1953, 1967-1968, and
1991-2001 as "tax hike eras", and 1953-1967, 1969-1991, 2001-2010 as "tax cut
eras", and points out that tax revenues increase in "tax hike eras" and that
tax cuts lead to lower revenues. Zubin Jelveh, writing for Portfolio.com,
criticized the "Wall Street Journal" editorial for failing to adequately
separate social insurance taxes from other types of tax revenues (such as
income tax and corporate tax revenue). Because social insurance taxes go
directly into the Social Security trust fund, revenue that is not earmarked for
pension checks has actually fallen over the last 50 years. Jelveh points out
that the main reason for this decline is a dramatic decline in corporate tax
revenues, from more than 5% of GDP to less than 2%. Jelveh uses these facts to
critique editorialist David Ranson's use of Hauser's Law. Ranson believes that
because tax revenues remain constant over time, raising tax rates on the rich
will be ineffective at raising revenue. Journalist Jonathan Chait has written
in "The New Republic" that "swings are fairly dramatic" through U.S. history
for tax receipts as a percent of GDP. He stated that the George H. W. Bush and
Bill Clinton administrations received "massive" extra revenues as the result of
tax increases while the George W. Bush administration tax cuts lead to a
"massive" drop in revenues. He labeled the idea of static, flat revenues as a
"scam".
