He who does not work, neither shall he eat He who does not work, neither shall
he eat is a Biblical aphorism derived from , which became a slogan for new
colonies and socialist societies. New Testament. that is, The Greek phrase
οὐ θέλει ἐργάζεσθαι means “is not willing to work”.
Other English translations render this as “would” or “will not work”,
which may confuse readers unaccustomed to this use of the verb in the archaic
sense of “want to, desire to”. Jamestown. The slogan is said to have been
used by John Smith when establishing the English colony of Jamestown, Virginia
after an experiment with a common store system was abandoned (1607-1609).
Soviet Union. According to Lenin, “He who does not work shall not eat” is a
necessary principle under socialism, the preliminary phase of the evolution
towards communist society. The phrase appears in his 1917 work, "The State and
Revolution". Through this slogan Lenin explains that in socialist states only
productive individuals could be allowed access to the articles of consumption.
In accordance with Lenin’s understanding of the socialist state, article
twelve of the 1936 Soviet Constitution states: In Lenin’s writing, this was
not so much directed at lazy or unproductive workers, but rather the
bourgeoisie. (Marxist theory defines the bourgeoisie as the group of those who
buy the labor-power of workers and engage it in the process of production,
deriving profits from the surplus value thus expropriated. Once communism was
realised, that is, after the abolition of property and the law of value, no-one
would live off the labor of others.) Neither did the principle apply to those
rendered incapable of work by old age or disability. These groups would have a
right to society's products because they were not at fault for their condition.
The elderly, in particular, had worked during their youth, and so could not be
denied life’s basic necessities. The Soviet state accordingly provided a
basic level of social security. In reality, the resulting lack of motivation
and productivity was illustrated by one of the more famous Russian political
jokes, "the authorities pretend they are paying wages, workers pretend they are
working."
