Health care reform United States. In the United States, the debate regarding
healthcare reform includes questions of a right to health care, access,
fairness, sustainability, quality and amounts spent by government. The mixed
public-private health care system in the United States is the most expensive in
the world, with health care costing more per person than in any other nation,
and a greater portion of gross domestic product (GDP) is spent on it than in
any other United Nations member state except for East Timor (Timor-Leste). A
study of international health care spending levels in the year 2000, published
in the health policy journal "Health Affairs", found that while the U.S. spends
more on health care than other countries in the Organisation for Economic Co-
operation and Development (OECD), the use of health care services in the U.S.
is below the OECD median by most measures. The authors of the study concluded
that the prices paid for health care services are much higher in the U.S. In
spite of the amount spent on health care in the U.S., according to a 2008
Commonwealth Fund report, the United States ranks last in the quality of health
care among developed countries. The World Health Organization (WHO), in 2000,
ranked the US health care system 37th in overall performance and 72nd by
overall level of health (among 191 member nations included in the study).
International comparisons that could lead to conclusions about the quality of
the health care received by Americans are subject to debate. The US pays twice
as much yet lags other wealthy nations in such measures as infant mortality and
life expectancy, which are among the most widely collected, hence easily
compared, international statistics. Many people are underinsured, for example,
in Colorado "of those with insurance for a full year, 36.3% were underinsured."
About 10.7 million insured Americans spend more than a quarter of their annual
paychecks on health care because of the high deductible polices. The Patient
Protection and Affordable Care Act (Public Law 111-148) was signed into law by
President Barack Obama on March 23, 2010. Along with the Health Care and
Education Reconciliation Act of 2010 (signed March 30), the Act is a product of
the health care reform efforts of the Democratic 111th Congress and the Obama
administration. The law includes health-related provisions to take effect over
the next four years, including expanding Medicaid eligibility for people making
up to 133% of the federal poverty level (FPL), subsidizing insurance premiums
for people making up to 400% of the FPL ($88,000 for family of 4 in 2010) so
their maximum "out-of-pocket" payment for annual premiums will be from 2% to
9.5% of income, providing incentives for businesses to provide health care
benefits, prohibiting denial of coverage and denial of claims based on pre-
existing conditions, establishing health insurance exchanges, prohibiting
insurers from establishing annual coverage caps, and support for medical
research. According to White House and Congressional Budget Office figures, the
maximum share of income that enrollees would have to pay for the would vary
depending on their income relative to the federal poverty level, as follows:
for families with income 133–150% of FPL will be 3-4% of income, for families
with income of 150–200% of FPL will be 4-6.3% of income, for families with
income 200–250% of FPL will be 6.3-8.05% of income, for families with income
250-300% of FPL will be 8.05-9.5% of income, for families with income from 300
to 400% of FPL will be 9.5% of income. The costs of these provisions are offset
by a variety of taxes, fees, and cost-saving measures, such as new Medicare
taxes for those in high-income brackets, taxes on indoor tanning, cuts to the
Medicare Advantage program in favor of traditional Medicare, and fees on
medical devices and pharmaceutical companies; there is also a tax penalty for
those who do not obtain health insurance, unless they are exempt due to low
income or other reasons. The Congressional Budget Office estimates that the net
effect of both laws will be a reduction in the federal deficit by $143 billion
over the first decade. The universal health care proposal pending in the U.S.
Congress is called the United States National Health Care Act (H.R. 676,
formerly the "Medicare for All Act.") The Congressional Budget Office and
related government agencies scored the cost of a universal health care system
several times since 1991, and have uniformly predicted cost savings, probably
because of the 40% cost savings associated with universal preventative care and
elimination of insurance company overhead costs. Hawaii and Massachusetts. Both
Hawaii and Massachusetts have implemented some incremental reforms in health
care, but neither state has complete coverage of its citizens. For example,
data from the Kaiser Family Foundation shows that 5% of Massachusetts and 8% of
Hawaii residents are uninsured. To date, The U.S. Uniform Law Commission,
sponsored by the National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws has
not submitted a uniform act or model legislation regarding health care
insurance or health care reform. United Kingdom. Health care was reformed in
1948 with the creation of the National Health Service or NHS. It was originally
established as part of a wider reform of social services and funded by a system
of National Insurance, though receipt of health care was never contingent upon
making contributions towards the National Insurance Fund. Private health care
was not abolished but had to compete with the NHS. About 15% of all spending on
health in the UK is still privately funded but this includes the patient
contributions towards NHS provided prescription drugs, so private sector health
care in the UK is quite small. As part of a wider reform of social provision it
was originally thought that the focus would be as much about the prevention of
ill-health as it was about curing disease. The NHS for example would distribute
baby formula milk fortified with vitamins and minerals in an effort to improve
the health of children born in the post war years as well as other supplements
such as cod liver oil and malt. Many of the common childhood diseases such as
measles, mumps, and chicken pox were mostly eradicated with a national program
of vaccinations. The NHS has been through several reforms since 1948 although
it is probably fair to say that the system has been through phases of
evolutionary change. The Conservative Thatcher administrations attempted to
bring competition into the NHS by developing a supplier/buyer role between
hospitals as suppliers and health authorities as buyers. This necessitated the
detailed costing of activities, something which the NHS had never had to do in
such detail, and some felt was unnecessary. The Labour Party generally opposed
these changes, although after the party became New Labour, the Blair government
retained elements of competition and even extended it, allowing private health
care providers to bid for NHS work. Some treatment and diagnostic centres are
now run by private enterprise and funded under contract. However, the extent of
this privatisation of NHS work is still very very small, though remains
controversial. The administration committed more money to the NHS raising it to
almost the same level of funding as the European average and as a result, there
has been a large expansion and mordernisation programme and waiting times are
now much more acceptable than they once were. The government of Gordon Brown
has announced several new reforms for care in England. One is to take the NHS
back more towards health prevention by tackling issues that are known to cause
long term ill health. The biggest of these is obesity and related diseases such
as diabetes and cardio-vascular disease. The second reform is to make the NHS a
more personal service, and it is negotiating with doctors to provide more
services at times more convenient to the patient, such as in the evenings and
at weekends. This personal service idea would introduce regular health check-
ups so that the population is screened more regularly. Doctors will give more
advice on ill-health prevention (for example encouraging and assisting patients
to control their weight, diet, exercise more, cease smoking etc.) and so tackle
problems before they become more serious. Waiting times, which have already
fallen considerably under Blair (median wait time is about 6 weeks for elective
non-urgent surgery) are also in focus. The NHS will from December 2008, ensure
that no person waits longer than 18 weeks from the date that a patient is
referred to the hospital to the time of the operation or treatment. This 18
week period thus includes the time to arrange a first appointment, the time for
any investigations or tests to determine the cause of the problem and how it
should be treated. An NHS Constitution for England has recently been published
which lays out the legal rights of patients as well as promises (not legally
enforceable) the NHS strives to keep in England. Germany. Numerous health care
reforms in Germany were legislative interventions to stabilise the public
health insurance since 1983. 9 out of 10 citizens are publicly insured, only 8%
privatly. Health care in Germany including its industry and all services is one
of the largest sectors of the German economy. The total expenditure in health
economics of Germany was about 287.3 billion Euro in Germany in 2010,
equivalent to 11.6 percent of gross domestic product (GDP) this year and about
3.510 Euro per capita. Direct inpatient and outpatient care equivalent to just
about a quarter of the entire expenditure - depending on the perspective.
Expenditure on pharmaceutical drugs is almost half as high as those for the
entire hospital sector. Pharmaceutical drug expenditure grew by an annual
average of 4.1% between 2004 and 2010. Such developments caused since the 1980s
numerous health care reforms. An actual example of 2010 and 2011: First time
since 2004 the drug expenditure fell from 30.2 billion Euro in 2010 to 29.1
billion Euro in 2011, i. e. minus 1.1 billion Euro or minus 3.6%. That was
caused by restructuring the Social Security Code: manufacturer discount 16%
instead of 6%​​, price moratorium, increasing discount contracts,
increasing discount by wholesale trade and pharmacies. The Netherlands. The
Netherlands has introduced a new system of health care insurance based on risk
equalization through a risk equalization pool. In this way, a compulsory
insurance package is available to all citizens at affordable cost without the
need for the insured to be assessed for risk by the insurance company.
Furthermore, health insurers are now willing to take on high risk individuals
because they receive compensation for the higher risks. A 2008 article in the
journal Health Affairs suggested that the Dutch health system, which combines
mandatory universal coverage with competing private health plans, could serve
as a model for reform in the US. A video (in Dutch and English) is available
which explains the reforms. Subtitles in English are available by clicking the
'T' control on the video control after clicking this link. Russia. Following
the collapse of the Soviet Union, Russia embarked on a series of reforms
intending to deliver better health care by compulsory medical insurance with
privately owned providers in addition to the state run institutions. According
to the OECD none of 1991-93 reforms worked out as planned and the reforms had
in many respects made the system worse. Russia has more physicians, hospitals,
and health care workers than almost any other country in the world on a per
capita basis, but since the collapse of the Soviet Union, the health of the
Russian population has declined considerably as a result of social, economic,
and lifestyle changes. However, after Putin became president in 2000 there was
significant growth in spending for public healthcare and in 2006 it exceed the
pre-1991 level in real terms. Also life expectancy increased from 1991-93
levels, infant mortality rate dropped from 18.1 in 1995 to 8.4 in 2008. Russian
Prime Minister Vladimir Putin announced a large large-scale health-care reform
in 2011 and pledged to allocate more than 300 billion rubles ($10 billion) in
the next few years to improve health care in the country. He also said that
obligatory medical insurance tax paid by companies for compulsory medical
insurance will increase from current 3.1% to 5.1% starting from 2011. Taiwan.
Taiwan changed its health care system in 1995 to a National Health Insurance
model similar to the US Medicare system for seniors. As a result, the 40% of
Taiwanese people who had previously been uninsured are now covered. It is said
to deliver universal coverage with free choice of doctors and hospitals and no
waiting lists. Polls in 2005 are reported to have shown that 72.5% of Taiwanese
are happy with the system, and when they are unhappy, it's with the cost of
premiums (equivalent to less than US$20 a month). Employers and the self-
employed are legally bound to pay National Health Insurance (NHI) premiums
which are similar to social security contributions in other countries. However,
the NHI is a pay-as-you-go system. The aim is for the premium income to pay
costs. The system is also subsidized by a tobacco tax surcharge and
contributions from the national lottery. Elsewhere. As evidenced by the large
variety of different health care systems seen across the world, there are
several different pathways that a country could take when thinking about
reform. In comparison to the UK, physicians in Germany have more bargaining
power through professional organizations (i.e., physician associations); this
ability to negotiate has an impact on reform efforts. Germany makes use of
sickness funds, which citizens are obliged to join but are able to opt out if
they have a very high income (Belien 87). The Netherlands used a similar system
but the financial threshold for opting out was lower (Belien 89). The Swiss, on
the other hand use more of a privately based health insurance system where
citizens are risk-rated by age and sex, among other factors (Belien 90). The
United States government provides health care to just over 25% of its citizens
through various agencies, but otherwise does not employ a system. Health care
is generally centered around regulated private insurance methods. One key
component to health care reform is the reduction of health care fraud and
abuse. In the U.S. and the EU, it is estimated that as much as 10 percent of
all health care transactions and expenditures may be fraudulent. See Terry L.
Leap, "Phantom Billing, Fake Prescriptions, and the High Cost of Medicine:
Health Care Fraud and What to do about It" (Cornell University Press, 2011).
Also interesting to notice is the oldest health care system in the world and
its advantages and disadvantages, see Health in Germany.
