Hegemonic stability theory Hegemonic Stability Theory (HST) is a theory of
international relations. Rooted in research from the fields of political
science, economics, and history, HST indicates that the international system is
more likely to remain stable when a single nation-state is the dominant world
power, or hegemon.. Thus, the fall of an existing hegemon or the state of no
hegemon diminishes the stability of international system. When a hegemon
exercises leadership, either through diplomacy, coercion, or persuasion, it is
actually deploying its "preponderance of power." This is called hegemony, which
refers to a state's ability to "single-handedly dominate the rules and
arrangements ... international political and economic relations." Research on
hegemony can be divided into two schools of thought: the realist school and the
systemic school. Each school can be further sub-divided. Two dominant theories
have emerged from each school. What Robert Keohane first called the "theory of
hegemonic stability," joins A. F. K. Organski's Power Transition Theory as the
two dominant approaches to the realist school of thought. Long Cycle Theory,
espoused by George Modelski, and World Systems Theory, espoused by Immanuel
Wallerstein, have emerged as the two dominant approaches to the systemic school
of thought. Charles P. Kindleberger is one of the scholars most closely
associated with HST, and is even regarded by some as the father of HST.
Kindleberger argued, in his 1973 book "The World in Depression: 1929-1939",
that the economic chaos between World War I and World War II that led to the
Great Depression, can be blamed in part on the lack of a world leader with a
dominant economy. The theory is about more than economics though: the central
idea behind HST is that the stability of the global system, in terms of
politics, international law, and so on, relies on the hegemon to develop and
enforce the rules of the system. In addition to Kindleberger, key figures in
the development of hegemonic stability theory include Modelski, Robert Gilpin,
Robert Keohane, Stephen Krasner, and others. Hegemonic Rise. In order for a
nation-state to rise to the level of hegemon, there are some attributes it must
or is more advantageous to have. First of all, it must have political strength,
military force, and superior national power that is necessary for its ability
to forge new international laws and organizations. In terms of military force,
a standing defensive army is not enough. A superior navy, or air force is. This
explains why many hegemons have been geographically situated on peninsulas or
islands. Peninsularity and insularity provide added security, and, where naval
power is necessary, the ability to project military forces. In some cases,
hegemons have not been insular or peninsular. The United States of America, for
instance, has become a virtual island. It has two massive seaboards, and its
neighbors are strong allies, and relatively reliable. Also, the modern
invention of nuclear weapons, and the presence of a superior air force provide
highly reliable security for the country, setting it apart from the rest of the
world. Secondly, a hegemon must have a large and growing economy. Usually,
unrivaled supremacy in at least one leading economic or technological sector is
necessary. Thirdly, a hegemon must have will to lead, and the will to establish
a hegemonic regime. Also, it must have the capability to lead and enforce the
rules of the system. After World War I, Great Britain possessed the will to
lead, but lacked the necessary abilities to do so. Without the ability to force
stability on the international system, Great Britain was able to do little to
prevent the onset of the Great Depression or World War II. Finally, a hegemon
must commit to the system, which needs to be perceived as mutually beneficial
for other great powers and important state-actors. Competing Theories of
Hegemonic Stability. Hegemony is an important aspect of international
relations. Various schools of thought and theories have emerged in an attempt
to better understand hegemonic actors and their influence. The Systemic School
of Thought. According to Thomas J. McCormick, scholars and other experts on the
systemic school define hegemony "as a single power's possession of
'simultaneous superior economic efficiency in production, trade and finance.'"
Furthermore, a hegemon's superior position is considered the logical
consequence of superior geography, technological innovation, ideology, superior
resources, and other factors. Long Cycle Theory. George Modelski, who presented
his ideas in the book, "Long Cycles in World Politics" (1987), is the chief
architect of long cycle theory. In a nutshell, long cycle theory describes the
connection between war cycles, economic supremacy, and the political aspects of
world leadership. Long cycles, or long waves, offer interesting perspectives on
global politics by permitting "the careful exploration of the ways in which
world wars have recurred, and lead states such as Britain and the United States
have succeeded each other in an orderly manner." Not to be confused with Simon
Kuznets' idea of long-cycles, or long-swings, long cycles of global politics
are patterns of past world politics. The long cycle, according to Dr. Dan Cox,
is a period of time lasting approximately 70 to 100 years. At the end of that
period, "the title of most powerful nation in the world switches hands.".
Modelski divides the long cycle into four phases. When periods of global war,
which could last as much as one-fourth of the total long cycle, are factored
in, the cycle can last from 87 to 122 years. Many traditional theories of
international relations, including the other approaches to hegemony, believe
that the baseline nature of the international system is anarchy. Modelski's
long cycle theory, however, states that war and other destabilizing events are
a natural product of the long cycle and larger global system cycle. They are
part of the living processes of the global polity and social order. Wars are
"systemic decisions" that "punctuate the movement of the system at regular
intervals." Because "world politics is not a random process of hit or miss, win
or lose, depending on the luck of the draw or the brute strength of the
contestants," anarchy simply doesn't play a role. After all, long cycles have
provided, for the last five centuries, a means for the successive selection and
operation of numerous world leaders. Modeslki used to believe that long cycles
were a product of the modern period. He suggests that the five long cycles,
which have taken place since about 1500, are each a part of a larger global
system cycle, or the modern world system. Under the terms of long cycle theory,
five hegemonic long cycles have taken place, each strongly correlating to
economic Kondratieff Waves (or K-Waves). The first hegemon would have been
Portugal during the 16th century, then the Netherlands during the 17th century.
Next, Great Britain served twice, first during the 18th century, then during
the 19th century. The United States has been serving as hegemon since the end
of World War II. The traditional view of long cycle theory has evolved
somewhat, as Modelski now suggests that Northern and Southern Sung China,
Venice and Genoa were each the dominant economic powers during medieval long
cycles. However, he does not classify any of these states as world powers. Only
when Portugal gained hegemony after 1500 is that distinction made. Other Views
of Hegemonic Stability. The Neorealist Interpretation of Hegemony. Neorealists
have been focusing on this theory recently, the main proponent of it being John
J. Mearsheimer who is trying to incorporate it into 'offensive realism'. In his
book 'The Tragedy of Great Power Politics' Mearsheimer outlines how the
anarchic system that neorealists subscribe to (see Kenneth Waltz for original
theory) creates power hungry states who will each attempt to install themselves
as regional and global hegemons. His theory is not widely embraced by fellow
realists who argue that the hegemon supports the system so long as it is in
their interests. The system is created, shaped and maintained by coercion. The
hegemon would begin to undermine the institution when it is not in their
interests. With the decline of a hegemon, the system descends into instability.
Other realists argue that the anarchic system does not actually give causal
motivation to aid the creation of hegemons. The Neoliberal Interpretation of
Hegemony. Neoliberals argue that the hegemon provides public goods through
institutions and works in the best interests of everybody. It is motivated by
'enlightened self-interest'; the hegemon takes on the costs because it is good
for all actors, thereby creating stability in the system, which is also in the
interests of all actors. With the decline of the hegemon, institutions don't
automatically die; instead, they take on a life of their own (see Regime
Theory). Is the U.S. still a hegemon? Hegemony demands power, which is defined
by Susan Strange as the ability of one party to affect outcomes such that their
preferences take precedence over the preferences of other parties. The question
of whether the U.S. is still a hegemon is tied into whether or not it has lost
power. Keohane sees power as tied into resources and production. The US GDP is
now lower relative to others as there are growing economies with considerable
amount of GDP such as BRIC countries. This implies a loss or decreased power of
US as a hegemon. Although resources are an important determinant of power, they
are not always determinative. For example, the German troops that conquered
western Europe were actually fewer in number than their opponents. Susan
Strange uses this logic to argue that the U.S. is still a hegemon. One form of
power that the U.S. possess is structural power. After the Exxon Valdez
accident, the US passed a domestic law commanding any oil delivery ship to have
unlimited liability insurance. Even though most oil shipping companies are
located overseas, they nevertheless complied with the law because the US is
world's largest market for oil. This non coercive or attractive form of power
is key to Keohane and Nye's concept of Soft Power. In addition to structural
power, the U.S. has many resources. It unilaterally helped Mexico in the Peso
Crisis and unilaterally helped Russia with economic aid. The United States has
also 'persuaded' many countries to embrace the free market; through
institutions such as the International Monetary Fund, it pushed Latin American
nations to undertake economic programs that Washington believed were necessary
(see Washington Consensus). Then, can and will China rise as a hegemon? There
are arguments regarding whether China can and will rise as a hegemon beyond the
level of a regional hegemon. Although the country's national power, especially
its fast-growing economy and strong military force, is one of the largest in
the world, it still lacks few attributes a single nation-state must have to
become a global hegemon. Firstly, China has a low chance of becoming a hegemon
due to the system of ideology of today's world. In the 20th century, the US had
its ideology in the spread of democracy against communism and establishment of
free economy and capitalism. It is questionable whether China has a similar
ideology and the ability to lead the world in the apsect of human rights,
envrionment, equality, democracy, freedom, and other significant values. Also,
China's economy in terms of its sustainability and systematic instability may
limit its power to rise as a hegemon. The country's economy largely depends on
the production of low-priced goods and uitlization of abundant labor force.
Also, the economic gap between the rich and poor, and among the states adds
instability to the economy of the country.
