Hendrix College Hendrix College is a private liberal arts college located in
Conway, Arkansas. The student body averages around 1,400 and currently
represents forty-three states and fourteen foreign countries. In "US News and
World Report's" America's Best Colleges, Hendrix was ranked in 2011 as one of
the top "up and coming" liberal arts colleges. In the 2008 edition Hendrix is
ranked 71st in the nation. In 2009, "Forbes" ranked it 81st of America's Best
Colleges. The college is affiliated with the United Methodist Church; however,
the curriculum is secular and the student body is composed of people from many
different religious backgrounds. Hendrix is a member of the Associated Colleges
of the South. Its current president is Dr. James Timothy Cloyd. Hendrix College
is listed in Loren Pope's "Colleges That Change Lives". College history.
Hendrix College was founded as a primary school called Central Institute in
1876 at Altus, Arkansas, by Rev. Isham L. Burrow. In 1881 it was renamed
Central Collegiate Institute when secondary and collegiate departments were
added. The next year the first graduating collegiate class, composed of three
women, were awarded "Mistress of English Literature" degrees. In 1884, three
conferences of the Methodist Episcopal Church, South purchased the school. This
began the school's relationship with the Methodist Episcopal Church, South and
later The Methodist Church, and United Methodist Church. The Central Collegiate
Institute was renamed Hendrix College in 1889 in honor of Rev. Eugene Russell
Hendrix, a presiding bishop over three Arkansas Methodist conferences. This
same year, the primary school was discontinued. Hendrix College was initially
designated a male college, but as early as 1889, the class catalog allowed for
the enrollment of women who were interested in the college's course of study.
In 1890, after receiving bids from seven other Arkansas towns, Hendrix Board of
Trustees chose Conway as the new location for the college. By 1925 the
secondary department was discontinued. A bid was accepted in 1929 to merge the
college with Henderson-Brown College, a private college in Arkadelphia,
Arkansas. The merger briefly created Hendrix-Henderson College, until two years
later when the Board of Trustees removed "Henderson" from the name. As a result
of this merger, the Hendrix Bull Dogs became the Hendrix Warriors, and the
college newspaper, formerly the "Bull Dog," was renamed the "College Profile."
The newly formed college was planning to move the school to Little Rock,
Arkansas, but the city of Conway was able to raise $150,000 to keep the school
located at Hendrix's campus. Two years later the name of the college reverted
back to Hendrix College after a short period of being named Trinity College,
which was opposed by many students and alumni. The college merged with Galloway
Woman’s College in Searcy, Arkansas in 1933, during the Great Depression.
Hendrix College retained its location and facilities during this merger.
Athletics. Hendrix College teams participate as a member of the National
Collegiate Athletic Association's Division III. The Warriors are a charter
member of the Southern Athletic Association (SAA), starting effectively in the
2012-13 season. Hendrix was formerly a member of the Southern Collegiate
Athletic Conference (SCAC). Men's sports include baseball, basketball, cross
country, football, golf, lacrosse, soccer, swimming & diving, tennis and track
& field; while women's sports include basketball, cross country, field hockey,
golf, lacrosse, soccer, softball, swimming & diving, tennis, track & field and
volleyball. Recognition. "U.S. News & World Report" lists Hendrix as the #1
“Up-and-coming Liberal Arts College” in its 2009, 2010, and 2011 list of
colleges. Hendrix is also ranked 80th on the magazine's list of best liberal
arts colleges. The "Fiske Guide to Colleges" names Hendrix as one of 44
national "Best Buy" colleges and universities in its 2010 edition. "Forbes"
lists Hendrix as ranked #102 on the “America's Best Colleges” for 2010. The
"Princeton Review" lists Hendrix for academic excellence in its 2008 college
guide, "The Best 366 Colleges:" 11th in the "professors get high marks"
category, 11th in the "best classroom experience" category, 16th in the "best
college theater" category, and 20th in the "lots of race/class interaction."
Its 2008 edition of "American’s Best Value Colleges" also lists Hendrix. "The
Best 371 Colleges" (2010) lists Hendrix 5th for “Easiest Campus to Get
Around” and 13th for “Best Athletic Facilities.” Hendrix College is
featured in Loren Pope's "Colleges That Change Lives: 40 Schools that Will
Change the Way You Think About Colleges." The Institute of International
Education has awarded Hendrix with a 2012 Andrew Heiskell Award for
International Exchange Partnerships as project coordinators of the Rwanda
Presidential Scholars Program. Campus buildings. Since the mid-1990s, the
college has been pursuing a master plan for campus construction, developed in
consultation with the architectural design firm Duany Plater-Zyberk & Co. There
are 36 buildings on campus, three of which are listed on the National Register
of Historic Places (NRHP).
