Hereditary education policy The Modified Scheme of Elementary Education or New
Scheme of Elementary Education or Madras Scheme of Elementary Education dubbed
by its critics as Kula Kalvi Thittam (Hereditary Education Policy) (), was an
abortive attempt at education reform introduced by the Indian National Congress
Government of the Madras State, led by C. Rajagopalachari (Rajaji) in 1953. The
scheme proposed the introduction of two shifts or sessions in elementary
schools. In one session regular teaching would be done and during the second
session, the students would be sent home to learn the occupations of their
parents. It became controversial and was accused of being a casteist scheme to
perpetuate the caste hierarchy. The opposition to the scheme was led by the
Dravida Munnetra Kazhagam (DMK). Public opposition and internal dissent within
the congress led to the deferment of the scheme. The discontent it triggered
among the Congress legislature members forced the resignation of Rajaji as
Chief Minister. The scheme was dropped completely by Rajaji's successor Kamaraj
in 1954. Background. According to the 1951 Census of India, the literacy rate
in the Madras State was 20.86%. During fiscal year 1950-51, the Madras State
Government spent 6.87 crore Rupees (6,870,000) - about 11.5% of total revenues
for the state - for Elementary education. The enrollment rate for children of
school-going age was around 47.8%. The Directive Principles of the Indian
Constitution require the Indian state to provide education to all citizens. In
accordance to this directive, in 1950 the Madras State's Directorate of Public
Instruction prepared a ten year plan to provide education to all children of
school-going age. This plan called for an allocation of one crore Rs
(1,00,00,000) per year for enrolling 500,000 additional students for the next
ten years. Against this, the actual allocation in 1950-51 was only Rs. 500,000.
The cost of educating a student was estimated to be around Rs.22.80 per year,
out of which the government's contribution was only Rs.16.30. Out of the
12,22,775 students who had enrolled in standard I in 1946-47, only 4,61,686
(37%) had reached the Standard V in 1950-51. It was against this background,
the Congress party with Rajaji as chief minister took power on 10 April 1952.
Earlier attempts at change. In 1939, during Rajaji's first term as Chief
Minister of the Madras Presidency, the girl students of standards III to V and
those belonging to Scheduled Castes had been allowed to attend school for only
three hours a day and spend the rest of the day helping their parents. In the
academic year 1949-50, during the Chief ministership of P. S. Kumaraswamy Raja,
an experimental shift system had been introduced in ten taluks and later
expanded to other areas as an optional measure. Schools which adapted this
system functioned in two shifts or sessions. Teachers who worked during both
sessions were paid an additional allowance of 10 Rupees per month. However this
system was not widely adopted and by 1951 only 155 elementary schools (out of a
total 38,687) in the state were functioning in shifts. Implementation. The
Rajaji Government introduced the new elementary education scheme in all schools
in the non-municipal (rural) areas for the academic year 1953-54 (from 18 June
1953). It was planned that eventually the scheme would be extended to 35,000 of
the total 38,687 schools in the state. However due to public opposition, it was
put on hold on 29 July 1953 and dropped altogether on 18 May 1954. Opposition.
After the scheme was announced, Rajaji gave a speech to the washermen at the
Adyar riverbank. In it he referred to "Kuladharma", the social obligation of
each clan or caste. The opposition used such incidents to lend credence to
their "casteist motive" accusation. Rajaji and his education minister MV
Krishna Rao responded with a counter campaign in the scheme's defense. They
gave speeches and made broadcasts in the All India Radio explaining their
position. The month of June 1953 saw aggressive propaganda efforts by both the
proponents and opponents of the scheme. On 13 July 1953, the DMK executive
committee met and decided to conduct a "marial" (blockade) agitation outside
the Chief Minister's residence. EVK Sampath was nominated to lead the
agitation. This agitation was part of a three pronged attack on the
Government's policies by the DMK. On 14 July 1953, a possession led by
Satyavani Muthu was organised to protest the scheme. Its destination was
Rajaji's official residence at Bazullah road, T. Nagar. It was stopped by the
police as it was unlicensed. The next day (15 July 1953) the confrontation
heated up with the Government introducing a motion in the Legislative Assembly
for implementing the scheme from the academic year 1953-54. On the same day
another DMK procession was stopped before it could reach T Nagar. In the next
fifteen days as many as twenty such processions were attempted by the DMK.
Deferment. By the end of July, public opinion started to turn against the
scheme and at least four public petitions were tabled in the Legislative
Assembly about the scheme. On 29 July 1953, M.V Krishna Rao, the minister for
education moved a motion for considering the new scheme. After a discussion,
Communist leader K. P Gopalan moved a motion to drop the scheme. The house was
deadlocked with 138 ayes to 138 noes on dropping the scheme. The speaker of the
assembly J. Shivashanmugam Pillai used his casting vote to defeat the motion. A
second motion to defer the scheme and refer it to a committee of experts was
moved by K.R Viswanatham. This motion passed with 138 ayes against 137 noes.
The Scheme was stayed and the Parulekar Committee was commissioned to review
the scheme. Parulekar committee. On 20 August 1953, the Government passed an
order (Education G.O # 1888) to constitute a committee of experts for reviewing
the scheme. The committee was composed of Prof. RV. Parulekar, Director of
Indian Institute of Education Bombay, as the Chairman; Dr.B.B. Dey, Retired
Director of Public Instruction, Madras; Prof. Mohammad Mujeeb, Vice-Chancellor
of the Jamia Millia University as members and S. Govindarajulu Naidu, the
former Director of Public Instruction, Madras, and the then Director of Public
Instruction, Andhra Pradesh, as the Member Secretary. The Parulekar committee
submitted its report on 23 November 1953. It found the scheme to be sound and
endorsed the Government's position. It made additional recommendations
including extending the scheme to rural areas, opening as many as 4000 new
schools, revising the existing curriculum, providing training and remuneration
to the craftsmen involved. Cancellation. But Rajaji did not relent and his
education minister C Subramaniam upped the ante by announcing that the scheme
would be extended to urban areas in June 1954. This spurred the Congress
legislators into open revolt. They scheduled a meeting of the Congress
Legislative Party on 21 March. Faced with certain defeat in the leadership
election that was bound to happen in that meeting, Rajaji tried a last minute
compromise - he would quit if C. Subramaniam was chosen as his successor and
the scheme was kept. But Kamaraj, the leader of the anti-Rajaji camp, refused
to accept the deal. The meeting was postponed by a week and when it happened on
March 31, C. Subramaniam was defeated by Kamaraj. Rajaji resigned and Kamaraj
took over as chief minister on 13 April 1954. This effectively ended the
prospects of the new education scheme. On 18 May 1954, C Subramaniam announced
in the assembly that the scheme was being dropped. The reason stated for the
dropping was "that the necessary acceptance, support and cooperation of the
people were not forthcoming for the scheme and the atmosphere was not
propitious for the success of the scheme". Meanwhile, the composite Madras
State had been reorganised along linguistic lines. The state of Andhra had
split from Madras on 1 October 1953. The Andhra Government constituted an
Elementary Education Committee with Dr. B. Kuppuswamy as chairman to review the
elementary education situation. The Kuppuswamy committee report recommended the
rejection of the Modified Elementary Education Scheme. In 1954 the Andhra state
canceled the scheme. Criticism. The Andhra Elementary Education Committee
Report also rejected the Modified Scheme and recommended an approach similar to
the one eventually adopted by the Kamaraj Government. Legacy. The Modified
Scheme of Elementary Education even after being dropped had the unintended
consequence of bringing primary education to hundreds of thousands of school
children in Tamil Nadu. Rajaji's successor Kamaraj was ever mindful of the fact
that it was the issue of primary education that caused his predecessor's
downfall. Knowing the public opposition to Rajaji's scheme he took the
diametrically opposite approach in providing education to Tamil Nadu's children
- imparting free and compulsory education till the age of 14. He set up a
commission under R.M. Alagappa Chettiar to examine the means for providing
compulsory primary education. Instead of sending children away from the school,
the committee recommended active Government intervention to bring more children
into the schooling system by building new schools and abolishing school fees.
This approach was successful and by the end of Kamaraj's tenure as Chief
Minister in 1963, enrollment in primary schools had been doubled. Further
reading.
