Herzl Award The Herzl Award is awarded annually by the Department for Zionist
Activities of the World Zionist Organization to outstanding young men and women
in recognition of their exceptional efforts on behalf of Israel and the Zionist
cause. The award was first awarded in 2004, on the centennial anniversary of
Theodore Herzl’s death. Background. Herzl was the father of political
Zionism. Even though he died at the young age of 44, of which only 9 were
dedicated to the Zionist cause, he was able to mobilize the forces and create
the infrastructure that would revolutionize the Jewish world and bring about
the realization of the Jewish people’s age-old dream of returning to Zion.
Award requirements. Nominees must be no older than 44, Herzl’s age at the
time of his death. Recipients. All Herzl Award recipients receive a distinctive
certificate and an engraved cast bronze trophy, as well as being inscribed in a
special Herzl album in Jerusalem. United States: Brian Sacks; Elana Yael
Heideman; David Borowich; Dr. Moises Salinas Australia: Dr. Ron Weiser South
Africa: Errol Anstey Denmark: Simon Boysen Hungary: Dr. Attila Novak India:
Raphael (Ralphy) Ezekiel Jhirad Argentina: Susana Edith Gelber Mexico: Meny
Samra Cohen; Marcos Metta Cohen Belgium: Francis Weitz United Kingdom: David
Collins, Steven Elstein, Jonathan Hantman Venezuela: Elías Farache South
Africa: Avrom Krengel Canada: Gabriel Martell Russia: Evgeny Maryanchik
Denmark: Dalia Melchior Mexico: Enrique Olsoff Argentina: Damian Szvalb
Uruguay: Gerardo Stuczynski South Africa: Owen Kevin Futeran Denmark: Andrea
Uzan Sweden: Ted Ekeroth Argentina: Adrian Gluck Germany: Stanislav Skibinski
Mexico: Moises Mitrani, Nathan Feldman New Zealand: Phil Koningham United
Kingdom: Stephen Rosenthal Great Britain: Shanee Fischer, London; Daniel Berke,
Manchester Sweden: Dmitri Vasserman Venezuela: Alberto Moryusef Mexico: Jacobo
Adat Chile: Andrés Abramovicz and Marisol Garriga South Africa: Tamar Lazarus,
Cape Town Denmark: Charlotte Thalmay Uruguay: Laura Taragan Mexico: Mauricio
Faradji Argentina: Daniel Lew; Fabio Kornblaum S Africa: Rabbi Laurence (Doron)
Perez Sweden: Torbjorn Karfunkel USA: Debbie Isaacs United Kingdom: Aryeh
Grossman (Mizrachi) In addition, the Winner of the South African Zionist
Federation's "Zionist Quiz" for schools is awarded a Herzl Prize 2009.
