Hesiod Hesiod ( or ; , "Hƒìs√≠odos") was a Greek oral poet generally thought by
scholars to have been active between 750 and 650 BC, around the same time as
Homer. His is the first European poetry in which the poet regards himself as a
topic, an individual with a distinctive role to play. Ancient authors credited
him and Homer with establishing Greek religious customs. Modern scholars refer
to him as a major source on Greek mythology, farming techniques, early economic
thought (he is sometimes identified as the first economist), archaic Greek
astronomy and ancient time-keeping. Hesiod practised various styles of
traditional verse, including gnomic, hymnic, genealogical and narrative poetry,
but he was not able to manipulate them all fluently. Comparisons with Homer can
be unflattering. As one modern scholar observed: "It is as if an artisan with
his big, awkward fingers were patiently, fascinatedly, imitating the fine seam
of the professional tailor." Life. The dating of his life is a contested issue
in scholarly circles and it is covered below in Dating. Epic narrative allowed
poets like Homer no opportunity for personal revelations but Hesiod's extant
work comprises didactic poems and here he went out of his way to let his
audience in on a few details of his life, including three explicit references
in "Works and Days", as well as some passages in his "Theogony" that support
inferences. We learn in the former poem that his father came from Cyme in
Aeolis (on the coast of Asia Minor, a little south of the island Lesbos), and
crossed the sea to settle at a hamlet, near Thespiae in Boeotia, named Ascra,
"a cursed place, cruel in winter, hard in summer, never pleasant" ("Works", l.
640). Hesiod's patrimony there, a small piece of ground at the foot of Mount
Helicon, occasioned lawsuits with his brother Perses, who seems at first to
have cheated him of his rightful share thanks to corrupt authorities or "kings"
but later became impoverished and ended up scrounging on the thrifty poet
("Works" l. 35, 396). Unlike their father, Hesiod was averse to sea travel but
he once crossed the narrow strait between the Greek mainland and Euboea to
participate in funeral celebrations for one Athamas of Chalcis, where he won a
tripod in a singing competition. He also describes a meeting between himself
and the Muses on Mount Helicon, where he had been pasturing sheep when the
goddesses presented him with a laurel staff, a symbol of poetic authority
("Theogony", ll. 22‚Äì35) Fanciful though it might seem, the account has led
ancient and modern scholars to infer that he did not play the lyre, or that he
was not professionally trained, otherwise he would have been presented with a
lyre instead. Some scholars have seen Perses as a literary creation, a foil for
the moralizing that Hesiod develops in "Works and Days," but there are also
arguments against this theory. For example, it is quite common for works of
moral instruction to have an imaginative setting, as a means of getting the
audience's attention, but it is difficult to see how Hesiod could have
travelled the countryside entertaining people with a narrative about himself if
the account was known to be fictitious. Gregory Nagy, on the other hand, sees
both "Persƒìs" ("the destroyer": / "perth≈ç") and "Hƒìsiodos" ("he who emits
the voice:" / "hiƒìmi" + / "audƒì") as fictitious names for poetical personae.
It might seem unusual that Hesiod's father migrated from Asia Minor westwards
to mainland Greece, the opposite direction to most colonial movements at the
time, and Hesiod himself gives no explanation for it. However around 750 BC, or
a little later, there was a migration of sea-going merchants from his original
home in Cyme in Asia Minor to Cumae in Campania (a colony they shared with
Euboeans), and possibly his move west had something to do with that, since
Euboea is not far from Boetia, where he eventually established himself and his
family. The family association with Cyme might explain his familiarity with
eastern myths, evident in his poems, though the Greek world might have already
developed its own versions of them. In spite of Hesiod's complaints about
poverty, life on his father's farm could not have been too uncomfortable if
"Works and Days" is anything to judge by, since he describes the routines of
prosperous yeomanry rather than peasants. His farmer employs a friend (l. 370)
as well as servants (ll. 502, 573, 597, 608, 766), an energetic and responsible
ploughman of mature years (ll. 469‚Äì71), a slave boy to cover the seed (ll.
441‚Äì6), a female servant to keep house (ll. 405, 602) and working teams of
oxen and mules (ll. 405, 607f.). One modern scholar surmises that Hesiod may
have learned about world geography, especially the catalogue of rivers in
"Theogony" (ll. 337‚Äì45), listening to his father's accounts of his own sea
voyages as a merchant The father probably spoke in the Aeolian dialect of Cyme
but Hesiod probably grew up speaking the local Boeotian dialect. However, while
his poetry features some Aeolisms there are no words that are certainly
Boeotian‚Äîhe composed in the main literary dialect of the time (Homer's
dialect): Ionian. It is probable that Hesiod wrote his poems down, or dictated
them, rather than passed them on orally, as rhapsodes did‚Äîotherwise the
pronounced personality that now emerges from the poems would surely have been
diluted through oral transmission from one rhapsode to another. If he did write
or dictate, it was perhaps as an aid to memory or because he lacked confidence
in his ability to produce poems extempore, as trained rhapsodes could do. It
certainly wasn't in a quest for immortal fame since poets in his era had no
such notions. However, some scholars suspect the presence of large-scale
changes in the text and attribute this to oral transmission. Possibly he
composed his verses during idle times on the farm, in the spring before the May
harvest or the dead of winter. The personality behind the poems is unsuited to
the kind of "aristocratic withdrawal" typical of a rhapsode but is instead
"argumentative, suspicious, ironically humorous, frugal, fond of proverbs, wary
of women." He was in fact a misogynist of the same calibre as the later poet,
Semonides. He resembles Solon in his preoccupation with issues of good versus
evil and "how a just and all-powerful god can allow the unjust to flourish in
this life". He resembles Aristophanes in his rejection of the idealised hero of
epic literature in favour of an idealised view of the farmer. Yet the fact that
he could eulogise kings in "Theogony" (ll. 80ff, 430, 434) and denounce them as
corrupt in "Works and Days" suggests that he could resemble whichever audience
he composed for. Various legends accumulated about Hesiod and they are recorded
in several sources: Two different‚Äîyet early‚Äîtraditions record the site of
Hesiod's grave. One, as early as Thucydides, reported in Plutarch, the "Suda"
and John Tzetzes, states that the Delphic oracle warned Hesiod that he would
die in Nemea, and so he fled to Locris, where he was killed at the local temple
to Nemean Zeus, and buried there. This tradition follows a familiar ironic
convention: the oracle that predicts accurately after all. The other tradition,
first mentioned in an epigram by Chersias of Orchomenus written in the 7th
century BC (within a century or so of Hesiod's death) claims that Hesiod lies
buried at Orchomenus, a town in Boeotia. According to Aristotle's "Constitution
of Orchomenus," when the Thespians ravaged Ascra, the villagers sought refuge
at Orchomenus, where, following the advice of an oracle, they collected the
ashes of Hesiod and set them in a place of honour in their "agora", next to the
tomb of Minyas, their eponymous founder. Eventually they came to regard Hesiod
too as their "hearth-founder" ( / "oikistƒìs"). Later writers attempted to
harmonize these two accounts. Dating. Greeks in the late fifth and early 4th
centuries BC considered their oldest poets to be Orpheus, Musaeus, Hesiod and
Homer‚Äîin that order. Thereafter Greek writers began to consider Homer earlier
than Hesiod. Devotees of Orpheus and Musaeus were probably responsible for
precedence being given to their two cult heroes and maybe the Homeridae were
responsible in later antiquity for promoting Homer at Hesiod's expense. The
first known writers to locate Homer earlier than Hesiod were Xenophanes and
Heraclides Ponticus, though Aristarchus of Samothrace was the first actually to
argue the case. Ephorus made Homer a younger cousin of Hesiod, Herodotus
("Histories", 2.53) evidently considered them near-contemporaries, and the 4th
century BC sophist Alcidamas in his work "Mouseion" even brought them together
for an imagined poetic "agon", which survives today as the "Contest of Homer
and Hesiod". Most scholars today agree with Homer's priority but there are good
arguments on either sides. Hesiod certainly predates the lyric and elegiac
poets whose work has come down to the modern era. Imitations of his work have
been observed in Alcaeus, Epimenides, Mimnermus, Semonides, Tyrtaeus and
Archilochus, from which it has been inferred that the latest possible date for
him is about 650 BC. An upper limit of 750 BC is indicated by a number of
considerations, such as the probability that his work was written down, the
fact that he mentions a sanctuary at Delphi that was of little national
significance before c. 750 BC ("Theogony" l. 499), and he lists rivers that
flow into the Euxine, a region explored and developed by Greek colonists
beginning in the 8th century BC. ("Theogony" 337‚Äì45). Hesiod mentions a
poetry contest at Chalcis in Euboea where the sons of one Amphidamas awarded
him a tripod ("Works and Days" ll.654‚Äì662). Plutarch identified this
Amphidamas with the hero of the Lelantine War between Chalcis and Eretria and
he concluded that the passage must be an interpolation into Hesiod's original
work, assuming that the Lelantine War was too late for Hesiod. Modern scholars
have accepted his identification of Amphidamas but disagreed with his
conclusion. The date of the war is not known precisely but estimates placing it
around 730‚Äì705 BC, fit the estimated chronology for Hesiod. In that case, the
tripod that Hesiod won might have been awarded for his rendition of "Theogony",
a poem that seems to presuppose the kind of aristocratic audience he would have
met at Chalcis. Works. Three works attributed to Hesiod by ancient commentators
have survived: "Works and Days", "Theogony" and "Shield of Heracles". Other
works attributed to him are only found now in fragments. The surviving works
and fragments were all written in the conventional metre and language of epic.
However the "Shield of Heracles" is now known to be spurious and probably was
written in the sixth century BC. Many ancient critics also rejected "Theogony"
(e.g. Pausanias 9.31.3) but that seems rather perverse since Hesiod mentions
himself by name in that poem (line 22). While they may be very different in
subject matter, "Theogony" and "Works and Days" share a distinctive language,
metre and prosody that subtly distinguish them from Homer's work and from the
"Shield of Heracles" (see Hesiod's Greek below). Moreover, they both refer to
the same version of the Prometheus myth. Yet even these authentic poems may
include interpolations. For example, the first ten verses of the "Works and
Days" may have been borrowed from an Orphic hymn to Zeus (they were recognised
as not the work of Hesiod by critics as ancient as Pausanias). Some scholars
have detected a proto-historical perspective in Hesiod, a view rejected by Paul
Cartledge, for example, on the grounds that Hesiod advocates a not-forgetting
without any attempt at verification. Hesiod has also been considered the father
of gnomic verse. He had ""a passion for systematizing and explaining things"".
Ancient Greek poetry in general had strong philosophical tendencies and Hesiod,
like Homer, demonstrates a deep interest in a wide range of 'philosophical'
issues, from the nature of divine justice to the beginnings of human society.
Aristotle ("Metaphysics" 983b‚Äì987a) believed that the question of first
causes may even have started with Hesiod ("Theogony" 116‚Äì53) and Homer
("Iliad" 14.201, 246). He viewed the world from outside the charmed circle of
aristocratic rulers, protesting against their injustices in a tone of voice
that has been described as having a ""grumpy quality redeemed by a gaunt
dignity"" but, as stated in the biography section, he could also change to suit
the audience. This ambivalence appears to underlie his presentation of human
history in "Works and Days", where he depicts a golden period when life was
easy and good, followed by a steady decline in behaviour and happiness through
the silver, bronze and Iron Ages¬ ‚Äì except he inserts a heroic age between
the last two, though representing its warlike men as better than their bronze
predecessors. He seems in this case to be catering to two different world-
views, one epic and aristocratic, the other unsympathetic to the heroic
traditions of the aristocracy. "Theogony". The "Theogony" is commonly
considered Hesiod's earliest work. Despite the different subject matter between
this poem and the "Works and Days", most scholars, with some notable exceptions
(like Evelyn-White), believe that the two works were written by the same man.
As M.L. West writes, "Both bear the marks of a distinct personality: a surly,
conservative countryman, given to reflection, no lover of women or life, who
felt the gods' presence heavy about him." The "Theogony" concerns the origins
of the world (cosmogony) and of the gods (theogony), beginning with Chaos,
Gaia, and Eros, and shows a special interest in genealogy. Embedded in Greek
myth, there remain fragments of quite variant tales, hinting at the rich
variety of myth that once existed, city by city; but Hesiod's retelling of the
old stories became, according to the fifth-century historian Herodotus, the
accepted version that linked all Hellenes. The creation myth in Hesiod has long
been held to have Eastern influences, such as the Hittite Song of Kumarbi and
the Babylonian Enuma Elis. This cultural crossover would have occurred in the
eighth and ninth century Greek trading colonies such as Al Mina in North Syria.
(For more discussion, read Robin Lane Fox's "Travelling Heroes" and Walcot's
"Hesiod and the Near East.") "Works and Days". The "Works and Days" is a poem
of over 800 verses which revolves around two general truths: labour is the
universal lot of Man, but he who is willing to work will get by. Scholars have
interpreted this work against a background of agrarian crisis in mainland
Greece, which inspired a wave of documented colonisations in search of new
land. This poem is one of the earliest known musings on economic thought. This
work lays out the five Ages of Man, as well as containing advice and wisdom,
prescribing a life of honest labour and attacking idleness and unjust judges
(like those who decided in favour of Perses) as well as the practice of usury.
It describes immortals who roam the earth watching over justice and injustice.
The poem regards labor as the source of all good, in that both gods and men
hate the idle, who resemble drones in a hive. Other writings. Of these works
forming the extended Hesiodic corpus, only the "Shield of Heracles" (, "Aspis
Hƒìrakleous") is transmitted intact via a medieval manuscript tradition.
Classical authors also attributed to Hesiod a lengthy genealogical poem known
as "Catalogue of Women" or "Ehoiai" (because sections began with the Greek
words "ƒì hoiƒì," "Or like the one who¬ ..."). It was a mythological catalogue
of the mortal women who had mated with gods, and of the offspring and
descendants of these unions. In addition to these works, the "Suda" lists an
otherwise unknown "dirge for Batrachus, beloved". Reception. "Portrait" Bust.
The Roman bronze bust, the so-called "Pseudo-Seneca," of the late first century
BC found at Herculaneum is now thought not to be of Seneca the Younger. It has
been identified by Gisela Richter as an imagined portrait of Hesiod. In fact,
it has been recognized since 1813 that the bust was not of Seneca, when an
inscribed herma portrait of Seneca with quite different features was
discovered. Most scholars now follow Richter's identification. Hesiod's Greek.
Hesiod employed the conventional dialect of epic verse, which was Ionian.
Comparisons with Homer, a native Ionian, can be unflattering. Hesiod's handling
of the dactylic hexameter was not as masterful or fluent as Homer's and one
modern scholar refers to his "hobnailed hexameters". His use of language and
meter in "Works and Days" and "Theogony" distinguishes him also from the author
of the "Shield of Heracles". All three poets, for example, employed digamma
inconsistently, sometimes allowing it to affect syllable length and meter,
sometimes not. The ratio of observance/neglect of digamma varies between them.
The extent of variation depends on how the evidence is collected and
interpreted but there is a clear trend, revealed for example in the following
set of statistics. Hesiod does not observe digamma as often as the others do.
That result is a bit counter-intuitive since digamma was still a feature of the
Boeotian dialect that Hesiod probably spoke, whereas it had already vanished
from the Ionic vernacular of Homer. This anomaly can be explained by the fact
that Hesiod made a conscious effort to compose like an Ionian epic poet at a
time when digamma was not heard in Ionian speech, while Homer tried to compose
like an older generation of Ionian bards, when it was heard in Ionian speech.
There is also a significant difference in the results for "Theogony" and "Works
and Days", but that is merely due to the fact that the former includes a
catalog of divinities and therefore it makes frequent use of the definite
article associated with digamma, o·º±. Though typical of epic, his vocabulary
features some significant differences from Homer's. One scholar has counted 278
un-Homeric words in "Works and Days", 151 in "Theogony" and 95 in "Shield of
Heracles". The disproportionate number of un-Homeric words in "W & D" is due to
its un-Homeric subject matter. Hesiod's vocabulary also includes quite a lot of
formulaic phrases that are not found in Homer, which indicates that he may have
been writing within a different tradition.
