Heterodox economics Heterodox economics refers to methodologies or schools of
economic thought that are considered outside of "mainstream economics," and
often represented by expositors as contrasting with or going beyond
neoclassical economics. Mainstream economists sometimes assert that it has
little or no influence on the vast majority of academic economists in the
English speaking world. "Mainstream economics" may be called "orthodox" or
"conventional" economics by its critics. "Heterodox economics" is an umbrella
term used to cover various approaches, schools, or traditions. These include
socialist, Marxian, institutional, evolutionary, Austrian, feminist, social,
post-Keynesian, and ecological economics among others. A recent review
documents several prominent groups of heterodox economists since at least the
1990s as working together with a resulting increase in coherence across
different constituents. Along these lines, the International Confederation of
Associations for Pluralism in Economics (ICAPE) does not define "heterodox
economics" and has avoided defining its scope. ICAPE defines its mission as
"promoting pluralism in economics." In defining a common ground in the
"critical commentary," one writer described fellow heterodox economists as
trying to do three things: (1) identify shared ideas that generate a pattern of
heterodox critique across topics and chapters of introductory macro texts; (2)
give special attention to ideas that link methodological differences to policy
differences; and (3) characterize the common ground in ways that permit
distinct paradigms to develop common differences with textbook economics in
different ways. One study suggests four key factors as important to the study
of economics by self-identified heterodox economists: history, natural systems,
uncertainty, and power. History. A number of heterodox schools of economic
thought challenged the dominance of neoclassical economics after the
neoclassical revolution of the 1870s. In addition to socialist critics of
capitalism, heterodox schools in this period included advocates of various
forms of mercantilism, such as the American School dissenters from neoclassical
methodology such as the historical school, and advocates of unorthodox monetary
theories such as Social credit. Other heterodox schools active before and
during the Great Depression included Technocracy and Georgism. Physical
scientists and biologists were the first individuals to use energy flows to
explain social and economic development. Joseph Henry, an American physicist
and first secretary of the Smithsonian Institution, remarked that the
"fundamental principle of political economy is that the physical labor of man
can only be ameliorated by… the transformation of matter from a crude state
to a artificial condition...by expending what is called power or energy." The
rise, and absorption into the mainstream of Keynesian economics, which appeared
to provide a more coherent policy response to unemployment than unorthodox
monetary or trade policies contributed to the decline of interest in these
schools. After 1945, the neoclassical synthesis of Keynesian and neoclassical
economics resulted in a clearly defined mainstream position based on a division
of the field into microeconomics (generally neoclassical but with a newly
developed theory of market failure) and macroeconomics (divided between
Keynesian and monetarist views on such issues as the role of monetary policy).
Austrians and post-Keynesians who dissented from this synthesis emerged as
clearly defined heterodox schools. In addition, the Marxist and
institutionalist schools remained active. Rejection of neoclassical economics.
There is no single "heterodox economic theory"; there are many different
"heterodox theories" in existence. What they all share, however, is a rejection
of the neoclassical orthodoxy as representing the appropriate tool for
understanding the workings of economic and social life. The reasons for this
rejection may vary. Some of the elements commonly found in heterodox critiques
are listed below. Criticism of the neoclassical model of individual behavior.
One of the most broadly accepted principles of neoclassical economics is the
assumption of the "rationality of economic agents". Indeed, for a number of
economists, the notion of rational maximizing behavior is taken to be
synonymous with economic behavior (Becker 1976, Hirshleifer 1984). When some
economists' studies do not embrace the rationality assumption, they are seen as
placing the analyses outside the boundaries of the Neoclassical economics
discipline (Landsberg 1989, 596). Neoclassical economics begins with the "a
priori" assumptions that agents are rational and that they seek to maximize
their individual utility (or profits) subject to environmental constraints.
These assumptions provide the backbone for rational choice theory. Neoclassical
economic theory is grounded in a particular conception of human psychology,
agency or decision-making. It is assumed that all human beings make economic
decisions so as to maximize pleasure or utility. Some heterodox theories reject
this basic assumption of neoclassical theory, arguing for alternative
understandings of how economic decisions are made and/or how human psychology
works. It is possible to accept the notion that humans are pleasure seeking
machines, yet reject the idea that economic decisions are governed by such
pleasure seeking. Human beings may, for example, be unable to make choices
consistent with pleasure maximization due to social constraints and/or
coercion. Humans may also be unable to correctly assess the choice points that
are most likely to lead to maximum pleasure, even if they are unconstrained
(except in budgetary terms) in making such choices. And it is also possible
that the notion of pleasure seeking is itself a meaningless assumption because
it is either impossible to test or too general to refute. Economic theories
that reject the basic assumption of economic decisions as the outcome of
pleasure maximization are heterodox. Shiozawa emphasizes that economic agents
act in a complex world and therefore impossible for them to attain maximal
utility point. They instead behaves as if there are a repertories of many ready
made rules, one of which they chose according to relvant situation. Criticism
of the neoclassical model of market equilibrium. In microeconomic theory, cost-
minimization by consumers and by firms implies the existence of supply and
demand correspondences for which market clearing equilibrium prices exist, if
there are large numbers of consumers and producers. Under convexity assumptions
or under some marginal-cost pricing rules, each equilibrium will be Pareto
efficient: In large economies, non-convexity also leads to quasi-equilibria
that are nearly efficient. However, the concept of market equilibrium has been
criticized by Austrians, post-Keynesians and others, who object to applications
of microeconomic theory to real-world markets, when such markets are not
usefully approximated by microeconomic models. Heterodox economists assert that
micro-economic models rarely capture reality. Mainstream microeconomics may be
defined in terms of optimization and equilibrium, following the approaches of
Paul Samuelson and Hal Varian. On the other hand, heterodox economics may be
labeled as falling into the of institutions, history, and social structure.
Most recent developments. Over the past two decades, the intellectual agendas
of heterodox economists have taken a decidedly pluralist turn. Leading
heterodox thinkers have moved beyond the established paradigms of Austrian,
Feminist, Institutional-Evolutionary, Marxian, Post Keynesian, Radical, Social,
and Sraffian economics—opening up new lines of analysis, criticism, and
dialogue among dissenting schools of thought. This cross-fertilization of ideas
is creating a new generation of scholarship in which novel combinations of
heterodox ideas are being brought to bear on important contemporary and
historical problems, such as socially-grounded reconstructions of the
individual in economic theory; the goals and tools of economic measurement and
professional ethics; the complexities of policymaking in today's global
political economy; and innovative connections among formerly separate
theoretical traditions (Marxian, Austrian, feminist, ecological, Sraffian,
institutionalist, and post-Keynesian) (for a review of post-Keynesian
economics, see Lavoie (1992); Rochon (1999)). David Colander, an advocate of
complexity economics, argues that the ideas of heterodox economists are now
being discussed in the mainstream without mention of the heterodox economists,
because the tools to analyze institutions, uncertainty, and other factors have
now been developed by the mainstream. He suggests that heterodox economists
should embrace rigorous mathematics and attempt to work from within the
mainstream, rather than treating it as an enemy. Energy economics relating to
thermoeconomics, is a broad scientific subject area which includes topics
related to supply and use of energy. Thermoeconomists argue that economic
systems always involve matter, energy, entropy, and information.
Thermoeconomics is based on the proposition that the role of energy in
biological evolution should be defined and understood through the second law of
thermodynamics but in terms of such economic criteria as productivity,
efficiency, and especially the costs and benefits of the various mechanisms for
capturing and utilizing available energy to build biomass and do work. As a
result, thermoeconomics are often discussed in the field of ecological
economics, which itself is related to the fields of sustainability and
sustainable development. Fields or schools of heterodox economics. 2003. "A
Companion to the History of Economic Thought". Blackwell Publishing. ISBN 0-
631-22573-0 p. 452 "#" Listed in Journal of Economic Literature codes scrolled
to at . § Listed in "The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics", 2nd Edition,
v. 8, Appendix IV, p. 856, searchable by clicking (the JEL classification codes
JEL:) radio button B5, B52, or B59, then the Search button (or Update Search
Results button) at http://www.dictionaryofeconomics.com/
search_results?edition=all&field=content&q=&topicid=B5. Some schools in the
social sciences aim to promote certain perspectives: classical and modern
political economy; economic sociology and anthropology; gender and racial
issues in economics; and so on.
