Hierarchical organization A hierarchical organization is an organizational
structure where every entity in the organization, except one, is subordinate to
a single other entity. This arrangement is a form of a hierarchy. In an
organization, the hierarchy usually consists of a singular/group of power at
the top with subsequent levels of power beneath them. This is the dominant mode
of organization among large organizations; most corporations, governments, and
organized religions are hierarchical organizations with different levels of
management, power or authority. For example, the broad, top-level overview of
the general organization of the Catholic Church consists of the Pope, then the
Cardinals, then the Archbishops, and so on. Members of hierarchical
organizational structures chiefly communicate with their immediate superior and
with their immediate subordinates. Structuring organizations in this way is
useful partly because it can reduce the communication overhead by limiting
information flow; this is also its major limitation. Visualization. A hierarchy
is typically visualized as a pyramid, where the height of the ranking or person
depicts their power status and the width of that level represents how many
people or business divisions are at that level relative to the whole—the
highest-ranking people are at the apex, and there are very few of them; the
base may include thousands of people who have no subordinates). These
hierarchies are typically depicted with a tree or triangle diagram, creating an
organizational chart or organigram. Those nearest the top have more power than
those nearest the bottom, and there being fewer people at the top then at the
bottom. As a result, superiors in a hierarchy generally have higher status and
command greater rewards than their subordinates. Common models. All governments
and most companies have similar structures. Traditionally, the monarch was the
pinnacle of the state. In many countries, feudalism and manorialism provided a
formal social structure that established hierarchical links at every level of
society, with the monarch at the top. In modern post-feudal states the nominal
top of the hierarchy still remains the head of state, which may be a president
or a constitutional monarch, although in many modern states the powers of the
head of state are delegated among different bodies. Below the head, there is
commonly a senate, parliament or congress, which in turn often delegate the
day-to-day running of the country to a prime minister. In many democracies, the
people are considered to be the notional top of the hierarchy, over the head of
state; in reality, the people's power is restricted to voting in elections. In
business, the business owner traditionally occupied the pinnacle of the
organization. In most modern large companies, there is now no longer a single
dominant shareholder, and the collective power of the business owners is for
most purposes delegated to a board of directors, which in turn delegates the
day-to-day running of the company to a managing director or CEO. Again,
although the shareholders of the company are the nominal top of the hierarchy,
in reality many companies are run at least in part as personal fiefdoms by
their management; corporate governance rules are an attempt to mitigate this
tendency. Studies of hierarchical organizations. The organizational development
theorist Elliott Jacques identified a special role for hierarchy in his concept
of requisite organization. The iron law of oligarchy, introduced by Robert
Michels, describes the inevitable tendency of hierarchical organizations to
become oligarchic in their decision making. Hierarchiology is the term coined
by Dr. Laurence J. Peter, originator of the Peter Principle described in his
humorous book of the same name, to refer to the study of hierarchical
organizations and the behavior of their members. The IRG Solution -
hierarchical incompetence and how to overcome it argued that hierarchies were
inherently incompetent, and were only able to function due to large amounts of
informal lateral communication fostered by private informal networks. Criticism
and alternatives. In the work of diverse theorists such as William James
(1842–1910), Michel Foucault (1926–1984) and Hayden White, important
critiques of hierarchical epistemology are advanced. James famously asserts in
his work "Radical Empiricism" that clear distinctions of type and category are
a constant but unwritten goal of scientific reasoning, so that when they are
discovered, success is declared. But if aspects of the world are organized
differently, involving inherent and intractable ambiguities, then scientific
questions are often considered unresolved. A hesitation to declare success upon
the discovery of ambiguities leaves heterarchy at an artificial and subjective
disadvantage in the scope of human knowledge. This bias is an artifact of an
aesthetic or pedagogical preference for hierarchy, and not necessarily an
expression of objective observation. Hierarchies and hierarchical thinking has
been criticized by many people, including Susan McClary and one political
philosophy which is vehemently opposed to hierarchical organization: anarchism
is generally opposed to hierarchical organization in any form of human
relations. Heterarchy is the most commonly proposed alternative to hierarchy
and this has been combined with responsible autonomy by Gerard Fairtlough in
his work on Triarchy theory. Amidst constant innovation in information and
communication technologies, hierarchical authority structures are giving way to
greater decision-making latitude for individuals and more flexible definitions
of job activities and this new style of work presents a challenge to existing
organizational forms, with some research studies contrasting traditional
organizational forms against groups that operate as online communities that are
characterized by personal motivation and the satisfaction of making one's own
decisions.
