Hillary Rodham cattle futures controversy In 1978 and 1979, lawyer and First
Lady of Arkansas Hillary Rodham engaged in a series of trades of cattle futures
contracts. Her initial $1,000 investment had generated nearly $100,000 when she
stopped trading after ten months. In 1994, after Hillary Rodham Clinton had
become First Lady of the United States, the trading became the subject of
considerable controversy regarding the likelihood of such a spectacular rate of
return, possible conflict of interest, and allegations of disguised bribery,
allegations that Clinton strongly denied. There were no official investigations
of the trading and Clinton was never charged with any wrongdoing. Trades and
first exposure. Rodham had no experience in such financial instruments. Bill
Clinton's salary as Arkansas Attorney General and then Governor of Arkansas was
modest and Rodham was interested in building a financial cushion for the future
(the ill-fated Whitewater Development Corporation would be another such effort
from this time.) Starting in October 1978, when Bill Clinton was Attorney
General and on the verge of being elected Governor, she was guided by James
Blair, a friend, lawyer, outside counsel to Tyson Foods, Arkansas' largest
employer, and, since 1977, a futures trader who was doing so well he encouraged
friends and family to enter the commodity markets as well. Blair in turn traded
through, and relied upon cattle markets expertise from, broker Robert L. "Red"
Bone of Ray E. Friedman and Co. (Refco), a former Tyson executive and World
Series of Poker semifinalist. Rodham later wrote that she educated herself
about the market and followed it closely, winning and losing money. By January
1979, she was up $26,000; but later, she would lose $16,000 in a single trade.
At one point she owed in excess of $100,000 to Refco as part of covering
losses, but no margin calls were made by Refco against her. Near the end of the
trading, Blair correctly sold short and gave her a $40,000 gain in one
afternoon. In July 1979, once she became pregnant with Chelsea Clinton, "I lost
my nerve for gambling walked away from the table $100,000 ahead." She briefly
traded sugar futures contracts in October 1979, but more conservatively; once
her daughter was born in February 1980, she moved all her commodities gains
into U.S. Treasury Bonds. The profits made during the cattle trading first came
to public light in a March 18, 1994 report by "The New York Times", which had
been reviewing the Clintons' financial records for two months. It immediately
gained considerable press attention, and coincided with the beginning of
congressional hearings over the Whitewater controversy. Media pressure
continued to build, and on April 22, 1994, Hillary Clinton gave an unusual
press conference under a portrait of Abraham Lincoln in the State Dining Room
of the White House, to address questions on both matters; it was broadcast live
by CBS, NBC, ABC, and CNN. In it she said she had done the trading, but often
relying upon the advice of Blair, and having him place orders for her; she said
she did not believe she had received preferential treatment in the process. She
also downplayed the dangers of such trading: "I didn't think it was that big a
risk. and the people he was talking with knew what they were doing." Afterwards
she won media praise for the manner in which she conducted herself during this,
her first adversarial press conference; "Time" called her "open, candid, but
above all unflappable ... the real message was her attitude and her poise. The
confiding tone and relaxed body language ... immediately drew approving
reviews." Likelihood of results. Various publications sought to analyze the
likelihood of Rodham's successful results. The editor of the "Journal of
Futures Markets" said in April 1994, "This is like buying ice skates one day
and entering the Olympics a day later. She took some extraordinary risks."
According to "The Washington Post"'s May 1994 analysis, "while Clinton's
account was wildly successful to an outsider, it was small compared to what
others were making in the cattle futures market in the 1978-79 period."
However, the "Post"'s comparison was of absolute profits, not necessarily
percentage rate of return. In a Fall 1994 paper for the "Journal of Economics
and Finance", economists from the University of North Florida and Auburn
University investigated the odds of gaining a hundred-fold return in the cattle
futures market during the period in question. Using a model that was stated to
give the hypothetical investor the benefit of the doubt, they concluded that
the odds of such a return happening were at best 1Â in 31Â trillion. Financial
writer Edward Chancellor noted in 1999 that Clinton made her money by betting
"on the short side at a time when cattle prices doubled." "Bloomberg News"
columnist Caroline Baum and hedge fund manager Victor Niederhoffer published a
detailed 1995 analysis in "National Review" that found typical patterns and
behaviors in commodities trading not met and that concluded her explanations
for her results were highly implausible. These results are quite remarkable.
Two-thirds of her trades showed a profit by the end of the day she made them
and 80 percent were ultimately profitable. Many of her trades took place at or
near the best prices of the day. Only four explanations can account for these
remarkable results. Blair may have been an exceptionally good trader. Hillary
Clinton may have been exceptionally lucky. Blair may have been front-running
other orders. Or Blair may have arranged to have a broker fraudulently assign
trades to benefit Clinton's account. Merc and Melamed investigations. Chicago
Mercantile Exchange records indicated that $40,000 of her profits came from
larger trades initiated by James Blair. According to exchange records, "Red"
Bone, the commodities broker that facilitated the trades on behalf of Refco,
reportedly because Blair was a good client, allowed Rodham to maintain her
positions even though she did not have enough money in her account to cover her
activity. For example, she was allowed to order 10 cattle futures contracts,
normally a $12,000 investment, in her first commodity trade in 1978 although
she had only $1,000 in her account at the time. Refco was fined for violating
Chicago Mercantile Exchange rules governing margin trading. Leo Melamed, a
former chairman of the Mercantile Exchange, was brought in by request of the
White House to review the trading records. On April 11, 1994, he said that the
whole matter was "a tempest in a teapot" and that while her brokers had not
required her to provide typical margin cushions, she had not knowingly
benefitted. On May 26, 1994, after the new records concerning the larger Blair
trades came to light, he said "I have no reason to change my original
assessment. Mrs. Clinton violated no rules in the course of her transactions."
But as to the question of whether she had been allocated profits from larger
block trades, he said of the new accounting, "It doesn't suggest that there was
allocation, and it doesn't prove there wasn't," an assessment of uncertainty
shared by Merton Miller, a Nobel Prize-winning economist at the University of
Chicago Graduate School of Business. Clinton responses. Hillary Clinton's
defenders, including White House Counsel Lloyd Cutler, maintained throughout
that she had made her own decisions, that her own money was constantly at risk,
and that she made both winning and losing trades throughout the ten months.
Regarding suggestions that Blair had favored Clinton so that Tyson Foods could
gain influence with Governor Clinton, they pointed out that Tyson had, in fact,
later "opposed" Clinton during his 1980 re-election bid, an observation the
First Lady had also made at her news conference. Clinton's defenders also
stressed that Blair and others stayed in the market longer than Rodham and lost
a good amount of what they had earlier made later that summer and fall, showing
that the risk was real; indeed some reports had Blair losing $15 million
altogether and declaring bankruptcy, and in October 1979 Blair would file suit
against both Bone and Refco for manipulation of markets and other charges.
Official findings. There never was any official governmental investigation
into, or findings about, or charges brought regarding Hillary Rodham's cattle
futures trading (as opposed to Refco practices overall); furthermore, by the
time her trading results became known, 15 years had passed and statute of
limitations issues may have been pertinent. Melamed's statements were sometimes
used as a proxy "official" finding by the Merc, although he was a private
consultant by then and was brought in by the White House. In practice, the
debate over the cattle futures controversy was never resolved, and all four of
"Marshall Magazine"'s possible explanations have their adherents to this day.
