Hindutva Hindutva (Devanagari: हिन्दुत्व, "Hinduness", a word
coined by Vinayak Damodar Savarkar in his 1923 pamphlet entitled "" ) is the
set of movements advocating Hindu nationalism. Members of the movement are
called "Hindutvavadi"s. According to a 1995 Supreme Court of India judgement
the word Hindutva could be used to mean "the way of life of the Indian people
and the Indian culture or ethos". In India, an umbrella organization called the
Sangh Parivar champions the concept of Hindutva. The sangh comprises
organizations such as the Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh (RSS), Bharatiya Janata
Party (BJP), Bajrang Dal, and the Vishwa Hindu Parishad. This ideology has
existed since the early 20th century, forged by Savarkar, but came to
prominence in Indian politics in the late 1980s, when two events attracted a
large number of mainstream Hindus to the movement. The first of these events
was the Rajiv Gandhi government's use of its large Parliamentary Majority to
overturn a Supreme Court verdict granting alimony to an old woman, a verdict
that had angered many Muslims (see the Shah Bano case). The second was the
dispute over the 16th century Mughal Babri Mosque in Ayodhya—built by Babur
after his first major victory in India. The Supreme Court of India refused to
take up the case in the early 1990s, leading to a huge outcry. Tempers soon
flared, and a huge number of nationalist Hindus from all parts of India razed
the mosque in late 1992, causing nationwide communal riots. The razing of the
mosque and subsequent conflict arguably lifted the BJP and Hindutva to
international prominence. Definition. According to Savarkar, Hindutva is meant
to denote the Hindu characteristic, or Hinduness. In a judgment delivered in
1995, the Supreme Court of India ruled that "Ordinarily, Hindutva is understood
as a way of life or a state of mind and is not to be equated with or understood
as religious Hindu fundamentalism... it is a fallacy and an error of law to
proceed on the assumption... that the use of words Hindutva or Hinduism per se
depicts an attitude hostile to all persons practising any religion other than
the Hindu religion... It may well be that these words are used in a speech to
promote secularism or to emphasise the way of life of the Indian people and the
Indian culture or ethos, or to criticise the policy of any political party as
discriminatory or intolerant. Central concepts. Cultural nationalism. According
to this, the natives of India share a common culture, history and ancestry. M S
Golwalkar, one of the main proponents of Hindutva believed that India's
diversity in terms of customs, traditions and ways of worship was its
uniqueness and that this diversity was not without the strong underlying
cultural basis which was essentially native. He believed that the Hindu natives
with all their diversity, shared among other things "the same philosophy of
life", "the same values" and "the same aspirations" which formed a strong
cultural and a civilizational basis for a nation. Savarkar similarly believed
that the Indian subcontinent (which includes the area south of the Himalaya and
the Hindu Kush or Akhand Bharat ("undivided India", अखण्ड
भारत) is the homeland of the Hindus. He considered "Hindus" as those
who consider India ("Bharat", भारत) to be their motherland
("matrubhumi"), fatherland ("pitrubhumi", पितृभूमि) as well as
their holy land ("punyabhumi", पुण्यभूमि), hence describing
it purely in cultural terms. RSS, one of the main votaries of Hindutva has
stated that it believes in a cultural connotation of the term "Hindu". "The
term Hindu in the conviction as well as in the constitution of the RSS is a
cultural and civilizational concept and not a political or religious dogma. The
term as a cultural concept will include and did always include all including
Sikhs, Buddhists,and Jains. The cultural nationality of India, in the
conviction of the RSS, is Hindu and it was inclusive of all who are born and
who have adopted Bharat as their Motherland, including Muslims, Christians and
Parsis. The answering association submit that it is not just a matter of RSS
conviction, but a fact borne out by history that the Muslims, Christians and
Parsis too are Hindus by culture although as religions they are not so."
Decolonization. Emphasizing historical oppression of Hindus by colonial
invaders like the Muslims (see Muslim conquest of the Indian subcontinent) and
the Christians and the call to "reverse" the cultural influence resulting from
these intrusions. Social justice. The acceptance that Hindu social structure
"is ridden with castes and communities", and that this has led to "barriers and
segregation" and condemnation of "obnoxious vice of social inequality" and
"untouchability". The supporters of Hindutva have a positive outlook towards
the Dalit community, which they aim to bring to leadership positions in their
organizations. Uniform Civil Code. Leaders subscribing to Hindutva have been
known for their demands for a Uniform Civil Code for all the citizens of India.
They believe that differential laws based on religion violate Article 44 of the
Indian Constitution and have sowed the seeds of divisiveness between different
religious communities. The advocates of Hindutva often use the term pseudo-
secularism to refer to policies which they believe are unduly favorable towards
the Muslims and Christians. They oppose what they see as a 'separate-but-equal'
system; some supporters of Hindutva see it as the Indian National Congress
party's effort to woo the sizable minority vote bank at the expense of true
equality. The subject of a Uniform Civil Code, which would remove special
religion-based provisions for different religions (Hindus, Muslims, Christians,
etc.) from the Indian Constitution, is thus one of the main agendas of Hindutva
organizations. The Uniform Civil Code is opposed by Muslims and political
parties like the Indian National Congress and The Communist Party of India
(Marxist) Followers of Hindutva have questioned differential religious laws in
India which allows polygamy and triple talaq among Muslims and thereby
compromises on the status of Muslim women and "marginalizes" them. The passing
of the Muslim Women (Protection of Rights on Divorce) Act, 1986 by the Rajiv
Gandhi government, under pressure from conservative Muslims, to dilute the
secular judgment of the Supreme Court, was opposed by Hindutva organisations.
The new act, in tune with the Shariat, denied even utterly destitute Muslim
divorcees the right to alimony from their former husbands. Protection of Hindu
interests. The followers of Hindutva are known for their criticism of the
Indian government as too passive with regard to the ethnic cleansing of
Kashmiri Hindus by Kashmiri Muslim separatists and advocates of Hindutva wish a
harder stance in Jammu and Kashmir. They have called for the protection of
native Hindu traditions, holy structures, rivers and the cow (which is
considered holy by Hindus). Hindu nationalists have the stated aim of uniting
the Hindu society which is plagued by casteism, regionalism, and passive
religion. Views on other faiths. The votaries of Hindutva believe that the way
Muslims and Hindus have treated each other in the past is a "one-way
compromise" and they intend on making society more balanced and fair towards
the majority Hindu population. The BJP has also invited Muslims to be a part of
this new society and work with the Hindus, Buddhists, Jains and Sikhs for a
better India. Even more militant parties such as the Shiv Sena have invited
Muslims to join and the party leader declared after the Babri Mosque incident,
The Rediff Election Interview/Bal Thackeray,"Rediff.com" Views on Indian
history. The Hindu organisations like the RSS believe that the history of India
was written by the British with a condescending attitude towards the native
people and their culture. M S Golwalkar writes that the history of ancient
India was summed up as "Tanglewood Tales". Similar concerns were raised by
Nobel Laureate Rabindranath Tagore in his essay, "The History of Bharatvarsha",
in 1903. He calls the history books "nightmarish account of India". He writes
"while the lands of the aliens existed, there also existed the indigenous
country" meaning the latter was grossly being neglected. He adds that the
British accounts of Indian history "throw a beam of artificial light on such a
spot that in our own eyes the very profile of our country is made dark". M S
Golwalkar argues that it was a delibrate Imperialist strategy to teach Indians
a wrong version of history. In this context, writings of Lord Macaulay,"the
brain behind the system of English education", are referred to as an indication
of this. Lord Macaulay had stated, "We must at present do our best to form a
class who may be interpreters between us and millions whom we govern—a class
of persons Indian in blood and colour, but English in tastes, in opinions, in
morals and in intellect." He had also written "No Hindu who has received an
English education ever remains sincerely attached to his religion. It is my
firm belief that if our plans of education are followed up, there will not be a
single idolater among the respected classes 30 years hence.” Senior RSS
leader H V Sheshadri refers to this attitude of "White man's burden" which he
believes shaped the English education system in India and British version of
Indian history. The RSS is opposed to the theory of Indo-Aryan migration to
India, a number believing in the alternative Out of India theory. While largely
uncontroversial in academia, the "Aryan Invasion theory" debate in India,
involving e.g. Sita Ram Goel, Romila Thapar, Irfan Habib and Arun Shourie, is
also a matter of politics. Organizations. Hindutva is commonly identified as
the guiding ideology of the Sangh Parivar, a family of radical Hindu
Nationalist organizations, and of the Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh in
particular. In general, "Hindutvavaadis" (followers of Hindutva)
condescendingly believe that they represent the well-being of Hinduism,
Sikhism, Buddhism, Ayyavazhi, Jainism and all other religions prominent in
India. The major political wing is the BJP which was in power in India's
Central Government for six years from 1998 to 2004 and is now the main
opposition party. In May 2012 it was in power in the states of Gujarat, Madhya
Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, Karnataka. It is an alliance partner in the states of
Orissa, Punjab, Bihar, Goa Political parties pertaining to the Hindutva
ideology are not limited to the Sangh Parivar. Examples of political parties
independent from the Sangh's influence include Prafull Goradia's Akhil
Bharatiya Jana Sangh and Uma Bharti's Bharatiya Janshakti Party. The influence
of these groups is relatively limited. The controversial Maharashtrian
political party, the Shiv Sena, converted its ideology to the Hindutva one in
recent times. It has been very influential in the Indian state of Maharashtra.
The party is not part of the Sangh Parivar but is associated with the Bharatiya
Janata Party. Similar is the Shiromani Akali Dal, which is a Sikh religious
party but maintains ties with Hindutva organizations, as they also represent
Sikhism. [[ Dr.Rajeev Menon Ji Maharaj, National President of Hindu Mahasabha
is Active in South Indian States like Karnataka Andhra Pradesh, Kerala and
Tamil Nadu respectively. Criticism and support. The opponents of Hindutva
philosophy consider Hindutva ideology as a euphemistic effort to conceal
communal beliefs and practices. Many Indian sociologues have described the
Hindutva movement as fascist in classical sense, in its ideology and class
support specially targeting the concept of homogenised majority and cultural
hegemony. The Hindutva movement on the other hand terms such description as
coming from the far left. More moderate critics of Hindutva do not base their
criticism on allegations of "fascism", but raise issues with regards to their
sometimes-vacillating attitudes towards non-Hindus and secularism. The epithet
of "fascism" is also used to evoke double standards against Hindus in political
and academic discourse. The academia and polity have been accused of engaging
in a form of anti-Hindu McCarthyism against Hindu political expression by
leveling the accusation of "fascism" against anyone who expresses sympathy for
Hindus. Critics have used the political epithets of "Indian fascism" and "Hindu
fascism" to describe the ideology of the Sangh Parivar. For example, Marxist
social scientist Prabhat Patnaik has written that the Hindutva movement as it
has emerged is "classically fascist in class support, methods and programme"
Patniak bases this argument on the following "ingredients" of classical fascism
present in Hindutva: the attempt to create a unified homogenous majority under
the concept of 'the Hindus'; a sense of grievance against past injustice; a
sense of cultural superiority; an interpretation of history according to this
grievance and superiority; a rejection of rational arguments against this
interpretation; and an appeal to the majority based on race and masculinity.
The description of Hindutva as fascist has been condemned by pro-Hindutva
authors such as Koenraad Elst who claim that the ideology of Hindutva meets
none of the characteristics of fascist ideologies. Claims that Hindutva social
service organisations such as the Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh are "fascist"
have been disputed by academics such as Vincent Kundukulam. Academics Chetan
Bhatt and Parita Mukta reject the identification of Hindutva with fascism,
because of Hindutva's embrace of cultural rather than racial nationalism,
because of its "distinctively Indian" character, and because of "the RSS’s
disavowal of the seizure of state power in preference for long-term cultural
labour in civil society." They instead describe Hindutva as a form of
"revolutionary conservatism" or "ethnic absolutism". Mohan Bhagwat, the head of
RSS, says, “The country should have a Prime Minister who propounds
Hindutva.” Nobel Laureate V.S. Naipaul also rejects these allegations and
views the rise of Hindutva as a welcome, broader civilizational resurgence of
India.
