Hindi–Urdu controversy The Hindi–Urdu controversy is an ongoing
dispute—dating back to the 19th century—regarding the status of Hindi and
Urdu as a single language (see Hindi-Urdu), and the establishment of a single
standard language in certain areas of north and northwestern India. While the
debate was "officially" settled by a government order in 1950, declaring Hindi
as the official language, some resistance remains. The present notion among
Muslims about this dispute is that Hindus abandoned Urdu Language, whereas
Hindus believe that Urdu was artificially created during Muslim rule. Hindi and
Urdu are literary registers of the "Khariboli" dialect of the Hindi languages,
spoken as a mother tongue by about 45% of India's population, mostly in modern
North and Central India. A Persianized variant of Khariboli, known variously as
Urdu, began to take shape during the Delhi Sultanate (1206-1526 AD) and Mughal
Empire (1526–1858 AD) in South Asia. The British East India company replaced
Persian with Urdu written in Urdu script as the official standard of Hindi-
speaking Northern provinces of modern day India in addition to English. The
last few decades of the nineteenth century witnessed the eruption of the
Hindi–Urdu controversy in North-Western provinces and Oudh with "Hindi" and
"Urdu" protagonists advocating the official use of Hindustani with the
Devanagari script or with the Persian script, respectively. Hindi movements
advocating the growth of and official status for Devanagari were established in
Northern India. Babu Shiva Prasad and Madan Mohan Malaviya were notable early
proponents of this movement. This, consequently, led to the development of Urdu
movements defending Urdu's official status; Syed Ahmed Khan was one of its
noted advocates. In 1900, the Government issued a decree granting symbolic
equal status to both Hindi and Urdu which was opposed by Muslims and received
with jubilation by Hindus. Hindi and Urdu started to diverge linguistically,
with Hindi drawing on Sanskrit as the primary source for formal and academic
vocabulary, often with a conscious attempt to purge the language of Persian-
derived equivalents. Deploring this Hindu-Muslim divide, Gandhi proposed re-
merging the standards, using either Devanagari or Urdu script, under the
traditional generic term Hindustani. Bolstered by the support received by
Congress and various leaders involved in the Indian Independence Movement,
Hindi in Devanagari script along with English replaced Urdu as the official
language of India during the institution of the Indian constitution in 1950.
Background. The main cause of this divide may be attributed to the aspirations
of both communities (Hindu and Muslim) to take their cultural inspiration which
became open contention over the Language during Indian independence. Muslims
has mostly looked towards their Muslim Ummah for cultural inspiration whereas
Hindus generally get inspiration from the ancient Vedic Culture and other
ancient past. During Muslim rule (whose founders were West Asians) people who
converted to Islam readily adopted the culture they brought with them. Persian
at that time was considered a prestigious and important language in many parts
of Islamic world like Central Asia. The founder of Islamic rule in India were
from different ethnic background viz. Turks, Mongols, Arabs, Afghans etc. and
all of them used Persian as their lingua franca and court Language. Hindus
considered these things as an alien culture. With the passage of time things
like Sanskrit language, Dhoti, Ayurveda etc. came to associated with Hindus,
and Persian Language, Yunani Medicine with Muslims. There also came to be
differences in the cuisine and culture of two communities. During pre-1971
Pakistan, Ayyub Khan once said that "...East Bengalis... still are under
considerable Hindu culture and influence. This is because the Bengali language
is Sanskritized and uses Indic script" (see also Bengali Language Movement).
Urdu became the language of the courts of Muslim rulers who invaded the Indian
subcontinent from the eighth century onwards. It developed from the Khariboli
dialect of the Delhi area with an infusion of words from Arabic, Persian and
Turkish. As the Muslim invaders spread in the Northern India, Urdu interacted
with various vernaculars and introduced Persian words into local languages and
absorbed local vocabulary, and over a period of time developed into a distinct
spoken language. Hindi also developed from Khariboli, albeit with the
assimilation of words from local languages and Sanskrit. Several factors
contributed to the increasing divergence of Hindi and Urdu. The Muslim rulers
chose to write Urdu in Urdu script instead of Devanagari script. In time, Urdu
in Urdu script also became a literary language with an increasing body of
literature written in the 18th and 19th century. A division developed gradually
between Hindus who chose to write Hindi-Urdu in Devanagari script and Muslims
and some Hindus who chose to write the same in Urdu script. The development of
Hindi movements in the late nineteenth century further contributed to this
divergence. Paul R. Brass, Professor (Emeritus) of Political Science and
International Studies at the University of Washington notes in his book,
"Language, Religion and Politics in North India", Controversy. British language
policy. In 1837, the British East India company replaced Persian with local
vernacular in various provinces as the official and court language. However, in
the northern regions of the Indian subcontinent, Urdu in Urdu script instead of
Hindi in Devanagari script was chosen to replace Persian. The most immediate
reason for the controversy is believed to be the contradictory language policy
in North India in the 1860s. While the then government encouraged both Hindi
and Urdu as a medium of education in school, it discouraged Hindi or Nagari
script for official purposes. This policy gave rise to conflict between
students educated in Hindi or Urdu for the competition of government jobs,
which eventually took on a communal form. Hindi and Urdu movements. In 1867,
some Hindus in the United Provinces of Agra and Oudh during the British Raj in
India began to demand that Hindi be made an official language in place of Urdu.
Babu Shiva Prasad of Banares was one of the early proponents of the Nagari
script. In a "Memorandum on court characters" written in 1868, he accused the
early Muslim rulers of India for forcing them to learn Persian. In 1897, Madan
Mohan Malaviya published a collection of documents and statements titled "Court
character and primary education in North Western Provinces and Oudh", in which,
he made a compelling case for Hindi. Several Hindi movements were formed in the
late 19th and early 20th century; notable among them were Nagari Pracharini
Sabha formed in Banaras in 1893, Hindi Sahitya Sammelan in Allahabad in 1910,
Dakshina Bharat Hindi Prachar Sabha in 1918 and Rashtra Bhasha Prachar Samiti
in 1926. The movement was encouraged in 1881 when Hindi in Devanagari script
replaced Urdu in Persian script as the official language in neighboring Bihar.
They submitted 118 memorials signed by 67,000 people to the Education
Commission in several cities. The proponents of Hindi argued that the majority
of people spoke Hindi and therefore introduction of Nagari script would provide
better education and improve prospects for holding Government positions. They
also argued that Urdu script made court documents illegible, encouraged forgery
and promoted the use of complex Arabic and Persian words. Organisations such as
Anjuman Taraqqi-e-Urdu were formed for the advocacy of Urdu. Advocates of Urdu
argued that Hindi scripts could not be written faster, and lacked
standardisation and vocabulary. They also argued that the Urdu language
originated in India, asserted that Urdu could also be spoken fluently by most
of the people and disputed the assertion that official status of language and
script is essential for the spread of education. Communal violence broke out as
the issue was taken up by firebrands. Sir Syed Ahmed Khan had once stated, "I
look to both Hindus and Muslims with the same eyes & consider them as two eyes
of a bride. By the word nation I only mean Hindus and Muslims and nothing else.
We Hindus and Muslims live together under the same soil under the same
government. Our interest and problems are common and therefore I consider the
two factions as one nation." Speaking to Mr. Shakespeare, the governor of
Banaras, after the language controversy heated up, he said "I am now convinced
that the Hindus and Muslims could never become one nation as their religion and
way of life was quite distinct from one and other." In the last three decades
of 19th century the controversy flared up several times in North-Western
provinces and Oudh. The Hunter commission, appointed by the Government of India
to review the progress of education, was used by the advocates of both Hindi
and Urdu for their respective causes. Gandhi's idea of Hindustani. Hindi and
Urdu continued to diverge both linguistically and culturally. Linguistically,
Hindi continued drawing words from Sanskrit, and Urdu from Persian, Arabic and
Turkish. Culturally Urdu came to be identified with Muslims and Hindi with
Hindus. This wide divergence in the 1920s was deplored by Gandhi who exhorted
the re-merging of both Hindi and Urdu naming it Hindustani written in both
Nagari and Persian scripts. Though he failed in his attempt to bring together
Hindi and Urdu under the Hindustani banner, he popularised Hindustani in other
non-Hindi speaking areas. Muslim separatism. It has been argued that the
Hindi–Urdu controversy sowed the seeds for Muslim separatism in South Asia.
However, other historians dispute this, pointing to the development of Muslim
separatism in Bengal where Urdu was not spoken. Some also argued that Syed
Ahmad had expressed separatist views long before the controversy developed.
Urdu to Hindi. On April 1900, the colonial Government of the North-Western
Provinces issued an order granting equal official status to both Nagari and
Perso-Arabic scripts. This decree evoked protests from Urdu supporters and joy
from Hindi supporters. However, the order was more symbolic in that it did not
provision exclusive use of Nagari script. Perso-Arabic remained dominant in
North-Western provinces and Oudh as the preferred writing system until
independence. C. Rajagopalachari, chief minister of Madras Presidency
introduced Hindustani as a compulsory language in secondary school education
though he later relented and opposed the introduction of Hindi during the
Madras anti-Hindi agitation of 1965. Bal Gangadhar Tilak supported Devanagari
script as the essential part of nationalist movement. The language policy of
Congress and the independence movement paved its status as an alternative
official language of independent India. Hindi was supported by religious and
political leaders, social reformers, writers and intellectuals during
independence movement securing that status. Hindi along with English was
recognised as the official language of India during the institution of the
Indian constitution in 1950.
