Hindmarsh Island bridge controversy The Hindmarsh Island bridge controversy was
a 1990s Australian legal and political controversy that involved the clash of
Indigenous Australian religious beliefs and property rights. A proposed bridge
to Hindmarsh Island, near Goolwa, South Australia (intended to replace the
existing cable ferry and service a proposed marina development) attracted
opposition from many local residents, environmental groups and indigenous
leaders. In 1994, a group of Ngarrindjeri women Elders claimed the site was
sacred to them for reasons that could not be revealed. The case attracted much
controversy because the issue intersected with broader concerns about
Indigenous rights in the Australian community at the time, and coincided with
the Mabo and Wik High Court cases regarding Native Title. "Secret Women's
Business", as the group's claims became known, became the subject of intense
legal battles. Some Ngarrindjeri women came forward to dispute the veracity of
the claims. The Hindmarsh Island Royal Commission found that "secret women's
business" had been fabricated. Subsequently, the Howard Government passed the
"Hindmarsh Island Bridge Act (1997)", which allowed construction to go ahead.
The bridge was completed in March 2001. In August 2001, a civil case in the
Federal Court of Australia re-ignited the debate. In rejecting claims for
damages by the developers, Justice John von Doussa stated that he was not
satisfied that the claims of "secret women's business" had been fabricated,
although never explicitly stating them to be true. The Ngarrindjeri and their
supporters took the decision as a vindication, and many organisations
subsequently apologised. Opinion remains divided over the issue to the present
day. Background. In 1977, Adelaide developers Tom and Wendy Chapman, trading as
Binalong Pty Ltd, purchased of land on Hindmarsh Island in the Murray River
estuary and later received planning permission for their company to build a
560-berth marina, car parking, residential development, conference centre, golf
course and associated buildings. Wendy Chapman was a former Lord Mayor of
Adelaide from 1983 to 1985. Ted Chapman was the father of Liberal Party
President Vickie Chapman and had vacated his state parliamentary seat in 1992
for future Premier, Dean Brown. With the marina only partially completed, in
1988 the Chapmans applied for permission to increase the size of the project as
the original project was found to be financially unviable. The Planning
Assessment Commission rejected the proposal, stating that the development
couldn't expand unless a bridge was built from Goolwa to Hindmarsh Island as
the existing Cable ferry would not be able to handle the increased traffic. In
October 1989, approval was granted for a bridge, to be financed by the
Chapmans, subject to an Environmental Impact Study (EIS). The EIS (the Edmonds
Report) was completed within two weeks and identified the need for an
anthropological study. The Chapmans funded a study by Rod Lucas who reported in
January 1990 that existing written records did not record mythological
sites,but cautioned that consultation with Indigenous groups would be required.
Indigenous Heritage. The Ngarrindjeri are one of the 30–40 clan-groups
("lakinyeri") that inhabited South Australia at the time of white settlement.
Originally numbering around 6,000 members they are the only tribe in Australia
whose land lay within of a capital city to have survived as a distinct people.
In April 1990, the State Minister for Environment and Planning wrote to the
Chapmans granting them planning permission for the bridge to Hindmarsh Island
and the extensions to their marina. The estimated cost of the bridge was around
$6 million which was considerably more than the estimated value of the marina
once completed. The planning permission was subject to a number of conditions,
including the requirements for consultation with "relevant Aboriginal
representative bodies" such as Ngarrendjeri Elders, the Raukkan Community
Council, the Ngarrendjeri Lands and Progress Association, and the Lower Murray
Heritage Committee. This was to become an issue in 1994 as the Chapmans had
clearly not met these requirements. Although the Chapmans had done several
environmental impact studies, submitted plans that included the bridge to the
Raukkan Community Council and had also consulted with Henry Rankin, a senior
Ngarrendjeri Elder, in November 1989 this was prior to the planning permission
for the bridge being granted on condition of additional consultation. In the
Federal Court hearing in 1994, Wendy Chapman gave evidence that the page of the
letter setting out these additional consultation requirements was missing from
the Minister's letter she had received (the same recommendations were also
included in an assessment sent to the Chapmans by the Department of Environment
and Planning). She also stated her belief that as no skeletal remains had been
found, no further consultation was required. Government Assistance. The
Hindmarsh Island marina was at this time losing money and the Chapmans were in
financial difficulties due the failure of another marina project they had built
at Wellington. They could not afford to construct the bridge themselves so they
approached the State Government for assistance. Beneficial Finance, a
subsidiary of the state owned State Bank of South Australia, had supplied the
financing for the marina development. By 1990 it was obvious that the State
Bank was having financial difficulties and The State Labor government led by
Premier John Bannon was anxious to protect Beneficial’s large investment in
the Chapman's projects. The government was also under pressure for a series of
major projects it had promised that had never eventuated so the bridge project
was also seen as likely to be the only major success Labor would be able to
claim for the next election. The State government made a deal with Chapmans.
Binalong would pay up front for the bridge to be built. Then the State
government would reimburse Binalong for half of the cost of construction, up to
a limit of $3 million. Legal Liability. In September 1990 Beneficial Finance
decided to withdraw funding and the Chapmans approached Partnership Pacific, a
subsidiary of Westpac, to take over the financing. Partnership Pacific agreed
but only with the condition that the State Government paid the entire cost of
the bridge. A secret meeting was arranged between the Chapmans, Westpac and the
government at which it was accepted that the government would pay the whole
cost of the bridge while the Chapmans would pay back half at a later date, but
only after Binalong had paid off all its debts to Westpac. Binalong owed so
much money to the State Bank through Beneficial Finance that Bannon apparently
had no choice but to prop the company up. The State Bank collapsed not long
after with debts of $3 Billion. On 22 November 1990, Premier Bannon wrote a
personal letter to the Managing Director of Westpac, Stewart Fowler,
guaranteeing government financing of the bridge and in February 1991, Cabinet
approved the funding agreement as outlined in the Premier's letter. Initially
the government had no liability beyond paying half the cost of the bridge.
Unfortunately, Premier Bannon’s letter had created an unintended liability
for the State government. Not only was the government liable for Wespac’s
losses if it did not build the bridge but even if the bridge was built and
Westpac suffered any losses from stages two, three and four of the marina
project, the government was now also liable to cover those losses which could
run to hundreds of millions of dollars. A deed was signed in March 1993 binding
the government to this commitment. Public outrage at government funding of a
project for the sole benefit of private developers, led South Australian
Legislative Council member and leader of the Australian Democrats, Mike
Elliott, to call for a Parliamentary inquiry into the bridge and the financial
arrangements between the government and Westpac. One of its terms of reference
dealt specifically with the propriety of the government's decision in
conferring private benefits at taxpayers' expense. The inquiries findings
criticised the financial arrangements between the government, the Chapmans and
Wespac, and recommended that the government reconsider the bridge and examine
whether the bridge could be replaced by a second ferry. In early October, the
Lower Murray Heritage Committee wrote to the Aboriginal Affairs Minister asking
him to protect Aboriginal sites on Hindmarsh Island however, work on the bridge
began on 27 October 1993 though it quickly ceased due to industrial action.
1993 Election. Largely due to the financial disaster of the State Bank collapse
leaving the state essentially bankrupt, Labor was routed in the December 1993
election and the Liberals came to power with Dean Brown as Premier. When in
opposition the Liberals had campaigned against the Hindmarsh Island Bridge and
stopping it was a campaign promise during the election. Further up the Murray,
the local community in Berri was campaigning for a much-needed bridge to
replace their ferry and the government had agreed to build it. Seeking a way
out of the Hindmarsh Island contract, Premier Brown hired Samuel Jacobs QC, to
carry out an investigation into the legal responsibilities of the contract.
Shortly before the 1993 elections the Labor government had instructed
archaeologist, Dr Neil Draper, to survey Hindmarsh Island and the mainland
foreshore for Aboriginal sites. Justice Jacobs, unaware of Draper’s survey,
finished his report in early 1994, concluding there was no way out of building
the bridge without significant financial liabilities. On 29 April 1994, Draper
presented his report to the new Liberal government. The report mentioned that
the area had spiritual significance to Aboriginal women, identified a number of
significant sites and argued that they should be protected under the State
Aboriginal Heritage Act. On 3 May the State Minister for Aboriginal Affairs, Dr
Michael Armitage, now used his powers under the act to authorise damage to the
identified sites if required for the bridge to proceed. Work recommenced and a
number of protestors were arrested. It has since been pointed out that Justice
Jacobs and the government had missed an opportunity to cancel the bridge
contract. They had overlooked that Aboriginal Heritage legislation overrides
all contractual obligations. Opposition. Many people, including a majority of
the islands inhabitants, variously opposed the government funding of a project
for the benefit of private developers, the urbanisation of Hindmarsh Island
and/or the effects it would have on the natural environment had also voiced
their opposition. Initiating legal action in April 1994 they applied to the
Federal government for an order prohibiting construction. On 12 May, shortly
before construction began, at the request of the Ngarrindjeri, the Federal
Minister for Aboriginal Affairs, Robert Tickner issued an emergency declaration
blocking work on the bridge, and then appointed a lawyer, Professor Cheryl
Saunders OA, to report on the significant Aboriginal sites. Saunders consulted
with a range of interested parties, including a group of Ngarrindjeri women who
claimed Hindmarsh Island was sacred to them as a fertility site, and for other
reasons that could not be publicly revealed. An anthropologist, Dr Dean Fergie,
prepared an assessment of the women's claims, which was then submitted to
Saunders. As a part of this process some of these cultural secrets were written
down and sealed in two envelopes marked "Confidential: to be read by women
only" and forwarded to Tickner with the assessment. On 10 July 1994, Tickner
placed a 25 year ban on the bridge construction putting the marina in doubt and
bringing the Chapmans close to bankruptcy. In February 1995 the Chapmans
initiated a legal challenge of the ban in the Federal Court. Although the Judge
praised Saunders report and criticized the Chapman’s litigation, the Judge
overturned the ban on a legal technicality. The media had heavily criticized
the ban and focused on Tickner issuing it based on the contents of sealed
envelopes that he had never read. In fact Saunders’ assessment had stressed
that the contents were not needed to reach a decision, as there was enough
evidence supporting their contents in the assessment and public domain. In
fact, Tickner is on record in the February court case as stating that his
decision was not based on the envelopes. In March, Shadow Minister for the
Environment Ian McLachlan was forced to resign after tabling some of the secret
documents in Parliament misrepresenting how he obtained them and falsely
claiming they had not been marked "Confidential". The envelope had been
delivered to McLachlan's office in error and despite being clearly marked
"Confidential: to be read by women only" had been read, photocopied and
circulated among both male and female staff. In May 1995 the media and
politicians aired the claims of five "dissident" Aboriginal women who stated
that what had become known as "secret women's business" must have been
"fabricated" by the "proponents" because they either had no knowledge of the
secrets or did not believe them. Binalong fails. In 1994, Binalong went into
liquidation owing Partnership Pacific $18.5 million with Westpac taking
possession of the marina as mortgagee. The marina was at this time valued at up
to $1.35 million although this would later be revised to $4.5 million in
September 1997. Following protracted negotiations, in September 1997 Westpac
sold the marina to Kebaro Pty Ltd, a family trust belonging to the Chapmans for
$50,000 with a further $1.3 million to follow at a later date. As part of the
transaction, the liquidator of Binalong agreed to assign Binalong's causes of
action to Mr and Mrs Chapman who would then pay a percentage of any damages
recovered in court to the liquidators. In regards to the financial losses the
Chapmans believed had resulted from the heritage applications, the Chapmans
claimed financial losses of $16.58 million based on the difference between what
the Chapmans paid Westpac and what they claimed the completed marina would have
sold for had the bridge been built prior to 1994. In 2001 this court action
failed. Royal Commission. In June 1995, the Hindmarsh Island Royal Commission
was called by the South Australian government. The proponent Ngarrindjeri women
were sharply divided. Some believed nothing of the secrets could be revealed
for any reason, while others argued that some cultural rules had to be broken
in order to protect the area. 23 of the proponent Ngarrindjeri women withdrew
from the Royal Commission, rejecting an inquiry into people's spiritual beliefs
as unlawful. Those that did attend refused to testify and heckled from the
gallery or were otherwise generally disruptive. The 12 dissident women (and one
man) by contrast were well behaved. The terms of reference for the Commission
implied that the contents of the envelopes were central to the Ministers
decision to implement the 25 year ban. The Commission sought clarification from
Premier Brown who confirmed the contents were not central. However, the counsel
for the dissidents continued to emphasize the importance of knowing what the
contents stated. Chief spokesperson for the dissident women, Dorothy Wilson
testified to the Royal Commission how she first heard about the ‘’secret
women's business’’ at a meeting called by the Lower Murray Aboriginal
Heritage Committee. She initially believed the story as Dr. Doreen Kartinyeri
was in a position to have secrets passed to her by the female elders. Following
the meeting the women went to the local Heritage Committee where the men were.
One of the men later pointed to an aerial map of Hindmarsh Island hanging on
the wall and commented that it looked like "female privates". As a map of the
island along with the same claim was in the secret envelope, Wilson had second
thoughts "It just doesn’t add up to being secret women’s business if the
men actually told us. If our old women didn’t know about it, well then why
did the men tell us about it? I thought it must be a load of nonsense." The
premise was that a man should not know what Hindmarsh Island looked like.
Kartinyeri later responded that the man shouldn't have said that, because he
was a man but that "pointing at an aerial map that's been surveyed" does not
imply that the claim itself was fabricated. None of the dissident women were
able to take their claims of fabrication further than their own lack of
knowledge of the beliefs. Several admitted that they had no knowledge of any
Ngarrindjerri culture or traditions at all. Some admitted that it was not
unreasonable for only a limited number of women to be privy to traditional
secrets. One took the position that they saw no point in living in the past
even if the claims were true. The women all identified themselves as Christians
and it has been suggested some saw The Dreamtime as incompatible with their own
beliefs, was a Pagan belief and as such, wrong. It had been shown before the
Commission that no anthropological work regarding the Ngarrindjeri,
specifically Ronald Berndt’s authoritative book "A World That Was," mentioned
the existence of a secret life for Ngarrindjeri women. Cultural geographer Dr
Jane Jacobs argued that these publications needed to be seen as a product of
their times. In the case of Berndt, we are assuming a male anthropologist
walking into an Aboriginal community in the 1940s got the truth. His enquiries
were likely not directed towards secrets held by female members of the tribe.
Connie Roberts, who was born in 1919 and was one of the elders who had passed
the "women’s business" on to Doreen Kartinyeri, was asked about talking about
such things with an anthropologist: "You can't. You're not supposed to talk
about things like that. My parents told me, only the old people used to tell
certain people." In December, without knowing what was in the envelopes, the
Royal Commission found that the idea of Hindmarsh Island as being significant
to the Ngarrindjerri women had come about at the meeting of the Lower Murray
Aboriginal Heritage Committee. Despite evidence that mention of the island as a
fertility site had been mentioned in 1967, predating the meeting, the Royal
Commission found that the secret women's business was a fabrication and hoax.
Specifically, the Royal Commission based its finding on five points. The way
the secrets were revealed, at the last minute then progressively was
suspicious. The lack of mention of the secrets in the anthropological record.
The Seven Sisters Dreaming story belonged to the western Aborigines and was
never part of the Ngarrindjerri Dreaming. The testimony given by dissidents
Dorothy Wilson and Doug Milera supported fabrication and lastly, that the
secret women's business was irrational because the barrages were a more
intrusive barrier than a bridge could be. Heritage Applications. The first
Section 10 application brought by the so-called "proponent women" in 1994 under
the "Aboriginal and Torres Straits Islander Heritage Act 1986" succeeded. On
the basis of the Report of Law Professor Cheryl Saunders (1994), Minister
Robert Tickner declared a 25-year ban on the building of a bridge. That ban was
overturned on a technicality. The veracity of the proponent's women story was
not at issue. They had told their story and been believed but the Minister had
erred in the manner in which he had dealt with the material. The Ngarrindjeri
brought another application under the federal heritage act in 1995-6. This time
Senator Rosemary Crowley appointed a woman judge, Jane Mathews, to be the
reporter and thus the proponent women would be able to include knowledge
restricted to women without violating their cultural rules. However, the
Mathews Report was not able to run its full course. in 1996 the Howard Liberal
government came to power and Minister Herron refused to appoint a woman to
receive the report. Then, following the Federal Court judgment in Tickner v
Western Australia of 28 May 1996, Mathews (1996: 43–6) made it plain that the
women could not rely on material that was not being made available to the other
parties most closely affected by the application. Rather than have their
stories read by a male minister and made available to other parties, the women
withdrew their restricted material. They chose not to violate their religious
law that women’s knowledge was for women’s eyes only. Although this
knowledge was missing, the Mathews Report of June 1996 nonetheless acknowledges
that the area of the proposed bridge was of significance. The dissident
Ngarrindjeri women sought a declaration from the High Court that the nomination
of Justice Mathews as the reporter was incompatible with her commission as a
judge of the Federal Court of Australia. On 6 September 1996, the majority of
the court agreed and the appointment of Justice Mathews was invalid (see Wilson
v Minister for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Affairs (1996) 189 CLR
1.). The Hindmarsh Island Bridge Act. When John Howard's Coalition Government
of Australia came to power in 1996, it legislated to allow the bridge to
proceed (see Hindmarsh Island Bridge Act 1996). The Ngarrindjeri challenged the
legislation in the High Court on the basis that it was discriminatory to
declare that the Heritage Protection Act applied to sites everywhere but on
Hindmarsh Island, and that such discrimination – essentially on the basis of
race – had been disallowed since the Commonwealth was granted the power to
make laws with respect to the "Aboriginal race" as a result of the 1967
Referendum. The High Court decided, controversially, that the amended s.51
(xxvi) of the Constitution did not restrict the Commonwealth parliament to
making laws for the "benefit" of the "Aboriginal race", and could in fact enact
laws to the "detriment" of any particular race. This decision effectively meant
that those people who had believed that they were casting a vote "against" the
discrimination of Indigenous people in 1967 had in fact merely allowed the
Commonwealth to participate in the discrimination against Indigenous people
which had been practiced by the States throughout their history. Racial
discrimination has been outlawed by the "Racial Discrimination Act" 1975 (Cth),
but the "Hindmarsh Island Bridge Act" of 1996 expressly removed the Hindmarsh
Island area from the purview of the "Racial Discrimination Act". The von Doussa
Decision. Federal Court judge, Mr John von Doussa, heard from all parties to
the dispute in the course of the action brought by the Chapmans. In his Reasons
for Decision (2001: para 5), von Doussa summaries This action seeks damages for
losses allegedly suffered by Binalong from five respondents. Mr Tickner is sued
as the former Minister. Professor Cheryl Saunders is sued as the person
nominated by Mr Tickner under the Australian Heritage Protection Act to receive
representations from interested members of the public and to prepare the report
required by the Act concerning the application for protection. Luminis Pty Ltd
(Luminis) and Dr Deane Fergie are sued in respect of their provision of
consultancy services to the ALRM including the preparation of a report
containing an anthropological evaluation of the significance of secret women's
knowledge within Aboriginal tradition to the area where the bridge was to be
constructed. The last respondent is the Commonwealth of Australia which is sued
for compensation on the basis that the declaration under the Heritage
Protection Act resulted in the acquisition of property belonging to Binalong.
The evidence received by the Court on this topic is significantly different to
that which was before the Royal Commission. Upon the evidence before this Court
I am not satisfied that the restricted women's knowledge was fabricated or that
it was not part of genuine Aboriginal tradition. One of the two key independent
expert witnesses from the South Australian Museum, Philip Clark, was found by
the Federal Court to have erred in terms of professional objectivity before the
Royal Commission when it was discovered that he had been secretly helping the
lawyers for the "dissident" Ngarrindjerri women. In 2001, a civil case in the
Federal Court of Australia found against the developers and dismissed the
claims of fabrication. Aftermath. Successful defamation actions taken by
developers Tom and Wendy Chapman and their son Andrew against conservation
groups, academics, politicians, media operators, printers and individuals who
had spoken out against the Bridge have resulted in the Chapmans receiving court
judgements of around $850,000 in their favour. The bulk of the damages related
to claims by the defendants that the Chapmans had used SLAPP accusations to
silence them. The defamation case defendants relied heavily on the defence of
"fair comment upon a matter of public interest" and the "Lange Defence"
(pronounced : The constitutional right to freedom of speech on political
matters). However; the court found that these defences did not apply because
the defendants were motivated by malice which was proven by the Defendants
being engaged in a "campaign" to stop the bridge and the "targeting" of the
Chapmans. The judgment was of concern to environmental activists as any form of
direct action such as non-violent picketing, boycotting or attempts to coerce
changes of policy or behaviour, while not illegal, could impute "malice" in any
resulting defamation claim. As a result of the Chapman defamation actions, the
Environmental Defenders Office has called for the introduction of a "Protection
of Public Participation Act" for South Australia. Based on North American
legislation, the proposed Act would ensure that those engaged in non-violent
public participation are protected from threats or suits that infringe free
speech. In early 2002, Peter Sutton, a former head of Anthropology of the South
Australian Museum who had been unable to take a position on the claims, stated
that additional evidence discovered since the von Doussa judgement had changed
his view. "I still allow that aspects of these beliefs may have been
embellished or given greater weight than before...but the patterns and matches
with earlier materials on some strands makes the overal fabrication theory
insupportable." In September 2002, the Alexandrina Council apologised to the
Ngarrindjeri, acknowledged their rights as the traditional owners of the
country and entered into a Kungun Ngarrindjeri Yunnan (Listen to Ngarrindjeri
Speaking) agreement. On 7 July 2010, the Government of South Australia endorsed
the finding that "Secret Women's Business" was genuine in a ceremony at the
foot of the bridge. Ngarrindjeri elders then led a symbolic walk across the
bridge. Elders now believe it is acceptable for Ngarrindjeri people to use the
bridge to access their land and waters but culturally and morally still reject
the bridge.
