Hindu nationalism Hindu nationalism has been collectively referred to as the
expressions of social and political thought, based on the native spiritual and
cultural traditions of historical India. Some scholars have argued that the use
of the term "Hindu nationalism" to refer to "Hindū rāṣṭravāda" is a
simplistic translation and is better described by the term "Hindu polity". The
native thought streams became highly relevant in the Indian history when they
helped form a distinctive identity to the Indian polity and provided a basis
for questioning colonialism. They inspired the freedom movements against the
British rule based on armed struggle, coercive politics and non-violent
protests. They also influenced social reform movements and economic thinking in
India. History. The term Hinduism derives from a Persian word that refers to
the Sindhu (or Indus) river in northwest India; "Hindu" was first used in the
14th century by Arabs, Persians, and Afghans to describe the peoples of the
region. The usage of the word 'Hindu' to describe the native polity of India
have been found in the historical accounts of medieval India. These usages show
that the word Hindu, until the early nineteenth century was emphasized by
nativity rather than by religion. Prominent among the southern Indian rulers of
the fourteenth century were the Sangama rulers of Vijayanagara empire who were
hailed as 'Hinduraya suratana', the best among the Hindu rulers. The Sangama
rulers were in constant conflict with the Sultanate of Bijapur, and this usage
of the word 'Hindu' in the title, was obviously to distinguish them as native
rulers as against the Sultans who were "perceived to be foreign in origin". In
the sixteenth century in north India, in the year 1556, Samrat Hem Chandra
Vikramaditya, native of Rewari, Haryana established vedic 'Hindu Raj' from
Delhi after defeating Akbar's Mughal forces at Agra and Delhi, albeit for a
short period. Prior to his coronation on 7th October,1556, at Purana Quila
( Pandvon Ka Quila ) Delhi, Hemu had won 22 battles, between 1553-1556, against
Afghans and Mughals from Punjab to Bengal, without losing any. Hem Chandra was
killed in the Second Battle of Panipat. According to Palmer-Fernandez "Hindus"
did not conceive themselves as a religious unity in any sense except in
opposition to foreign rule. For example, the early seventeenth-century Telugu
work, 'Rayavachakamu', condemns the Muslim rulers for being foreign and
barbarian and only rarely for specifically religious traits. The other
references include the glorification of the Chauhana heroes of Jalor as 'Hindu'
by Padmanabha in his epic poem, Kanhadade-prabandha, which he composed in AD
1455. The Rajput ruler, Maha Rana Pratap became renowned with the title of
'Hindu-kula-kamala-divakara' for his relentless fight against the Mughals.
Maharaja Pratap Aditya was the most prominent of the Hindu rulers of Bengal. He
declared independence from the Mughals and established an independent Hindu
state in Bengal. 'Hindavi Swarajya' (self rule of the natives) was how the rule
of Chhatrapati Shivaji Maharaj, the most notable of the rulers of the
seventeenth century was described. The usage of 'Hindavi' (translated as 'of
Hindus' in Marathi) in 'Hindavi Swarajya' is considered to mean Indian
Independence rather than the rule by a religious sect or a community. Hindu
Renaissance in the late 19th century. Many Hindu reform movements originated in
the late nineteenth century. These movements led to the fresh interpretations
of the ancient scriptures of Upanishads and Vedanta and also emphasized on
social reform. The marked feature of these movements was that they countered
the notion of western superiority and white supremacy propounded by the
colonizers as a justification for British colonialism in India. This led to the
upsurge of patriotic ideas that formed the cultural and an ideological basis
for the freedom struggle in India. Brahmo Samaj. The Brahmo Samaj was one of
the earliest Hindu renaissance movements in India under the British rule. It
was started by a Bengali scholar, Ram Mohan Roy in 1828. Ram Mohan Roy
endeavored to create from the ancient Upanishadic texts, a vision of
rationalist 'modern' India. Religiously he criticized idolatry and believed in
a monotheistic religion devoid of any idolatry and religious customs. His major
emphasis was social reform. He fought against Caste discrimination and
advocated equal rights for women. Although the Brahmos found favorable response
from the British Government and the Westernized Indians, they were largely
isolated from the larger Hindu society due to their intellectual Vedantic and
Unitarian views. But their efforts to systematize Hindu spirituality based on
rational and logical interpretation of the ancient Indian texts would be
carried forward by other movements in Bengal and across India. Arya Samaj. Arya
Samaj is considered one of the overarching Hindu renaissance movements of the
late nineteenth century. Swami Dayananda, the founder of Arya Samaj, rejected
idolatry, caste restriction and untouchability, child marriage and advocated
equal status and opportunities for women. He opposed "Brahmanism" (which he
believed had led to the corruption of the knowledge of Vedas) as much as he
opposed Christianity and Islam. Although Arya Samaj was a social movement, many
revolutionaries and political leaders of the Indian Independence movement like
Ramprasad Bismil, Bhagat SinghShyamji Krishnavarma, Bhai Paramanand and Lala
Lajpat Rai were to be inspired by it. Swami Vivekananda. Another 19th century
Hindu reformer was Swami Vivekananda. Vivekananda as a student was educated in
contemporary Western thought. He joined Brahmo Samaj briefly before meeting
Ramakrishna, who was a priest in the temple of the mother goddess Kali in
Calcutta and who was to become his Guru. Vivekananda's major achievement was to
ground Hindu spirituality in a systematic interpretation of Vedanta. This
project started with Ram Mohan Roy of Brahmo Samaj and which had produced
rational Hinduism was now combined with disciplines such as yoga and the
concept of social service to attain perfection from the ascetic traditions in
what Vivekananda called the "practical Vedanta". The practical side essentially
included participation in social reform. He made Hindu spirituality,
intellectually available to the Westernized audience. His famous speech at the
Parliament of the World's Religions at Chicago on September 11, 1893, followed
huge reception of his thought in the West and made him a celebrity in the West
and subsequently in India too. A major element of Vivekananda's message was
nationalist. He saw his effort very much in terms of a revitalization of the
Hindu nation, which carried Hindu spirituality and which could counter Western
materialism. The notions of White supremacy and Western superiority, strongly
believed by the colonizers, were to be questioned based on Hindu spirituality.
This kind of spiritual Hinduism was later carried forward by Mohandas K. Gandhi
and Sarvepalli Radhakrishnan. It also became a main inspiration for the current
brand of Hindu nationalism today. One of the most revered leaders of the
Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh (RSS), Baba Saheb Apte's lifelong pet sentence was
"Vivekananda is like Gita for the RSS." Historians have observed that this
helped the nascent Independence movement with a distinct national identity and
kept it from being the simple derivative function of European nationalisms. Sri
Aurobindo. Sri Aurobindo was a nationalist and one of the first to embrace the
idea of complete political independence for India. He was inspired by the
writings of Swami Vivekananda and the novels of Bankim Chandra Chattopadhyay.
He “based his claim for freedom for India on the inherent right to freedom,
not on any charge of misgovernment or oppression”. He believed that the
primary requisite for national progress, national reform, is the free habit of
free and healthy national thought and action and that it was impossible in a
state of servitude. He was part of the revolutionary group Anushilan Samiti and
was involved in armed struggle against the British In his brief political
career spanning only four years, he led a delegation from Bengal to the Indian
National Congress session of 1907 and contributed to the revolutionary
newspaper Bande Mataram. In 1910, he withdrew from political life and spent his
remaining life doing spiritual exercises and writing. But his works kept
inspiring revolutionaries and struggles for freedom, including the famous
Chittagong Uprising. Both Swami Vivekananda and Sri Aurobindo are credited with
having founded the basis for a vision of freedom and glory for India in the
spiritual richness and heritage of Hinduism. Independence movement. The
influence of the Hindu renaissance movements was such that by the turn of the
20th century, there was a confluence of ideas of the Hindu cultural nationalism
with the ideas of Indian nationalism. Both could be spoken synonymous even by
tendencies that were seemingly opposed to sectarian communalism and Hindu
majoritism. The Hindu renaissance movements held considerable influence over
the revolutionary movements against the British rule and formed the
philosophical basis for the struggles and political movements that originated
in the first decade of the twentieth century. Revolutionary movements.
Anushilan Samiti and Jugantar. Anushilan Samiti was one of the prominent
revolutionary movements in India in the early part of twentieth century. It was
started as a cultural society in 1902, by Aurobindo and the followers of Bankim
Chandra to propagate the teachings of the Bhagavad-Gita. But soon the Samiti
had its goal to overthrow the British rule in India. Various branches of the
Samiti sprung across India in the guise of suburban fitness clubs but secretly
imparted arms training to its members with the implicit aim of using them
against the British administration On April 30, 1908 at Muzaffarpur, two
revolutionaries, Khudiram Bose and Prafulla Chaki threw bombs at a British
convoy aimed at British officer Kingsford. Both were arrested trying to flee.
Aurobindo was also arrested on 2 May 1908 and sent to Alipore jail. The report
sent from Andrew Fraser, the then Lt Governor of Bengal to Lord Minto in
England declared that although Sri Aurobindo came to Calcutta in 1906 as a
Professor at the National College, “he has ever since been the principal
advisor of the revolutionary party. It is of utmost importance to arrest his
potential for mischief, for he is the prime mover and can easily set tools, one
to replace another.” But charges against Aurobindo were never proved and he
was acquitted. Many members of the group faced charges and were transported and
imprisoned for life. Others went into hiding. In 1910, when, Aurobindo withdrew
from political life and decided to live a life of renounciate, the Anushilan
Samiti declined. One of the revolutionaries, Jatindra Das Mukherjee, who
managed to escape the trial started a group which would be called Jugantar.
Jugantar continued with its armed struggle with the British, but the arrests of
its key members and subsequent trials weakened its influence. Many of its
members were imprisoned for life in the notorious Andaman Cellular jail. India
House. A revolutionary movement was started by Shyamji Krishnavarma, a
Sanskritist and an Arya Samajist, in London, under the name of India House in
1905. The brain behind this movement was said to be V D Savarkar. Krishnaverma
also published a monthly "Indian Sociologist", where the idea of an armed
struggle against the British was openly espoused. The movement had become well
known for its activities in the Indian expatriates in London. When Gandhi
visited London in 1909, he shared a platform with the revolutionaries where
both the parties politely agreed to disagree, on the question of violent
struggle against British and whether Ramayana justified such violence. Gandhi,
while admiring the "patriotism" of the young revolutionaries, had dissented
vociferously from their violent blueprints for social change. In turn the
revolutionaries disliked his adherence to constitutionalism and his close
contacts with moderate leaders of Indian National Congress. Moreover they
considered his method of "passive resistance" effeminate and humiliating. The
India House had soon to face a closure following the assassination of William
Hutt Curzon Wyllie by the revolutionary Madan Lal Dhingra, who was close to
India House. Veer Savarkar also faced charges and was transported. Shyamji
Krishnaverma fled to Paris. India House gave formative support to ideas that
were later formulated by Savarkar in his book named 'Hindutva'. Hindutva was to
gain relevance in the run up to the Indian Independence and would also form the
core to the political party named Hindu Mahasabha started by Savarkar. Indian
National Congress. “Lal-Bal-Pal”. “Lal-Bal-Pal” is the phrase that is
used to refer to the three nationalist leaders Lala Lajpat Rai, Bal Gangadhar
Tilak and Bipin Chandra Pal who held the sway over the Indian Nationalist
movement and the freedom struggle in the early parts of twentieth century. Lala
Lajpat Rai belonged to the northern province of Punjab. He was influenced
greatly by the Arya Samaj and was part of the Hindu reform movement. He joined
the Indian National Congress in 1888 and became a prominent figure in the
Indian Independence Movement. He started numerous educational institutions. The
National College at Lahore started by him became the centre for revolutionary
ideas and was the college where revolutionaries like Bhagat Singh studied.
While leading a procession against the Simon Commission, he was fatally injured
in the lathi charge by the British police. His death led the revolutionaries
like Chandrashekar Azad and Bhagat Singh to kill the British officer J.P.
Saunders, who they believed was responsible for the death of Lala Lajpat Rai.
Bal Gangadhar Tilak was a nationalist leader from the Central Indian province
of Maharashtra. He has been widely acclaimed the “Father of Indian unrest”
who used the press and Hindu occasions like Ganesh Chaturthi and symbols like
the Cow to create unrest against the British administration in India. Tilak
joined the Indian National Congress in 1890. Under the influence of such
leaders, the political discourse of the Congress moved from polite accusation
that imperial rule was “un-British” to the forthright claim of Tilak that
“Swaraj is my birthright and I will have it”. Bipin Chandra Pal of Bengal
was another prominent figure of the Indian nationalist movement, who is
considered a modern Hindu reformer, who stood for Hindu cultural nationalism
and was opposed to sectarian communalism and Hindu majoritism. He joined the
Indian National Congress in 1886 and was also one of the key members of
revolutionary India House. Gandhi and Ramarajya. Though Mohandas K. Gandhi
never called himself a “Hindu nationalist”, he believed in and propagated
concepts like Dharma and "Rama Rajya” (Rule of Lord Rama) as part of his
social and political philosophy. Gandhi said “By political independence I do
not mean an imitation to the British House of commons, or the soviet rule of
Russia or the Fascist rule of Italy or the Nazi rule of Germany. They have
systems suited to their genius. We must have ours suited to ours. What that can
be is more than I can tell. I have described it as Ramarajya i.e., sovereignty
of the people based on pure moral authority." He emphasized that “Rama
Rajya” to him meant peace and justice. “Whether Rama of my imagination ever
lived or not on this earth, the ancient ideal of Ramarajya is undoubtedly one
of true democracy in which the meanest citizen could be sure of swift justice
without an elaborate and costly procedure.” He also emphasized that it meant
respect for all religions: “My Hinduism teaches me to respect all religions.
In this lies the secret of Ramarajya.” Madan Mohan Malviya, an educationist
and a politician with the Indian National Congress was also a vociferous
proponent of the philosophy of Bhagavad-Gita. He was the president of the
Indian National Congress in the year 1909 and 1918. He was seen as a 'moderate'
in the Congress and was also considered very close to Gandhi. He popularized
the Sanskrit phrase "Satyameva Jayate" (Truth alone triumphs), which today is
the national motto of the Republic of India. He founded the Benaras Hindu
University in 1919 and became its first Vice-Chancellor. Subhas Bose. Apart
from Gandhi, revolutionary leader Netaji Subhas Chandra Bose referred to
Vedanta and the Bhagavad-Gita as sources of inspiration for the struggle
against the British. Swami Vivekananda's teachings on universalism, his
nationalist thoughts and his emphasis on social service and reform had all
inspired Subhas Chandra Bose from his very young days. The fresh interpretation
of the India's ancient scriptures appealed immensely to Subhas. Hindu
spirituality formed the essential part of his political and social thought
through his adult life, although there was no sense of bigotry or orthodoxy in
it. Subhas who called himself a socialist, believed that socialism in India
owed its origins to Swami Vivekananda. As historian Leonard Gordan explains
"Inner religious explorations continued to be a part of his adult life. This
set him apart from the slowly growing number of atheistic socialists and
communists who dotted the Indian landscape." "Hinduism was an essential part of
his Indianess". His strategy against the British also included the use of Hindu
symbols and festivals. In 1925, while in Mandalay jail, he went on a hunger
strike when Durga puja was not supported by prison authorities. Keshav Baliram
Hedgewar. Another leader of prime importance in the ascent of Hindu nationalism
was Dr Keshav Baliram Hedgewar of Nagpur. Hedgewar as a medical student in
Calcutta had been part of the revolutionary activities of the Anushilan Samiti
and Jugantar. He was charged with sedition in 1921 by the British
Administration and served a year in prison. He was briefly a member of Indian
National Congress. In 1925, he left the Congress to form the Rashtriya
Swayamsevak Sangh, which would become the focal point of Hindu movements in
Independent India. After the formation of the RSS too, Hedgewar was to take
part in the Indian National Congress led movements against the British rule. He
joined the Jungle Satyagraha agitation in 1931 and served a second term in
prison. The Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh started by him became one of the most
prominent Hindu organization with its influence ranging in the social and
political spheres of India. Partition of India. The Partition of India outraged
many majority Hindu nationalist politicians and social groups. Savarkar and
members of the Hindu Mahasabha were extremely critical of Mohandas K. Gandhi's
leadership. They accused him of appeasing the Muslims to preserve a unity that
in their opinion, did not exist; Savarkar endorsed the concept of the Two-
nation theory while disagreeing with it in practice. Some Hindu nationalists
also blamed Gandhi for conceding Pakistan to the Muslim League via appeasement.
Also, they were further inflamed when Gandhi conducted a fast-unto-death for
the Indian government to give Rs. 55 crores which were due to the Pakistan
government, but were being held back due to the Indo-Pakistani War of 1947.
After the assassination of Mahatma Gandhi by Nathuram Godse, the Sangh Parivar
was plunged into distress when the RSS was accused of involvement in his
murder. Along with the conspirators and the assassin, Vinayak Damodar Savarkar
was also arrested. The court acquitted Savarkar, and the RSS was found be to
completely unlinked with the conspirators. The Hindu Mahasabha, of which Godse
was a member, lost membership and popularity. The effects of public outrage had
a permanent effect on the Hindu Mahasabha, which is now a defunct Hindutva
party. Evolution of ideological terminology. The word 'Hindu', throughout
history, had been used as an inclusive description which lacked a definition
and was used to refer to the native traditions and people of India. It was only
in the late eighteenth century that the word 'Hindu' came to be used
extensively with religious connotation, while still being used as a synecdoche
describing the indigenuous traditions. Hindutva and Hindu Rashtra. Savarkar.
Savarkar was one of the first in the twentieth century to attempt a definitive
description of the term 'Hindu' in terms of what he called "Hindutva" meaning
Hinduness. The coinage of the term 'Hindutva' was an attempt by Savarkar who
was an atheist and a rationalist, to de-link it from any religious connotations
that had become attached to it. He defined the word Hindu as: "He who considers
India as both his Fatherland and Holyland". He thus defined Hindutva ("Hindu-
ness") or Hindu as different from Hinduism. This definition kept the Abrahamic
religions (Judaism, Christianity and Islam) outside its ambit and considered
only native religious denominations as Hindu. This distinction was emphasized
on the basis of territorial loyalty rather than on the religious practices. In
this book that was written in the backdrop of the Khilafat Movement and the
subsequent Malabar Rebellion, Savarkar wrote "Their (Muslims' and Christians')
holy land is far off in Arabia or Palestine. Their mythology and Godmen, ideas
and heroes are not the children of this soil. Consequently their names and
their outlook smack of foreign origin. Their love is divided". Savarkar, also
defined the concept of Hindu Rashtra (translated as "Hindu polity"). The
concept of Hindu Polity called for the protection of Hindu people and their
culture and emphasized that political and economic systems should be based on
native thought rather than on the concepts borrowed from the West. Golwalkar. M
S Golwalkar, the second head of the Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh (RSS), was to
further this non-religious, territorial loyalty based definition of 'Hindu' in
his book 'Bunch of thoughts'. 'Hindutva' and 'Hindu Rashtra' would form the
basis of Golwalkar's ideology and that of the RSS. While emphasizing on
religious pluralism, Golwalkar believed that Semitic monotheism and exclusivism
were incompatible with and against the native Hindu culture. He wrote "Those
creeds (Islam and Christianity) have but one prophet, one scripture and one
God, other than whom there is no path of salvation for the human soul. It
requires no great intelligence to see the absurdity of such a proposition". He
added "As far as the national tradition of this land is concerned, it never
considers that with a change in the method of worship, an individual ceases to
be the son of the soil and should be treated as an alien. Here, in this land,
there can be no objection to God being called by any name whatever. Ingrained
in this soil is love and respect for all faiths and religious beliefs. He
cannot be a son of this soil at all who is intolerant of other faiths." He
further would echo the views of Savarkar on territorial loyalty, but with a
degree of inclusiveness, when he wrote "So, all that is expected of our Muslim
and Christen co-citizens is the shedding of the notions of their being
'religious minorities' as also their foreign mental complexion and merging
themselves in the common national stream of this soil." Deendayal Upadhyaya.
Deendayal Upadhyaya, another RSS ideologue, presented the Integral Humanism as
the political philosophy of the erstwhile Bharatiya Jana Sangh in the form of
four lectures delivered in Bombay on April 22–25, 1965 as an attempt to offer
a third way, rejecting both communism and capitalism as the means for socio-
economic emancipation. Contemporary descriptions. Later thinkers of the RSS,
like H V Sheshadri and K S Rao, were to emphasize on the non theocratic nature
of the word "Hindu Rashtra", which they believed was often inadequately
translated, ill interpreted and wrongly stereotyped as a theocratic state. In a
book, H. V. Sheshadri, the senior leader of the RSS writes "As Hindu Rashtra is
not a religious concept, it is also not a political concept. It is generally
misinterpreted as a theocratic state or a religious Hindu state. Nation
(Rashtra) and State (Rajya) are entirely different and should never be mixed
up. State is purely a political concept. The State changes as the political
authority shifts from person to person or party to party. But the people in the
Nation remain the same. They would maintain that the concept of Hindu Rashtra
is in complete agreement with the principles of secularism and democracy. The
concept of 'Hindutva' is continued to be espoused by the organizations like the
RSS and political parties like the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP). But the
definition, does not have the same rigidity with respect to the concept of
'holy land' laid down by Savarkar, and stresses on inclusivism and patriotism.
BJP leader and the then leader of opposition, Atal Bihari Vajpayee, in 1998,
articulated the concept of 'holy land' in Hindutva as follows "Mecca can
continue to be holy for the Muslims but India should be holier than the holy
for them. You can go to a mosque and offer namaz, you can keep the roza. We
have no problem. But if you have to choose between Mecca or Islam and India you
must choose India. All the Muslims should have this feeling: we will live and
die only for this country.". In an article written by Hindutva thinker and
journalist Dipin Damodharan, Hindu nation:The Unddisputed Legacy of Every
Indian published in American Chronicle, he writes " The word Hindu stands for
India´s entire society, those who live in this country and admit the fact that
this is a primeval nation with a long history and an ancient tradition are all
roofed by that word; they are all members of the Hindu Rashtra". He also quotes
a mantra from "Vishnu Purana" to support his view. It tells India as the one
extending to the north of the seas and lying to the south of the Himalayas and
calls it Bharat (India) and her children as Bharatis (Indians). In 1995, in a
landmark judgment the Supreme Court of India observed that "Ordinarily,
Hindutva is understood as a way of life or a state of mind and is not to be
equated with or understood as religious Hindu fundamentalism. A Hindu may
embrace a non-Hindu religion without ceasing to be a Hindu and since the Hindu
is disposed to think synthetically and to regard other forms of worship,
strange gods and divergent doctrines as inadequate rather than wrong or
objectionable, he tends to believe that the highest divine powers complement
each other for the well-being of the world and mankind." Post-independence
movements. Somnath temple movement. The Somnath temple is an ancient temple at
Prabhas Patan in the coastal Indian province of Gujarat, which had been
destroyed several times by the Muslim foreign invaders, starting with Mahmud
Ghaznavi in 1025 AD. The last of such destructions took place in 1706 AD when
Prince Mohammad Azam carried out the orders of Moghul ruler Aurangzeb to
destroy the temple of Somnath beyond possible repair. A small mosque was put in
its place. Before Independence, Prabhas Pattan where Somnath is located was
part of the Junagarh State, ruled by the Nawab of Junagarh. On the eve of
Independence the Nawab announced the accession of Junagarh, which had over 80%
Hindu population, to Pakistan. The people of Junagarh rose in revolt and set up
a parallel government under Gandhian leader and freedom fighter, Shri Samaldas
Gandhi. The Nawab, unable to resist the popular pressure, bowed out and escaped
to Pakistan. The provincial government under Samaldas Gandhi formally asked
Government of India to take over. The Deputy Prime Minister of India, Sardar
Patel came to Junagadh on November 12, 1947 to direct the occupation of the
state by the Indian army and at the same time ordered the reconstruction of the
Somanath temple. When Sardar Patel, K M Munshi and other leaders of the
Congress went to Gandhiji with the proposal of reconstructing the Somnath
temple, Gandhiji blessed the move, but suggested that the funds for the
construction should be collected from the public and the temple should not be
funded by the state. He expressed that he was proud to associate himself to the
project of renovation of the temple But soon both Gandhiji and Sardar Patel
died and the task of reconstruction of the temple was now continued under the
leadership of K M Munshi, who was the Minister for Food and Civil, supplies in
the Nehru Government. The ruins were pulled down in October 1950 and the mosque
was moved to a different location. In May 1951, Rajendra Prasad, the first
President of the Republic of India, invited by K M Munshi, performed the
installation ceremony for the temple Rajendra Prasad said in his address "It is
my view that the reconstruction of the Somnath Temple will be complete on that
day when not only a magnificent edifice will arise on this foundation, but the
mansion of India's prosperity will be really that prosperity of which the
ancient temple of Somnath was a symbol.". He added "The Somnath temple
signifies that the power of reconstruction is always greater than the power of
destruction" This episode created a serious rift between the then Prime
Minister Jawaharlal Nehru, who saw in movement for reconstruction of the temple
an attempt at Hindu revivalism and the President Rajendra Prasad and Union
Minister K M Munshi, saw in its reconstruction, the fruits of freedom and the
reversal of injustice done to Hindus. The emergence of the Sangh Parivar. The
Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh, which was started in 1925, had grown as a huge
organisation by the end of British rule in India. But the assassination of
Gandhi and a subsequent ban on the organisation plunged it into distress. The
ban was revoked when it was absolved of the charges and it led to the resumtion
of its activities. The 1960s saw the volunteers of the RSS join the different
social and political movements. Movements that saw a large presence of
volunteers included the Bhoodan, a land reform movement led by prominent
Gandhian Vinoba Bhave and the Sarvodaya led by another Gandhian Jayaprakash
Narayan. RSS supported trade union, the Bharatiya Mazdoor Sangh and political
party Bharatiya Jana Sangh also grew into considerable prominence by the end of
the decade. Another prominent development was the formation of the Vishwa Hindu
Parishad (VHP), an organisation of Hindu religious leaders, supported by the
RSS, with the aim of uniting the various Hindu religious denominations and to
usher social reform. The first VHP meeting at Mumbai was attended among others
by all the Shankaracharyas, Jain leaders, Sikh leader Master Tara Singh
Malhotra, the Dalai Lama and contemporary Hindu leaders like Swami
Chinmayananda. From its initial years, the VHP led a concerted attack on the
social evils of untouchability and casteism while launching social welfare
programmes in the areas of education and health care, especially for the
Scheduled Castes, backward classes and the tribals. The organizations started
and supported by the RSS volunteers came to be known collectively as the Sangh
Parivar. Next few decades saw a steady growth of the influence of the Sangh
Parivar in the social and political space of India.
