History of democracy The history of democracy traces back from classical Athens
in the 6th century B.C. to the present day. According to one definition,
democracy is a political system in which all the members of the society have an
equal share of formal political power. In modern representative democracy, this
formal equality is embodied primarily in the right to vote. Antiquity. Historic
origins. Although it is generally believed that the concepts of democracy and
constitution were created in one particular place and time – identified as
Ancient Athens circa 508 BC — there is evidence to suggest that democratic
forms of government, in a broad sense, may have existed in several areas of the
world well before the turn of the 5th century. Within that broad sense it is
plausible to assume that democracy in one form or another arises naturally in
any well-bonded group, such as a tribe. This is tribalism or "primitive
democracy". A "primitive democracy" is identified in small communities or
villages when the following take place: face-to-face discussion in the village
council or a headman whose decisions are supported by village elders or other
cooperative modes of government. Nevertheless, on a larger scale sharper
contrasts arise when the village and the city are examined as political
communities. In urban governments, all other forms of rule – monarchy,
tyranny, aristocracy, and oligarchy – have flourished. Proto-democratic
societies. In recent decades scholars have explored the possibility that
advancements toward democratic government occurred somewhere else (i.e. other
than Greece) first, as Greece developed its complex social and political
institutions long after the appearance of the earliest civilizations in Egypt
and the Near East. Mesopotamia. Thorkild Jacobsen has studied the pre-
Babylonian Mesopotamia and uses Sumerian epic, myth and historical records to
identify what he calls "primitive democracy". By this he means a government in
which ultimate power rests with the mass of free male citizens, although "the
various functions of government are as yet little specialized, the power
structure is loose". In the early period of Sumer, kings such as Gilgamesh did
not hold the autocratic power which later Mesopotamia rulers wielded. Rather,
major city-states had a council of elders and a council of "young men" (likely
to be comprised by free men bearing arms) that possessed the final political
authority, and had to be consulted on all major issues such as war. This
pioneering work, while constantly cited, has invoked little serious discussion
and less outright acceptance. The criticism from other scholars focuses on the
use of the word "democracy", since the same evidence also can be interpreted
convincingly to demonstrate a power struggle between primitive monarchs and the
nobility, a struggle in which the common people act more as pawns than the
sovereign authority. Jacobsen concedes that the vagueness of the evidence
prohibits the separation between the "Mesopotamian democracy" from a "primitive
oligarchy". India. A serious claim for early democratic institutions comes from
the independent "republics" of India, "sanghas" and "ganas", which existed as
early as the sixth century BCE and persisted in some areas until the fourth
century CE. The evidence is scattered and no pure historical source exists for
that period. In addition, Diodorus (a Greek historian writing two centuries
after the time of Alexander the Great's invasion of India), without offering
any detail, mentions that independent and democratic states existed in India.
However, modern scholars note that the word "democracy" at the third century BC
and later had been degraded and could mean any autonomous state no matter how
oligarchic it was. The main characteristics of the "gana" seem to be a monarch,
usually called raja and a deliberative assembly. The assembly met regularly in
which at least in some states attendance was open to all free men, and
discussed all major state decisions. It had also full financial,
administrative, and judicial authority. Other officers, who are rarely
mentioned, obeyed the decisions of the assembly. The monarch was elected by the
"gana" and apparently he always belonged to a family of the noble "K'satriya
Varna". The monarch coordinated his activities with the assembly and in some
states along with a council of other nobles. The Licchavis had a primary
governing body of 7,077 rajas, the heads of the most important families. On the
other hand, the Shakyas, the Gautama Buddha's people, had the assembly open to
all men, rich and poor. Scholars differ over how to describe these governments
and the vague, sporadic quality of the evidence allows for wide disagreements.
Some emphasize the central role of the assemblies and thus tout them as
democracies; other scholars focus on the upper class domination of the
leadership and possible control of the assembly and see an oligarchy or an
aristocracy. Despite the obvious power of the assembly, it has not yet been
established if the composition and participation was truly popular. The first
main obstacle is the lack of evidence describing the popular power of the
assembly. This is reflected in the "Artha' shastra", an ancient handbook for
monarchs on how to rule efficiently. It contains a chapter on dealing with the
"sangas", which includes injunctions on manipulating the noble leaders, yet it
does not mention how to influence the mass of the citizens – a surprising
omission if democratic bodies, not the aristocratic families, actively
controlled the republican governments. Another issue is the persistence of the
four-tiered Varna class system. The duties and privileges on the members of
each particular caste – which were rigid enough to prohibit someone sharing a
meal with those of another order – might have affected the role members were
expected to play in the state, regardless of the formal institutions. The lack
of the concept of citizen equality across caste system boundaries lead many
scholars to believe that the true nature of "ganas" and "sanghas" would not be
comparable to that of truly democratic institutions. Sparta. Ancient Greece, in
its early period, was a loose collection of independent city states called
poleis. Many of these poleis were oligarchies. The most prominent Greek
oligarchy, and the state with which democratic Athens is most often and most
fruitfully compared, was Sparta. Yet Sparta, in its rejection of private wealth
as a primary social differentiator, was a peculiar kind of oligarchy and some
scholars note its resemblance to democracy. In Spartan government, the
political power was divided between four bodies: two Spartan Kings (monarchy),
gerousia ("Council of Gerontes" (Elders), including the two kings), the ephors
(representatives who oversaw the Kings) and the apella (assembly of Spartans).
The two kings served as the head of the government. They ruled simultaneously
but came from two separate lines. The dual kingship diluted the effective power
of the executive office. The kings shared their judicial functions with other
members of the gerousia. The members of the gerousia had to be over the age of
60 and were elected for life. In theory, any Spartan over that age could stand
for election. However, in practice, they were selected from wealthy,
aristocratic families. The gerousia possessed the crucial power of legislative
initiative. Apella, the most democratic element, was the assembly where
Spartans above the age of 30 elected the members of the gerousia and the
ephors, and accepted or rejected gerousia's proposals. Finally, the five ephors
were Spartans chosen in apella to oversee the actions of the kings and other
public officials and, if necessary, depose them. They served for one year and
could not be re-elected for a second time. Over the years the ephors held great
influence into forming foreign policy and acted as the main executive body of
state. Additionally, they had full responsibility of the Spartan educational
system, which was essential for maintaining the high standards of the Spartan
army. As Aristotle noted, ephors were the most important key institution of
state, but because often they were appointed from the whole social body it
resulted in very poor men holding office, with the ensuing possibility that
they could easily be bought. The creator of the Spartan system of rule was the
legendary lawgiver Lycurgus. He is associated with the drastic reforms that
were instituted in Sparta after the revolt of the helots in the second half of
the 7th century BC. In order to prevent another helot revolt, Lycurgus devised
the highly militarized communal system that made Sparta unique among the city-
states of Greece. All his reforms were directed towards the three Spartan
virtues: equality (among citizens), military fitness and austerity. It is also
probable that Lycurgus delineated the powers of the two traditional organs of
the Spartan government, the gerousia and the apella. The reforms of Lycurgus
were written as a list of rules/laws called Great Rhetra; making it the world's
first written constitution. In the following centuries Sparta became a military
superpower, and its system of rule was admired throughout the Greek world for
its political stability. In particular, the concept of equality played an
important role in Spartan society. The Spartans referred to themselves as
"όμοιοι" ("Homoioi", "men of equal status"). It was also reflected in the
Spartan public educational system, agoge, where all citizens irrespective of
wealth or status had the same education. This was admired almost universally by
contemporaries, from historians such as Herodotus and Xenophon to philosophers
such as Plato and Aristotle. In addition, the Spartan women, unlike elsewhere,
enjoyed "every kind of luxury and intemperance" including elementary rights
such as the right to inheritance, property ownership and public education.
Overall the Spartans were remarkably free to criticize their kings and they
were able to depose and exile them. However, despite these "democratic"
elements in the Spartan constitution, there are two cardinal criticisms,
classifying Sparta as an oligarchy. First, individual freedom was restricted,
since as Plutarch writes ""no man was allowed to live as he wished"", but as in
a ""military camp"" all were engaged in the public service of their polis. And
second, the gerousia effectively maintained the biggest share of power of the
various governmental bodies. The political stability of Sparta also meant that
no significant changes in the constitution were made. The oligarchic elements
of Sparta became even stronger, especially after the influx of gold and silver
from the victories in the Persian Wars. In addition, Athens, after the Persian
Wars, was becoming the hegemonic power in the Greek world and disagreements
between Sparta and Athens over supremacy emerged. These lead to a series of
armed conflicts known as the Peloponnesian War, with Sparta prevailing in the
end. However, the war exhausted both poleis and Sparta was in turn humbled by
Thebes at the Battle of Leuctra in 371 BC. It was all brought to an end a few
years later, when Philip II of Macedon crushed what remained of the power of
the factional city states to his South. Athens. Athens is regarded as the
birthplace of democracy and it is considered an important reference point of
democracy. Athens emerged in the 7th century BC, like many other poleis, with a
dominating powerful aristocracy. However, this domination led to exploitation
causing significant economic, political, and social problems. These problems
were enhanced early in the sixth century and as ""the many were enslaved to
few, the people rose against the notables"". At the same period in the Greek
world many traditional aristocracies were disrupted by popular revolutions,
like Sparta in the second half of the 7th century BC. Sparta's constitutional
reforms by Lycurgus introduced a hoplite state and showed how inherited
governments can be changed and lead to military victory. After a period of
unrest between the rich and the poor, the Athenians of all classes turned to
Solon for acting as a mediator between rival factions, and reaching to a
generally satisfactory solution of their problems. Solon and the foundations of
democracy. Solon, an Athenian (Greek) of noble descent but moderate means, was
a Lyric poet and later a lawmaker; Plutarch placed him as one of the Seven
Sages of the ancient world. Solon attempted to satisfy all sides by alleviating
the suffering of the poor majority without removing all the privileges of the
rich minority. Solon divided the Athenians, into four property classes, with
different rights and duties for each. As the Rhetra did in the Lycurgian
Sparta, Solon formalized the composition and functions of the governmental
bodies. Now, all citizens were entitled to attend the Ecclesia (Assembly) and
vote. Ecclesia became, in principle, the sovereign body, entitled to pass laws
and decrees, elect officials, and hear appeals from the most important
decisions of the courts. All but those in the poorest group might serve, a year
at a time, on a new Boule of 400, which was to prepare business for Ecclesia.
The higher governmental posts, archons (magistrates), were reserved for
citizens of the top two income groups. The retired archons were becoming
members of Areopagus (Council of the Hill of Ares), and like Gerousia in
Sparta, it was able to check improper actions of the newly powerful Ecclesia.
Solon created a mixed timocratic and democratic system of institutions.
Overall, the reforms of the lawgiver Solon in 594 BC, devised to avert the
political, economic and moral decline in archaic Athens and gave Athens its
first comprehensive code of law. The constitutional reforms eliminated
enslavement of Athenians by Athenians, established rules for legal redress
against over-reaching aristocratic archons, and assigned political privileges
on the basis of productive wealth rather than noble birth. Some of his reforms
failed in the short term, yet he is often credited with having laid the
foundations for Athenian democracy. Democracy under Cleisthenes and Pericles.
Even though the Solonian reorganization of the constitution improved the
economic position of the Athenian lower classes, it did not eliminate the
bitter aristocratic contentions for control of the archonship, the chief
executive post. Peisistratus became tyrant of Athens three times and remained
in power until his death in 527 BC. His sons Hippias and Hipparchus succeeded
him. After the fall of tyranny and before the year 508–507 was over,
Cleisthenes proposed a complete reform of the system of government, which later
was approved by the popular Ecclesia. Cleisthenes reorganized the population
into ten tribes, with the aim to change the basis of political organization
from the family loyalties to political ones, and improve the army's
organization. He also introduced the principle of equality of rights for all,
isonomia, by expanding the access to power to more citizens. During this
period, the word "democracy" (Greek: δημοκρατία – "rule by the
people") was first used by the Athenians to define their new system of
government. The Athenian democracy of Cleisthenes and Pericles, was based on
freedom, through the reforms of Solon, and equality (isonomia), introduced by
Cleisthenes and later expanded by Ephialtes and Pericles. To preserve these
principles the Athenians used lot for selecting officials. Lot's rationale was
to ensure all citizens were ""equally"" qualified for office, and to avoid any
corruption allotment machines were used. Moreover, in most positions chosen by
lot, Athenian citizens could not be selected more than once; this rotation in
office meant that no-one could build up a power base through staying in a
particular position. Another important political institution in Athens was the
courts; they were composed with large number of juries, with no judges and they
were selected by lot on a daily basis from an annual pool, also chosen by lot.
The courts had unlimited power to control the other bodies of the government
and its political leaders. Participation by the citizens selected was
mandatory, and a modest financial compensation was given to citizens whose
livelihood was affected by being "drafted" to office. The only officials chosen
by elections, one from each tribe, were the "strategoi" (generals), where
military knowledge was required, and the "treasurers", who had to be wealthy,
since any funds revealed to have been embezzled were recovered from a
treasurer's private fortune. Debate was open to all present and decisions in
all matters of policy were taken by majority vote in Ecclesia (compare direct
democracy), in which all male citizens could participate (in some cases with a
quorum of 6000). The decisions taken in Ecclesia were executed by Boule of 500,
which had already approved the agenda for Ecclesia. The Athenian Boule was
elected by lot every year and no citizen could serve more than twice. Overall,
the Athenian democracy was not only "direct" in the sense that decisions were
made by the assembled people, but also "directest" in the sense that the people
through the assembly, boule and courts of law controlled the entire political
process and a large proportion of citizens were involved constantly in the
public business. And even though the rights of the individual (probably) were
not secured by the Athenian constitution in the modern sense, the Athenians
enjoyed their liberties not in opposition to the government, but by living in a
city that was not subject to another power and by not being subjects themselves
to the rule of another person. Birth of political philosophy. Within the
Athenian democratic environment many philosophers from all over the Greek world
gathered to develop their theories. Socrates was the first to raise the
question, and further expanded by his pupil Plato, about what is the relation/
position of an individual within a community. Aristotle continued the work of
his teacher, Plato, and laid the foundations of political philosophy. The
political philosophy created in Athens was in words of Peter Hall, ""in a form
so complete that hardly added anyone of moment to it for over a millennium"".
The decline, its critics and revival. The Athenian democracy, in its two
centuries of life-time, twice voted against its democratic constitution, both
during the crisis at the end of the Pelopponesian War, creating first the Four
Hundred (in 411 BC) and second Sparta's puppet régime of the Thirty Tyrants
(in 404 BC). Both votes were under manipulation and pressure, but democracy was
recovered in less than a year in both cases. Athens restored again its
democratic constitution, after the unification by force of Greece from Phillip
II of Macedon and later Alexander the Great, but it was politically shadowed by
the Hellenistic empires. Finally after the Roman conquest of Greece in 146 BC,
Athens was restricted to matters of local administration. However, the decline
of democracy was not only due to external powers, but from its citizens, such
as Plato and his student Aristotle. Through their influential works, after the
rediscovery of classics during renaissance, Sparta's political stability was
praised, while the Periclean democracy was described as a system of rule, where
either the less well-born, the mob (as a collective tyrant) or the poorer
classes, were holding power. It was only centuries afterwards, with the
publication of "A history of Greece" by George Grote in 1846, that the Athenian
democracy of Pericles started to be viewed positively by political thinkers.
Over the last two decades scholars have re-examined the Athenian system of rule
as a model of empowering citizens and a ""post-modern"" example for communities
and organisations alike. Roman Republic. Even though Rome is classified as a
Republic and not a democracy, its history has helped preserve the concept of
democracy over the centuries. The Romans invented the concept of classics and
many works from Ancient Greece were preserved. Additionally, the Roman model of
governance inspired many political thinkers over the centuries, and today's
modern (representative) democracies imitate more the Roman than the Greek
models. The Republic. Rome was a city-state in Italy next to powerful
neighbors; Etruscans had built city-states throughout central Italy since 13th
century BC and in the south were Greek colonies. Similar to other city-states,
Rome was ruled by a king. However, social unrest and the pressure of external
threats led in 510 BC the last king to be deposed by a group of aristocrats led
by Lucius Junius Brutus. A new constitution was crafted, but the conflict
between the ruling families (patricians) and the rest of the population, the
plebeians continued. The plebs were demanding for definite, written, and
secular laws. The patrician priests, who were the recorders and interpreters of
the statutes, by keeping their records secret used their monopoly against
social change. After a long resistance to the new demands, the Senate in 454 BC
sent a commission of three patricians to Greece to study and report on the
legislation of Solon and other lawmakers. When they returned, the Assembly in
451 BC chose ten men – a "decemviri" – to formulate a new code, and gave
them supreme governmental power in Rome for two years. This commission, under
the supervision of a resolute reactionary, Appius Claudius, transformed the old
customary law of Rome into Twelve Tables and submitted them to the Assembly
(which passed them with some changes) and they were displayed in the Forum for
all who would and could read. The Twelve Tables recognised certain rights and
by the 4th century BC, the plebs were given the right to stand for consulship
and other major offices of the state. The political structure as outlined in
the Roman constitution resembled a mixed constitution and its constituent parts
were comparable to those of the Spartan constitution: two consuls, embodying
the monarchic form; the Senate, embodying the aristocratic form; and the people
through the assemblies. The consul was the highest ranking ordinary magistrate.
Consuls had power in both civil and military matters. While in the city of
Rome, the consuls were the head of the Roman government and they would preside
over the Senate and the assemblies. While abroad, each consul would command an
army. The Senate passed decrees, which were called "senatus consultum" and were
official advices to a magistrate. However, in practice it was difficult for a
magistrate to ignore the Senate's advice. The focus of the Roman Senate was
directed towards foreign policy. Though it technically had no official role in
the management of military conflict, the Senate ultimately was the force that
oversaw such affairs. Also it managed Rome's civil administration. The
requirements for becoming a senator included having at least 100,000 denarii
worth of land, being born of the patrician (noble aristocrats) class, and
having held public office at least once before. New Senators had to be approved
by the sitting members. The people of Rome through the assemblies had the final
say regarding the election of magistrates, the enactment of new laws, the
carrying out of capital punishment, the declaration of war and peace, and the
creation (or dissolution) of alliances. Despite the obvious power the
assemblies had, in practice the assemblies were the least powerful of the other
bodies of government. An assembly was legal only if summoned by a magistrate
and it was restricted from any legislative initiative or the ability to debate.
And even the candidates for public office as Livy writes ""levels were designed
so that no one appeared to be excluded from an election and yet all of the
clout resided with the leading men"". Moreover the unequal weight of votes was
making a rare practice for asking the lowest classes for their votes. Roman
stability, in Polybius’ assessment, was owing to the checks each element put
on the superiority of any other: a consul at war, for example, required the
cooperation of the Senate and the people if he hoped to secure victory and
glory, and could not be indifferent to their wishes. This was not to say that
the balance was in every way even: Polybius observes that the superiority of
the Roman to the Carthaginian constitution (another mixed constitution) at the
time of the Hannibalic War was an effect of the latter’s greater inclination
toward democracy than to aristocracy. Moreover, recent attempts to posit for
Rome personal freedom in the Greek sense – "eleutheria": living as you like
– have fallen on stony ground, since "eleutheria" (which was an ideology and
way of life in the democratic Athens) was anathema in the Roman eyes. Rome’s
core values included order, hierarchy, discipline, and obedience. These values
were enforced with laws regulating the private life of an individual. The laws
were applied in particular to the upper classes, since the upper classes were
the source of Roman moral examples. Rome became the ruler of a great
Mediterranean empire. The new provinces brought wealth to Italy, and fortunes
were made through mineral concessions and enormous slave run estates. Slaves
were imported to Italy and wealthy landowners soon began to buy up and displace
the original peasant farmers. By the late 2nd century this led to renewed
conflict between the rich and poor and demands from the latter for reform of
constitution. The background of social unease and the inability of the
traditional republican constitutions to adapt to the needs of the growing
empire led to the rise of a series of over-mighty generals, championing the
cause of either the rich or the poor, in the last century BC. Transition to
Empire. Over the next few hundred years, various generals would bypass or
overthrow the Senate for various reasons, mostly to address perceived
injustices, either against themselves or against poorer citizens or soldiers.
One of those generals was Julius Caesar, where he marched on Rome and took
supreme power over the republic. Caesar's career was cut short by his
assassination at Rome in 44 BC by a group of Senators including Marcus Junius
Brutus. In the power vacuum that followed Caesar's assassination, his friend
and chief lieutenant, Marcus Antonius, and Caesar's grandnephew Octavian who
also was the adopted son of Caesar, rose to prominence. Their combined strength
gave the triumvirs absolute power. However, in 31 BC war between the two broke
out. The final confrontation occurred on 2 September 31 BC, at the naval Battle
of Actium where the fleet of Octavian under the command of Agrippa routed
Antony's fleet. Thereafter, there was no one left in the Roman Republic who
wanted, or could stand against Octavian, as the adopted son of Caesar moved to
take absolute control. Octavian left the majority of Republican institutions
intact, though he influenced everything and ultimately, controlled the final
decisions, and had the legions to back it up, if necessary. By 27 BC the
transition, though subtle and disguised, was complete. In that year, Octavian
offered back all his powers to the Senate, and in a carefully staged way, the
Senate refused and titled Octavian "Augustus" — "the revered one". He was
always careful to avoid the title of "rex" — "king", and instead took on the
titles of "princeps" — "first citizen" and "imperator", a title given by
Roman troops to their victorious commanders. Roman Empire and Late Antiquity.
The Roman Empire had been born. Once Octavian named Tiberius as his heir, it
was clear to everyone that even the hope of a restored Republic was dead. Most
likely, by the time Augustus died, no one was old enough to know a time before
an Emperor ruled Rome. The Roman Republic had been changed into a despotic
régime, which, underneath a competent and strong Emperor, could achieve
military supremacy, economic prosperity, and a genuine peace, but under a weak
or incompetent one saw its glory tarnished by cruelty, military defeats,
revolts, and civil war. The Roman Empire was eventually divided between the
Western Roman Empire which fell in 476 AD and the Eastern Roman Empire (also
called the Byzantine Empire) which lasted until the fall of Constantinople in
1453 AD. Medieval institutions. Most of the procedures used by modern
democracies are very old. Almost all cultures have at some time had their new
leaders approved, or at least accepted, by the people; and have changed the
laws only after consultation with the assembly of the people or their leaders.
Such institutions existed since before the Iliad or the Odyssey, and modern
democracies are often derived or inspired by them, or what remained of them.
Nevertheless, the direct result of these institutions was not always a
democracy. It was often a narrow oligarchy, as in Venice, or even an absolute
monarchy, as in Florence, in renaissance period but during medieval period they
were guild democracies. Indigenous peoples of the Americas. Historian Jack
Weatherford has argued that the ideas leading to the American Constitution and
democracy derived from various indigenous peoples of the Americas including the
Iroquois. Weatherford claimed this democracy was founded between the years
1000–1450, and lasted several hundred years, and that the American democratic
system was continually changed and improved by the influence of Native
Americans throughout North America. Temple University professor of anthropology
and an authority on the culture and history of the Northern Iroquois Elizabeth
Tooker has reviewed these claims and concluded they are myth rather than fact.
The idea that North American Indians had a democratic culture is several
decades old, but not usually expressed within historical literature. The
relationship between the Iroquois League and the Constitution is based on a
portion of a letter written by Benjamin Franklin and a speech by the Iroquois
chief Canasatego in 1744. Tooker concluded that the documents only indicate
that some groups of Iroquois and white settlers realized the advantages of a
confederation, and that ultimately there is little evidence to support the idea
that eighteenth century colonists were knowledgeable regarding the Iroquois
system of governance. What little evidence there is regarding this system
indicates chiefs of different tribes were permitted representation in the
Iroquois League council, and this ability to represent the tribe was
hereditary. The council itself did not practice representative government, and
there were no elections; deceased chiefs' successors were selected by the most
senior woman within the hereditary lineage in consultation with other women in
the clan. Decision making occurred through lengthy discussion and decisions
were unanimous, with topics discussed being introduced by a single tribe.
Tooker concludes that "...there is virtually no evidence that the framers
borrowed from the Iroquois" and that the myth that this was the case is the
result of exaggerations and misunderstandings of a claim made by Iroquois
linguist and ethnographer J.N.B. Hewitt after his death in 1937. The Aztecs
also practiced elections, but the elected officials elected a supreme speaker,
not a ruler. Rise of democracy in modern national governments. The secret
ballot. The notion of a secret ballot, where one is entitled to the privacy of
their votes, is taken for granted by most today by virtue of the fact that it
is simply considered the norm. However, this practice was highly controversial
in the 19th century; it was widely argued that no man would want to keep his
vote secret unless he was ashamed of it. The two earliest systems used were the
Victorian method and the South Australian method. Both were introduced in 1856
to voters in Victoria and South Australia. The Victorian method involved voters
crossing out all the candidates whom he did not approve of. The South
Australian method, which is more similar to what most democracies use today,
had voters put a mark in the preferred candidate's corresponding box. The
Victorian voting system also was not completely secret, as it was traceable by
a special number. The stone inscriptions in a temple say that ballot elections
were held in South India by a method called Kudavolai system. Kudavolai means
the ballot sheet of leaf that was put secretly in a pot vessel called
“kudam”.The details are found inscribed on the walls of the village
assembly hall. Actually, the once- village-assembly hall is the present temple.
The details show that the village had a secret ballot electoral system and a
written Constitution, prescribing the mode of elections. 20th century waves of
democracy. The end of the First World War was a temporary victory for democracy
in Europe, as it was preserved in France and temporarily extended to Germany.
Already in 1906 full modern democratic rights, universal suffrage for all
citizens was implemented constitutionally in Finland as well as a proportional
representation, open list system. Likewise, the February Revolution in Russia
in 1917 inaugurated a few months of liberal democracy under Alexander Kerensky
until Lenin took over in October. The terrible economic impact of the Great
Depression hurt democratic forces in many countries. The 1930s became a decade
of dictators in Europe and Latin America. The Indian Citizenship Act of 1924
granted full U.S. citizenship to America's indigenous peoples, called "Indians"
in this Act. (The Fourteenth Amendment guarantees citizenship to persons born
in the U.S., but only if "subject to the jurisdiction thereof"; this latter
clause excludes certain indigenous peoples.) The act was signed into law by
President Calvin Coolidge on June 2, 1924. The act further enfranchised the
rights of peoples resident within the boundaries of the USA. Post World War II.
World War II was ultimately a victory for democracy in Western Europe, where
representative governments were established that reflected the general will of
their citizens. However, many countries of Central and Eastern Europe became
undemocratic Soviet satellite states. In Southern Europe, a number of right-
wing authoritarian dictatorships (most notably in Spain and Portugal) continued
to exist. Japan had moved towards democracy during the Taishō period during
the 1920s, but it was under effective military rule in the years before and
during World War II. The country adopted a new constitution during the postwar
Allied occupation, with initial elections in 1946. Decolonisation and Civil
Rights Movements. World War II also planted seeds of freedom outside Europe and
Japan, as it weakened, with the exception of the USSR and the United States,
all the old colonial powers while strengthening anticolonial sentiment
worldwide. Many restive colonies/possessions were promised subsequent
independence in exchange for their support for embattled colonial powers during
the war. The United States, itself a former colony and emerging colonial power
in its own right, flexed its new influence in support of the decolonisation
process, for example supporting prominent Arab nationalist Nasser during the
Suez Crisis in 1956, often cited as the last gasp of European colonialism. The
aftermath of World War II also resulted in the United Nations' decision to
partition the British Mandate into two states, one Jewish and one Arab. On 14
May 1948 the state of Israel declared independence and thus was born the first
full democracy in the Middle East. Israel is a representative democracy with a
parliamentary system and universal suffrage. India became a Democratic Republic
in 1950 after achieving independence from Great Britain in 1947. After holding
its first national elections in 1952, India achieved the status of the world's
largest liberal democracy with universal suffrage which it continues to hold
today. Most of the former British and French colonies were independent by 1965
and at least initially democratic. The process of decolonisation created much
political upheaval in Africa and parts of Asia, with some countries
experiencing often rapid changes to and from democratic and other forms of
government. In the United States of America, the Voting Rights Act of 1965 and
the Civil Rights Act enforced the 15th Amendment, and the 24th Amendment ended
poll taxing, removing all tax placed upon voting. Which was a technique which
was commonly used to restrict the African American vote. The Voting Rights Act
also granted voting rights to all Native Americans, irrespective of their home
state. The minimum voting age was reduced to 18 by the 26th Amendment in 1971.
Late Cold War and after. New waves of democracy swept across Southern Europe in
the 1970s, as a number of right-wing nationalist dictatorships fell from power.
Later, in Central and Eastern Europe in the late 1980s, the communist states in
the USSR sphere of influence were also replaced with liberal democracies. Much
of Eastern Europe, Latin America, East and Southeast Asia, and several Arab,
central Asian and African states, and the not-yet-state that is the Palestinian
Authority moved towards greater liberal democracy in the 1990s and 2000s. An
analysis by Freedom House shows that there was not a single liberal democracy
with universal suffrage in the world in 1900, but that in 2000, 120 of the
world's 192 nations, or 62% were such democracies. They count 25 nations, or
13% of the world's nations with "restricted democratic practices" in 1900 and
16, or 8% of the world's nations today. They counted 19 constitutional
monarchies in 1900, forming 14% of the world's nations, where a constitution
limited the powers of the monarch, and with some power devolved to elected
legislatures, and none in the present. Other nations had, and have, various
forms of non-democratic rule. While the specifics may be open to debate (for
example, New Zealand actually enacted universal suffrage in 1893, but is
discounted due to a lack of complete sovereignty and certain restrictions on
the Māori vote), the numbers are indicative of the expansion of democracy
during the twentieth century. 21st century waves of democracy. In the 21st
century, democracy movements have been seen across the world. In the Arab
world, an unprecedented series of major protests occurred with citizens of
Egypt, Tunisia, Bahrain, Yemen, Jordan, Syria and other countries across the
MENA region demanding democratic rights. This revolutionary wave was given the
term Tunisia Effect. The Palestinian Authority also took action to address
democratic rights. In Iran, following a highly-disputed presidential vote
wrought with fraud, Iranian citizens held a major series of protests calling
for change and democratic rights (see: the 2009–2010 Iranian election
protests and the 2011 Iranian protests). The 2003 US-led invasion of Iraq led
to a toppling of Saddam Hussein and a new constitution with free and open
elections and democratic rights. In Asia, the country of Burma (also known as
Myanmar) had long been ruled by a military junta, however in 2011, the
government changed to allow certain voting rights and released democracy-leader
Aung San Suu Kyi from house arrest. However, Burma still will not allow Suu Kyi
to run for election and still has major human rights problems and not full
democratic rights. In Bhutan, in December 2005, the 4th King Jigme Singye
Wangchuck announced to that the first general elections would be held in 2008,
and that he would abdicate the throne in favor of his eldest son. Bhutan is
currently undergoing further changes to allow for a constitutional monarchy. In
the Maldives protests and political pressure led to a government reform which
allowed democratic rights and presidential elections in 2008. Contemporary
trends. Under the influence of the theory of deliberative democracy, there have
been several experiments since the start of the new millennium with what are
called deliberative fora, places (in real life or in cyber space) where
citizens and their representatives assemble to exchange reasons. One type of
deliberative forum is called a minpublic: a body of randomly chosen or actively
selected citizens that represents the whole population. Examples of this are
citizens' assemblies and peoples' juries. Citizens' assemblies have been used
in Canada (2004, 2006) and the Netherlands (2006) to debate electoral reform,
and in Iceland (2009 and 2010) for broader constitutional change.
