Historical institutionalism Historical institutionalism (HI) is a social
science method that uses institutions in order to find sequences of social,
political, economic behavior and change across time. It is a comparative
approach to the study of all aspects of human organizations and does so by
relying heavily on case studies. Borrowing from Charles Tilly, historical
institutionalism is a method apt for measuring "big structures, large
processes, and huge comparisons". Historical Institutionalism has generated
some of the most important books in the fields of sociology, political science
and economics. In fact, some of these studies have inspired policy and its
scholars have received numerous awards. Although historical institutionalism
proper is fairly new (circa 1979), it identifies with the great traditions in
history, philosophy, politics, sociology and economics. Old and new
institutionalism. Institutions have been always central to social science but
they have not been addressed with the same emphasis and manner in every
approach. Before and after the turn of the twentieth century, several scholars
were writing about institutions, but they had not developed a theory of
institutions yet. Most of these approaches relied heavily on the study of
formal institutions (i.e. the law) (see hermeneutics). Moreover, they were
highly normative and, thus, prescriptive (i.e. Weber prescribed the
professionalization of bureaucracy in order to have a modern state).
Institutionalist e. This is often called "old institutionalism". During the
1950s, structural-functionalism blurred the study of institutions. They were
more concerned about the variability of the modernization process across
countries and about prescribing and generalizing at the systemic level rather
than acknowledging the different paths that development can take. (i.e. Gabriel
Almond and Sidney Verba, "The Civic Culture"). The new institutionalism begins
with the works of Samuel Huntington, "Political Order in Changing Societies";
Barrington Moore's, "Social Origins of Dictatorship and Democracy", and more
specifically Theda Skocpol’s, "States and Social Revolutions: A Comparative
Analysis of France, Russia & China". These books spawned the new research
program. As stated above, before HI arrived, institutions were only treated as
the formal rules of behavior (i.e. the law). In contrast, historical
institutionalism has loosened the definition of institutions. In this new
approach, institutions can take the shape of a formal bureaucratic structure
but also an ideology or an informal costume. The significance of this change of
approach is that historical institutionalism denies that power and history have
only one source as past approaches (i.e. the State) and has given agency to all
kinds of social groups and behaviors (e.g. in "Weapons of the Weak" James Scott
acknowledges the power of "gossip" in political life.) In emphasizing the
participation of all kind of groups, not just elites or the state, historical
institutionalism offers a dynamic approach to history. Moreover, HI avoids
prescription. On the contrary, since historical institutionalism is interested
in the richness and different paths that a revolution or an economic reform can
take given that different groups participate in each case, they are sensitive
to the differences that can occur when following a particular political design
(i.e. democracy). In that sense, it also avoids the teleological determinism of
past approaches. For historical institutionalism, the actors both determined by
and are producers of history. The treatment of history. Unlike most western
scholars who preceded them, including classical liberals, classical Marxists,
empiricists, dialectical thinkers and positivists, historical institutionalists
do not accept that history necessarily develops in a straightforward, linear
fashion. Instead, they examine the conditions under which a particular
trajectory was followed and not others, a phenomenon that Gabriel Almond refers
to as the "historical cure". As a consequence, specifying why particular paths
were "not" taken is as important as specifying the actual trajectory of
history. As opposed to the old institutionalists, they accept the fact that
history will not necessarily lead to a "happy" outcome (i.e. "communism or
democracy as the end of history)". A related crux of historical
institutionalism is that temporal sequences matter: outcomes depend upon the
timing of exogenous factors (such as inter-state competition or economic
crisis) in relation to particular institutional configurations (such as the
level of bureaucratic professionalism or degree of state autonomy from class
forces). For example, Theda Skocpol suggests that the democratic outcome of the
English Civil War was a result of the fact that the comparatively weak English
Crown lacked the military capacity to fight the landed upper-class. In
contrast, the rise of rapid industrialization and fascism in Prussia when faced
with international security threats was because the Prussian state was a
“highly bureaucratic and centralized agrarian state” composed by “men
closely ties to landed notables”. Thomas Ertman, in his account of state
building in medieval and early modern Europe, argues that variations in the
type of regime built in Europe during this period can be traced to one macro-
international factor and two historical institutional factors. At the macro-
structural level, the “timing of the onset of sustained geopolitical
competition” created an atmosphere of insecurity that appeared best addressed
by consolidating state power. The timing of the onset of competition is
critical for Ertman’s explanation. States that faced competitive pressures
early had to consolidate through patrimonial structures, since the development
of modern bureaucratic techniques had not yet arrived. States faced with
competitive pressures later could on the other hand, could take advantage of
advancements in training and knowledge to promote a more technical oriented
civil service. Some problems. Historical institutionalism is not a unified
intellectual enterprise (see also new institutionalism). Some scholars are
oriented towards treating history as the outcome of rational and purposeful
behavior based on the idea of equilibrium (see rational choice). They rely
heavily on quantitative approaches. Others, more qualitative oriented scholars,
reject the idea of rationality and instead emphasize the idea that randomness
and accidents matter in political and social outcomes. There are unsolvable
epistemological differences between both approaches. However given the
historicity of both approaches, and given their focus on institutions, both can
fall under "historical institutionalism" .
