Islamic fundamentalism in Iran The history of fundamentalist Islam in Iran (or
"History of Principle-ism") covers the history of Islamic revivalism and the
rise of political Islam in modern Iran. Today, there are basically three types
of Islam in Iran: traditionalism, modernism, and a variety of forms of
revivalism usually brought together as fundamentalism. Neo-fundamentalists in
Iran are a subgroup of fundamentalists who have also borrowed from Western
countercurrents of populism, fascism, anarchism, Jacobism and Marxism. The term
Principlists, or "Osoulgarayan", is an umbrella term commonly used in Iranian
politics to refer to a varieties of conservative circles and parties. The term
contrasts with reformists or "Eslaah-Talabaan" who seek religious and
constitutional reforms in Iran. Definition. "Fundamentalism is the belief in
absolute religious authority and the demand that this religious authority be
legally enforced. Often, fundamentalism involves the willingness to do battle
for one's faith. Fundamentalists make up only one part of any religion's
followers, who usually fall along a wide spectrum of different interpretations,
beliefs and strong values." "In western usage these words and Fundamentalism
have a rather specific connotation; they suggest a certain type of religiosity-
emotional indeed sentimental; not intellectual, perhaps even anti intellectual;
and in general apolitical and even anti-political. Fundamentalists are against
liberal theology and biblical criticism and in favor of a return to
fundamentals-i.e. to the divine inerrant text of the scriptures. For the so
call fundamentalists of Islam these are not and never have been the issues.
Liberal theology have not hitherto made much headway in Islam, and the divinity
and inerrancy of the Quran are still central dogmas of the faith ... Unlike
their Christian namesakes, the Islamic fundamentalists do not set aside but on
the contrary embrace much of the post-scriptural scholastic tradition of their
faith, in both its theological and its legal aspects." The Islamist version of
political Islam ("neo-fundamentalism" in this article) emerged in response to
the perceived shortcomings of fundamentalism. The Islamists, with their
cosmopolitan backgrounds, introduced various tools they had borrowed from the
West into their organizational arsenal. Ideologically, they drew on
antimodernist philosophies that embodied Western dissatisfaction with the
consequences of industrialization and positivism. Iranian fundamentalists and
conservatives, commonly describe themselves as "principalist" (also spelled
"principle-ist"); that is, acting politically based on Islamic and
revolutionary principles. Background. Currently there exists three main types
of Islam in Iran: traditionalists (represented by Hossein Nasr, Yousef Sanei),
modernists (represented by Abdolkarim Soroush), fundamentalists (represented by
Ali Khamenei, Mohammad Taghi Mesbah Yazdi, and several Grand Ayatollahs the
youngest one Mahdi Hadavi). Subsequently, religious fundamentalism in Iran has
several aspects that make it different from Islamic fundamentalism in other
parts of the world. The terms Iranian "conservatism," "fundamentalism" and
"neo-fundamentalism" are all subject to numerous philosophical debates. Javad
Tabatabaei and Ronald Dworkin and a few other philosophers of law and politics
have criticized the terminology and suggested various other classifications in
the context of Iranian political philosophy. "Even an appropriate vocabulary
seemed to be lacking in western languages and writers on the subjects had
recourse to such words as "revivalism", "fundamentalism" and "integrism." But
most of these words have specifically Christian connotations, and their use to
denote Islamic religious phenomena depends at best on a very loose analogy."
Traditionists who account for the majority of clerics keep themselves away from
modernity and neither accept nor criticize it. Traditionalists believe in
eternal wisdom and are critics of humanism and modernity. Traditionalists
believe in a sort of religious pluralism which makes them different from
Fundamentalists. Fundamentalists are also against modernity. Contrary to
traditionists, fundamentalists openly criticize modernity. Moreover
fundamentalists believe that for reviving the religion in the modern era and
for opposing modernity, they need to gain social and political power. This
makes fundamentalists different from traditionists and traditionalists who are
not interested in gaining political power. As an example of different views on
fundamentalism, one can refer to Ruhollah Khomeini who is considered as
populist, fundamentalist and reformer by various observers. In July 2007
Iranian reformist president Mohammad Khatami said that Ruhollah Khomeini was
the leading "reformist" of our time. Emergence. The birth of fundamentalist
Islam in Iran is attributed to the early 20th century, almost a century after
secular humanism and its associated art and science entered Iran. Sheikh
Fazlollah Nouri and Navvab Safavi were among the pioneers of religious
fundamentalism in Iran and today serve as the Islamic Republic’s foremost
heroes and role models. Iran was the first country in the post-World War II era
in which political Islam was the rallying cry for a successful revolution,
followed by the new state formally adopting political Islam as its ruling
ideology. The grand alliance that led to the 1979 revolution abandoned the
traditional clerical quietism, adopting a diverse ideological interpretation of
Islam. The first three Islamic discourses were Khomeinism, Ali Shariati’s
Islamic-left ideology, and Mehdi Bazargan’s liberal-democratic Islam. The
fourth discourse was the socialist guerrilla groups of Islamic and secular
variants, and the fifth was secular constitutionalism in socialist and
nationalist forms. While some researchers refute explanations of "Islamic
fundamentalism" as an anti-imperialist political force directed against Western
dominance in the Islamic world, others, such as Moaddel, argue that Islam has
been politicized only during the second half of the twentieth century as a
discourse of opposition, not to Western domination in the state system, but to
the ideas, practices, and arbitrary political interventions of a westernizing
secularist political elite. This elite has established ideologically uniform,
repressive states which have imposed a Western model and outlook in Muslim
societies by coercive means. Islamism thus emerged as a competing narrative
contending for state power against a secularist discourse. Its goal was to
seize state power through an Islamization of all aspects of life in a Muslim
society. In January 2007, a new parliamentary faction announced its formation.
The former "Osulgarayan" ("principle-ist") faction divided into two due to
"lack of consensus" on Mahmoud Ahmadinejad's policies. The new faction was
named "Faction of creative principle-ists" which is said to be critical of
Mahmoud Ahmadinejad's neo-principle-list policies and to reject conservatism on
such matters related to the government. The main leaders of the faction are
Emad Afroogh, Mohammad Khoshchehreh, Saeed Aboutaleb and MP Sobhani.
Viewpoints. There is a lot that is unique about Iranian fundamentalism but it
nonetheless must be seen as one of the Abrahamic revivalisms of the twentieth
century. As in the course of the Persian Constitutional Revolution nearly a
century earlier, the concept of justice was at the center of the ideological
debates among the followers of the three Islamic orientations during and after
the revolution. The conservatives (principle-ists) adhered to the traditional
notion of Islamic justice, one which, much like the Aristotelian idea of
justice, states that "equals should be treated alike, but unequals
proportionately to their relevant differences, and all with impartiality." The
radicals (neo-principle-ists), on the other hand, gave a messianic
interpretation to the concept, one that promised equal distribution of societal
resources to all—including the "unequals." And finally, those with a liberal
orientation to Islam understood the notion of justice in terms of the French
revolutionary slogan of egalité, i.e., the equality of all before the law.
While the principle-ists (conservatives) were generally suspicious of modern
ideas and resistant to modern lifestyles at the time of the Iranian revolution,
the Islamic radicals (neo-principle-ists) were receptive to many aspects of
modernity and willing to collaborate with secular intellectuals and political
activists. Many of the so-called neo-principle-ists (neo-fundamentalists), like
Christian fundamentalists, pull out a verse from the scriptures and give it a
meaning quite contrary to its traditional commentary. Also, even while
denouncing modernism as the "Great Satan", many principle-ists accept its
foundations, especially science and technology. For traditionalists, there is
beauty in nature which must be preserved and beauty in every aspect of
traditional life, from chanting the Qur'an to the artisan's fashioning a bowl
or everyday pot. Many principle-ists even seek a Qur'anic basis for modern
man's domination and destruction of nature by referring to the injunction to
'dominate the earth' – misconstruing entirely the basic idea of vicegerency:
that man is expected to be the perfect servant of God. An example of an
environmental problem is the overpopulation of the earth. The Neo-
fundamentalists's family policy is to increase the population dramatically.
Iranian president Mahmoud Ahmadinejad's call for increasing Iran's population
from 70 to 120 millions can be understood in the same line. In Mehdi Mozaffan's
chapter on a comparative study of Islamism in Algeria and Iran, he says, A
major difference between fundamentalism in Iran and main stream Islamic
fundamentalism is that the former has nothing to do with Salafism. According to
Gary Legenhausen: "The term "Islamic Fundamentalism" is one that has been
invented by Western journalists by analogy with "Christian Fundamentalism". It
is not a very apt term, but it has gained currency. In the Sunni world it is
used for groups descended from the Salafiyyah movement, such as the Muslim
Brotherhood." It is worth noting that the concept of "Salaf" (السلف) does
not exist in Shia theology in contrast to Sunni Islam as well as Christianity
(a similar concept referred to as "original Christianity"). Political Islam
consists of a broad array of mass movements in the Muslim world, which share a
conviction that political power is an essential instrument for constructing a
God-fearing society. They believe that Muslims can fulfill their religious
obligations only when public law sanctions and encourages pious behavior. To
this end, the majority of these movements work to take control of state power,
whether by propaganda, plebiscite, or putsch. A look through several
generations of clerics in seminaries shows significant differences in
viewpoints and practical approaches. When young Ruhollah Khomeini urged his
mentor Ayatullah Husain Borujerdi, to oppose the Shah more openly. Broujerdi
rejected his idea. He believed in the "separation" of religion from politics,
even though he was Khomeini's senior in rank. However just before his death
Hossein Boroujerdi (d. 1961), expressed his opposition to the Shah’s plans
for land reform and women’s enfranchisement. He also issued a fatwa for
killing Ahmad Kasravi. Khomeini remained silent till his seniors Ayatollah
Haeri or Ayatolla Boroujerdi's, were alive. Then he was promoted to the status
of a Grand marja and started his activism and established his Islamic Republic
eventually. Among Khomeini's students, there were notable clerics whose ideas
were not compatible with their mentor. As examples of the prototypes of his
students one can mention Morteza Motahhari, Mohammad Beheshti and Mohammad
Taghi Mesbah Yazdi. Criticizing Mesbah Yazdi and Haghani school Beheshti said:
"Controversial and provocative positions that are coupled with violence, in my
opinion...will have the reverse effect. Such positions remind many individuals
of the wielding of threats of excommunication that you have read about in
history concerning the age of the Inquisition, the ideas of the Church, and the
Middle Ages". Morteza Motahhari, the most notable student of Khomeini, was
widely known as the main theoretician of Iranian revolution (next to Ali
Shariati). While Mesbah Yazdi was an advocate of expelling secular University
lecturers, Motahhari insisted that the philosophy of marxism or liberalism must
be taught by a marxist and liberal respectively. Both Motahhari and Beheshti
were assassinated by terrorist groups early after the revolution. Motahhari
also introduced the concept of "dynamism of Islam". After the triumph of the
revolution in February 1979, and the subsequent liquidation of the liberal and
secular-leftist groups, two principal ideological camps became dominant in
Iranian politics, the "conservatives" (fundamentalists) and the "radicals"
(neo-fundamentalists). The radicals' following of Khomeini of the revolution
rather than his incumbency of the office of the Supreme Jurist (Vali-eFaqih) or
his theocratic vision of the "Islamic Government." Today, Mohammad Taqi Mesbah
Yazdi clearly rejects Khomeini's "Islamic Republic" and supports the idea of
"Islamic government" where the votes of people has no value. Contrary to
Iranian traditionalists, neo-fundamentalists as well as Iranian liberals have
been under the influence of western thinkers. The Islamic neo-fundamentalists
have also borrowed from Western countercurrents of populism, fascism,
anarchism, Jacobism, and Marxism without the welfare state. During 1990s, Akbar
Ganji had discovered crucial links that connected the chain murders of Iran to
the reigning neoconservative clergymen (Ali Fallahian, Gholam Hossein Mohseni-
Ejehei, Mohammad Taghi Mesbah-Yazdi) who had issued the fatwas legitimizing
assassinations of secular humanists and religious modernists. In May 1996,
Akbar Ganji presented a lecture at Shiraz University entitled "Satan Was the
First Fascist." He was charged with defaming the Islamic Republic and tried in
a closed court. His defense was later published under the title of "Fascism is
one of the Mortal Sins." (Kian, Number 40, February 1997.) Another important
issue is the concept of "insider-outsider" introduced by Ali Khamenei, the
supreme leader of Iran. Accordingly, in his administration outsiders have less
rights compared to insiders and cannot have any administrative posts. He stated
that "I mean, you his followers must trust an insider as a member of your
clique. We must consider as insiders those persons who are sympathetic towards
our revolution, our state and Islam. The outsiders are the ones who are opposed
to the principle of our state." He also made a clear distinction between what
he called "extremism" and "fundamentalism": " There may be a handful of
extremists here and there, but all the elements serving in various departments
of our country are fundamentalists in essence." In contrast to neo-principle-
ists, principle-ists accepts the ideas of democracy and UDHR. During his
lifetime, Ayatollah Khomeini expressed support for the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights; in "Sahifeh Nour" (Vol.2 Page 242), he states: "We would like to
act according to the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. We would like to be
free. We would like independence." However, Iran adopted an "alternative" human
rights declaration, the Cairo Declaration on Human Rights in Islam, in 1990
(one year after Khomeini's death). Fabrication of fake history and use of
propaganda is common among neo-fundamentalist circles. A good example is spread
of superstitions over and fabricating a fake history for Jamkaran mosque, a
small ordinary mosque suddenly turned out to be the holiest place in Shia
Islam. The issue has been harshly criticized even by conservative circles. Some
of Iran's ayatollahs say the legend of Jamkaran is superstition. During
Khatami's presidency, Mohammad Taghi Mesbah Yazdi claimed that an unnamed
former CIA chief had visited Iran with a suitcase stuffed with dollars to pay
opinion-formers. "What is dangerous is that agents of the enemy, the CIA, have
infiltrated the government and the cultural services," he was quoted as saying.
On top of its official budget for Iran, the CIA had given "hundreds of millions
of dollars to our cultural officials and journalists," he added. "The former
head of the CIA recently came here as a tourist with a suitcase full of dollars
for our cultural centres and certain newspapers. He made contact with various
newspaper chiefs and gave them dollars." Nasser Pourpirar for instance believes
that a significant portion of Iranian history are baseless fabrications by
Jewish orientalists and Zionists. The whole existence of Pre-Islamic Iran is no
more than a Jewish conspiracy and the most important key for analyzing
today’s world events is the analysis of ancient "Jewish genocide of Purim."
Another neoconservative theorist, Mohammad Ali Ramin believes that contemporary
western history (e.g. Holocaust) are all fabrications by Jews. He also claimed
that Adolf Hitler was a Jew himself. M.A. Ramin, Hassan Abbasi, Abbas Salimi
Namin and others have been giving speeches about Jewish conspiracy theory,
Iranian and western history intensively all over the country since the
establishment of Ahmadinejad government in 2005. Currently, Abadgaran described
itself as a group of Islamic neo-principle-ist, have the control over current
Iranian government. However, it lost the 2006 city council election. The
problem with identity is at the heart of fundamentalism, no matter it is
Islamic, Jewish or Christian. If people's religious identity becomes more
prominent than the national identity, fundamentalism will rise. In other words,
fundamentalism can be seen as "identity-ism." Many of the religious remarks
that are made in Iran, especially from official platforms, basically rest on
identity-oriented thinking and the inculcation of an identity known as a
religious identity. Under Ahmadinejad, neo-conservative forces are determined
to make the Islamic Republic more Islamic than republican. Whether they will
succeed is another matter. Power in Iran is a complicated matter, and various
factions exist even among conservatives, who run the gamut from hard-liners to
pragmatists. Some among Iran’s leadership would accept accommodation with the
West in exchange for economic and strategic concessions, while others are
content to accept isolation from the West. Others favor a "Chinese model,"
which in Iran would mean opening the economy to international investment while
maintaining the clergy’s dominance. It is these complex internal forces that
will decide the future of Iranian politics. Circles, schools and organizations.
Fadayan-e Islam. Fadayan-e Islam was founded in 1946 as an Islamic
fundamentalist organization. The founder of the group was Navab Safavi, a neo-
fundamentalist cleric. The group's aim was to transform Iran into an "Islamic
state." To achieve their objective, the group committed numerous terrorist
acts. Notable among these was the 1946 assassination of Ahmad Kasravi, an
intellectual who had criticized the Shia Islamic clergy. The group also
assassinated two prime ministers (Ali Razmara and Hassan Ali Mansour, 1951 and
1965) and an ex-prime minister (Hazhir, 1949). Mujahedin-e Khalq Organization
(MEK). The MEK philosophy mixes Marxism and Islam. Formed in the 1960s, the
organization was an attempt in bridging Islam and Marxism to offer a
revolutionary brand of Islam. It was expelled from Iran after the Iranian
Revolution in 1979, and its primary support came from the former Iraqi regime
of Saddam Hussein starting in the late 1980s. The MEK conducted anti-Western
attacks prior to the Revolution. Since then, it has conducted terrorist attacks
against the interests of the clerical regime in Iran and abroad. The MEK
advocates the overthrow of the Iranian regime and its replacement with the
group’s own leadership. During the 1970s, the MEK killed US military
personnel and US civilians working on defense projects in Tehran and supported
the takeover in 1979 of the US Embassy in Tehran. In 1981, the MEK detonated
bombs in the head office of the Islamic Republic Party and the Premier’s
office, killing some 70 high-ranking Iranian officials, including Chief Justice
Mohammad Beheshti, President Mohammad-Ali Rajai, and Premier Mohammad-Javad
Bahonar. Near the end of the 1980–1988 war with Iran, Baghdad armed the MEK
with military equipment and sent it into action against Iranian forces. In
1991, the MEK assisted the Government of Iraq in suppressing the Shia and
Kurdish uprisings in southern Iraq and the Kurdish uprisings in the north. In
April 1992, the MEK conducted near-simultaneous attacks on Iranian embassies
and installations in 13 countries, demonstrating the group’s ability to mount
large-scale operations overseas. MKO is recognized as a terrorist group by both
US and EU. The MKO maintains fascistic behaviour with all those who do not
share its views and positions and routinely attacks Iranian intellectuals and
journalists abroad. For instance, MEK agents attacked Iranian journalist
Alireza Nourizadeh and injured him seriously. Haghani school. Haghani Circle is
a neo-fundamentalist school of thought in Iran founded by a group of clerics
based in the holy city of Qom and headed by Ayatollah Mohammad Taghi Mesbah
Yazdi, an influential cleric and theologian. The school trains clerics with
both a traditional and modern curriculum, including a secular education in
science, medicine, politics, and Western/non-Islamic philosophy (the topics
that are not taught in traditional schools). It was founded by Ayatollah Mesbah
Yazdi, Ayatollah Ahmad Jannati, Ayatollah Dr. Beheshti and Ayatollah Sadoughi.
Many famous theologians and influential figures in Iran's politics after the
revolution were associated (as teacher or student) with the Haghani Circle or
follows its ideology. Combatant Clergy Association. The association is composed
of right wing conservative elements of Iran’s political culture, including
the nation’s foremost politicized clerics, the Friday prayer leaders in most
of Iran’s metropolitan areas, the bazaar merchants, and the Supreme Leader.
Not surprisingly, members of this faction support a continuation of the status
quo, including strict limits on personal freedoms and the continued primacy of
the clergy in the nation’s day-to-day governance. Important constituents of
the Militant Clergy Society include the Islamic Coalition Society and the
Coalition of Followers of the Line of the Imam. The Combatant Clergy
Association was the majority party in the 4th and 5th parliaments after the
Iranian revolution. It was founded in 1977 by a group of clerics with
intentions to use cultural approach to overthrow the Shah. Its founding members
were Ali Khamenei, Motahhari, Beheshti, Bahonar, Rafsanjani and Mohammad
Mofatteh and its current members include Akbar Hashemi Rafsanjani, Ahmad
Jannati, Mahdavi Kani, Reza Akrami and Hassan Rohani. As the foremost advocates
of the Iranian status quo that has left millions disenfranchised, the Militant
Clergy Society is exceedingly unpopular among rank-and-file Iranians. Ansar e
Hezbollah. Ansar-e-Hezbollah is a militant neo-fundamentalist group in Iran.
Mojtaba Bigdeli is a spokesman for the Iranian Hezbollah. Human Rights Watch
strongly condemned the brutal assault on students at Tehran University halls of
residence in the early hours of Friday 9 July 1999 by members of the Ansar-
e Hezbollah. Basij. Basij is a military fundamentalist network established
after the Iranian revolution. In July 1999, "Ezzat Ebrahim-Nejad" was shot dead
in Tehran University dormitory by a member of Basij military force. The event
initiated a huge demonstration. In 2001, a member of the Basij, Saeed Asgar
attempted to assassinate Saeed Hajjarian a leading reformist and political
advisor to reformist Iranian President Mohammad Khatami. Asagar was arrested
and sentenced to spend 15 years in jail, but was released after spending only a
short term in prison. Human Rights Watch informs that the Basij belong to the
"Parallel institutions" ("nahad-e movazi"), "the quasi-official organs of
repression that have become increasingly open in crushing student protests,
detaining activists, writers, and journalists in secret prisons, and
threatening pro-democracy speakers and audiences at public events." Under the
control of the Office of the Supreme Leader these groups set up arbitrary
checkpoints around Tehran, uniformed police often refraining from directly
confronting these plainclothes agents. "Illegal prisons, which are outside of
the oversight of the National Prisons Office, are sites where political
prisoners are abused, intimidated, and tortured with impunity." On 8 March 2004
the Basij issued a violent crackdown on the activists celebrating the
International Women's Day in Tehran. On 13 November 2006, Tohid Ghaffarzadeh, a
student at Islamic Azad University of Sabzevar was murdered by a Basij member
at the University. The murderer reportedly said that what he did was according
to his religious beliefs. Tohid Ghaffarzadeh was talking to his girlfriend when
he was approached and stabbed with a knife by the Basij member. Theories of
state based on divine legitimacy. Islamic republic versus Islamic
administration. Since the election of pro-reform president Mohammad Khatami in
1997, there have been two basic approaches, two outlooks, toward the
achievement of reform in Iran: "Reformists" within the regime (in-system
reformers) essentially believe that the Constitution has the capacity—indeed,
the positive potential—to lead the "Revolutionary" government of Iran toward
"democracy." By contrast, secularists, who remain outside the regime, basically
think that the Constitution contains impediments profound enough to block
meaningful reform. On the other hand, fundamentalists and in-system reformers
on one side and neo-fundamentalists on the other side are struggling over
"Khomeini’s Islamic Republic" versus "Mesbah’s Islamic administration."
Mohammad Taghi Mesbah Yazdi and Ansar-e-Hezbollah call for a change in the
Iranian constitution from a republic to an Islamic administration. They believe
the institutions of the Islamic Republic, such as the Majlis (Iran's
Parliament), are contradictory to Islamic government which is completely
centered around Velayat-e Faqih and total obedience to him. Ali Khamenei,
himself, has remained silent on the issue of whether Iran should have an
Islamic Republic or an Islamic Administration. However, he clearly rejected the
supervision of Assembly of Experts on the institutions that are governed
directly under his responsibility (e.g. Military forces, Judiciary system and
IRIB). Neo-fundamentalists believe that the supreme leader is holy and
infallible and the role of people and elections are merely to discover the
leader. However, the legitimacy of the leader comes from God and not the
people. In January 2007, Akbar Hashemi Rafsanjani who won the 2006 election for
Assembly of Experts, clearly rejected this idea and emphasized on the fact that
the leader and the cleric members of the Assembly of Experts may make wrong
decisions and the legitimacy of the leader comes from the people not the God.
Beyond these theoretical debates, elements of the "Islamic Administration" are
(in practice) slowly replacing those of the "Islamic Republic". Exporting
Islamic Revolution and Islamist diplomacy. Upon establishment of Islamic
Republic, the two factions (conservatives and radicals) differed on foreign
policy and cultural issues. The radicals (neo-cons) adamantly opposed any
rapprochement with the United States and, to a lesser extent, other Western
countries, while seeking to expand Iran’s relations with the socialist bloc
countries. They advocated active support for Islamic and liberation movements,
so called "export of the revolution", throughout the world. The conservatives
favored a more cautious approach to foreign policy, with the ultimate aim of
normalizing Iran’s economic relations with the rest of the world, so long as
the West’s political and cultural influence on the country could be curbed.
According to Iranian scholar Ehsan Naraghi, anti-Western attitude among Iranian
Islamists has its root in Marxism and Communism rather than Iranian Islam. Iran
and the West had good relations with mutual respect after the Safavid era.
However, with the emergence of Communism in Iran, anti-Western attitudes were
taken up by some extremists. As Naraqi states, anti-Western attitude in other
parts of the Muslim world has a different root than the one in Iran. After the
end of the Iran–Iraq War in 1988 and the death of Ayatollah Khomeini,
pragmatists (under the leadership of Akbar Hashemi Rafsanjani) sought to
normalize Iran’s relations with other countries, particularly those in the
region, by playing down the once-popular adventurist fantasy of "exporting the
Islamic revolution" to other Muslim lands. After the victory of Mahmoud
Ahmadinejad in the 2005 elections and the defeat of pragmatists/reformists
(under the leadership of Mohammad Khatami), the Neoconservatives who gained
full control of both parliament and government for the first time since the
Iranian Revolution again recalled the idea of exporting the revolution after
years of silence. Since the Iranian Revolution, the new Islamic Republic of
Iran has pursued an Islamic ideological foreign policy that has included
creation of Hezbollah, subsidies to Hamas, opposition to Israel and Zionist
leaders, and aid to Iraq's Shiite political parties. Hamas leaders verified in
2008 that since Israel pulled out of the Gaza strip in 2005 they have sent
their fighters to Iran to train in field tactics and weapons technology. In an
interview in 2007, Hezbollah Deputy Secretary-General Naim Kassem told the
Iranian Arabic-language TV station al-Qawthar that all military actions in
Lebanon must be approved by the authorities in Tehran; in 2008 Iran issued a
stamp commemorating a recently killed Hezbollah leader. Fundamentalism and
political realism are diplomatically incompatible. It is believed that the most
evident characteristic of diplomacy is flexibility. The reason Iran’s
diplomacy has encountered many shortcomings and lost numerous opportunities
provided by international or regional political developments is the country’s
focus on fundamental values and neglect of national interests. Fundamentalism
is always accompanied with idealism while diplomacy always emphasizes
realities. Therefore, the model of realistic fundamentalism will not work in
the diplomatic arena. Muslim thinkers in the world generally believe in a sort
of "religious internationalism." Even religious modernists in Iran have still
some inclinations towards religious internationalism, and the concept of
nation-state is not firmly established in their mind. These kinds of beliefs
are mainly rooted in traditional thinking rather than postmodernism. There are
however some religious intellectuals like Ahmad Zeidabadi who are against
religious internationalism. Meanwhile, Western countries have adopted various
different strategies with respect to fundamentalists. The attitudes of these
countries have been mainly driven by geopolitics and the oil market rather than
religious extremism itself. According to Graham Fuller of the RAND Corporation
and a former Vice-Chairman of the National Intelligence Council at CIA, "United
States had no problem with Islam or even Islamic fundamentalism as such. [...]
one of the closest American allies in the Middle East, Saudi Arabia, is a
fundamentalist state." Also Maryam Rajavi, the leader of an Islamist-Marxist
group, has been invited several times by EU parliament members to address the
assembly. In 2004 Alejo Vidal Quadras, European Parliament’s first Vice
President, met Maryam Rajavi whose group is listed as a terrorist group by EU
and USA. Mehdi Noorbaksh, a professor at the Center for International Studies,
University of St. Thomas in Texas, believes that the perceived threat of
Islamic fundamentalism to world peace and security is based on politically and
ideologically motivated misinterpretation of the reformist nature of Islamic
revival. The portrayal of Iran as a radical Islamic terrorist state by the US
has strengthened the extremists and weakened democratic, reformists groups in
Iran. According to Professor Noorbaksh, "The spread of democracy and the
introduction of socio-political reforms in the Middle East, especially in Iran,
will undermine US domination over the region." Seminary-University conflicts.
One of the main clarion calls raised within the geography of events known as
the Cultural Revolution was the call for seminary-university unity. The
original idea was a reconciliation between science and religion. In other words
the meaning of seminary-university unity was a resolution of the historical
battle between science and religion. Resolving this battle is a scholarly
endeavour, not a political and practical one. However, after the revolution,
since clerics came to rule over the country, the idea of seminary-university
unity, which meant understanding between seminary teachers and academics,
gradually turned into submission by academics to clerics and seminary teachers,
and it lost its logical and scholarly meaning and took on a political and
practical sense. Appointment of Abbasali Amid Zanjani as the only cleric
president of University of Tehran in 27 December 2005 can be understood in the
same line. Tehran University is the symbol of higher education in Iran.
Abbasali Amid Zanjani hold no academic degree and was appointed by Mohammad
Mehdi Zahedi, the minister of Science, Research, and Technology in Mahmoud
Ahmadinejad's cabinet. There was a journal in 1980s, by the name of "University
of Revolution" which used to include some material written by
neofundamentalists. They wrote many articles to prove that science is not wild
and without a homeland, that it is not the case that it recognises no
geography, and that it is therefore possible for us to create "Islamic
sciences." In 2007, Mohammad Taghi Mesbah Yazdi, a well-known cleric, attacked
the University people calling them the most indecent people. In April 2008,
four leading clerics namely Abdollah Javadi Amoli, Ebrahim Amini, Mohammad
Taghi Mesbah Yazdi and Mohammed Emami-Kashani criticized Iranian Universities,
University students and Iranian Higher education system as being secular, non-
Islamic, indecent and cheap. Islamist art and literature. Both Iranian
principle-ism and neo principle-ism are associated with their own art, cinema
and literature. In cinema, the first attempts were perhaps made by Masoud
Dehnamaki. Dehnamaki, a famous neo-principle-ist, made his first documentary
film "Poverty and Prostitution" in 2002. His next documentary was "Which Blue,
Which Red," a film about the rivalry between the Iranian capital’s two
football teams, Esteqlal and Persepolis, and their fans. He is now making his
debut feature-length film "The Outcasts". Iranian journalist turned documentary
filmmaker Masud Dehnamaki was formerly the managing director and chief editor
of the weeklies "Shalamcheh" and "Jebheh," which were closed by Tehran’s
conservative Press Court. These journals were among the main neo-principle-ist
publications. The rightist newsweekly "Shalamcheh" under the editorship of
Masoud Dehnamaki, one of the strongest opponents of President Khatami and his
policies, has been closed down by the press supervisory board of the Ministry
of Culture and Islamic Guidance, presumably for insulting or criticizing the
late Grand Ayatollah Kho'i, who had called the "velayat-e faqih" position
unislamic, prior to his passing away. Perhaps the most influential neo-
conservative newspaper during the 1990s and 2000s was Kayhan daily. Hossein
Shariatmadari and Hossein Saffar Harandi (who later became a Minister of
Culture) were the main editor and responsible chief of the newspaper. In 2006,
the British ambassador to Tehran met Hossein Shariatmadari and acknowledged the
role of Kayhan in Iran and the region. To promote art and literature, "Islamic
Development Organization" was founded by Ayatollah Khomeini. In 1991, Ali
Khamenei revised the organization's structure and plans. The plan is to promote
religious and moral ideas through art and literature. According to the Minister
of Culture, Hossein Saffar Harandi, the funds for Qur'anic activities would
increase by fourfold in the year 2007. "All of the ninth governments' cultural
and artistic activities should conform to the Holy Book," he declared. While
promoting their own art and literature, principle-ists are against the
development of art and literature that has no "valuable content." In late 1996,
following a fatwa by Ali Khamenei stating that music education corrupts the
minds of young children, many music schools were closed and music instruction
to children under the age of 16 was banned by public establishments (although
private instruction continued). Khamenei and his followers believe that
"Nihilism and Beatle-ism" have ravaged Western youth. According to the renowned
novelist and the first president of Iranian Association of Writers after the
revolution, Simin Daneshvar, Islamic Republic has been generally hostile toward
Iranian writers and intellectuals. This is contrary to the attitude of the
Pahlavi regime, Daneshvar added in an interview with Etemaad Daily in 2007. In
2007, Javad Shamghadri, artistic advisor to president Ahmadinejad, publicly
stated that: "Like many other countries in the world, Iran too can get along
without a film industry." "Only 20 percent of people go to the cinema, and
their needs can be provided through the national radio and television network,"
he added. Islamic-neoclassical economy. In the early times of 1979 revolution
Ayatollah Khomeini declared that what mattered was Islam and not the economy.
In one of his comments, he dismissed the concerns of his first prime minister,
Mehdi Bazargan, about the economy by simply noting that "Economics is for
donkeys!" However Khomeini in many occasions advised his followers about
justice and giving priority to the rights of the deprived and the oppressed
members of the community. "Association of the Lecturers of Qom's Seminaries,"
or ALQRS (Jame'eh-ye Modarresin-e Howzeh-ye 'Elmiyeh-ye Qom), published their
authenticated version of Islamic economy in 1984. It was based on traditional
interpretation of Islamic jurisprudence, which the ALQRS find compatible with
the market system and neoclassical economics. They emphasize economic growth
against social equity and declare the quest for profit as a legitimate Islamic
motive. According to ALQRS, attaining "maximum welfare" in a neoclassical sense
is the aim of an Islamic economic system. However, the system must establish
the limits of individual rights. In accordance with this ideological-
methodological manifesto of the ALQRS, in February 1984, the council for
cultural revolution proposed a national curriculum for economics for all
Iranian Universities. The concept of "Islamic economics" appeared as a rainbow
on the revolutionary horizon and disappeared soon after the revolutionary heat
dissipated (the end of 1980s and after the death of Ayatollah Khomeini). It
disappeared from Iranian political discourse for fifteen years. In the June
2005 presidential elections, neither the populist-fundamentalist Factional
conflict dominated Iranian economic politics under the Ayatollah Khomeini from
1979 to 1989. The two principal factions were a statist-reformist group that
favored state control of the economy and a conservative group that favored the
private sector. Both factions claimed Khomeini's support, but by 1987, he
clearly had sided with the statist-reformists because he believed state
capitalism to be the best way of heading off any threat to Islam. Khomeini's
death on 3 June 1989 left the factions without their source of legitimation.
Islamic republic and de-Iranianisation policy. Iranian identity versus
religious identity. Mehdi Bazargan, the first Prime minister of Islamic
Republic, once said: "Imam wants Iran for Islam and we want Islam for Iran."
Due to the commitment to Pan-Islamism inherent in Iranian Islamic revolutionary
ideology, the Islamic Republic's attitude toward Sunni Islam is positive. At
the beginning of the Islamic Revolution, one of the most-notorious clerics in
Iran, Sadeq Khalkhali known as the "hanging judge", who was renowned for his
brutality and mass executions in post-revolutionary Iran, tried to destroy
2500-year-old Persepolis, and after that the mausoleum of Ferdowsi. He was
stopped by the efforts of the locals. Iranian government in several occasions
constructed dams and rail roads in the vicinity of ancient archeological sites
that date back to pre-Islamic era. In January 2007, the Minister of Energy,
Parviz Fattah directly ordered the opening of the Sivand Dam. Referring to the
critics, he said: "I will make a museum next to the dam with my own money!"
Sivand dam project has been one of the most condemned projects in post-
revolution Iran due to its potential to destroy Iranian archaeological sites.
Some Iranians are furious about the construction of the dam and argue that
there is no objective in the world worthy to justify the construction of a dam,
so close to Pasargadae. Hossein Marashi, the Iranian Vice President for
Cultural Heritage and Tourism said: "We can not sacrifice the dam for cultural
and historical sites." Sivand Dam became operational in 2007. Ahmadinejad's
government, however, refused to buy the detectors needed for monitoring
humidity of the Pasargadae. Also "Karun-3 dam" was constructed during
Rafsanjani's presidency which led to destruction of ancient archeological site
in Izeh. Defaming Cyrus the Great, Islamist negationist Sadeq Khalkhali wrote
an article entitled "Kourosh-e Doroughin" (Impostor Cyrus) shortly after the
revolution. In 2001, Nasser Pourpirar wrote two books entitled "Twelve
centuries of silence" and "A bridge to past", claiming that the Sassanid empire
and Parthian Empires never existed, and are the fabrications of Jewish and
American orientalists. Abbas Salimi Namin attributed Persepolis to Russian
civilization. Islamist negationists Abbas Salimi Namin and Purpirar were
coworkers for the hardline "Kayhan Havaei" (a weekly review of the daily Keyhan
in English) after the revolution. Namin, a computer engineer and former member
of Haghani circle is a close ally of Ali Khamenei, the leader of the Islamic
Republic. Ignored by Iranian scholars, such figures managed to enter and
influence traditional clerical circles and the policy makers of the Islamic
Republic. Interestingly several of these Islamist negationists were formerly
associated with Marxist groups before acting as agents of Islamic Republic.
Ruling clerics sought to stamp out many traditions, like Nowruz, a celebration
with some Zoroastrian links that stretches back thousands of years to the pre-
Islamic era, to mark the arrival of spring. The celebration is considered by
many here the most Iranian of holidays. Several proposals have been made by
conservatists to replace or shorten Norouz celebrations but rejected because of
public protests. Ayatollah Khazali, a member of the powerful Guardians Council
and the Experts Assembly for Leadership, has proposed that the celebration of
Ghadir (Shiites commemorate these festivities as the day prophet Mohammad is
recorded to have named disciple Ali to be his successor) should replace the
traditional Iranian celebration of Norouz. Ali Khamenei in many occasions
attacked the Iranian fire festival Chahar Shanbeh Suri and also called for
shortening Norouz, claiming that the holidays are seriously damaging Iranian
economy. Following an order by Ali Khamenei the fire festival has been banned
by the regime since it is of Zoroastrian origins and is not Islamic. However,
due to internal opposition, the government had to step back. Arabic vs Persian.
The most detailed and explicit statement about Arabic was made by Akbar Hashemi
Rafsanjani in 1981 in an important Sermon linking the fate of Persian language
directly to that of Persian nationality: "both shall vanish as soon as Islamic
unity is attained". The tradition of banning names dates to the beginning of
the Islamic Revolution in the early 1980s, when Iran's conservative leaders
sought to purge the country of both Western culture and its own Persian, pre-
Islamic past. Fundamentalists consider it unfortunate that Iranians used to be
Zoroastrians, or that the ancient Persian empire achieved its greatest triumphs
before Islam's arrival. To that end, they compiled a long list of forbidden
names that included Zoroastrians gods and goddesses, commanders of ancient
Persian armies, and other such tainted, best-forgotten figures. Indeed, Arabic
names, except for a handful of Sunni villains, were fine. Persian ones, despite
originating from the language actually spoken in Iran, had to be checked
against the official list. Along the way, other politically inconvenient
realities were fought on the baby name terrain. Wishing to quell an uprising by
ethnically Kurdish Iranians in the north, the government banned Kurdish names.
Street names had changed from old Persian names to Arabic and Muslim names.
This whole shift of the Iranian identity toward a more Islamic one created a
kind of crisis. Iranian society on the other hand, identify itself as Iranian.
In Iran-Iraq war for example, all Iranians irrespective of their religions and
ethnic groups defended the country. Abdolkarim Soroush, foremost Iranian
religious intellectual, once suggested to adapt the religion to Iranian culture
by organizing Ashura and other Islamic festivals according to Iranian calendar
instead of Islamic calendar to avoid conflicts between Iranian identity and
religion. Principle-ists and Women issues. Principle-ists, irrespective of
their genders, support a very strict life style for women in Iran. The women in
the seventh Iranian parliament were against the bill on Iran joining the
Convention on the Elimination of All forms of Discrimination Against Women
(CEDAW), which the female reformists in the sixth parliament had fought for
vigorously. The women in the seventh parliament have exhibited conservative,
right wing tendencies, setting them apart from their counterparts in the
preceding parliament. In July 2007, Ali Khamenei criticized Iranian women's
rights activists and the "Convention on the Elimination of All forms of
Discrimination Against Women" (CEDAW): "In our country ... some activist women,
and some men, have been trying to play with Islamic rules in order to match
international conventions related to women," Khamenei said. "This is wrong."
However he is positive on reinterpreting Islamic law in a way that it is more
favorable for women – but not by following Western conventions. Khamenei made
these comments two days after an Iranian women's right activist Delaram Ali was
sentenced to 34 months of jail and 10 lashes by Iran's judiciary. Iranian
judiciary works under the responsibility of the Supreme Leader and is
independent from the government. Principle-ists in Iran forced Islamic dress on
Iranian women soon after the revolution of 1979. Since then Iranian police,
governed under the responsibility of the Supreme Leader, have continuously
attacked women who do not adhere to the dress code. Fighting such women is
considered "fighting morally corrupt people" by principle-ists. In 2007 a
national crackdown was launched by the police in which thousands of women were
warned and hundred were arrested. Violators of the dress code can be given
lashes, fines and imprisonment. Sae'ed Mortazavi, Tehran's public prosecutor,
made this clear when he told the Etemad newspaper: "These women who appear in
public like decadent models endanger the security and dignity of young men".
Mohammad Taqi Rahbar, a fundamentalist MP, agreed, saying, "Men see models in
the streets and ignore their own wives at home. This weakens the pillars of
family." In October 2002, Ali Khamenei asked the Iranian women to avoid
feminism and sexism in their campaigns for better female rights. "In the
process of raising women's issues and solving their problems, feminist
inclinations and sexism should be avoided," he told a group of female
parliamentarians. Like many other Grand Ayatollahs, Ali Khamenei believes that
women should be wives and mothers. Supreme Leader Ayatollah Ali Khamenei has
publicly stated: "The real value of a woman is measured by how much she makes
the family environment for her husband and children like a paradise." In July
1997 Khamenei said that the idea of women’s equal participation in society
was "negative, primitive and childish." Fundamentalist scholars justify the
different religious laws for men and women by referring to the biological and
sociological differences between men and women. For example, regarding the
inheritance law which states that women’s share of inheritance is half that
of men, Ayatollah Makarim Shirazi quotes the Imam Ali ibn Musa Al-reza who
reasons that at the time of marriage man has to pay something to woman and
woman receives something, and that men are responsible for both their wives'
and their own expenses but women have no responsibility thereof. Women,
however, make up 27% of the Iranian labor force, and the percentage of all
Iranian women who are economically active has more than doubled from 6.1% in
1986 to 13.7% in 2000. In terms of health, life expectancy went up by eleven
years between 1980 and 2000 for both Iranian men and women. With respect to
family planning, "levels of childbearing have declined faster than in any other
country," going from 5.6 births per woman in 1985 to 2.0 in 2000, a drop
accomplished by a voluntary, but government-sponsored, birth control program.
The fact that these changes have occurred within an Islamic legal regime
suggests that formal legal status may not be a key factor determining women’s
well-being. Women in Iran are only allowed to sing in chorus. Also women are
not allowed to attend Sport stadiums. In 2006 Mahmoud Ahmadinejad,
surprisingly, ordered the vice president to allocate half of the Azadi Soccer
Stadium to women. Six Grand Ayatollahs and several MPs protested against Mr.
Ahmadinejad's move, and finally the Supreme Leader Ali Khamenei ordered the
president to reconsider his order and follow the clergy. Tolerance and Civil
rights. The issue of tolerance and violence has been subject to intense debates
in Iran. A cleric and member of the conservative Islamic Coalition Party,
Hojjatoleslam Khorsand was cited by "Etemad daily" as saying that "in cultural
issues, a policy of tolerance and laxity is not acceptable." Ayatollah Mohammad
Taqi Mesbah-Yazdi, a member of the Assembly of Experts, said about Islam's
enemies: "They presented principles such as tolerance and compromise as
absolute values while violence was introduced as a non-value." Mesbah-Yazdi
believes that "the taboo – that every act of violence is bad and every act of
tolerance is good – must be broken." Opponents of violence – "even some of
the elite" – have been "deceived and entrapped" by "foreign propaganda," he
said. Mesbah-Yazdi believes that "The enemies of Islam must also feel the
harshness and violence of Islam." He also stated that "The culture of tolerance
and indulgence means the disarming of society of its defense mechanism."
Dividing Iranians into Insider and Outsider was first introduced by Ali
Khamenei. "Kayhan", which is governed by Ali Khamenei, editorialized on 5
August 1999 that an Insider is "someone whose heart beats for Islam, the
revolution and the Imam," while Outsiders are those who have "separated their
path from the line of the Imam, the system, and the people who, by relying on
"citizens' rights", want to introduce themselves as equal partners."
Irreligious people in Islamic Republic of Iran are not recognized as citizens
and do not enjoy any civil rights. While Jews, Christians and other minorities
have the right to take part in University entrance exams and can become members
of parliament or city councils, irreligious people are not granted even their
basic rights. Most irreligious people, however, hide their beliefs and pretend
to be Muslims. Non-believers – atheists under Islam – do not have "the
right to life." Non believers such as those supporting communist ideologies
have been executed purely for being non-believers. The charge against them has
been made as "corrupters on earth." In an attempt to disguise the Islamic
attitude to apostasy, some Muslims often quote the Koranic verse: "There shall
be no compulsion in religion." For a Muslim wishing to leave Islam in Iran this
is simply not true and is punishable by death. "Any newspaper or writer wanting
to renounce the fundamental principles of Islam or questioning the vengeance
law is an apostate and liable to the death penalty," "Ali Khamenei" told a
gathering of several thousand troops in the northeastern town of Mashhad. In
one occasion, Persian daily "Neshat" published an article which called for
abolishing the death penalty, claiming that the capital punishment is no cure
for maladies afflicting modern society. In reaction to this article,
conservative "Tehran Times Daily" stressed that writers of such articles must
remember that the Iranian Muslim nation will not only never tolerate such
follies but that the apostates will be given no opportunity to subvert the
religion. Neshat's article drew severe criticism from the theologians and
clerics, particularly the Supreme Leader Ayatollah Khamenei, who in clear words
warned that apostate journalists will be liable to the death penalty, noted the
article in the opinion column of the paper adding that the judiciary also
promptly warned against any acts or words that undermine the pillars of the
Islamic revolution. In 2002, Ansar e Hezbollah, a hard-line group best known
for disrupting reformist gatherings and beating up students, declared a "holy
war" to rid Iran of reformers who promote Western democracy and challenge the
country's Supreme Leader. Masoud Dehnamaki, an ideologue with the group, also
said that Iranians who try to appease Iran's enemies such as the United States
"should be stopped." During Mohammd Khatami's presidency, minister Ataollah
Mohajerani launched a tolerance policy ("Tasahol va Tasamoh"). This policy was
criticized harshly by conservatives and ended in resignation of the minister.
while some conservatives like Emad Afrough support the idea of Civil society,
some like Ayatollah Mesbah Yazdi are opposed to the idea of civil rights for
citizens. Emad Afrough stated: "If we do not actively seek cultural change, our
national and ethnic cultures get destroyed. We must consciously choose to
answer the questions confronting us. Today's question is civil society ... I
believe we can easily reconstruct civil society here (in Iran) based on our own
values and cultural characteristics. Civil society is a necessity, and the
growing complexity of society requires it. Our historical past also supports
it. In reality, in Iran, as in elsewhere in the Middle East, the only obstacle
to civil society is the state." In February 2004 Parliament elections, the
Council of Guardians, a council of twelve members, half of whom are appointed
by Ali Khamenei, disqualified thousands of candidates, including many of the
reformist members of the parliament and all the candidates of the Islamic Iran
Participation Front party from running. It did not allow 80 members of the 6th
Iranian parliament (including the deputy speaker) to run in the election. Apart
from Ali Khamenei, many conservative theorists as Emad Afrough supported the
decision of Guardian council and accused the reformist parliament members of
"being liberal, secular and with no Iranian identity". Referring to 7th
parliament members, Ali Meshkini said that the list of candidates had signed by
Imam Mahdi: "...I have a special gratitude for Honorable Baqiyatullah (aj),
whom when seven months ago during the Night of Power the Divine angels
presented him with the list of the names and addresses of the members of the
(new) parliament, His Eminency signed all of them...". In June 2007, Mahmoud
Ahmadinejad was criticized by some Iranian parliament members over his remark
about Christianity and Judaism. According to Arab News Agency, President
Ahmadinejad stated: "In the world, there are deviations from the right path:
Christianity and Judaism. Dollars have been devoted to the propagation of these
deviations. There are also false claims that these will save mankind. But Islam
is the only religion that will save mankind." Some members of the Iranian
parliament criticized these remarks as being fuels to religious war. However,
Musa Ghorbani, a chairman of the parliament, strongly supported the president's
remark, calling it "in accordance with the constitution". Also Hossein Noori
Hamedani advocates fighting the Jews in order to prepare the ground and to
hasten the advent of the Hidden Imam, the Messiah according to Shiite belief.
In 2007, Ali Khamenei claimed that "Today, homosexuality is a major problem in
the western world. They nations however ignore it. But the reality is that
homosexuality has become a serious challenge, pain and unsolvable problem for
the intellectuals in the west." Khamenei, however did not mention any names of
western intellectuals. While Iran has been quick to condemn attacks on Shia
mosques and Shia holy places all over the world, it has been intolerant toward
other religions. For instance in 2006, authorities in the city of Qom arrested
more than 1,000 followers of the mystical Sufi tradition of Islam. Iran's hard-
line daily "Kayhan" on 14 February 2006 quoted senior clerics in Qom as saying
that Sufism should be eradicated in the city, while the Reuters news agency
reported that in September one of Iran's hard-line clerics, Grand Ayatollah
Hossein Noori Hamedani, called for a clampdown on Sufis in Qom. In 2006,
Iranian president Mahmoud Ahmadinejad launched a plan to suppress what he
called "indecent religious associations that work under the cover of
spirituality and Sufism". Morteza Agha-Tehrani, one of the closest disciples of
Mesbah-Yazdi and moral advisor to President Ahmadinejad was the leader of a
raid on Sufi mosques in Qom. Iran does not allow a single Sunni mosque to be
built in Tehran. Although President Mohammad Khatami promised during election
times to build a Sunni mosque in Tehran, he refused to do so after taking
office. After winning the election he was reminded of his promise, but he came
up with the excuse that the Supreme Leader Ayatollah Ali Khamenei had not
agreed to the proposal. Shias make up roughly 30 percent of the Islamic world,
with Sunnis and other branches making up the rest. In Iran, Shias constitute
almost 90% of Iran's population Although the Iranian government invests funds
for the promotion and spreading of Islam, it does not tolerate active promotion
of other religions by its believers. Maryam Rostampour and Marzieh Amirizadeh
Esmaeilabad were two Iranian women, both converts from Islam to Christianity,
who were active in church activities and distributing Bibles. Both were
arrested and kept in Evin prison in 2009. Criticism of Islamist interpretation
of Islam in Iran. Islamic scholarship in Iran has a long tradition of debate
and critique. This tradition has come to pose a challenge to the constitutional
order of the Islamic Republic of Iran, as a number of seminary-trained scholars
have applied their critical methods to basic issues of state legitimacy, in
particular the state’s right to insist on interpretive closure. For example,
Dr. Mehdi Ha’iri Yazdi, the son of the late Shaykh Abdolkarim Haeri, the
founding member of the Qom Theology School, has written a book about criticism
of velayat-e faqıh. The regime has responded with force, convening special
clergy courts to silence and imprison scholars, in violation of seminary norms
of scholarly debate. These conspicuous acts of discipline seem to have
backfired, as each escalating punishment has generated new critics within. In
Iran, unlike most countries, epistemological debates have political
implications. Because the Islamic Republic stakes its legitimacy on the
scholarly authority of its jurist-ruler, the regime takes such debates quite
seriously. Through the Special Clergy Court, the regime has tried to clamp down
on relativism, calling it self-defeating. The dissident seminarians, too, have
distanced themselves from relativism, calling themselves legitimate religious
authorities. It is unclear how the dissidents will reconcile the two seminary
norms of open debate and scholarly authority, or what political ramifications
might follow from such a reconciliation. It is already clear, though, that the
dissidents are creating an unprecedentedly rich documentary record of Islamic
critique of the Islamic state. Future of fundamentalism in Iran. Abdolkarim
Soroush, advocate of Islamic pluralism, believes that fundamentalism in Iran
will self-destruct as it is afflicted with an internal contradiction, which
will shatter it from within. Similar ideas have been put forward by Iranian
scholar Saeed Hajjarian. Abdolkarim Soroush, Mohsen Kadivar, Saeed Hajjarian
and Seyyed Hossein Nasr are among most notable critics of fundamentalism in
Iran. Today Iranian neofundamentalists are a very strong minority in Qom
seminaries. However, they enjoy support from two Grand Marjas, namely Nasser
Makarem Shirazi and Hossein Noori Hamedani as well as direct support from
supreme leader of Iran, Ali Khamenei. Iran as a victim of Islamic
fundamentalism. There was a handful of Iranian victims among the thousands of
innocent dead of 11 September 2001 attacks. Behnaz Mozakka was among the
victims of 7 July 2005 London bombings. In 1943, a Saudi religious judge
ordered an Iranian pilgrim beheaded for allegedly defiling the Great Mosque
with excrement supposedly carried into the mosque in his pilgrim's garment. In
1987, Saudi Arabia's fundamentalist regime attacked Iranian pilgrims who were
doing a peaceful annual demonstration of Haj and killed some 275 people. 303
people were seriously injured. For years, Iranian pilgrims had tried to stage
peaceful political demonstrations in the Muslim holy city of Mecca during the
"hajj". Iran sees the 1987 massacre of Iranian pilgrims as the first major
attack by Sunni extremists like Osama bin Laden and the emerging Al-Qaeda on
Shia Iranians. A few days before the massacre of Iranian pilgrims by Saudi
police, USS Vincennes shot down Iran Air Flight 655, killing 290 civilians. In
March 2004 (Ashura), Al-Qaeda killed 40 Iranian pilgrims at the Shia holy
places in Iraq. Many others were injured in the blasts. Ashura commemorates the
killing of the revered Imam Hussein at the battle of Karbala in the seventh
century AD. It is the event that gave birth to the Shia branch of Islam which
predominates in Iran. Ashura is by far the most significant day in the Iranian
religious calendar, and it is commemorated as a slaughter of innocents by
traitors and tyrants. Justifying the attack on Iran, Saddam Hussein accused
Iranians of "murdering the second (Umar), third (Uthman), and fourth (Ali)
Caliphs of Islam". In March 1988, Saddam Hussein killed about 20,000 Iranian
soldiers immediately using nerve-gas agents. According to Iraqi documents,
assistance in developing chemical weapons was obtained from firms in many
countries, including the United States, West Germany, the United Kingdom,
France and China. Iraq also targeted Iranian civilians with chemical weapons.
Many thousands were killed in attacks on populations in villages and towns, as
well as front-line hospitals. Many still suffer from the severe effects. In
December 2006, Saddam Hussein said he would take responsibility "with honour"
for any attacks on Iran using conventional or chemical weapons during the
1980–1988 war but he took issue with charges that he ordered attacks on
Iraqis.
