Historical school of economics The Historical school of economics was an
approach to academic economics and to public administration that emerged in
19th century in Germany, and held sway there until well into the 20th century.
The Historical school held that history was the key source of knowledge about
human actions and economic matters, since economics was culture-specific, and
hence not generalizable over space and time. The School rejected the universal
validity of economic theorems. They saw economics as resulting from careful
empirical and historical analysis instead of from logic and mathematics. The
School also preferred reality, historical, political, and social as well as
economic, to mathematical modelling. Most members of the school were also
"Sozialpolitiker" (Social Policy-ers), i.e. concerned with social reform and
improved conditions for the common man during a period of heavy
industrialization. They were more disparagingly referred to as
"Kathedersozialisten," rendered in English as "Socialists of the Chair"
(compare armchair revolutionary), due to their position as professors (depicted
sitting in chairs). Predecessors included Friedrich List. The Historical school
largely controlled appointments to Chairs of Economics in German universities,
as many of the advisors of Friedrich Althoff, head of the university department
in the Prussian Ministry of Education 1882-1907, had studied under members of
the School. Moreover, Prussia was the intellectual powerhouse of Germany and so
dominated academia, not only in central Europe, but also in the United States
until about 1900, because the American economics profession was led by holders
of German Ph.Ds. The Historical school was involved in the Methodenstreit
("strife over method") with the Austrian School, whose orientation was more
theoretical and aprioristic. Influence in the Anglosphere. In the Anglosphere
(English speaking countries), the Historical school is perhaps the least known
and least understood approach to the study of economics, because it differs
radically from the now-dominant Anglo-American analytical point of view. Yet
the Historical school forms the basis—both in theory and in practice—of the
social market economy, for many decades the dominant economic paradigm in most
countries of continental Europe. The Historical school is also a source of
Joseph Schumpeter's dynamic, change-oriented, and innovation-based economics.
Although his writings could be critical of the School, Schumpeter's work on the
role of innovation and entrepreneurship can be seen as a continuation of ideas
originated by the Historical School, especially the work of von Schmoller and
Sombart. English school. Although not nearly as famous as its German
counterpart, there was also an English Historical School, whose figures
included Francis Bacon and Herbert Spencer. It was this school that heavily
critiqued the deductive approach of the classical economists, especially the
writings of David Ricardo. This school revered the inductive process and called
for the merging of historical fact with those of the present period. Included
in this school are: William Whewell, Richard Jones, Walter Bagehot, Thorold
Rogers, Arnold Toynbee and William Cunningham just to name a few.
