Homer In the Western classical tradition, Homer (; , "Hómēros") is the author
of the "Iliad" and the "Odyssey", and is revered as the greatest of ancient
Greek epic poets. These epics lie at the beginning of the Western canon of
literature, and have had an enormous influence on the history of literature.
When he lived is unknown. Herodotus estimates that Homer lived 400 years before
Herodotus' own time, which would place him at around 850 BC; while other
ancient sources claim that he lived much nearer to the supposed time of the
Trojan War, in the early 12th century BC. Modern researchers appear to place
Homer in the 7th or 8th centuries BC. The formative influence played by the
Homeric epics in shaping Greek culture was widely recognized, and Homer was
described as the teacher of Greece. Homer's works, which are about fifty
percent speeches, provided models in persuasive speaking and writing that were
emulated throughout the ancient and medieval Greek worlds. Fragments of Homer
account for nearly half of all identifiable Greek literary papyrus finds.
Period. For modern scholars "the date of Homer" refers not to an individual,
but to the period when the epics were created. The consensus is that "the
"Iliad" and the "Odyssey" date from around the 8th century BC, the "Iliad"
being composed before the "Odyssey", perhaps by some decades," i.e. earlier
than Hesiod, the "Iliad" being the oldest work of Western literature. Over the
past few decades, some scholars have argued for a 7th century BC date. Oliver
Taplin believes that the conclusion of modern researchers is that Homer dates
to between 750 to 650 BC. Some of those who argue that the Homeric poems
developed gradually over a long period of time give an even later date for the
composition of the poems; according to Gregory Nagy for example, they only
became fixed texts in the 6th century BC. The question of the historicity of
Homer the individual is known as the "Homeric question"; there is no reliable
biographical information handed down from classical antiquity. The poems are
generally seen as the culmination of many generations of oral story-telling, in
a tradition with a well-developed formulaic system of poetic composition. Some
scholars, such as Martin West, claim that "Homer" is "not the name of a
historical poet, but a fictitious or constructed name." Life and legends.
"Homer" is a Greek name, attested in Aeolic-speaking areas, and although
nothing definite is known about him, traditions arose purporting to give
details of his birthplace and background. The satirist Lucian, in his "True
History", describes him as a Babylonian called Tigranes, who assumed the name
Homer when taken "hostage" ("homeros") by the Greeks. When the Emperor Hadrian
asked the Oracle at Delphi about Homer, the Pythia proclaimed that he was
Ithacan, the son of Epikaste and Telemachus, from the "Odyssey". These stories
were incorporated into the various "Lives of Homer" compiled from the
Alexandrian period onwards. Homer is most frequently said to be born in the
Ionian region of Asia Minor, at Smyrna, or on the island of Chios, dying on the
Cycladic island of Ios. A connection with Smyrna seems to be alluded to in a
legend that his original name was "Melesigenes" ("born of Meles", a river which
flowed by that city), with his mother the nymph Kretheis. Internal evidence
from the poems gives evidence of familiarity with the topography and place-
names of this area of Asia Minor, for example, Homer refers to meadow birds at
the mouth of the Caystros , a storm in the Icarian sea , and mentions that
women in Maeonia and Caria stain ivory with scarlet. The association with Chios
dates back to at least Semonides of Amorgos, who cited a famous line in the
"Iliad" (6.146) as by "the man of Chios". An eponymous bardic guild, known as
the Homeridae (sons of Homer), or "Homeristae" ('Homerizers') appears to have
existed there, tracing descent from an ancestor of that name, or upholding
their function as rhapsodes or "lay-stitchers" specialising in the recitation
of Homeric poetry. Wilhelm Dörpfeld suggests that Homer had visited many of
the places and regions which he describes in his epics, such as Mycenae, Troy,
the palace of Odysseus at Ithaca and more. According to Diodorus Siculus, Homer
had even visited Egypt. The poet's name is homophonous with ("hómēros"),
"hostage" (or "surety"), which is interpreted as meaning "he who accompanies;
he who is forced to follow", or, in some dialects, "blind". This led to many
tales that he was a hostage or a blind man. Traditions which assert that he was
blind may have arisen from the meaning of the word in both Ionic, where the
verbal form ("homēreúō") has the specialized meaning of "guide the blind",
and the Aeolian dialect of Cyme, where ("hómēros") is synonymous with the
standard Greek ("tuphlós"), meaning 'blind'. The characterization of Homer as
a blind bard goes back to some verses in the Delian "Hymn to Apollo," the third
of the "Homeric Hymns," verses later cited to support this notion by
Thucydides. The Cymean historian Ephorus held the same view, and the idea
gained support in antiquity on the strength of a false etymology which derived
his name from "ho mḕ horṓn" (: "he who does not see"). Critics have long
taken as self-referential a passage in the "Odyssey" describing a blind bard,
Demodocus, in the court of the Phaeacian king, who recounts stories of Troy to
the shipwrecked Odysseus. Many scholars take the name of the poet to be
indicative of a generic function. Gregory Nagy takes it to mean "he who fits
(the Song) together". (homēréō), another related verb, besides signifying
"meet", can mean "(sing) in accord/tune". Some argue that "Homer" may have
meant "he who puts the voice in tune" with dancing. Marcello Durante links
"Homeros" to an epithet of Zeus as "god of the assemblies" and argues that
behind the name lies the echo of an archaic word for "reunion", similar to the
later Panegyris, denoting a formal assembly of competing minstrels. Some
"Ancient Lives" depict Homer as a wandering minstrel, like Thamyris or Hesiod,
who walked as far as Chalkis to sing at the funeral games of Amphidamas. We are
given the image of a "blind, begging singer who hangs around with little
people: shoemakers, fisherman, potters, sailors, elderly men in the gathering
places of harbour towns". The poems, on the other hand, give us evidence of
singers at the courts of the nobility. There is a strong aristocratic bias in
the poems demonstrated by the lack of any major protagonists of non-
aristocratic stock, and by episodes such as the beating down of the commoner
Thersites by the king Odysseus for daring to criticize his superiors. In spite
of this scholars are divided as to which category, if any, the court singer or
the wandering minstrel, the historic "Homer" belonged. Works attributed to
Homer. The Greeks of the sixth and early fifth centuries BC understood by
"Homer", generally, "the whole body of heroic tradition as embodied in
hexameter verse". Thus, in addition to the "Iliad" and the "Odyssey," there are
"exceptional" epics which organize their respective themes on a "massive
scale". Many other works were credited to Homer in antiquity, including the
entire Epic Cycle. The genre included further poems on the Trojan War, such as
the "Little Iliad", the "Nostoi", the "Cypria," and the "Epigoni", as well as
the Theban poems about Oedipus and his sons. Other works, such as the corpus of
"Homeric Hymns", the comic mini-epic "Batrachomyomachia" ("The Frog-Mouse
War"), and the "Margites" were also attributed to him, but this is now believed
to be unlikely. Two other poems, the "Capture of Oechalia" and the "Phocais"
were also assigned Homeric authorship, but the question of the identities of
the authors of these various texts is even more problematic than that of the
authorship of the two major epics. Problems of authorship. The idea that Homer
was responsible for just the two outstanding epics, the "Iliad" and the
"Odyssey", did not win consensus until 350 BC. While many find it unlikely that
both epics were composed by the same person, others argue that the stylistic
similarities are too consistent to support the theory of multiple authorship.
One view which attempts to bridge the differences holds that the "Iliad" was
composed by "Homer" in his maturity, while the "Odyssey" was a work of his old
age. The "Batrachomyomachia", "Homeric Hymns" and cyclic epics are generally
agreed to be later than the "Iliad" and the "Odyssey". Most scholars agree that
the "Iliad" and "Odyssey" underwent a process of standardisation and refinement
out of older material beginning in the 8th century BC. An important role in
this standardisation appears to have been played by the Athenian tyrant
Hipparchus, who reformed the recitation of Homeric poetry at the Panathenaic
festival. Many classicists hold that this reform must have involved the
production of a canonical written text. Other scholars still support the idea
that Homer was a real person. Since nothing is known about the life of this
Homer, the common joke—also recycled with regard to Shakespeare—has it that
the poems "were not written by Homer, but by another man of the same name."
Samuel Butler argues, based on literary observations, that a young Sicilian
woman wrote the "Odyssey" (but not the "Iliad"), an idea further pursued by
Robert Graves in his novel "Homer's Daughter" and Andrew Dalby in
"Rediscovering Homer". Independent of the question of single authorship is the
near-universal agreement, after the work of Milman Parry, that the Homeric
poems are dependent on an oral tradition, a generations-old technique that was
the collective inheritance of many singer-poets ("aoidoi"). An analysis of the
structure and vocabulary of the "Iliad" and "Odyssey" shows that the poems
contain many formulaic phrases typical of extempore epic traditions; even
entire verses are at times repeated. Parry and his student Albert Lord pointed
out that such elaborate oral tradition, foreign to today's literate cultures,
is typical of epic poetry in a predominantly oral cultural milieu, the key
words being "oral" and "traditional". Parry started with "traditional": the
repetitive chunks of language, he said, were inherited by the singer-poet from
his predecessors, and were useful to him in composition. Parry called these
repetitive chunks "formulas". Exactly when these poems would have taken on a
fixed written form is subject to debate. The traditional solution is the
"transcription hypothesis", wherein a non-literate "Homer" dictates his poem to
a literate scribe between the 8th and 6th centuries BC. The Greek alphabet was
introduced in the early 8th century BC, so it is possible that Homer himself
was of the first generation of authors who were also literate. The classicist
Barry B. Powell suggests that the Greek alphabet was invented ca. 800 BC by one
man, probably Homer, in order to write down oral epic poetry. More radical
Homerists like Gregory Nagy contend that a canonical text of the Homeric poems
as "scripture" did not exist until the Hellenistic period (3rd to 1st century
BC). New methods try also to elucidate the question. Combining information
technologies and statistics, the stylometry allows to scan various linguistic
units: words, parts of speech, sounds... Based on the frequencies of Greek
letters, a first study of Dietmar Najock highlights the unity of the works of
Homer compared to Hesiod. The thesis of modern analysts being questioned, the
debate remains open. Homeric studies. The study of Homer is one of the oldest
topics in scholarship, dating back to antiquity. The aims and achievements of
Homeric studies have changed over the course of the millennia. In the last few
centuries, they have revolved around the process by which the Homeric poems
came into existence and were transmitted over time to us, first orally and
later in writing. Some of the main trends in modern Homeric scholarship have
been, in the 19th and early 20th centuries, "Analysis" and "Unitarianism" (see
Homeric Question), schools of thought which emphasized on the one hand the
inconsistencies in, and on the other the artistic unity of, Homer; and in the
20th century and later "Oral Theory", the study of the mechanisms and effects
of oral transmission, and "Neoanalysis", the study of the relationship between
Homer and other early epic material. Homeric dialect. The language used by
Homer is an archaic version of Ionic Greek, with admixtures from certain other
dialects, such as Aeolic Greek. It later served as the basis of Epic Greek, the
language of epic poetry, typically in dactylic hexameter. Homeric style.
Aristotle remarks in his "Poetics" that Homer was unique among the poets of his
time, focusing on a single unified theme or action in the epic cycle. The
cardinal qualities of the style of Homer are well articulated by Matthew
Arnold:Matthew Arnold, 'On Translating Homer' (Oxford Lecture, 1861) in Lionel
Trilling (ed.) "The Portable Matthew Arnold,"(1949) Viking Press, New York 1956
pp. 204–228, p. 211 The peculiar rapidity of Homer is due in great measure to
his use of hexameter verse. It is characteristic of early literature that the
evolution of the thought, or the grammatical form of the sentence, is guided by
the structure of the verse; and the correspondence which consequently obtains
between the rhythm and the syntax—the thought being given out in lengths, as
it were, and these again divided by tolerably uniform pauses—produces a swift
flowing movement such as is rarely found when periods are constructed without
direct reference to the metre. That Homer possesses this rapidity without
falling into the corresponding faults, that is, without becoming either
fluctuant or monotonous, is perhaps the best proof of his unequalled poetic
skill. The plainness and directness of both thought and expression which
characterise him were doubtless qualities of his age, but the author of the
"Iliad" (similar to Voltaire, to whom Arnold happily compares him) must have
possessed this gift in a surpassing degree. The "Odyssey" is in this respect
perceptibly below the level of the "Iliad". Rapidity or ease of movement,
plainness of expression, and plainness of thought are not distinguishing
qualities of the great epic poets Virgil, Dante, and Milton. On the contrary,
they belong rather to the humbler epico-lyrical school for which Homer has been
so often claimed. The proof that Homer does not belong to that school—and
that his poetry is not in any true sense ballad poetry—is furnished by the
higher artistic structure of his poems and, as regards style, by the fourth of
the qualities distinguished by Arnold: the quality of nobleness. It is his
noble and powerful style, sustained through every change of idea and subject,
that finally separates Homer from all forms of ballad poetry and popular epic.
Like the French epics, such as the "Chanson de Roland", Homeric poetry is
indigenous and, by the ease of movement and its resultant simplicity,
distinguishable from the works of Dante, Milton and Virgil. It is also
distinguished from the works of these artists by the comparative absence of
underlying motives or sentiment. In Virgil's poetry, a sense of the greatness
of Rome and Italy is the leading motive of a passionate rhetoric, partly veiled
by the considered delicacy of his language. Dante and Milton are still more
faithful exponents of the religion and politics of their time. Even the French
epics display sentiments of fear and hatred of the Saracens; but, in Homer's
works, the interest is purely dramatic. There is no strong antipathy of race or
religion; the war turns on no political events; the capture of Troy lies
outside the range of the "Iliad"; and even the protagonists are not comparable
to the chief national heroes of Greece. So far as can be seen, the chief
interest in Homer's works is that of human feeling and emotion, and of drama;
indeed, his works are often referred to as "dramas". History and the Iliad. The
excavations of Heinrich Schliemann at Hisarlik in the late 19th century
provided initial evidence to scholars that there was an historical basis for
the Trojan War. Research into oral epics in Serbo-Croatian and Turkic
languages, pioneered by the aforementioned Parry and Lord, began convincing
scholars that long poems could be preserved with consistency by oral cultures
until they are written down. The decipherment of Linear B in the 1950s by
Michael Ventris (and others) convinced many of a linguistic continuity between
13th century BC Mycenaean writings and the poems attributed to Homer. It is
probable, therefore, that the story of the Trojan War as reflected in the
Homeric poems derives from a tradition of epic poetry founded on a war which
actually took place. It is crucial, however, not to underestimate the creative
and transforming power of subsequent tradition: for instance, Achilles, the
most important character of the "Iliad," is strongly associated with southern
Thessaly, but his legendary figure is interwoven into a tale of war whose kings
were from the Peloponnese. Tribal wanderings were frequent, and far-flung,
ranging over much of Greece and the Eastern Mediterranean. The epic weaves
brilliantly the "" (scattered remains) of these distinct tribal narratives,
exchanged among clan bards, into a monumental tale in which Greeks join
collectively to do battle on the distant plains of Troy. Hero cult. In the
Hellenistic period, Homer was the subject of a hero cult in several cities. A
shrine, the "Homereion", was devoted to him in Alexandria by Ptolemy IV
Philopator in the late 3rd century BC. This shrine is described in Aelian's 3rd
century AD work "Varia Historia". He tells how Ptolemy "placed in a circle
around the statue Homer all the cities who laid claim to Homer" and mentions a
painting of the poet by the artist Galaton, which apparently depicted Homer in
the aspect of Oceanus as the source of all poetry. A marble relief, found in
Italy but thought to have been sculpted in Egypt, depicts the apotheosis of
Homer. It shows Ptolemy and his wife or sister Arsinoe III standing beside a
seated poet, flanked by figures from the "Odyssey" and "Iliad", with the nine
Muses standing above them and a procession of worshippers approaching an altar,
believed to represent the Alexandrine Homereion. Apollo, the god of music and
poetry, also appears, along with a female figure tentatively identified as
Mnemosyne, the mother of the Muses. Zeus, the king of the gods, presides over
the proceedings. The relief demonstrates vividly that the Greeks considered
Homer not merely a great poet but the divinely inspired reservoir of all
literature. Homereia also stood at Chios, Ephesus, and Smyrna, which were among
the city-states that claimed to be his birthplace. Strabo (14.1.37) records an
Homeric temple in Smyrna with an ancient "xoanon" or cult statue of the poet.
He also mentions sacrifices carried out to Homer by the inhabitants of Argos,
presumably at another Homereion. Transmission and publication. Though evincing
many features characteristic of oral poetry, the "Iliad" and "Odyssey" were at
some point committed to writing. The Greek script, adapted from a Phoenician
syllabary around 800 BC, made possible the notation of the complex rhythms and
vowel clusters that make up hexameter verse. Homer's poems appear to have been
recorded shortly after the alphabet's invention: an inscription from Ischia in
the Bay of Naples, ca. 740 BC, appears to refer to a text of the "Iliad";
likewise, illustrations seemingly inspired by the Polyphemus episode in the
"Odyssey" are found on Samos, Mykonos and in Italy, dating from the first
quarter of the seventh century BC. We have little information about the early
condition of the Homeric poems, but in the second century BC, Alexandrian
editors stabilized this text from which all modern texts descend. In late
antiquity, knowledge of Greek declined in Latin-speaking western Europe and,
along with it, knowledge of Homer's poems. It was not until the fifteenth
century AD that Homer's work began to be read once more in Italy. By contrast
it was continually read and taught in the Greek-speaking Eastern Roman Empire
where the majority of the classics also survived. The first printed edition
appeared in 1488 (edited by Demetrios Chalkokondyles and published by Bernardus
Nerlius, Nerius Nerlius, and Demetrius Damilas in Florence, Italy). Selected
bibliography. English translations. This is a partial list of translations into
English of Homer's Iliad and Odyssey.
