Home Nations Home Nations is a collective term, that depending on the context
in which it is used, either means the nations of the constituent countries of
the United Kingdom (England, Northern Ireland, Scotland and Wales); or if a
sport is governed by a council representing the island of Ireland, such as the
Irish Rugby Football Union, the term can refer to the nations of the
constituent countries on the island of Great Britain (England, Scotland and
Wales) and the collective Irish nation. This dual meaning has persisted in
existence despite the partition of Ireland in 1922 as historically the term
included all of Ireland, which between 1800 and 1922 was wholly a part of the
United Kingdom. The term home countries (not to be confused with the "home
counties") is also sometimes used, and is synonymous. The term is also used by
British Cycling to refer to the seven representative teams of the United
Kingdom and the Crown Dependencies (the Isle of Man, Jersey and Guernsey) that
participate in the Commonwealth Games. The Crown Dependencies are not part of
the United Kingdom. Association football. In association football, the Home
Nations originally referred to the then four national teams of the United
Kingdom: England, Ireland, Scotland and Wales. Today, the Irish Football
Association organises the Northern Ireland national football team while the
Football Association of Ireland organises the Republic of Ireland national
football team; the latter is not referred to as a Home Nation. A debate took
place among the football associations that govern the sport in England,
Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland, over whether they will allow their
members to participate in the 2012 Summer Olympics as a single UK team. The
English Football Association and the news media used the term Home Nations to
describe the parties to the debate. Rugby union. In 1883, the first Home
Nations Championship was played between England, Ireland, Scotland and Wales.
At this point in Ireland's history, the country was still under British rule
and therefore these teams were referred to as the Home Nations. In 1910, France
officially joined the competition and it was renamed the Five Nations
Championship. Despite the partition of Ireland into Northern Ireland and Irish
Free State (including subsequent political developments leading to the Republic
of Ireland), Ireland continues to have a single team representing the entire
island and is therefore sometimes still referred to as a Home Nation - despite
not being a Home Nation of the United Kingdom. When France was expelled from
the international championship in 1932, the tournament reverted back to being
known simply as the Home Nations tournament until the readmission of France
immediately after the 1939 tournament, just before World War II caused its
suspension until 1947. Since the admission of Italy in 2000, the tournament has
been known by its current name, the Six Nations Championship. Victory by any
Home Nation over the other three Home Nations is a Triple Crown. The Home
Nations also contribute players to a unified team known as the British and
Irish Lions. Southern Hemisphere teams who beat all four home nations in one
tour are said to have a Grand Slam Tour. Rugby League. The Amateur Four Nations
competition in rugby league, run annually from 2002 to 2007 for the A sides of
Wales, England, Scotland and Ireland, was also referred to as the "home nations
championship".
