Home economics Home economics (also known as family and consumer sciences or
Home Ec.) is the profession and field of study that deals with the economics
and management of the home and community. Home economics is a field of formal
study including such topics as consumer education, institutional management,
interior design, home furnishing, cleaning, handicrafts, sewing, clothing and
textiles, commercial cooking, cooking, nutrition, food preservation, hygiene,
child development, managing money, and family relationships. This teaches
students how to properly run a family environment and make the world a better
place for generations to come. Sexual education and drug awareness might be
also covered, along with topics such as fire prevention and safety procedures.
It prepares students for homemaking or professional careers, or to assist in
preparing to fulfill real-life responsibilities at home. It is taught in
secondary schools, colleges and universities, vocational schools, and in adult
education centers; students include women and men. In the 19th century, home
economics classes were intended to ready young women for their duties in the
home. Classes were first offered in the United States, Canada, Germany and
Great Britain, followed by Latin America, Asia, and Africa. International
organizations such as those associated with the United Nations have been
involved in starting home economics programs around the world. Etymology. The
preferred name of the field of study and profession is Home Economics.
Internationally, the field of study has consistently retained the name Home
Economics and it is recognized both within and beyond the boundaries of the
profession. Content. Situated in the human sciences, home economics draws from
a range of disciplines to achieve optimal and sustainable living for
individuals, families, and communities. Historically, home economics has been
in the context of the home and household, but this has extended in the 21st
century to include the wider living environments as we better understand that
the capacities, choices, and priorities of individuals and families impact at
all levels, ranging from the household to the local and the global community.
Home economists are concerned with promoting and protecting the well-being of
individuals, families, and communities; they facilitate the development of
attributes for lifelong learning for paid, unpaid, and voluntary work. Home
economics professionals are advocates for individuals, families, and
communities. The content of home economics comes from the synthesis of multiple
disciplines. This interdisciplinary knowledge is essential because the
phenomena and challenges of everyday life are not typically one-dimensional.
The content of home economics courses varies, but might include: food,
nutrition, and health; personal finance; family resource management; textiles
and clothing; and housing; consumerism and consumer science; household
management; design and technology; food science and hospitality; human
development and family studies; education and community services, among others.
The capacity to draw from such disciplinary diversity is a strength of the
profession, allowing for the development of specific interpretations of the
field, as relevant to the context. The college which later became Michigan
State University began courses in home economics for women in 1870. After the
Education Act, 1902, there were in Manchester, England, 13 district evening
schools of domestic economy each with 6 hours of teaching per week. Areas of
practice. It is also called Human sciences based on everyday work where the
setting is our house. To be successful in these four dimensions of practice
means that the profession is constantly evolving, and there will always be new
ways of performing the profession. This is an important characteristic of the
profession, linking with the 21st century requirement for all people to be
"expert novices", that is, good at learning new things, given that society is
constantly and rapidly changing with new and emergent issues and challenges.
Human science is Human science. Historical skills. In the past, household
skills included: herbal medicine, converting hide into leather, soap making,
spinning yarn and thread, weaving cloth and rugs, and patchwork quilting.
Further skills were cooking on a wood-burning stove, churning butter, baking
bread, and preserving food by drying and by glass-jar canning. Cleaning. Home
cleaning can be analyzed into four parts: litter removal, storage of
belongings, dusting, and washing of surfaces. Laundry is a separate subject.
Washing of surfaces is the most dangerous and complicated part because of the
cleaning solutions. For example, hard water deposits are cleaned with acid
solutions and dirt is cleaned with alkaline solutions; they both harm the skin
and each weaken the other. Mixing chlorine bleach and ammonia together forms
toxic gas. Solvents including paint thinner and rubbing alcohol are toxic and
flammable. Disinfectants are poisonous. Even dish water requires rubber gloves.
Finances. The home economist deals with money. A budget is a plan of what to
spend on based on gathered facts. Being frugal includes buying the inexpensive
brand. Credit is lending. Budgeting how much to spend with a credit card is
done, as well as how much to save each paycheck toward a car. Investments are
ways to store extra money. They include bank accounts. Taxpayers sometimes get
audited and show financial records to government officials. Impact. The leading
national professional organization for home economics in the United States is
the American Association of Family and Consumer Sciences. The leading
international organization home economics is the International Federation for
Home Economics (IFHE) Home Economics is a vital profession currently enjoying
renewed attention in the present era. Our contemporary world is characterised
as one of unprecedented transition from industrial to knowledge-based culture
and globalised economy, with all encompassing effects on society and culture.
The information age is complex, diverse and unpredictable, yet has a strong
commitment to retaining those elements of society that are valued, while
looking ahead to the imperative of improving the world in which we all live
such that sustainable development is possible. Herein lies the potential for
Home Economics and the reason for renewed attention to the field of study, as
this is the key imperative of the profession.
