Homo economicus In economics, homo economicus, or economic human, is the
concept in many economic theories of humans as rational and narrowly self-
interested actors who have the ability to make judgments toward their
subjectively defined ends. Using these rational assessments, homo economicus
attempts to maximize utility as a consumer and economic profit as a producer.
This theory stands in contrast to the concept of "homo reciprocans", which
states that human beings are primarily motivated by the desire to be
cooperative and to improve their environment. History of the term. Mill, John
Stuart. "On the Definition of Political Economy, and on the Method of
Investigation Proper to It," London and Westminster Review, October 1836.
"Essays on Some Unsettled Questions of Political Economy", 2nd ed. London:
Longmans, Green, Reader & Dyer, 1874, essay 5, paragraphs 38 and 48. Later in
the same work, Mill goes on to write that he is proposing “an arbitrary
definition of man, as a being who inevitably does that by which he may obtain
the greatest amount of necessaries, conveniences, and luxuries, with the
smallest quantity of labour and physical self-denial with which they can be
obtained.” Smith, Adam. “On the Division of Labour,” The Wealth of
Nations, Books I-III. New York: Penguin Classics, 1986, page 119 This suggests
the same sort of rational, self-interested, labor-averse individual that Mill
proposes (although Smith did claim that individuals have sympathy for the well-
being of others, in "The Theory of Moral Sentiments"). Aristotle's "Politics"
discussed the nature of self-interest in Book II, Part V. "Again, how
immeasurably greater is the pleasure, when a man feels a thing to be his own;
for surely the love of self is a feeling implanted by nature and not given in
vain, although selfishness is rightly censured; this, however, is not the mere
love of self, but the love of self in excess, like the miser's love of money;
for all, or almost all, men love money and other such objects in a measure. And
further, there is the greatest pleasure in doing a kindness or service to
friends or guests or companions, which can only be rendered when a man has
private property." A wave of economists in the late 19th century—Francis
Edgeworth, William Stanley Jevons, Léon Walras, and Vilfredo Pareto—built
mathematical models on these assumptions. In the 20th century, Lionel
Robbins’ rational choice theory came to dominate mainstream economics and the
term Economic Man took on a more specific meaning of a person who acted
rationally on complete knowledge out of self-interest and the desire for
wealth. Model. "Homo economicus" is a term used for an approximation or model
of "Homo sapiens" that acts to obtain the highest possible well-being for him
or herself given available information about opportunities and other
constraints, both natural and institutional, on his ability to achieve his
predetermined goals. This approach has been formalized in certain social
sciences models, particularly in economics. "Homo economicus" is seen as
"rational" in the sense that well-being as defined by the utility function is
optimized given perceived opportunities. That is, the individual seeks to
attain very specific and predetermined goals to the greatest extent with the
least possible cost. Note that this kind of "rationality" does not say that the
individual's actual goals are "rational" in some larger ethical, social, or
human sense, only that he tries to attain them at minimal cost. Only naïve
applications of the "Homo economicus" model assume that this hypothetical
individual knows what is best for his long-term physical and mental health and
can be relied upon to always make the right decision for himself. See rational
choice theory and rational expectations for further discussion; the article on
rationality widens the discussion. As in social science in general, these
assumptions are at best approximations. The term is often used derogatorily in
academic literature, perhaps most commonly by sociologists, many of whom tend
to prefer structural explanations to ones based on rational action by
individuals. . According to the "O.E.D.," the human genus name "Homo" is Note
that such forms should logically keep the capital for the "genus"
name—"i.e.," "Homo economicus" rather than "homo economicus." Actual usage is
inconsistent. Amartya Sen has argued there are grave pitfalls in assuming that
rationality is limited to selfish rationality. Economics should build into its
assumptions the notion that people can give credible commitments to a course of
conduct. He demonstrates the absurdity with the narrowness of the assumptions
by some economists with the following example of two strangers meeting on a
street. Criticisms. "Homo economicus" bases his choices on a consideration of
his own personal "utility function". Consequently, the "homo economicus"
assumptions have been criticized not only by economists on the basis of logical
arguments, but also on empirical grounds by cross-cultural comparison. Economic
anthropologists such as Marshall Sahlins, Karl Polanyi, Marcel Mauss or Maurice
Godelier have demonstrated that in traditional societies, choices people make
regarding production and exchange of goods follow patterns of reciprocity which
differ sharply from what the "homo economicus" model postulates. Such systems
have been termed gift economy rather than market economy. Criticisms of the
"homo economicus" model put forward from the standpoint of ethics usually refer
to thís traditional ethic of kinship-based reciprocity that held together
traditional societies. Economists Thorstein Veblen, John Maynard Keynes,
Herbert A. Simon, and many of the Austrian School criticise "Homo economicus"
as an actor with too great of an understanding of macroeconomics and economic
forecasting in his decision making. They stress uncertainty and bounded
rationality in the making of economic decisions, rather than relying on the
rational man who is fully informed of all circumstances impinging on his
decisions. They argue that perfect knowledge never exists, which means that all
economic activity implies risk. Austrian economists rather prefer to use as a
model tool the "Homo agens". Empirical studies by Amos Tversky questioned the
assumption that investors are rational. In 1995, Tversky demonstrated the
tendency of investors to make risk-averse choices in gains, and risk-seeking
choices in losses. The investors appeared as very risk-averse for small losses
but indifferent for a small chance of a very large loss. This violates economic
rationality as usually understood. Further research on this subject, showing
other deviations from conventionally-defined economic rationality, is being
done in the growing field of experimental or behavioral economics. Some of the
broader issues involved in this criticism are studied in Decision Theory of
which Rational Choice Theory is only a subset. Other critics of the "Homo
economicus" model of humanity, such as Bruno Frey, point to the excessive
emphasis on extrinsic motivation (rewards and punishments from the social
environment) as opposed to intrinsic motivation. For example, it is difficult
if not impossible to understand how "Homo economicus" would be a hero in war or
would get inherent pleasure from craftsmanship. Frey and others argue that too
much emphasis on rewards and punishments can "crowd out" (discourage) intrinsic
motivation: paying a boy for doing household tasks may push him from doing
those tasks "to help the family" to doing them simply for the reward. Another
weakness is highlighted by sociologists, who argue that "Homo economicus"
ignores an extremely important question, "i.e.," the origins of tastes and the
parameters of the utility function by social influences, training, education,
and the like. The exogeneity of tastes (preferences) in this model is the major
distinction from "Homo sociologicus," in which tastes are taken as partially or
even totally determined by the societal environment (see below). Further
critics, learning from the broadly-defined psychoanalytic tradition, criticize
the "Homo economicus" model as ignoring the inner conflicts that real-world
individuals suffer, as between short-term and long-term goals ("e.g.," eating
chocolate cake and losing weight) or between individual goals and societal
values. Such conflicts may lead to "irrational" behavior involving
inconsistency, psychological paralysis, neurosis, and/or psychic pain. Further
irrational human behaviour can occur as a result of habit, laziness, mimicry
and simple obedience. Responses. Economists tend to disagree with these
critiques, arguing that it may be relevant to analyze the consequences of
enlightened egoism just as it may be worthwhile to consider altruistic or
social behavior. Others argue that we need to understand the consequences of
such narrow-minded greed even if only a small percentage of the population
embraces such motives. Free riders, for example, would have a major negative
impact on the provision of public goods. However, economists' supply and demand
predictions might obtain even if only a significant minority of market
participants act like "Homo economicus". In this view, the assumption of "Homo
economicus" can and should be simply a preliminary step on the road to a more
sophisticated model. Yet others argue that "Homo economicus" is a reasonable
approximation for behavior within market institutions, since the individualized
nature of human action in such social settings encourages individualistic
behavior. Not only do market settings encourage the application of a simple
cost/benefit calculus by individuals, but they reward and thus attract the more
individualistic people. It can be difficult to apply social values (as opposed
to following self-interest) in an extremely competitive market; a company that
refuses to pollute (for example) may find itself bankrupt. Defenders of the
"Homo economicus" model see many critics of the dominant school as using a
straw man technique. For example, it is common for critics to argue that real
people do not have cost-less access to infinite information and an innate
ability to instantly process it. However, in advanced-level theoretical
economics, scholars have found ways of addressing these problems, modifying
models enough to more realistically depict real-life decision-making. For
example, models of individual behavior under bounded rationality and of people
suffering from envy can be found in the literature."" It is primarily when
targeting the limiting assumptions made in constructing undergraduate models
that the criticisms listed above are valid. These criticisms are especially
valid to the extent that the professor asserts that the simplifying assumptions
are true and/or uses them in a propagandistic way. The more sophisticated
economists are quite conscious of the empirical limitations of the "Homo
economicus" model. In theory, the views of the critics can be combined with the
"Homo economicus" model to attain a more accurate model. Perspectives.
According to Sergio Caruso, when talking of "Homo economicus", one should
distinguish between the purely “methodological” versions, aimed at
practical use in the economic sphere (e.g. economic calculus), and the”
anthropological” versions, more ambitiously aimed at depicting a certain type
of man (supposed to be actually existing), or even human nature in general. The
former, traditionally founded on a merely speculative psychology, have proved
unrealistic and frankly wrong as descriptive models of economic behaviour
(therefore not applicable for normative purposes either); however, they are
liable to be corrected resorting to the new empirically based economic
psychology, which turns quite other than the philosophers’ psychology that
economists have used until yesterday. Among the latter (i.e. the
anthropological versions), one can make a further distinction between the weak
versions, more plausible, and the strong ones, irreparably ideological.
Depicting different types of “economic man” (each depending on the social
context) is in fact possible with the help of cultural anthropology, and social
psychology (a branch of psychology economists have strangely ignored), if only
those types are contrived as socially and/or historically determined
abstractions (such as Weber's, Korsch's, and Fromm's concepts of "Idealtypus",
“historical specification”, and “social character”). Even a Marxist
theoretician such as Gramsci – reminds Caruso – admitted of the "Homo
economicus" as a useful abstraction on the ground of economic theory, provided
that we grant there be as many "homines oeconomici" as the modes of production.
On the contrary, when one concept of "Homo economicus" claims to grasp the
eternal essence of what is human, at the same time putting aside all other
aspects of human nature (such as "Homo faber", "Homo loquens", "Homo ludens",
"Homo reciprocans", and so on), then the concept leaves the field of good
philosophy, not to speak of social science, and is ready to enter a political
doctrine as the most dangerous of its ideological ingredients. "Homo
sociologicus". Comparisons between economics and sociology have resulted in a
corresponding term Homo sociologicus (introduced by German Sociologist Ralf
Dahrendorf in 1958), to parody the image of human nature given in some
sociological models that attempt to limit the social forces that determine
individual tastes and social values. (The alternative or additional source of
these would be biology.) Hirsch "et al." say that "Homo sociologicus" is
largely a "tabula rasa" upon which societies and cultures write values and
goals; unlike "economicus," "sociologicus" acts not to pursue selfish interests
but to fulfill social roles (though the fulfillment of social roles may have a
selfish rationale—e.g. politicians or socialites). This "individual" may
appear to be all society and no individual.
