Hotelling's law Hotelling's law is an observation in economics that in many
markets it is rational for producers to make their products as similar as
possible. This is also referred to as the principle of minimum differentiation
as well as Hotelling's "linear city model". The observation was made by Harold
Hotelling (1895–1973) in the article "Stability in Competition" in "Economic
Journal" in 1929. The opposing phenomenon is product differentiation, which is
usually considered to be a business advantage if executed properly. A 1979
Econometrica paper, "On Hotelling's 'Stability in Competition'" by Aspremont,
Gabszewicz, and Thisse, argues that while the price competition in Hotelling's
paper correctly addressed the Bertrand paradox, explaining how firms can
compete in prices and still make positive profits, Hotelling made an error in
reasoning in the second part of the paper where he attempts to endogenize the
locations of the firms in his model and establishes his "law". The abstract of
Aspremont et al. reads: "The purpose of this note is to show that the so-called
Principle of Minimum Differentiation, as based on Hotelling's 1929 paper
'Stability in Competition' is invalid." Example. Suppose that there are two
competing shops located along the length of a street running north and south.
Each shop owner wants to locate his shop such that he maximises his own market
share by drawing the largest number of customers. In this example, the shop
itself is the 'product' considered and both products are equal in quality and
price. There is no difference in product to the customers. Customers are spread
equally along the street. Therefore, considering the prices are exactly the
same, each customer will always choose the nearest shop because there is no
difference in product. One shop. For a single shop, the optimal location is
anywhere along the length of the street. The shop owner is completely
indifferent about the location of the shop since it will draw all customers to
it, by default. However, from the point of view of a social welfare function
that tries to minimize the sum of squares of distances that people need to
walk, the optimal point is halfway along the length of the street. Two shops:
halfway. Hotelling's law predicts that a street with two shops will also find
both shops right next to each other at the same halfway point. Each shop will
serve half the market; one will draw customers from the north, the other all
customers from the south. Another example of the law in action or practice is
to think of two food push-carts at a beach. Assume one starts at the south end
of the beach and one starts at the north. Again assuming a rational consumer
and equal distribution along the beach, each cart will get 50% of the
customers, divided along an invisible line equidistant from the carts. But,
each cart owner will be tempted to push his cart slightly towards the other, in
order to move the invisible line so that it encompasses more than 50% of the
beach. Eventually, the push cart operators end up next to each other in the
center of the beach. Social optimum elsewhere. Obviously, it would be more
socially beneficial if the shops separated themselves and moved to one quarter
of the way along the street from each end — each would still draw half of the
customers (the northern or southern half) and the customers would enjoy a
shorter travel distance. However, neither shop would be willing to do this
independently, as it would then allow the other shop to relocate and capture
more than half the market. The original model assumes that each consumer along
the street will consume at least a minimum number of goods sold in the shops,
and that the price of these goods are fixed by an external authority. When
these assumptions are not met, companies have incentives to differentiate their
products. When not all people along the street, or along the range of possible
different product positions, consume a minimum number of goods, companies can
position their products to sections where consumers exist to maximize profit;
this will often mean that companies will position themselves in different
sections of the street, occupying niche markets. When prices are not fixed,
companies can modify their prices to compete for customers; in those cases it
is in the company's best interest to differentiate themselves as far away from
each other as possible so they face less competition from each other.
Application. The street is a metaphor for product differentiation; in the
specific case of a street, the stores differentiate themselves from each other
by location. The example can be generalized to all other types of horizontal
product differentiation in almost any product characteristic, such as
sweetness, colour, or size. The above case where the two stores are side by
side would translate into products that are identical to each other. This
phenomenon is present in many markets, particularly in those considered to be
primarily commodities, and results in less variety for the consumer. Businesses
in fact follow both product differentiation and Hotelling's law, as contrary as
they may seem. Take for example JetBlue. The low cost airline markets itself as
a revolutionary type of airline – cheaper airfare, nicer planes, better
locations. As JetBlue tries to differentiate its product from its competitors,
it also adopts similar flight schedules and similar service. An extension of
the principle into other environments of rational choice such as election
"markets" can explain the common complaint that, for instance, the presidential
candidates of the two American political parties are "practically the same".
Once each candidate is confirmed during primaries, they are usually established
within their own partisan camps. The remaining undecided electorate resides in
the middle of the political spectrum, and there is a tendency for the
candidates to "rush for the middle" in order to appeal to this crucial bloc.
Like the paradigmatic example, the assumption is that people will choose the
least distant option, (in this case, the distance is ideological) and that the
most votes can be had by being directly in the center.
