Human shield action to Iraq Human shield action to Iraq was a group of people
who travelled to Iraq to act as human shields with the purpose of preventing
the U.S.-led coalition troops from bombing certain locations during the 2003
Invasion of Iraq. Chronology. In December 2002 Kenneth O'Keefe, an ex-US Marine
and Gulf War veteran who had formally renounced his US citizenship posted a
call to action for large numbers of western citizens to migrate to Iraq and
deploy themselves as "Human Shields". The action was ultimately named the TJP
(Truth Justice Peace) Human Shield Action to Iraq. It was his position that
protests and petitions had no chance of pre-venting the invasion and he
reasoned that a large presence of western citizens, strategically placed in
Iraq, at sites critical to the civilian population, was the only viable
deterrent to the pre-planned war. The strategy of the action was based on the
huge disparity between the way western lives and non-western lives are valued,
thus he argued that thousands of Human Shields deployed to sites protected by
the Fourth Geneva Convention would make the invasion politically untenable.
O'Keefe was in the unique position of publicly acknowledging Saddam Hussein as
a "violent dictator" and "mass-murderer" before he arrived in Saddam controlled
Iraq, apparently he did this in an attempt to neutralize the inevitable
accusations that the Human Shields were simply pawns of Saddam. Consequently he
received no favor from the dictator, his influence within the action declined
rapidly as he traveled to Iraq, and eventually he was deported days before the
invasion. Before his deportation he repeatedly pointed to US and British
support for Hussein during all of his worst crimes, ultimately he argued that
it was the people of Iraq who would suffer most from war. In January 2003 a
group of dedicated anti-war activists joined O'Keefe in London and set out to
carry out the plan as a new form of non-violent direct action. Acknowledging
that traditional forms of protest were largely ineffective, on January 25, 2003
a group of 50 volunteers left London and headed for Baghdad with the intention
of acting as human shields. The convoy travelled through Europe and Turkey by
bus to pick up like-minded people along the way, totalling roughly 75 people.
It has been estimated that 200 to 500 people eventually made their way into
Iraq before the U.S. invasion in March. Upon reaching Baghdad, a strategy was
formed on the assumption that there would not be enough human shields to avert
an invasion. This was to involve the voluntary deployment of activists to
strategic locations throughout Baghdad, and possibly Basra, in an effort to
avert the bombing of those locations. There was much internal debate about
which locations were to be chosen. Eventually volunteers deployed to Al Daura
Electrical Plant, Baghdad South Electrical Plant, 7 April Water Treatment
Plant, Al Daura Water Treatment Plant, Tejio Food Silo, Al Daura Oil Refinery
and Al Mamun Telecommunications Facility. The need to work closely with the
Iraqi government was not something many of shield volunteers felt comfortable
with. Some felt that the list delivered by the officials compromised their
autonomy. Others felt that they would rather be deployed in schools, hospitals,
and orphanages. These shield volunteers left Iraq. The rest took up residence
at the sites, a list of which was sent to the Joint Chiefs of Staff together
with a request that they recognize their assertion that targeting these sites
would be in violation of Article 54 Protocol Additional to the Geneva
Convention. There was no response to the letters. At its peak the total of
shield volunteers in Baghdad numbered about 500, but the realization that the
thousands needed to have a chance of stopping a blitz on Baghdad had not
materialized, combined with the failure of the United Nations to forestall war,
meant that bombing was imminent. Many of the shields chose to stay; many others
chose to leave. Still others, like O’Keefe, were ordered out by the Iraqi
government. One 21-year-old human shield, Tom Hurndall, left Baghdad for
reasons of safety. He went to the Palestinian territories where he was shot by
an Israeli soldier while working with the International Solidarity Movement.
None of the 80 shields who stayed in Baghdad throughout the war were killed or
injured. None of the sites where they were residing were destroyed. During
their deployments a small group of volunteers led by Gordon Sloan of New
Zealand took on the job of vetting sites to ensure they were not in close
vicinity to military facilities. This was to be the cause of some conflict with
their Iraqi host, Dr. Abdul Razak al-Hashimi, Saddam Hussein's spokesman during
the first Gulf War, and head of the Friendship, Peace and Solidarity
organisation which was hosting the activists, under the authority of the
Baathist government. With an invasion imminent, Hashimi became frustrated by
Sloan's explorations, called a meeting, and asked the activists to deploy to
sites or leave Iraq. Hashimi's meeting is said by some of the leading
volunteers to have been a costly political mistake. It was the trigger of much
anxiety among the volunteers and negative reporting in the media, including
mis-reports that activists were being forced to deploy to military sites. It
was also at this point that some of the British volunteers were to return to
London along with the two double-decker red buses and their owner, which were
originally meant to have left soon after arrival. The paranoia that rose up
around Hashimi's announcement and the reports that the buses were leaving Iraq
slowed the influx of activists into Iraq, and caused some of those already
there to leave Iraq, believing they had lost credibility through Hashimi's
actions. The Iraqi authorities, on the other hand, saw Kenneth O'Keefe, Sloan,
and other organisers as constantly challenging Hashimi's authority and being
deliberately disruptive, and that some would-be shields were taking too long to
deploy to sites. Five of the 'trouble makers' were then asked to leave the
country. Many activists stayed on, however, and continued to shield the chosen
sites. It is claimed that eighty human shields stayed in the Baghdad area
throughout the bombing campaign. Analysis and effects of the human shields. On
February 26, 2003, Senior CNN Pentagon Correspondent, Jamie McIntyre, commented
that the "Pentagon says they will try to work around human shields" as long as
they were not deployed to military sites. Of all the shielded sites, only
one—arguably a legitimate target under the Geneva Conventions—was
eventually bombed, the Al Mamun Telecommunications Facility, one day after the
human shields pulled out of it. For violating a U.S. prewar travel ban, human
shields from the U.S. faced fines and/or imprisonment. On the day after the
departure of the human shield convoy, White House Chief of Staff, Andrew Card,
released a statement condemning the action and Fox News reported that U.S.
leaders were considering prosecuting U.S. human shields for war crimes.
Criticisms. The Human Shield Movement was criticised for what many saw as being
an overt act of aiding Saddam Hussein’s regime. Charges of the shields being
"dupes" and "useful idiots" for Saddam were widespread in the U.S. The human
shields countered that while various governments around the globe carry out
acts of aggression, the human shield action saw fit to defend against this one.
Human Rights Watch stated that "civilians acting as human shields, whether
voluntary or not, contribute indirectly to the war capability of a state. Their
actions do not pose a direct risk to opposing forces. Because they are not
directly engaged in hostilities against an adversary, they retain their
civilian immunity from attack." Human Rights Watch also noted that the use by a
state of human shields, voluntary or not, is a violation of international law,
citing Protocol I of the First Geneva Convention. Jonah Goldberg claimed after
a debate with O'Keefe, that "O'Keefe and his friends are objectively in favour
of Saddam Hussein and his murderous regime because they believe he is uniquely
worth defending with their bodies. They may be brave, I guess, but they're
still idiots, and I'm sure Saddam is grateful for them". Maria Ermanno,
chairwoman of the Swedish Peace and Arbitration Society, cited reports that
Iraqi officials were arranging transportation, accommodations and news
conferences for the human shields and that they were being used for propaganda
purposes by Saddam Hussein. "To go down to Iraq and live and act there on the
regime's expense, then you're supporting a terrible dictator. I think that
method is entirely wrong," Ermanno told Swedish Radio. The Iraqi regime was
also criticised for encouraging and facilitating the human shield actions,
since this was seen as violation of international law and Protocol I, article
20 of the Geneva Convention.
