Human settlement Settlement, locality or populated place are general terms used
in statistics, archaeology, geography, landscape history and other subjects for
a permanent or temporary community in which people live or have lived, without
being specific as to size, population or importance. A settlement can therefore
range in size from a small number of dwellings grouped together to the largest
of cities with surrounding urbanized areas. The term may include hamlets,
villages, towns and cities. The term is used internationally in the field of
geospatial modeling, and in that context is defined as "a city, town, village,
or other agglomeration of buildings where people live and work". A settlement
conventionally includes its constructed facilities such as roads, enclosures,
field systems, boundary banks and ditches, ponds, parks and woods, wind and
water mills, manor houses, moats and churches. In geography. The United States
Geological Survey (USGS) has a Geographic Names Information System that defines
three classes of human settlement: "Populated Place", "Census" and "Civil". The
populated place is defined as a place or area with clustered or scattered
buildings and a permanent human population (city, settlement, town, village or
hamlet) referenced with geographic coordinates, which is "usually not
incorporated and by definition has no legal boundaries". The Populated Places
may partially correspond to Civil records: "A political division formed for
administrative purposes (borough, county, incorporated place, municipio,
parish, town, township)." In landscape history. Landscape history studies the
form (morphology) of settlements – for example whether they are dispersed or
nucleated. Urban morphology can thus be considered a special type of cultural-
historical landscape studies. Settlements can be ordered by size, centrality or
other factors to define a settlement hierarchy. In statistics. Australia.
Geoscience Australia defines a populated place as "a named settlement with a
population of 200 or more persons." The Committee for Geographical Names in
Australasia used the term localities for rural areas, while the Australian
Bureau of Statistics uses the term "urban centres/localities" for urban areas.
Bulgaria. The Bulgarian Government publishes a National Register of Populated
Places (NRPP). Canada. The Canadian government uses the term "populated place"
in the "Atlas of Canada", but does not define it. Statistics Canada uses the
term localities for historical named locations. Croatia. The Croatian Bureau of
Statistics records population in units called settlements ("naselja"). India.
The Census Commission of India has a special definition of census towns.
Ireland. The Central Statistics Office of the Republic of Ireland has a special
definition of census towns. Russia. There are various types of inhabited
localities in Russia. Sweden. Statistics Sweden uses the term localities
("tätort") for various densely populated places. United Kingdom. The UK
Department for Communities and Local Government uses the term "urban
settlement" to denote an urban area when analysing census information. The
Registrar General for Scotland defines settlements as groups of one or more
contiguous localities, which are determined according to population density and
postcode areas. The Scottish settlements are used as one of several factors
defining urban areas. United States. Populated places may be specifically
defined in the context of censuses and be different from general-purpose
administrative entities, such as "place" as defined by the U.S. Census Bureau
or census-designated places. Abandoned populated places. The term "Abandoned
populated places" is a "Feature Designation Name" in databases sourced by the
National Geospatial-Intelligence Agency and GeoNames. Populated places can be
abandoned. Sometimes the structures are still easily accessible, such as in a
ghost town, and these may become tourist attractions. Some places that have the
appearance of a ghost town, however, may still be defined as populated places
by government entities. A town may become a ghost town because the economic
activity that supported it has failed, because of a government action, such as
the building of a dam that floods the town, or because of natural or human-
caused disasters such as floods, uncontrolled lawlessness, or war. The term is
sometimes used to refer to cities, towns, and neighborhoods that are still
populated, but significantly less so than in years past.
