Human shield Human shield is a military and political term describing the
deliberate placement of civilians in or around combat targets to deter an enemy
from attacking those targets. It may also refer to the use of civilians to
literally shield combatants during attacks, by forcing the civilians to march
in front of the soldiers. This is done in the hope that the other party will be
reluctant to attack them. Furthermore, if the other party attacks these targets
anyway, the resulting civilian casualties have propaganda value. Using this
technique increases the civilian casualty rate and is illegal by any nation
that is party to the Fourth Geneva Convention. 13th Century Mongols. During a
siege the Mongols would gather a crowd of local residents or soldiers
surrendered from previous battles, and would drive them forward in sieges and
battles. These "alive boards" or "human shields" would often take the brunt of
enemy arrows and crossbow bolts, thus leaving the Mongol warriors safer. World
War II. After World War II it was claimed by German SS general Gottlob Berger
that there was a plan, proposed by the Luftwaffe and approved by Adolf Hitler,
to set up special POW camps for captured airmen of the Royal Air Force and the
United States Army Air Force in large German cities, to act as human shields
against their bombing raids. Berger realised that this would contravene the
Geneva Convention and argued that there was not enough barbed wire - as a
result this plan was not implemented. Wehrmacht and later SS forces extensively
used Polish civilians as human shield during Warsaw Uprising when attacking the
insurgents' positions. First Gulf War. One of the most famous uses of human
shields occurred in Iraq in 1990, following the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait that
precipitated the first Gulf War. Saddam Hussein's government detained hundreds
of citizens of Western countries who were in Iraq for use as human shields in
an attempt to deter nations from participating in military operations against
the country. A number of these hostages were filmed meeting Hussein, and kept
with him to deter any targeted attacks, whilst others were held in or near
military and industrial targets. While the United Nations debated its response
to the invasion of Kuwait, several international statesmen and peace
campaigners visited Iraq to try to secure the release of the human shields,
many returning with around 10 or 12 each time. 21st century. Afghanistan.
According to various accounts - including the US ambassador to the UN - the
Taliban used women and children from their own population as human shields
against coalition forces in 2006, and 2007, and when the British attacked
during August 2008. Israeli-Palestinian conflict. By Palestinians. During the
Second Intifada (2000–2005) Palestinian gunmen used civilians and children as
human shield, by surrounding themselves with children while shooting on IDF
forces. In November 2006, Palestinian women volunteered as human shields to
allow the escape of Hamas gunmen from Israeli forces in Beit Hanoun in the Gaza
Strip. The armed Palestinians had barricaded themselves in a mosque, which was
surrounded by Israeli troops and tanks. According to a Hamas spokesman, a crowd
of women gathered outside the mosque in response to an appeal on the local
radio station for women to protect the Hamas fighters. The Palestinian gunmen
escaped by dressing in women's clothes and hiding in the large group. Also in
the same month, the Israeli Air Force warned Mohammed Weil Baroud, a
Palestinian leader said to be responsible for firing Qassam rockets at Israel,
to evacuate his home in Beit Lahia in the Gaza Strip in advance of an
airstrike. Instead, hundreds of Palestinians, including many women and
children, gathered outside Baroud's house. Israel suspended the airstrike out
of fear that the human shields would be killed or injured. In response to
Israel's reaction, another Palestinian leader said: "We have won. From now on
we will form human chains around every house that is threatened with
demolition." The Israeli Ministry of Foreign Affairs says Hamas now regularly
uses human shields to protect the homes of Hamas officials. The human rights
group Rabbis for Human Rights agreed to act as human shields during the annual
olive harvest to protect Palestinian villages from settlers. On October 29,
2007, in response to criticism of Israel's bombing of a Beit Hanoun Elementary
School for boys run by UNRWA, the Israel Defense Forces released drone footage
of mortars shot from a street adjacent to the school. Israel warned Ban Ki Moon
about the danger and requested an investigation. Local eyewitnesses later
confirmed that Hamas militants had fired at Israeli troops from adjacent a UN
school for girls where hundreds of Palestinians had sought refuge. 43
Palestinians were reported killed when a street outside the school was hit by
return fire. Israel accused Hamas of using civilians as human shields. A report
from the IDF brigade responsible for the attack stated that militants had
launched a rocket into Israel from a yard adjacent to the UN building and the
paratroop brigade had fired three rounds of mortars at the position. A GPS
error led to one of the mortars hitting the building. The Intelligence and
Terrorism Information Center, an Israeli NGO with close ties to the IDF,
accused Hamas and other armed groups of making extensive use of human shields
as integral part of their war doctrine, in order to prevent the IDF to target
them, during the Gaza War (2008-2009). According to the ITIC, tactics used by
Hamas that qualify as using human shields include hiding military
infrastructure in civilian buildings - including "mosques, hospitals and
educational institutions", firing rockets and mortar shells from civilian
population centers, "summoning civilians to come to operatives’ houses to
serve as human shields for terrorist operatives in danger of being attacked by
the IDF" and using children as human shield by "surrounding operatives with
children to facilitate their escape from combat zones". The IDF and Israel
Ministry of Foreign Affairs released a video accusing Hamas in a systematic use
of civilians as human shield, including several photoes of Hamas militants
using children as human shield and two videoes from the Gaza War (2008-2009)
showing Hamas militants grabbing children, allegdly using them as a human
shield. The IDF also released a video taken from an UAV drone documenting Hamas
militant launching a rocket from a roof of a civilian house and then using
children to escort him out to avoid being targeted by IDF forces. By Israel.
The IDF admittedly used Palestinians as human shields, a practice subsequently
banned by Israel's High Court of Justice. The Israeli Defense Ministry appealed
this decision. Amnesty International and Human Rights Watch assert the Israel
Defense Forces used Palestinian civilians as human shields during the 2002
Battle of Jenin. The Israeli human rights group B'Tselem said that "for a long
period of time following the outbreak of the second intifada, particularly
during Operation Defensive Shield, in April 2002, the IDF systematically used
Palestinian civilians as human shields, forcing them to carry out military
actions which threatened their lives". The practice was outlawed by the Supreme
Court of Israel in 2005 but human rights groups say the IDF continues to use
it, although they say the number of instances has dropped sharply. In February
2007, Associated Press Television News released footage of an incident
involving Sameh Amira, a 24-year-old Palestinian. The video appears to show the
West Bank resident serving as a human shield for a group of Israeli soldiers.
The Israeli Army launched a criminal investigation into the incident. In April
2007, the Israeli army suspended a commander after the unit he was leading was
accused of using Palestinians as human shields in a West Bank raid. During the
2008-2009 Gaza War known as Operation Cast Lead, Israeli military forces were
accused of continuing to use civilians as human shields by Amnesty
International and former Israeli soldiers (see Breaking the Silence). According
to testimonies, Israeli forces used unarmed Palestinians including children to
protect military positions, walk in front of armed soldiers; go into buildings
to check for booby traps or gunmen; and inspect suspicious objects for
explosives. The UN Human Rights Council also accused Israel of using human
shields during 2008-2009 Gaza Conflict The Guardian has compiled 3 videos and
testimony from civilians of alleged war crimes committed by Israeli soldiers
during the Gaza war, including the use of Palestinian children as human
shields, the targeting of medics and hospitals, and drone aircraft firing on
civilians deliberately. Three teenage brothers from the al-Attar family have
claimed that "they were taken from their home at gunpoint, made to kneel in
front of tanks to deter Hamas fighters from firing at them and sent by Israeli
soldiers into Palestinian houses to clear them". An Israeli military official
responded to these allegations: "The IDF operated in accordance with the rules
of war and did the utmost to minimise harm to civilians uninvolved in combat.
The IDF's use of weapons conforms to international law." An Israeli embassy
spokesperson considers these allegations suspect because of Hamas pressure,
adding: "Anyone who understands the realities of Gaza will know that these
people are not free to speak the truth. Those that wish to speak out cannot for
fear of beatings, torture or execution at the hands of Hamas." However, in a
report on the Gaza conflict, released July 2, 2009, Amnesty International wrote
that Israel did use human shields in Gaza. Amnesty claimed to have found cases
in which "Israeli troops forced Palestinians to stay in one room of their home
while turning the rest of the house into a base and sniper position,
effectively using the families, both adults and children, as human shields and
putting them at risk. The report also criticized Hamas for human rights
violations, but "found no evidence Palestinian fighters directed civilians to
shield military objectives from attacks, forced them to stay in buildings used
by militants, or prevented them from leaving commandeered buildings." The
Israeli military responded only by calling the report "unbalanced" and saying
that it ignored "blatant violations of international law perpetrated by Hamas."
On March 12, 2010 the Israel Defense Forces prosecution filed indictments
against two staff sergeants of the Givati Brigade for allegedly forcing a 9
year old Palestinian boy to open a number of bags they thought might contain
explosives in January 2009. The IDF said it opened the investigation after the
incident was brought to its attention by the United Nations. On October 3, 2010
a conviction in this matter was handed down by the military court against both
defendants, though neither soldier was jailed. Iraq. During the 2003 Invasion
of Iraq, a group of citizens of Western countries chose to travel to Iraq to
act as human shields. Their purpose was to prevent the U.S.-led coalition
troops from bombing certain locations. Of about 200 to 500 human shields who
traveled to Iraq before hostilities, at least 80 stayed. Of the shields who
stayed throughout the war, none were killed or injured and none of the sites
where they were residing were destroyed. Lebanon. Australian journalist Chris
Link reported and photographed incidents during the 2006 Lebanon War in which
Hezbollah used Lebanese civilians as human shields to dissuade the IDF from
firing at gunmen and rocket launchers, although Human Rights Watch then
conducted its own investigation and reported that Hezbollah did not
"deliberately" use civilians as a deterrent from IDF attack. HRW did however
conclude Hezbollah stored weapons "in or near civilian homes" and fighters
launched rockets within populated areas and near U.N. observers. HRW also
accused Hezbollah of using Lebanese homes as sites for rocket launchers,
usually without the home-owner's knowledge or permission, putting large numbers
of civilians at risk. On July 25, 2006, Israeli forces attacked and destroyed
an U.N. observer post in southern Lebanon, resulting in four deaths. One of the
fatalities, Canadian Major Paeta Derek Hess-von Kruedener, had sent an e-mail
to his former commander, retired Major-General Lewis MacKenzie, several days
before his death in which he described the Israeli bombardment, writing "The
closest artillery has landed within 2 meters of our position and the closest
1000 lb aerial bomb has landed 100 meters from our patrol base. This has not
been deliberate targeting, but rather due to tactical necessity." MacKenzie
interpreted this language for a reporter: "What that means is, in plain
English, 'We've got Hezbollah fighters running around in our positions, taking
our positions here and then using us for shields and then engaging the (Israeli
Defence Forces).'" Pakistan. According to the Pakistan Army spokesman, Islamic
militants used girls as human shields in Pakistan during the 2007 Siege of Lal
Masjid. The mosque's head cleric denied the allegations. On December 4, 2009,
terrorists attacked a Friday prayer ceremony in a mosque in Rawalpindi,
Pakistan where Bilal Riaz, a graduate student, acted as a human shield to save
his nephew's life. Sri Lanka. According to Human Rights Watch and a report
published by them on February 19, 2009 titled "War on the Displaced", the LTTE
had been preventing Tamil civilians from fleeing out of rebel held area and
using them as human shields against a Sri Lankan Army offensive. Libya. Gaddafi
supporters were acting as human shields in the Libya No Fly Zone, to try to
protect Gaddafi's compound, and airports. Syria. During the 2011–2012 Syrian
uprising, the army and loyalist militias of Bashar al-Assad were accused by the
group Human Rights Watch of using residents of towns as human shields when
advancing on opposition held areas, forcing them to march in front of the army.
Witness from different towns across the country said that the army had
kidnapped people and forced them to march in front of them when attacking towns
and villages. The purpose of this was to protect the army from attack. HRW said
"The Syrian army should immediately stop this abhorrent practice." Witnesses
stated that the army forcibly used children and elderly people as well to deter
anyone from firing on the soldiers. Tactic in peace campaigning. In recent
years civilian volunteers have attempted to use themselves as human shields to
prevent military conflict. In January 2003, anti-war activists organised Human
Shield Action to Iraq in advance of the 2003 invasion. Ultimately, Human Shield
Action brought 200 Westerners to Iraq. Many of them left as they ran out of
money and the likelihood of war became greater. Several of these human shields
had to be saved by US Marines after Iraqis threatened them for opposing the
invasion of their country. Rachel Corrie and Tom Hurndall, Western
International Solidarity Movement (ISM) volunteers in the Palestinian
territories, who died in 2003 and 2004 respectively have been described as
human shields campaigning against house demolition. ISM, however, strongly
objects to the use of the term "human shield" to describe their work,
preferring it be used only to refer to when the military uses civilians as
shields.
