Human geography Human geography is one of the two major sub-fields of the
discipline of geography. Human geography is a branch of the social sciences
that studies the world, its people, communities, and cultures with an emphasis
on relations of and across space and place. Human geography differs from
physical geography mainly in that it has a greater focus on studying human
activities and is more receptive to qualitative research methodologies. As a
discipline, human geography is particularly diverse with respect to its methods
and theoretical approaches to study. History. Geographical knowledge, both
physical and social, has a long history. In the history of geography,
geographers have often recorded and described features of the Earth that might
now be considered the remit of human, rather than physical, geographers. For
example Hecataeus of Miletus, a geographer and historian in ancient Greece,
described inhabitants of the ancient world as well as physical features. It was
not until the 18th and 19th centuries, however, that geography was recognised
as a formal academic discipline. The Royal Geographical Society was founded in
England in 1830, although the United Kingdom did not get its first full Chair
of geography until 1917. The first real geographical intellect to emerge in
United Kingdom geography was Halford John Mackinder, appointed reader at Oxford
University in 1887. The National Geographic Society was founded in the USA in
1888 and began publication of the "National Geographic" magazine which became
and continues to be a great populariser of geographic information. The society
has long supported geographic research and education. One of the first examples
of geographic methods being used for purposes other than to describe and
theorise the physical properties of the earth is John Snow's map of the 1854
Broad Street cholera outbreak. Though a physician and a pioneer of
epidemiology, the map is probably one of the earliest examples of Health
geography. The now fairly distinct differences between the subfields of
physical and human geography developed at a later date. This connection between
both physical and human properties of geography is most apparent in the theory
of Environmental determinism, made popular in the 19th century by Carl Ritter
and others, and with close links to evolutionary biology of the time.
Environmental determinism is the theory that a people's physical, mental and
moral habits are directly due to the influence of their natural environment.
However, by the mid-19th century, environmental determinism was under attack
for lacking methodological rigour associated with modern science, and later as
serving to justify racism and imperialism. A similar concern with both human
and physical aspects is apparent in the later Regional geography, during the
later 19th and first half of the 20th centuries. The goal of regional
geography, through regionalization, was to delineate space into regions and
then understand and describe the unique characteristics of each region, in both
human and physical aspects. With links to possibilism and cultural ecology,
some of the same notions of causal effect of the environment on society and
culture, as with environmental determinism remained. By the 1960s, however, the
quantitative revolution lead to strong criticism of regional geography. Due to
a perceived lack of scientific rigour in and overly descriptive nature of the
discipline, and a continued separation of geography from geology and the two
subfields of physical and human geography, geographers in the mid-20th century
began to apply statistical and mathematical model methods to solving spatial
problems. Much of the development during the quantitative revolution is now
apparent in the use of Geographic information systems; the use of statistics,
spatial modelling and positivist approaches is still important to many branches
of human geography. Well-known geographers from this period are Fred K.
Schaefer, Waldo Tobler, William Garrison, Peter Haggett, Richard J. Chorley,
William Bunge, and Torsten Hägerstrand. From the 1970s a number of critiques
of the positivism now associated with geography emerged. Known under the term
critical geography this signalled another turning point in the discipline.
Behavioural geography emerged for some time as a means to understand how people
made perceived spaces and places, and made locational decisions. More
influentially, radical geography emerged in the 1970s and 1980s, drawing
heavily on Marxist theory and techniques, and is associated with geographers
such as David Harvey and Richard Peet. Seeking to say something 'meaningful'
about the problems recognised through quantitative methods, to provide
explanations rather than descriptions, to put forward alternatives and
solutions and to be politically engaged, rather than the detachment associated
with positivist methods. (The detachment and objectivity of the quantitative
revolution was itself critiqued by radical geographers as being a tool of
capital). Radical geography and the links to Marxism and related theories
remain an important part of contemporary human geography (See: Antipode
(Journal)) Critical geography also saw the introduction of humanistic
geography, associated with the work of Yi-Fu Tuan, which, though similar to
behavioural geography, pushed for a much more qualitative approach in
methodology. The changes under critical geography have led to contemporary
approaches in the discipline such as Feminist geography, New cultural
geography, and the engagement with postmodern and post structural theories and
philosophies. Fields. Culture. Cultural geography is the study of cultural
products and norms and their variation across and relations to spaces and
places. It focuses on describing and analysing the ways language, religion,
economy, government, and other cultural phenomena vary or remain constant from
one place to another and on explaining how humans function spatially.
Development. Development Geography is the study of the Earth's geography with
reference to the Standard of living and the Quality of life of its human
inhabitants, study of the location, distribution and spatial organization of
economic activities, across the Earth. The subject matter investigated is
strongly influenced by the researcher's methodological approach. Economic.
Economic geography examines relationships between human economic systems,
states, and other factors, and the biophysical environment. Health. Health
geography is the application of geographical information, perspectives, and
methods to the study of health, disease, and health care. Historical.
Historical Geography is the study of the human, physical, fictional,
theoretical, and "real" geographies of the past. Historical geography studies a
wide variety of issues and topics. A common theme is the study of the
geographies of the past and how a place or region changes through time. Many
historical geographers study geographical patterns through time, including how
people have interacted with their environment, and created the cultural
landscape. Political. Political geography is concerned with the study of both
the spatially uneven outcomes of political processes and the ways in which
political processes are themselves affected by spatial structures. Population.
Population geography is the study of the ways in which spatial variations in
the distribution, composition, migration, and growth of populations are related
to the nature of places. Settlement. Settlement geography, including urban
geography, is the study of urban and rural areas with specific regards to
spatial, relational and theoretical aspects of settlement. That is the study of
areas which have a concentration of buildings and infrastructure. These are
areas where the majority of economic activities are in the secondary sector and
tertiary sectors. In case of urban settlement, they probably have a high
population density. Philosophical and theoretical approaches. Within each of
the subfields, various philosophical approaches can be used in research;
therefore, an urban geographer could be a Feminist or Marxist geographer, etc.
Human geography journals. As with all social sciences, human geographers
publish research and other written work in a variety of academic journals.
Whilst human geography is interdisciplinary, there are a number of journals
with a human geography focus.
