Hung parliament In a two-party parliamentary system of government, a hung
parliament occurs when neither major political party (or bloc of allied
parties) has an absolute majority of seats in the parliament (legislature). It
is also less commonly known as a balanced parliament or a legislature under no
overall control. If the legislature is bicameral, and the government is
responsible only to the lower house, then "hung parliament" is used only with
respect to that chamber. Most general elections in a two-party system will
result in one party having an absolute majority and thus quickly forming a new
government; a "hung parliament" is an exception to this pattern, and may be
considered anomalous or undesirable. One or both main parties may seek to form
a coalition government with smaller third parties, or a minority government
relying on confidence and supply support from third parties or independents. If
these efforts fail, a dissolution of parliament and a fresh election may be the
last resort. In a multi-party system with legislatures elected by proportional
representation, it is rare for a party to win an outright majority of seats, so
a "hung parliament" is the norm and the term is rarely used. However, the term
may be used to describe an election in which no established alliance among the
parties wins an outright majority, such as the 2005 German election, in which
the incumbent left-wing coalition and the right-wing opposition both failed to
win a majority. History. United Kingdom. In the United Kingdom, before World
War I, a largely stable two-party system existed for generations;
traditionally, only the Tories and Whigs, or from the mid-19th century the
Conservative and Liberal Parties, managed to deliver Members of Parliament in
significant numbers. Hung parliaments were thus rare, especially during the
19th century. The possibility of change arose when, in the aftermath of the Act
of Union, 1800, a number of Irish MPs took seats in the House, though initially
these followed the traditional alignments. However, two Reform Acts (in 1867
and in 1884) significantly extended the franchise and redrew the
constituencies, and coincided with a change in Irish politics. After the 1885
General Election, neither party had an overall majority. The Irish
Parliamentary Party held the balance of power and made Irish Home Rule a
condition of their support. However, the Liberal Party split on the issue of
Irish Home Rule, leading to another general election in 1886, in which the
Conservatives won the most seats and governed with the support of the fragment
of Liberalism opposed to Home Rule, the Liberal Unionist Party. Both the
election of January 1910, and that of December 1910 produced a hung parliament
with an almost identical number of seats won by the governing Liberal Party and
the Conservative Party. This was due both to the constitutional crisis and to
the rise of the Labour Party. The elections of 1929 resulted in the last hung
parliament for many years; in the meantime Labour had replaced the Liberals as
one of the two dominating parties. Since the elections of 1929, there have been
two general elections that resulted in hung parliaments in the UK. The first
was the election in February 1974, and the ensuing parliament lasted only until
that October. The second was the May 2010 election, the result of which was a
hung parliament with the Conservative party as the largest single party. The
results for the 3 main parties were: Conservatives - 307, Labour - 258, Liberal
Democrats - 57. Since the formation of this coalition, an Act of Parliament was
passed creating Fixed Five-Term Parliaments, so that the next election will not
take place until 2015. This was the idea of the Deputy Prime Minister, who is
the Leader of the Liberal Democrats Party, who said that this would stop the
Prime Minister, who is the Conservative Leader David Cameron, from calling a
snap election as many Conservatives have requested. Hung parliaments can also
arise when slim government majorities are eroded by by-election defeats and
defection of Members of Parliament to opposition parties, as well as
resignations of MPs from the House of Commons. This happened in December 1996
to the Conservative government of John Major (1990–97) and in mid 1978 to the
Labour government of James Callaghan (1976–79); this latter period covers the
era known as the Winter of Discontent. The minority government of Jim Callaghan
came when Labour ended their 15-month pact with the Liberals having lost their
majority in early 1977. According to researchers Andrew Blick and Stuart Wilks-
Heeg, the phrase "hung parliament" did not enter into common usage in the UK
until the mid-1970s, and was first used in the press by journalist Simon
Hoggart in "The Guardian" in 1974. Academic treatments of hung parliaments
include David Butler's "Governing Without a Majority: Dilemmas for Hung
Parliaments in Britain" (Sheridan House, 1986) and Vernon Bogdanor's 'Multi-
Party Politics and the Constitution' (Cambridge University Press, 1983).
Canada. Three recent Canadian Parliaments (the 38th, the 39th, and the 40th
Parliaments) were hung parliaments. However, the term is not used in Canada.
Instead, the term "minority government" or "minority parliament" is used.
Although minority governments have tended to be short-lived, the minority under
Prime Minister Stephen Harper managed to hold onto power from February 2006
until a no confidence vote in March 2011 resulted in the dissolution of
Parliament and elections held on May 2, 2011. The subsequent election saw a
majority parliament elected with Harper's Conservative Party obtaining a 14-
seat majority. Australia. Australian parliaments are modelled on the
Westminster system, with a hung parliament typically defined as a lack of a
lower house parliamentary majority from either the Australian Labor Party or
Liberal/National Coalition. Hung parliaments are rare at the federal level in
Australia, as a virtual two-party system, in which the Australian Labor Party
competes against an alliance of the conservative parties, has existed with only
brief interruptions since the early 20th century. Prior to 1910, no party had a
majority in the House of Representatives. As a result, there were frequent
changes of government, several of which took place during parliamentary terms.
Since 1910, when the two-party system was cemented, there have only been two
hung parliaments, the first in 1940, the second in 2010. At the 1940 federal
election, incumbent Prime Minister Robert Menzies secured the support of the
two crossbenchers and continued to govern, but in 1941 the independents
switched their support to Labor, bringing John Curtin to power. At the 2010
federal election, which resulted in an exact 72-72 seat tie between Labor and
The Liberal-National Coalition, incumbent Prime Minister Julia Gillard secured
the support of four out of six Independent and Green Party crossbenchers and
continued to govern. Having hung Parliaments in both Australia and the United
Kingdom at the same time, and also briefly including Canada as well, is
unprecedented in the history of the Commonwealth of Nations. Hung parliaments
are rather more common at a state level. The Tasmanian House of Assembly and
the unicameral Parliament of the Australian Capital Territory are both elected
by Hare-Clark proportional representation, thus, elections commonly return hung
parliaments. In other states and territories, candidates contest single-member
seats. With far fewer seats than federal parliament, hung parliaments are more
likely to be elected. Recent examples include New South Wales in 1991,
Queensland in 1995, Victoria in 1999, South Australia in 2002, Western
Australia in 2008, the Australian Capital Territory in 2008, and Tasmania in
2010. Consequences. In countries used to decisive election outcomes, a hung
parliament is often viewed as an unfavourable outcome, leading to relatively
weak and unstable government. A period of uncertainty after the election is
common, as major party leaders negotiate with independents and minor parties to
establish a working majority. An aspiring head of government may seek to build
a coalition government; in Westminster systems, this typically involves
agreement on a joint legislative programme and a number of ministerial posts
going to the minor coalition partners, in return for a stable majority.
Alternatively, a minority government may be formed, establishing confidence and
supply agreements in return for policy concessions agreed in advance, or
relying on case by case support. United Kingdom. In the February 1974 General
Election, sitting Prime Minister Edward Heath refused at first to resign,
attempting to build a coalition government despite winning fewer seats (though
gaining more votes) than the then opposition Labour Party. He was unable to do
this, and so the Labour Party led by Harold Wilson took over, in a minority
government. In the 2010 UK General Election, another hung parliament occurred,
and discussions followed to help create a stable government. This resulted in
agreement on a coalition government, which was also a majority government,
between the Conservative Party, which won the most votes and seats in the
election, and the Liberal Democrats. Australia. In the Western Australian state
election of 2008 the Australian Labor Party won more seats than the Liberal
Party at 28 to 24. The National Party along with three independents had the
seats needed to give either party a majority. To help the Liberal Party form
government, the Nationals supported the party on the condition that the
Royalties for Regions policy was implemented. In the 1999 Victorian state
election, the Labor Party won 42 seats, while the incumbent Liberal National
Coalition retained 43, with 3 seats falling to independents. The Labor Party
formed a minority government with the 3 independents. The 2010 Tasmanian state
election resulted in a hung parliament. After a period of negotiation, the
incumbent Labor government led by David Bartlett was recommissioned, but
containing the Leader of the Tasmanian Greens, Nick McKim, as a minister, and
the Greens' Cassy O'Connor as Cabinet Secretary. In the 2010 Federal election,
neither Labor nor the Liberal coalition secured the majority of seats required
to form a Government in their own right. Ultimately, a government was formed by
Julia Gillard with the help of three independent members and a Greens member
for the Australian House of Representatives. Greece. The 2012 elections in
Greece were overshadowed by the country's dire financial position, with a heavy
backlash against the ruling parties that supported stiff austerity measures.
The ruling Panhellenic Socialist Movement party lost much ground, with no party
having the numbers or the agreement to form a working coalition. As a result,
new elections will immediately be held. Working majority. There have been
occasions when, although a parliament or assembly is technically hung, the
party in power has a working majority. For example in the United Kingdom the
tradition is that the Speaker and Deputy Speakers do not vote and Sinn Féin
MPs never take their seats, so these members can be discounted from the
opposition numbers. United Kingdom. In 2005 for Wales, this was the case in the
National Assembly for Wales, where Labour lost their majority when Peter Law
was expelled for standing against the official candidate in the 2005
Westminster election in the Blaenau Gwent constituency. When the Assembly was
first elected on 1 May 2003, Labour won 30 seats, Plaid Cymru won 12, the
Conservatives won 11, Liberal Democrats won 6, and the John Marek Independent
Party won a seat. When Dafydd Elis-Thomas (Plaid) was reelected as the
presiding officer, this reduced the number of opposition AMs who could vote to
29, as the presiding officer only votes in the event of a tie, and even then
not on party political lines but rather according to Speaker Denison's rule.
Labour, thus, had a working majority of one seat. This was lost when Law ran in
Blaenau Gwent.
