Hunt Saboteurs Association The Hunt Saboteurs Association (HSA) is a worldwide
organization using direct action to stop the hunting of animals. HSA activists
use a model of leaderless resistance and have been using the same basic tactics
since their inception in 1963; the underlying principle being to directly
intervene in a day's hunting, historically by delaying or confusing the horses
and hounds. Origins. In 1964 John Prestige founded the Hunt Saboteurs
Association in Brixham, England, after being assigned to report on the Devon
and Somerset Staghounds, where "he witnessed the hunters drive a pregnant deer
into a village and kill her." Designed to "actively oppose blood sports," the
HSA eschewed parliamentary reforms and instead went directly out into the
fields of Britain to do everything they could, within the law, to prevent the
killing of British wildlife. "Within a year, HSA groups appeared across England
in Devon, Somerset, Avon, Birmingham, Hampshire and Surrey. Ronnie Lee, founder
of the animal rights group Band of Mercy (and later the Animal Liberation
Front), began his activism within an HSA group in Luton, England. HSA now
operates throughout Europe and North America. Hunt saboteurs are often referred
to as by the abbreviation "sabs". Early evidence. A group of hunt saboteurs
both appear and are a critical part of the plot in the 1963 film The List of
Adrian Messenger. Tactics. The HSA uses tactics as varied as using hunting
horns and whistles to misdirect hounds, scent dullers, laying false trails and
locking gates to disrupt a hunt. In the mid 90s sabs used a "gizmo" (a portable
cassette tape player linked up to a megaphone or other portable amplification
equipment) to play the sound of hounds in cry, causing the dogs to break off
the chase. The HSA has expanded into countries such as the United States and
Canada, so tactics have shifted depending on the type of hunting being
disrupted. The HSA now routinely disrupt deer, waterfowl, turkey, mink and hare
hunts, as well as angling and other types of fishing. This type of action has
been deemed illegal in numerous states with those states passing laws against
the disruption of legal hunting activities. Journal. HSA UK publishes a
quarterly journal, "Howl". External links. National Groups
