Husting A husting (called a stump in the United States) originally referred to
a physical platform from which representatives presented their views or cast
votes before a parliamentary or other election body. By metonymy, the term may
now refer to any event, such as debates or speeches, during an election
campaign where one or more of the representative candidates are present.
Development of the term. The origin of the term comes from the Old English word
"hasting" or Old Norse term "húsþing", literally the house "thing," meaning
the assembly of the household of personal followers or retainers of a king,
earl or chief, contrasted with the "folkmoot," the assembly of the whole
people. "Thing" literally meant any inanimate object, but also could refer to a
cause, suit, or assembly; a similar development of meaning is found in the
Latin "res", as in the word 'republic' or "res publica" ('public thing'),
meaning 'commonwealth'. The word still appears in the names of some of the
legislative assemblies throughout Scandinavia, for example the Folketing of
Denmark, the Althing of Iceland and the Storting of Norway. "Husting," or more
usually the plural "hustings," developed to mean a court of the city of London.
This court was formerly the county court for the city and was held before the
lord mayor, the sheriffs and aldermen, for the purpose of hearing pleas of
land, common pleas and appeals from the sheriffs. It had probate jurisdiction
and the ability to register wills. The charter of Canute (1032) contains a
reference to "hustings" weights, which points to the early establishment of
this court. It is doubtful whether courts of this name were held in other
towns, but John Cowell (1554–1611) in his "Interpreter" (1601) s.v.,
"Hustings," says that according to Fleta there were such courts at Winchester,
York, Lincoln, Sheppey and elsewhere. However, the passage from Fleta, as the
New English Dictionary points out, does not necessarily imply this (II. lv.
"Habet etiam Rex curiam in civitatibus ... et in locis ... sicut in Hustingis
London", Winton, est.). This hustings court jurisdiction eventually became
obsolete, but the court still sits occasionally for registering gifts made to
the city. Today, the Hustings Court tradition can be found in some areas of in
the United States, such as in Virginia, where Hustings Courts formerly decided
local criminal and other matters. In Richmond, Virginia, there is also a park
called Hustings Court Square, where polling votes used to take place. The
Husting in eighteenth and early nineteenth century practice. The Husting
referred to a platform or pavilion, a temporary structure erected at the place
of an election. The returning officer (in most borough constituencies the Mayor
or equivalent civic dignitary and in county elections the High Sheriff of the
county) was responsible for the detailed timing of the election and the
provision of a suitable husting. County elections took place at a single place
of election, which was usually the county town or a large town. On the
appointed day the returning officer attended at the husting with the
prospective candidates (or the agent of a candidate who was not present in
person). The candidates, with a proposer and a seconder for each, addressed the
assembled voters. This could sometimes be a difficult task in a large urban
constituency, where unpopular speakers might be shouted down. At the conclusion
of the speeches, a show of hands was taken. This was an informal indication of
the opinion of the voters and no official record was kept of how many voted for
a particular candidate. Sometimes a candidate who found he had little support
or otherwise did not want to continue declined to call for a poll. One example
of this was seen in the 1784 election for the four seats of the City of London.
William Pitt the Younger was proposed and "was returned on the show of hands,
but removed himself from consideration before the polling was completed. If
after this process there were not more candidates nominated and willing to go
to the poll than seats to be filled, the existing candidates were declared
elected. This was called an "unopposed return". But if there remained more
candidates than vacancies, the polling commenced. During polling, each vote was
declared openly on the husting, with the elector orally declaring for whom he
was casting a ballot. The vote was recorded in a poll book, along with the name
of each voter (which enabled further enquiries to be made about his eligibility
to vote, if a scrutiny was called for at the end of the polling). In certain
occasions, additional candidates were nominated as the polling continued, since
this gave an opportunity for more speeches. Polling could continue for many
days, so long as there were voters wanting to participate and the candidates
desired to continue. A maximum limit of fifteen days for polling was imposed by
law in the eighteenth century. At the end of the polling, the returning officer
was required to declare the result from the hustings and return the members
elected. This could be a problem after a hotly contested election, and rioting
was not unheard of. The 1722 election in Westminster was declared void on
account of such rioting. Modern usage. In using the term in reference to the
British parliament during the 1800s, husting referred to a platform in the
Guildhall on which the London court was held, and evolved to mean any platform
upon which the public nomination of candidates for a parliamentary election is
made, and from which the candidate addressed the electors. The Ballot Act 1872
did away with the public declaration of the nomination, however, so the term
has not been used in that context since then. The usage of the word now refers
to any meeting at which more than one candidate participates. This may involve
a combination of a debate, speeches or questions from the electors. North
America. In American political usage, there is no exactly equivalent term. The
closest phrase is that a person is said to be "stumping" or "on the stump" when
involved in any political campaigning, especially speech making. In current
Canadian usage the word is found only in the plural, to mean on the campaign
trail, or to refer to events of the campaign.
