Icarus Project The Icarus Project is a mental health movement characterized by
the view that many phenomena commonly labeled as mental illness should actually
be regarded as "dangerous gifts". The name is derived from Icarus, a hero in
Greek mythology, and is metaphorically used to convey that these experiences
can lead to "potentialflying dangerously close to the sun." History. In 2002,
Sascha Altman DuBrul wrote "Bipolar World", an article published in the "San
Francisco Bay Guardian", relating to his personal experiences being diagnosed
with bipolar disorder. Among the dozens of e-mails and other correspondence
that he received after this publication was a letter from Ashley McNamara, an
artist and writer who identified strongly with his experiences. DuBrul and
McNamara corresponded for a few weeks before finally meeting in person and
deciding to start The Icarus Project. The first step, they decided, was
creating a website where people who identified with "bipolar and other 'mental
illness' find real community and contribute to it." Mission. The Icarus
Project's stated aims are to provide a viable alternative to current methods of
approaching and treating mental illnesses. The national Icarus Collective staff
is set up to support local groups instead of creating the smaller organizations
themselves. The responsibilities of the local group are to gather people
locally for support, education, activism, and access to alternatives. The
Project advocates self-determination and caution when approaching psychiatric
care. It encourages harm reduction, alternatives to the medical model, and
self-determination in treatment and diagnosis. Structure/Funding. The Icarus
Project is currently under the fiscal sponsorship of FJC, a non-profit 501(c)3
umbrella organization arm of an investment firm, based in New York City. The
Icarus Project currently gets the bulk of its money from foundation grants, but
also has many individual donors. There has been considerable talk for many
years of alternate funding structures, and efforts are currently underway to
explore 501c3 and cooperative structures. The Icarus Project maintains a
financial transparency page. The Icarus Project does not accept funding from
pharmaceutical companies. The Icarus Project network. A full listing of local
Icarus affiliated groups can be found on The Icarus Project's website. Some of
the local groups currently meet in Media Mentions. The Icarus Project has been
mentioned in the New York Times, by Frontline 20/20, and many local media
outlets.
