Ideology An ideology is a set of ideas that constitute one's goals,
expectations, and actions. An ideology is a comprehensive vision, a way of
looking at things (compare worldview) as in several philosophical tendencies
(see political ideologies), or a set of ideas proposed by the dominant class of
a society to all members of this society (a "received consciousness" or product
of socialization). Ideologies are systems of abstract thought applied to public
matters and thus make this concept central to politics. Implicitly every
political or economic tendency entails an ideology whether or not it is
propounded as an explicit system of thought. History. The term "ideology" was
born in the highly controversial philosophical and political debates and fights
of the French Revolution and acquired several other meanings from the early
days of the First French Empire to the present. The word was coined by Destutt
de Tracy in 1796, assembling the parts "idea" (near to the Lockean sense) and
"-logy". He used it to refer to one aspect of his "science of ideas" (to the
study itself, not the subject of the study). He separated three aspects,
namely: ideology, general grammar, and logic, considering respectively the
subject, the means, and the reason of this science. He argues that among these
aspects ideology is the most generic term, because the science of ideas also
contains the study of their expression and deduction. According to Karl
Mannheim's historical reconstruction of the shifts in the meaning of ideology,
the modern meaning of the word was born when Napoleon Bonaparte (as a
politician) used it in an abusive way against "the ideologues" (a group which
included Cabanis, Condorcet, Constant, Daunou, Say, Madame de Staël, and
Tracy), to express the pettiness of his (liberal republican) political
opponents. Perhaps the most accessible source for the near-original meaning of
"ideology" is Hippolyte Taine's work on the Ancien Regime (the first volume of
"Origins of Contemporary France"). He describes ideology as rather like
teaching philosophy by the Socratic method, but without extending the
vocabulary beyond what the general reader already possessed, and without the
examples from observation that practical science would require. Taine
identifies it not just with Destutt De Tracy, but also with his milieu, and
includes Condillac as one of its precursors. (Tracy read the works of Locke and
Condillac while he was imprisoned during the Reign of Terror.) The word
"ideology" was coined long before the Russians coined "intelligentsia", or
before the adjective "intellectual" referred to a sort of person (see
substantive), i.e. an intellectual. Thus these words were not around when the
hard-headed, driven Napoleon Bonaparte took the word "ideologues" to ridicule
his intellectual opponents. Gradually, however, the term "ideology" has dropped
some of its pejorative sting, and has become a neutral term in the analysis of
differing political opinions and views of social groups. While Karl Marx
situated the term within class struggle and domination, others believed it was
a necessary part of institutional functioning and social integration. Analysis.
"Meta-ideology" is the study of the structure, form, and manifestation of
ideologies. Meta-ideology posits that ideology is a "coherent system of ideas",
relying upon a few basic assumptions about reality that may or may not have any
factual basis, but are subjective choices that serve as the seed around which
further thought grows. According to this perspective, ideologies are neither
right nor wrong, but only a relativistic intellectual strategy for categorizing
the world. The pluses and minuses of ideology range from the vigor and fervor
of true believers to ideological infallibility. Excessive need for certitude
lurks at fundamentalist levels in politics and religions. The works of George
Walford and Harold Walsby, done under the heading of systematic ideology, are
attempts to explore the relationships between ideology and social systems.
Charles Blattberg has offered an account which distinguishes political
ideologies from political philosophies. Mullins emphasizes that an ideology
should be contrasted with the related (but different) issues of "utopia" and
"historical myth". The German philosopher Christian Duncker called for a
"critical reflection of the ideology concept" (2006). In his work, he strove to
bring the concept of ideology into the foreground, as well as the closely
connected concerns of epistemology and history. In this work, the term ideology
is defined in terms of a system of presentations that explicitly or implicitly
claim to absolute truth. Though the word "ideology" is most often found in
political discourse, there are many different kinds of ideology: political,
social, epistemological, ethical, etc. Marxist view. In the Marxist economic
base and superstructure model of society, "base" denotes the relations of
production, and "superstructure" denotes the dominant ideology (religious,
legal, political systems). The economic base of production determines the
political superstructure of a society. Ruling class-interests determine the
superstructure and the nature of the justifying ideology—actions feasible
because the ruling class control the means of production. For example, in a
feudal mode of production, religious ideology is the most prominent aspect of
the superstructure, while in capitalist formations, ideologies such as
liberalism and social democracy dominate. Hence the great importance of the
ideology justifying a society; it politically confuses the alienated groups of
society via false consciousness, such as in the case of commodity
fetishism—the belief that value is inherent to a commodity, rather than
external, added to it via labor. The ruling class affect their social
reproduction by the dominant ideology's representing—to every social-economic
class—that the economic interests of the ruling class are the economic
interests of the entire society. Some explanations have been presented. György
Lukács proposes ideology as a projection of the class consciousness of the
ruling class. Antonio Gramsci uses cultural hegemony to explain why the
working-class have a false ideological conception of what are their best
interests. The Marxist formulation of "ideology as an instrument of social
reproduction" is conceptually important to the sociology of knowledge, viz.
Karl Mannheim, Daniel Bell, and Jürgen Habermas et al. Moreover, Mannheim has
developed, and progressed, from the "total" but "special" Marxist conception of
ideology to a "general" and "total" ideological conception acknowledging that
all ideology (including Marxism) resulted from social life, an idea developed
by the sociologist Pierre Bourdieu. Louis Althusser's "Ideological State
Apparatuses". Louis Althusser proposed a materialistic conception of ideology,
which made use of a special type of discourse: the lacunar discourse. A number
of propositions, which are never untrue, suggest a number of other
propositions, which are. In this way, the essence of the lacunar discourse is
what is "not" told (but is suggested). For example, the statement "All are
equal before the law," which is a theoretical groundwork of current legal
systems, suggests that all people may be of equal worth or have equal
"opportunities". This is not true, for the concept of private property and
power over the means of production results in some people being able to own
more ("much" more) than others. This power disparity contradicts the claim that
all share both practical worth and future opportunity equally; for example, the
rich can afford better legal representation, which practically privileges them
before the law. Althusser also proffered the concept of the Ideological State
Apparatus to explain his theory of ideology. His first thesis was ""ideology
has no history"": while individual ideolog"ies" have histories, interleaved
with the general class struggle of society, the general form of ideology is
external to history. His second thesis, ""Ideas are material"", explains his
materialistic attitude, which he illustrates with the "scandalous advice" of
Pascal toward unbelievers: "kneel and pray, and then you will believe". For
Althusser, beliefs and ideas are the products of social practices, not the
reverse. What is ultimately important for Althusser are not the subjective
beliefs held in the "minds" of human individuals, but rather the material
institutions, rituals, and discourses that produce these beliefs. Feminism as
critique of ideology. Naturalizing socially constructed patterns of behavior
has always been an important mechanism in the production and reproduction of
ideologies. Feminist theorists have paid close attention to these mechanisms.
Adrienne Rich, for example, has shown how to understand motherhood as a social
institution. However, feminism is not a homogeneous whole, and some corners of
feminist thought criticize the critique of social constructionism, by
advocating that it disregards too much of human nature and natural tendencies.
The debate, they say, is about the normative/naturalistic fallacy—the idea
that just something "being" natural does not necessarily mean it "ought" to be
the case. Political ideologies. Many political parties base their political
action and program on an ideology. In social studies, a Political "Ideology" is
a certain ethical set of ideals, principles, doctrines, myths, or symbols of a
social movement, institution, class, or large group that explains how society
should work, and offers some political and cultural blueprint for a certain
social order. A political ideology largely concerns itself with how to allocate
power and to what ends it should be used. Some parties follow a certain
ideology very closely, while others may take broad inspiration from a group of
related ideologies without specifically embracing any one of them. An ideology
is a collection of ideas. Typically, each ideology contains certain ideas on
what it considers to be the best form of government (e.g. democracy, theocracy,
caliphate etc.), and the best economic system (e.g. capitalism, socialism,
etc.). Sometimes the same word is used to identify both an ideology and one of
its main ideas. For instance, "socialism" may refer to an economic system, or
it may refer to an ideology which supports that economic system. Ideologies
also identify themselves by their position on the political spectrum (such as
the left, the center or the right), though this is very often controversial.
Finally, ideologies can be distinguished from political strategies (e.g.
populism) and from single issues that a party may be built around (e.g.
legalization of marijuana). Philosopher Michael Oakeshott provides a good
definition of ideology as "the formalized abridgment of the supposed sub-
stratum of the rational truth contained in the tradition." Studies of the
concept of ideology itself (rather than specific ideologies) have been carried
out under the name of systematic ideology. Political ideologies are concerned
with many different aspects of a society, some of which are: the economy,
education, health care, labor law, criminal law, the justice system, the
provision of social security and social welfare, trade, the environment,
minors, immigration, race, use of the military, patriotism, and established
religion. There are many proposed methods for the classification of political
ideologies. See the political spectrum article for a more in-depth discussion
of these different methods (each of whom generates a specific political
spectrum). Today, many commentators claim that we are living in a post-
ideological age, in which redemptive, all-encompassing ideologies have failed,
and this is often associated with Francis Fukuyama's writings on "the end of
history". Epistemological ideologies. Even when the challenging of existing
beliefs is encouraged, as in scientific theories, the dominant paradigm or
mindset can prevent certain challenges, theories, or experiments from being
advanced. A special case of science adopted as ideology is that of ecology,
which studies the relationships among living things on Earth. Perceptual
psychologist James J. Gibson believed that human perception of ecological
relationships was the basis of self-awareness and cognition itself. Linguist
George Lakoff has proposed a cognitive science of mathematics wherein even the
most fundamental ideas of arithmetic would be seen as consequences or products
of human perception—which is itself necessarily evolved within an ecology.
Deep ecology and the modern ecology movement (and, to a lesser degree, Green
parties) appear to have adopted ecological sciences as a positive ideology.
Some accuse ecological economics of likewise turning scientific theory into
political economy, although theses in that science can often be tested. The
modern practice of green economics fuses both approaches and seems to be part
science, part ideology. This is far from the only theory of economics to be
raised to ideology status—some notable economically based ideologies include
mercantilism, mixed economy, social Darwinism, communism, laissez-faire
economics, and free trade. There are also current theories of safe trade and
fair trade which can be seen as ideologies. Psychological research.
Psychological research increasingly suggests that ideologies reflect
motivational processes, as opposed to the view that political convictions
always reflect independent and unbiased thinking. Research in 2008 proposed
that ideologies may function as prepackaged units of interpretation that spread
because of basic human motives to understand the world, avoid existential
threat, and maintain valued interpersonal relationships. The authors conclude
that such motives may lead disproportionately to the adoption of system-
justifying worldviews. Psychologists have generally found that personality
traits, individual difference variables, needs, and ideological beliefs seem to
have a common thread. Ideology and semiotic theory. According to the
semiotician Bob Hodge, ideology "identifies a unitary object that incorporates
complex sets of meanings with the social agents and processes that produced
them. No other term captures this object as well as 'ideology'. Foucault's
'episteme' is too narrow and abstract, not social enough. His 'discourse',
popular because it covers some of ideology's terrain with less baggage, is too
confined to verbal systems. 'Worldview' is too metaphysical, 'propaganda' too
loaded. Despite or because of its contradictions, 'ideology' still plays a key
role in semiotics oriented to social, political life". Authors such as Michael
Freeden have also recently incorporated a semantic analysis to the study of
ideologies.
