List of political ideologies This is a list of political ideologies. Many
political parties base their political action and election program on an
ideology. In social studies, a political ideology is a certain ethical set of
ideals, principles, doctrines, myths or symbols of a social movement,
institution, class, and or large group that explains how society should work,
and offers some political and cultural blueprint for a certain social order. A
political ideology largely concerns itself with how to allocate power and to
what ends it should be used. Some parties follow a certain ideology very
closely, while others may take broad inspiration from a group of related
ideologies without specifically embracing any one of them. The popularity of an
ideology is in part due to the influence of "moral entrepreneurs", who
sometimes act in their own interests. An ideology is a collection of ideas.
Typically, each ideology contains certain ideas on what it considers to be the
best form of government (e.g. democracy, autocracy, etc.), and the best
economic system (e.g. capitalism, socialism, etc.). Sometimes the same word is
used to identify both an ideology and one of its main ideas. For instance,
"socialism" may refer to an economic system, or it may refer to an ideology
which supports that economic system. Ideologies also identify themselves by
their position on the political spectrum (such as the left, the centre or the
right), though this is very often controversial. Finally, ideologies can be
distinguished from political strategies (e.g. populism) and from single issues
that a party may be built around (e.g. opposition to European integration or
the legalization of marijuana). The following list attempts to divide the
ideologies found in practical political life into a number of groups; each
group contains ideologies that are related to each other. The headers refer to
names of the best-known ideologies in each group. The names of the headers do
not necessarily imply some hierarchical order or that one ideology evolved out
of the other. They are merely noting the fact that the ideologies in question
are practically, historically and ideologically related to each other. Note
that one ideology can belong to several groups, and there is sometimes
considerable overlap between related ideologies. Also, keep in mind that the
meaning of a political label can differ between countries and that parties
often subscribe to a combination of ideologies. The list is strictly
alphabetical. Thus, placing one ideology before another does not imply that the
first is more important or popular than the second. Socialism. Revolutionary
Socialism. "See also: List of communist ideologies"
