Image An image (from ) is an artifact that depicts or records visual
perception, for example a two-dimensional picture, that has a similar
appearance to some subject–usually a physical object or a person, thus
providing a depiction of it. Characteristics. Images may be two-dimensional,
such as a photograph, screen display, and as well as a three-dimensional, such
as a statue or hologram. They may be "captured" by optical devices–such as
cameras, mirrors, lenses, telescopes, microscopes, etc. and natural objects and
phenomena, such as the human eye or water surfaces. The word "image" is also
used in the broader sense of any two-dimensional figure such as a map, a graph,
a pie chart, or an abstract painting. In this wider sense, images can also be
"rendered" manually, such as by drawing, painting, , rendered automatically by
printing or computer graphics technology, or developed by a combination of
methods, especially in a pseudo-photograph. A volatile image is one that exists
only for a short period of time. This may be a reflection of an object by a
mirror, a projection of a camera obscura, or a scene displayed on a cathode ray
tube. A fixed image, also called a hard copy, is one that has been recorded on
a material object, such as paper or textile by photography or digital
processes. A mental image exists in an individual's mind: something one
remembers or imagines. The subject of an image need not be real; it may be an
abstract concept, such as a graph, function, or "imaginary" entity. For
example, Sigmund Freud claimed to have dreamed purely in aural-images of
dialogs. The development of synthetic acoustic technologies and the creation of
sound art have led to a consideration of the possibilities of a sound-image
made up of irreducible phonic substance beyond linguistic or musicological
analysis. A still image is a single image, as distinguished from a kinetic
image (see below). This phrase is used in photography, visual media and the
computer industry to emphasize that one is not talking about movies, or in very
precise or pedantic technical writing such as a standard. A film still is a
photograph taken on the set of a movie or television program during production,
used for promotional purposes. Moving image. A "moving image" is typically a
movie (film), or video, including digital video. It could also be an animated
display such as a zoetrope.
