Imanol Ordorika Sacristán Imanol Ordorika Sacristán (born in Mexico City,
October 31, 1958). Mexican social activist, political leader, academic and
intellectual. He was one of the initiators and principal leaders of the Consejo
Estudiantil Universitario at the National Autonomous University of Mexico
(Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, UNAM), with Carlos Imaz Gispert and
Antonio Santos Romero, from 1986 to 1990. A founder and prominent member of the
Partido de la Revolución Democrática (PRD) until 2001. Professor of social
sciences and education at the Universidad Nacional Autonoma de Mexico. Op-ed
writer for La Jornada and other Mexican media. Biography. Imanol Ordorika
Sacristan is the son of Imanol Ordorika Bengoechea and Maria Josefa Sacristan,
Spanish Civil War refugees from the Basque country and Madrid respectively. As
part of a progressive family he became acquainted with the ideals of Spanish
left wing republicanism, with the Cuban Revolution, and with the 1968 Mexican
student movement, since his early childhood. Student Activism. Ordorika majored
in physics at the Facultad de Ciencias in the Universidad Nacional Autónoma de
México in 1991. It is during his student days in the 1980s that he became a
militant of the Mexican revolutionary left (izquierda revolucionaria) through
the Committee Estudiantil de Solidaridad Obrero Campesina (CESOC) and as a
member of Revista Punto Critico, a marxist organization and journal founded by
the leaders of the 1968 Mexican student movement, and later Convergencia
Comunista 7 de enero (CC7). He became an important student leader and
representative to UNAM’s University Council and gained national prominence
with the creation of the Consejo Estudiantil Universitario in 1986. As a
student member of the Council first, and with the Consejo Estudiantil, starting
on October 31, 1986, Ordorika rejected structural adjustment policies affecting
Mexican universities and, more concretely, attempts to increase tuition,
restrictive student selection policies and standardized testing, proposed by
rector Jorge Carpizo McGregor, at the Universidad Nacional Autonoma de Mexico.
Ordorika participated in public debates (dialogos publicos) between UNAM
administrators and student leaders at the Che Guevara/Justo Sierra auditorium,
transmitted live by university radio and featured prominently by the Mexican
media in January 1987. During the student strike in February he was one of the
selected spokespersons until CEU defeated Carpizo's structural adjustment
reforms. National Politics. In 1988 Ordorika, Santos and Imaz led Mexican
university students to support Cuauhtemoc Cardenas´ independent presidential
candidacy against the ruling Partido Revolucionario Institucional’s Carlos
Salinas. For this purpose they created the Movimiento al Socialismo (MAS)
notably featuring Adolfo Gilly, Salvador Martínez della Rocca, Enrique
González Rojo, Raul Alvarez Garin and others. He was one of the founder and
leaders of newly formed left wing party Partido de la Revolución Democrática
(PRD), led by Cárdenas. Ordorika was a member of PRD's National Committee from
1990 to 1995. In 1994 he ran as this party's candidate for Federal Congress in
Mexico City district XXII. During the 2000 presidential electoral process
Ordorika was appointed spokesperson and campaign head of communications for
left wing candidate Cuauhtemoc Cardenas. After the elections and the 2001 PRD
congress Ordorika distanced himself from this party and exercised a strong
critique against its bureaucratic trends and centrist political positions.
Imanol Ordorika is also involved in the Mexican contemporary political debate
as a public speaker, an editorial writer at La Jornada and a media commentator.
Academic Life. In 1989 he became adjunct professor at the Instituto de
Investigaciones Económicas at UNAM, even though he actually majored in Physics
until 1991. From 1988 to 1990 he was elected member of the organizing committee
for the University Congress at this university. In 1990, he was elected faculty
representative to the University Congress. Ordorika obtained masters degrees in
education (1993) and sociology (1998) as well as a Ph.D degree in social
sciences and education from the Stanford University School of Education (1999).
He has been a full professor at UNAM since 2002. Ordorika is a renowned faculty
member and higher education specialist in Mexico and abroad. He has written
extensively on power relations and politics within postsecondary institutions,
faculty and student movements, higher education policy and on the impact of
globalization on colleges and universities. In 2004 Ordorika received the
"Frank Talbott Jr. Visiting University Chair" from the University of Virginia
and in 2006 he was awarded the "Alfonso Reyes Chaire des Etudes Mexicaines" by
the University of Paris III (Sorbonne Nouvelle). Since 2007 Imanol Ordorika is
General Director for Institutional Assessment (Director General de Evaluación
Institucional) at UNAM. Here has been in charge of the design and development
of the Mexican Universities Comparative Study.
