Immigration reform Immigration reform is a term used in political discussion
regarding changes to current immigration policy of a country. In its strict
definition, "reform " means to change into an improved form or condition, by
amending or removing faults or abuses. In the political sense, immigration
reform may include promoted, expanded, or open immigration, as well as reduced
or eliminated immigration. Immigration reform in the United States. This term
is also widely used to describe proposals to increase legal immigration while
decreasing illegal immigration, such as the guest worker proposal supported by
George W. Bush. Illegal immigration is a controversial issue in the United
States. Proponents of greater immigration enforcement argue that illegal
immigrants cost taxpayers an estimated $338.3 billion dollars and jeopardize
the safety of law enforcement officials and citizens, especially along the
Mexican border. Former Mexican president, Vicente Fox, writes that in 2001,
President George W. Bush, and the leadership of both parties of Congress were
about to pass significant immigration reform legislation benefiting Mexican
emigration to the U.S. The Immigration Reform and Control Act of 1986 made it
illegal to hire or recruit illegal immigrants. In 2006, the U.S. House of
Representatives passed the Border Protection, Anti-terrorism, and Illegal
Immigration Control Act of 2005, and in 2006 the U.S. Senate passed the
Comprehensive Immigration Reform Act of 2006. Neither bill became law because
their differences could not be reconciled in conference committee. The
legislative negotiations and national activism behind immigration reform from
2001-2007 is the subject of 12-part documentary film series How Democracy Works
Now. In 2009 the immigration reform became a hot topic, since the Barack Obama
administration recently signaled interest in beginning a discussion on
comprehensive immigration reform before year's end. The proposed comprehensive
immigration reform plan had as its goal bipartisan support and includes six
sections designed to have "something for everyone." These six sections are: (1)
to fix border enforcement, (2) “interior enforcement,” such as preventing
visa overstays, (3) preventing people from working without a work permit, (4)
creating a committee to adapt the number of visas available to changing
economic times, (5) an 'amnesty' type of program to legalize undocumented
immigrants, and (6) programs to help immigrants adjust to life in the United
States. A 2010 academic study has shown that when immigration issues receive
national media attention, established residents living in places that have seen
influx of new immigrants suddenly become much more politicized against
immigration. This suggests that it is not the influx of new residents or new
proximity to established residents that stir anti-immigrant sentiments; rather,
resentment is spurred by the heated and prominent nature of the debate itself.
The study, done by Georgetown University and published in the "American
Political Science Review", “Politicized Places: Explaining Where and When
Immigrants Provoke Local Opposition,” examined more than twelve different
surveys relating to immigration and local anti-immigration ordinances, spanning
the years 1992 to 2009. During a period of high national attention to
immigration, anti-immigration attitudes among established residents in fast-
changing counties increase by 9.9%. The study’s author states that ethnic and
racial surroundings appear to affect Americans’ political attitudes far less
than previously thought: “Those who live near larger proportions of
immigrants do not consistently exhibit more negative attitudes.” Rather, the
author concludes, “day-to-day encounters can be shaped by salient national
issues.” Arizona SB 1070. In 2009, services provided to illegal immigrants,
including incarceration, cost the state of Arizona an estimated $2.7 billion.
Citing Congress’ failure to enforce U.S. immigration laws, the state of
Arizona confronted reform and on April, 23, 2010 Republican Governor Jan Brewer
signed the Support Our Law Enforcement and Safe Neighborhoods Act (Arizona SB
1070), the broadest and strictest immigration reform imposed in the United
States. The SB1070 Arizona immigration law directs law enforcement officials to
ask for immigration papers on a "reasonable suspicion" that a person might be
an illegal immigrant and make arrests for not carrying ID papers. Previously,
police could not stop and check identification papers on a mere suspicion that
someone might be an illegal immigrant. Police could only ask about an
individual's immigration status if they are suspected of involvement in another
crime. On July 6, 2010, the US Department of Justice filed suit against
Arizona. The intent of the suit is to prevent Arizona from enforcing the law
and asks the court to find certain sections of the legislation null and void.
The United States Congress has left this issue untouched as many feared such a
vote could threaten their chances at reelection. Being the first state to pass
such legislation, Arizona has set a precedent for other states, but this
legislation has also caused Arizona to carry a large burden. Arizonans have
faced boycotts and protests from their commercial businesses to sporting events
and concert. Although the response has cost the state between $7 million and
$52 million, some in the state still feel that this outcome will outweigh the
initial cost. Due to conflict and protest, the week after she signed SB 1070,
Governor Brewer signed the Arizona legislature passed House Bill 2162 (HB 2162)
amending text in the original document. HB 2162 includes that race, color, and
national origin would not play a role in prosecution; in order to investigate
an individual's immigration status, he or she must be “lawfully stopped,
arrested or detained." Opponents of the law say that it will ultimately cost
the state “$26.4 billion in economic activity, $11.7 billion in gross state
product and approximately 140,024 jobs” if all illegal immigrants are removed
from the state. Immigration Court Reform. In the absence of comprehensive
immigration reform at the federal level, many advocacy groups have focused on
improving the fairness and efficiency of the immigration court system. They
propose incremental steps the executive branch can take to stop an “assembly
line approach” to deportation proceedings. These groups have identified
several issues that threaten the due process rights of immigrants, including
reliance on low quality videoconferencing to conduct hearings, inadequate
language interpretation services for non-English speakers, and limited access
to court records. They also focus on problems arising out of the recent
increase in immigration law enforcement without a commensurate boost in
resources for adjudication. Immigration Judges and DHS Trial Attorneys are
overworked, and the pro bono community has been unable to meet the demand for
representation: 49% of individuals facing removal proceedings in 2011 were
unrepresented. Other calls for reform include increased transparency at the
Board of Immigration Appeals (BIA) and more diversity of experience among
Immigration Judges, the majority of whom previously held positions adversarial
to immigrants. The differed action process President Obama announced on June
15, 2012 is one example of the incremental reform these groups seek. Under the
program, undocumented immigrants who were brought to the U.S. before age
fifteen can apply for a work permit and a two-year deferment from deportation
proceedings. The policy expands the Department of Homeland Security’s
prosecutorial discretion policy, focusing finite resources on criminals and
other threats to public safety. Immigration reform in the United Kingdom. As of
2010, in the United Kingdom, there is some cross-party support for immigration
reform, largely under the auspices of the Strangers into Citizens campaign.
Although the Liberal Democrats are the only major party to fully support
reform, some Labour MPs (including former leadership candidate John McDonald),
the IPPR (a Labour-leaning think-tank) and Boris Johnson (the Conservative
Mayor of London) also support a selective amnesty for illegal immigrants. Under
the Liberal Democrat proposal, this would involve regularisation for illegal
immigrants who have lived in the country for at least ten years and who do not
have a criminal record. It is argued that bringing many of these (estimates
varying widely from 300,000 to 800,000) individuals into the legal economy
would allow police to concentrate resources on tackling people traffickers and
criminals - and would raise billions in tax revenue - whereas deporting them
would cost £4.7 billion and take 30 years. This issue is still a matter of
political debate today in the United Kingdom.
