Import The term import is derived from the conceptual meaning as to bring in
the goods and services into the port of a country. The buyer of such goods and
services is referred to an "importer" who is based in the country of import
where the overseas based seller is referred to as an "exporter". Thus an import
is any good (e.g. a commodity) or service brought in from one country to
another country in a legitimate fashion, typically for use in trade. It is a
good that is brought in from another country for sale. Imported goods or
services are provided to domestic consumers by foreign producers. An import in
the receiving country is an export to the sending country. Imports, along with
exports, form the basics of international trade. Import of goods normally
requires involvement of the customs authorities in both the country of import
and the country of export and are often subject to import quotas, tariffs and
trade agreements. When the "imports" are the set of goods and services
imported, "Imports" also means the economic value of all goods and services
that are imported. The macroeconomic variable I usually stands for the value of
these imports over a given period of time, usually one year. Balance of trade.
Balance of trade represents a difference in value for import and export for a
country. A country has demand for an import when domestic quantity demanded
exceeds domestic quantity supplied, or when the price of the good (or service)
on the world market is less than the price on the domestic market. formula_2,
or equivalently formula_3 A trade deficit occurs when imports are large
relative to exports. Imports are impacted principally by a country's income and
its productive resources. For example, the US imports oil from Canada even
though the US has oil and Canada uses oil. However, consumers in the US are
willing to pay more for the marginal barrel of oil than Canadian consumers are,
because there is more oil demanded in the US than there is oil produced.
formula_7 Types of import. Companies import goods and services to supply to the
domestic market at a cheaper price and better quality than competing goods
manufactured in the domestic market. Companies import products that are not
available in the local market. Direct-import refers to a type of business
importation involving a major retailer (e.g. Wal-Mart) and an overseas
manufacturer. A retailer typically purchases products designed by local
companies that can be manufactured overseas. In a direct-import program, the
retailer bypasses the local supplier (colloquial "middle-man") and buys the
final product directly from the manufacturer, possibly saving in added costs.
This type of business is fairly recent and follows the trends of the global
economy. Statistical data. Data on the value of imports and their quantities
often broken down by detailed lists of products are available in statistical
collections on international trade published by the statistical services of
intergovernmental organisations (e.g. UNSTAT, FAOSTAT, OECD), supranational
statistical institutes (e.g. Eurostat) and national statistical institutes.
