Income elasticity of demand In economics, income elasticity of demand measures
the responsiveness of the demand for a good to a change in the income of the
people demanding the good, ceteris paribus. It is calculated as the ratio of
the percentage change in demand to the percentage change in income. For
example, if, in response to a 10% increase in income, the demand for a good
increased by 20%, the income elasticity of demand would be 20%/10% = 2.
Interpretation. Income elasticity of demand can be used as an indicator of
industry health, future consumption patterns and as a guide to firms investment
decisions. For example, the "selected income elasticities" below suggest that
an increasing portion of consumer's budgets will be devoted to purchasing
automobiles and restaurant meals and a smaller share to tobacco and margarine.
Income elasticities are closely related to the population income distribution
and the fraction of the product's sales attributable to buyers from different
income brackets. Specifically when a buyer in a certain income bracket
experiences an income increase, their purchase of a product changes to match
that of individuals in their new income bracket. If the income share elasticity
is defined as the negative percentage change in individuals given a percentage
increase in income bracket, then the income-elasticity, after some computation,
becomes the expected value of the income-share elasticity with respect to the
income distribution of purchasers of the product. When the income distribution
is described by a gamma distribution, the income elasticity is proportional to
the percentage difference between the average income of the product's buyers
and the average income of the population. Mathematical definition. More
formally, the income elasticity of demand, formula_2, for a given Marshallian
demand function formula_3 for a good is With income formula_7, and vector of
prices formula_8. Many necessities have an income elasticity of demand between
zero and one: expenditure on these goods may increase with income, but not as
fast as income does, so the proportion of expenditure on these goods falls as
income rises. This observation for food is known as "Engel's law". Types of
income elasticity of demand. In this case increase in income is accompanied by
relatively larger increase in quantity demanded. Here the value of coefficient
Ey is grater than unity (Ey>1). Eg: 20% increase in quantity demanded due to
10% increase in income. In this case increase in income is accompanied by same
proportionate increase in quantity demanded. Here the value of coefficient Ey
is equal to unity (Ey=1). Eg: 10% increase in quantity demanded due to 10%
increase in income. In this case proportionate increase in income is is
accompanied by less than increase in quantity demanded. Here the value of
coefficient Ey is less than unity (Ey<1). Eg: 5% increase in quantity demanded
due to 10% increase in income. This shows that quantity bought is constant
regardless of changes in income. Here the value of coefficient Ey is equal to
zero (Ey=0). Eg: No change in quantity demanded even 10% increase in income. In
this case increase in income is accompanied by decrease in quantity demanded.
Here the value of coefficient Ey is less than zero/negative (Ey<0). Eg: 5%
decrease in quantity demanded due to 10% increase in income. Selected income
elasticities. Income elasticities are notably stable over time and across
countries.
