Independence Independence is a condition of a nation, country, or state in
which its residents and population, or some portion thereof, exercise self-
government, and usually sovereignty, over the territory. The opposite of
independence is a dependent territory. Whether attainment of independence is
different from revolution has long been contested, and has often been debated
over the question of violence as a legitimate means to achieving sovereignty.
While some revolutions seek and achieve national independence, others aim only
to redistribute power — with or without an element of emancipation, such as
in democratization — "within" a state, which as such may remain unaltered.
Nation-states have been granted independence without any revolutionary acts.
The Russian October Revolution, for example, was not intended to seek national
independence; the United States Revolutionary War, however, was. "Autonomy"
refers to a kind of independence which has been granted by an overseeing
authority that itself still retains ultimate authority over that territory (see
Devolution). A protectorate refers to an autonomous region that depends upon a
larger government for its protection as an autonomous region. The dates of
established independence (or, less commonly, the commencement of revolution),
are typically celebrated as a national holiday known as an independence day.
Sometimes, a state wishing to achieve independence from a dominating power will
issue a declaration of independence; the earliest surviving example is
Scotland's Declaration of Arbroath in 1320, with the most recent example being
Azawad's declaration of independence in 2012. Declaring independence and
attaining it however, are quite different. A well-known successful example is
the U.S. Declaration of Independence issued in 1776. Historically, there have
been three major periods of declaring independence: the years from 1776 to the
Revolutions of 1848 in Europe; the immediate aftermath of the First World War
with the breakup of the Ottoman and Austro-Hungarian empires; and the decades
from to 1945 to 1979, when seventy newly independent states emerged from the
wreckage of the European colonial empires. Causes for a country or province
wishing to seek independence are many. Disillusionment rising from the
establishment is a cause widely used in separatist movements, but it is usually
severe economic difficulties that trigger these groups into action. The means
can extend from peaceful demonstrations, like in the case of the Indian
independence movement, to a violent civil war. Article note. The dates of
independence, as they have been ported into many articles from the "CIA World
Factbook" are defined as follows:
