Independent Media Center The Independent Media Center (also known as Indymedia
or IMC) is a global participatory network of journalists that report on
political and social issues. It originated during the Seattle anti-WTO protests
worldwide in 1999 and remains closely associated with the global justice
movement, which criticizes neo-liberalism and its associated institutions.
Indymedia uses an open publishing and democratic media process that allows
anybody to contribute. According to its homepage, "Indymedia is a collective of
independent media organizations and hundreds of journalists offering
grassroots, non-corporate coverage. Indymedia is a democratic media outlet for
the creation of radical, accurate, and passionate tellings of truth." Indymedia
was founded as an alternative to government and corporate media, and seeks to
facilitate people being able to publish their media as directly as possible.
Overview. The first Indymedia project was started in late November 1999 to
report on protests against the WTO meeting that took place in Seattle,
Washington, and to act as an alternative media source. This followed a
successful experiment in June that year, reporting the events of the Carnival
Against Capitalism in London, UK. The Media team there used software and
unmediated reports from protest participants. The open publishing script was
first developed by video activists in Sydney, Australia. "Even more
importantly, a group of hackers in Sydney, Australia, had written a special
piece of software for live updating of the webpage devoted to their local J18
event. Six months later, this “Active Software” would be used in the
American city of Seattle, as the foundation of the Indymedia project – a
multiperspectival instrument of political information and dialogue for the
twenty-first century" After Seattle the idea and network spread rapidly. By
2002, there were 89 Indymedia websites covering 31 countries (and the
Palestinian territories), growing to over 150 by January 2006, not all of them
currently active. Indymedia websites publish in a number of languages,
including English, Spanish, German, Italian, Portuguese, French, Russian,
Arabic and Hebrew. IMC collectives distribute print, audio, photo, and video
media, but are most well known for their open publishing newswires, sites where
anyone with internet access can publish news from their own perspective. The
content of an IMC is determined by its participants, both the users who post
content, and members of the local Indymedia collective who administer the site.
While Indymedias worldwide are run autonomously and differ according to the
concerns of their users, they share a commitment to provide copyleft content.
The general rule is that content on Indymedia sites can be freely reproduced
for non-commercial purposes. Content and focus. The origins of IMCs themselves
came out of protests against the concentrated ownership and perceived biases in
corporate media reporting. The first IMC node, attached as it was to the
Seattle anti-corporate globalization protests, was seen by activists as an
alternative news source to that of the corporate media, which they accused of
only showing violence and confrontation, and portraying all protesters
negatively. As a result, between 1999 and 2001, IMC newswires tended to be
focused on up-to-the-minute coverage of protests, from local demonstrations to
summits where anti-globalization movement protests were occurring, with protest
coverage continuing into 2007. IMC also run a global radio project which
aggregates audio RSS feeds from around the world. Organizational structure. IMC
is formed of local collectives which are expected to be open and inclusive of
individuals from a variety of different local anti-capitalist points of view,
whether or not these have any definite political philosophy, so that even those
without internet access can participate in both content creation and in content
consumption. Editorial policies, locally chosen by any Indymedia collective,
generally involve removing articles which the Indymedia editors believe promote
racism, sexism, hate speech, and homophobia. All Indymedia collectives are
expected to have a locally chosen, thoroughly discussed and clearly stated
editorial policy for posts to their website. Criticism. Allegations of anti-
Semitism. Indymedia has often faced criticism for anti-Semitism. In a 2002 op-
ed, alter-globalisation activist and critic of Israel Naomi Klein criticised
Indymedia for perpetuating conspiracy theories about the Jews, including
supposed involvement with the September 11 attacks and re-posting from the
infamous hoax "The Protocols of the Elders of Zion". In the same year, the
Swiss edition of Indymedia was sued for anti-Semitism by Aktion Kinder des
Holocaust for publishing a Carlos Latuff cartoon of a Jewish boy in the Warsaw
Ghetto saying "I am Palestinian". In early May 2003, after receiving numerous
complaints about newswire stories that referred to the Israel Defence Forces as
"Zionazi forces" or to Israelis as "Zionazis", Google temporarily stopped
including some IMCs in Google News searches, justifying the removal by
describing the term as a "degrading, hateful slur" and refused to index the Bay
Area IMC because it had appeared there; SF Bay Area Indymedia agreed that it
"could be considered hate speech". Servers seizures. Indymedia has had
interactions with authorities in USA and UK. Seizure of servers by the FBI. On
October 7, 2004, the FBI took possession of several server hard drives used by
a number of IMCs and hosted by US-based Rackspace Managed Hosting. The servers
in question were located in the United Kingdom and managed by the British arm
of Rackspace, but some 20 mainly European IMC websites were affected, and
several unrelated websites were affected, including the website of a Linux
distribution. No reasons were given at first by the FBI and Rackspace for the
seizure, in particular IMC was not informed. Rackspace claimed that it was
banned from giving further information about the incident. Some, but not all,
of the legal documents relating to the confiscation of the servers were
unsealed by a Texas district court in August 2005, following legal action by
the Electronic Frontier Foundation. The documents revealed that the only action
requested by the government was to surrender server log files. A statement by
Rackspace stated that the company had been forced to comply with a court order
under the procedures laid out by the Mutual Legal Assistance Treaty, which
governs international police co-operation on "international terrorism,
kidnapping and money laundering". The investigation that led to the court order
was said to have arisen outside of the U.S. Rackspace stated that they were
prohibited on giving further detail. Agence France-Presse reported FBI
spokesman Joe Parris, who said the incident was not an FBI operation, but that
the subpoena had been issued at the request of the Italian and the Swiss
governments. Again, no further details on specific allegations were given. UK
involvement was denied in an answer given to a parliamentary question posed by
Richard Allan, Liberal Democrat MP. Indymedia pointed out that they were not
contacted by the FBI and that no specific information was released on the
reasons of seizing the servers. Indymedia also sees the incident in the context
of "numerous attacks on independent media by the US Federal Government",
including a subpoena to obtain IP logs from Indymedia at the occasion of the
Republican National Conference, the shut-down of several community radio
stations in the US by the FCC, and a request by the FBI to remove a post on
Nantes IMC containing a photograph of alleged undercover Swiss police. The move
was condemned by the International Federation of Journalists, who stated that
"The way this has been done smacks more of intimidation of legitimate
journalistic inquiry than crime-busting" and called for an investigation.
Criticism was also voiced by European civil liberties organisation Statewatch
and the World Association of Community Radio Broadcasters (AMARC). Mathew Honan
commented in "Salon" that "This kind of thing doesn’t happen to Wolf
Blitzer". EFF attorney Kurt Opsahl compared the case with "Steve Jackson Games,
Inc. v. United States Secret Service". In Italy, the federal prosecutor of
Bologna Marina Plazzi confirmed that an investigation against Indymedia had
been opened because of suspected "support of terrorism", in the context of
Italian troops in the Iraqi city of Nasiriyah. The investigation was triggered
after 17 members of the coalition government belonging to the right-wing
Alleanza Nazionale, including Alessandra Mussolini, demanded that Indymedia be
shut down. A senior party member and government official had announced the co-
operation with US authorities, and party spokesman Mario Landolfi welcomed the
FBI's seizure of the Indymedia servers. Left-wing Italian politicians denounced
the move and called for an investigation. Bristol server seizure. Not long
after the Rackspace affair another server in the UK was seized by police in
June 2005. An anonymous post on the Bristol Indymedia server, came to police
attention for suggesting an "action" against a freight train carrying new cars
as part of a protest against cars and climate change in the run up to that
year's Gleneagles G8 summit. The police claimed that the poster broke the law
by "incitement to criminal damage", and sought access logs from the server
operators. Despite being warned by lawyers that the servers were "journalistic
equipment" and subject to special laws, the police proceeded with the seizure
and a member of the Bristol Indymedia group was arrested. Indymedia was
supported in this matter by the National Union of Journalists, Liberty and
Privacy International, along with others. This incident ended several months
later with no charges being brought by the police and the equipment returned.
Prior to the original server being returned, Bristol Indymedia was donated a
replacement server by local IT co-operative, Bristol Wireless. Other legal
actions in the United States. On January 30, 2009, one of the system
administrators of the server that hosts indymedia.us received a grand jury
subpoena from the Southern District of Indiana federal court. The subpoena
asked the administrator to provide all "IP addresses, times, and any other
identifying information" for every visitor to the site on June 25, 2008. The
subpoena also included a gag order that stated that the recipient is "not to
disclose the existence of this request unless authorized by the Assistant U.S.
Attorney." The administrator of indymedia.us could not have provided the
information because Indymedia sites generally do not keep IP address logs. The
Electronic Frontier Foundation determined that there was no legal basis for the
gag order, and that the subpoena request "violated the SCA's restrictions on
what types of data the government could obtain using a subpoena." Under Justice
Department guidelines, subpoenas to news media must have the authorization of
the attorney general. According to a CBS News blog, the subpoena of
indymedia.us was never submitted for review by the Attorney General. On
February 25, 2009, a United States Attorney sent a letter to an attorney with
the Electronic Frontier Foundation stating that the subpoena had been
withdrawn. Police action against IMC. On August 15, 2000, the Los Angeles
Police Department temporarily shut down the satellite uplink and production
studio of the Los Angeles Independent Media Center on its first night of
Democratic National Convention coverage, claiming explosives were in a van in
the adjacent parking lot. In July, 2001 at the 27th G8 summit in Genoa,
Indymedia journalists were seriously assaulted at the Diaz school where
Indymedia had set up a temporary journalism center and radio station. Twenty-
nine Italian police officers were indicted for grievous bodily harm, planting
evidence and wrongful arrest during a night-time raid on the Diaz School, and
thirteen were convicted. A further 45 state officials, including police
officers, prison guards and doctors, were charged with physically and mentally
abusing demonstrators and journalists held in a detention centre in the nearby
town of Bolzaneto. Video evidence from Indymedia and from the video activist
group Undercurrents, was used as key evidence for the prosecution. On June 1,
2003, Indymedia journalist Guy Smallman was seriously injured by a police
grenade in Geneva. He was covering protests against the G8 summit in nearby
Evian for Indymedia and Image Sans Frontière. Brad Will shooting. On October
27, 2006, New York–based journalist Bradley Roland Will was killed along with
two Mexican protesters in the city of Oaxaca. People had been demonstrating in
the city since May as part of an uprising prompted by a teachers strike.
Lizbeth Cana, attorney general of Oaxaca, claimed the conflict was caused by
the protesters and that the gunmen who engaged them were upset residents from
the area. The U.S. ambassador to Mexico, Tony Garza, however, claimed the men
may have been local police. Reporters Without Borders condemned the actions of
the Mexican government in allowing the accused to go free. Protesters also
allege that the men were police and not local residents. Associated Press
alleged that the protesters also had guns, describing the conflict as a
"shootout". Prizes and honors. In April 2008, in Brazil, IMC and Brad Will
received the Medalha Chico Mendes de Resistência ("Chico Mendes Resistance
Medal" in Portuguese) from the Brazilian humanitarian group Tortura Nunca Mais
("No more torture" in Portuguese) for their contribution for human rights and a
more fair society.
