Individual capital Individual capital, the economic view of talent, comprises
inalienable or personal traits of persons, tied to their bodies and available
only through their own free will, such as skill, creativity, enterprise,
courage, capacity for moral example, non-communicable wisdom, invention or
empathy, non-transferable personal trust and leadership. As recognized in
theories of economics. Individual talent & initiative was recognized as an
intangible quality of persons in economics back to at least Adam Smith. He
distinguished it (as "enterprise") from labour which can be coerced and is
usually seen as strictly imitative (learned or transmitted, via such means as
apprenticeship). Marxist economics refers instead to "an individual's social
capital - individuals are sources neither of creativity and innovation, nor
management skill. A problem with that analysis is that it simply cannot explain
the substitution problem and lack of demand that occurs when, for instance, an
understudy takes on a leading role, or a second author takes over writing a
popular book series. At the very least there must be some conditional, if not
firm-specific then "class specific", special ability to command premiums for
outstanding personal performance. Neoclassical economics by contrast refers to
"the individual in whom the human capital is ... embedded", which implies a
strong association of the individual with the instructional capital they learn
from, with little or no social capital influence. This is orthogonal to the
Marxist view, but not necessarily opposed. Human development theory reflects
both distinctions: it sees labour as the yield of individual capital in the
same way that neoclassical macro-economics sees financial capital as the yield
of the looser idea of human capital. But the rest problem and social welfare
function selection, as well as the subjective factors in behavioral finance,
has led to a closer analysis of factors of production. In effect, the financial
architecture is no longer trusted as an arbiter of the value of life as it was
in neoclassical economics. Money is not seen as values-neutral, but as
embodying a set of larger social choices about money supply rules, made by
measuring well-being of whole populations. Versus "human", "firm-specific",
"individual social". While conflated in many analyses with human capital, the
latter term includes social capital (human relationships) and instructional
capital (abstract texts and training materials and so on) that are not tied to
any one person, do not die with them or leave employment with them, and
therefore cannot be equated with talent alone. In intangibles measurement,
value creation and value reporting metrics require all assets with such
different characteristics to be categorized as different capital assets, so the
more exact reference to the individual person is preferred. Fusions of
terminology are common. Sociological analysts refer to "individual-level
elements of social capital" or "an individual's social capital" or just
"individual social capital" while economic analysts often use the phrase firm-
specific human capital. In either case the clearly includes individual capital
but also some "activity-", "community-" or "firm-specific" social capital
(community trust) and instructional capital (shareable knowledge or skills).
This is easy to measure: its yield is your salary in your current job. To the
degree this is consistent if you take other work nearby, this opens the
questions of what is "not" "firm-specific" and whether a nation is just a
bigger "firm": Some analyses see political capital, or just "influence" or
"trust of professionals" as a full style of capital of its own. Some ethicists,
most clearly Jane Jacobs, see this as simple corruption. Nonetheless,
corruption clearly has a cash value, involves some creativity to arrange, and
is a decision factor. It is a skill like any other. Versus "intellectual
capital". Perhaps because of this, not all theorists recognize individual
capital as being as essential as labour, or distinct from social or political
influence, or from instructional capacity. These theorists often refer to
"intellectual capital", which more properly describes a debate or locus of
complexity that arises when individuals take key instructional roles. Some
refer to celebrity as another fusion, when individuals take key social roles.
However, a great many celebrities are clearly not "intellectual" achievers nor
notable for any cognitive or analytic powers, e.g. Kim Kardashian, professional
sports figures or other athletes. While they may through sheer exposure become
involved in causes or controversies (as Paris Hilton did in the US presidential
election, 2008) it's clearly not correct to label all individually unique
talent or economic value as being an "intellectual" asset. This failure to
distinguish individual's objectively observed economic value (the power to
promote or publicize products, draw attention to causes, etc.) from the
"intellectual" powers is probably an elitist bias. Clearly, there are some
individuals, including non-humans such as a racehorse, which have economic
value unique to their individual body and being that cannot be captured or
defined as an "intellectual" asset nor as a set of "social" relationships
(because horses do not socialize in the sense humans do). Where slavery exists
or has existed, there is clearly a value put on living bodies separate from
their instructional or social selves. Thus for analyzing historical or criminal
economic activities, or even professional sports, the instructional capital vs.
individual capital vs. social capital distinction is essential. Investment.
Those who differentiate individual capital tend to see it as something that one
can invest in, directly, and see growth, directly. For individual skill, even
skill at a highly imitative enterprise, like sports or mastery of a musical
instrument, this is very often quite measurable. Many enterprises, for
instance, a music conservatory or circus school or creative writing coach, are
clearly making a living on the identification and (somewhat) measurable
enhancement of the individual.
