Indomania Indomania and Indophilia refer to the special interest India has
generated in the Western world, and more specifically, the culture and
civilisation of the Indian subcontinent. During the initial period of
colonialism (during the conquest of Bengal) everything about India had an
aspect of novelty, especially in Britain. This enthusiasm created a brand of
people who started studying everything possible about India, especially its
culture and ancient history. Later the people with interests in Indian aspects
came to be known as Indologists and their subject as Indology. Its opposite is
Indophobia. 18th and 19th century. The perception of Indian history and culture
by Europeans was fluctuating between two extremes in the 18th and 19th century.
Many European writers had seen India as a cradle of civilization during the
19th century. However, this overly romantic vision of India was more and more
replaced with an opposite "Indophobia", in which Indian history and culture was
marginalized. Friedrich Schlegel wrote in a letter to Tieck that India was the
source of all languages, thoughts and poems, and that "everything" came from
India. In the 18th century, Voltaire wrote that "I am convinced that everything
has come down to us from the banks of the Ganges, astronomy, astrology,
metempsychosis, etc... Much of the early enthusiasm for Indian culture can be
traced to the influence of Sir William Jones. Jones was only the second
Englishman to master Sanskrit, after Charles Wilkins. His insight that the
grammar and vocabulary of Sanskrit bore a resemblance to Greek and Latin marked
the discovery of the Indo-European family of languages. In February 1786 Jones
declared Sanskrit to be 'more perfect than the Greek, more copious than the
Latin, and more exquisitely refined than either.' Jones translated into English
a drama of Kalidasa and published it in 1789. The Calcutta edition was an
immediate success and two London editions followed within three years. Jones
also discovered that chess and algebra were of Indian origin. Every branch of
Indian studies owed something to his inspiration. An important development
during the British Raj period was the influence Hindu traditions began to take
on western thought and new religious movements. Goethe borrowed from Kalidasa
for the "Vorspiel auf dem Theater" in "Faust". An early champion of Indian-
inspired thought in the west was Arthur Schopenhauer, who in the 1850s
advocated ethics based on an "Aryan-Vedic theme of spiritual self-conquest" as
opposed to the ignorant drive toward earthly utopianism of the superficially
this-worldly "Jewish" spirit. At the end of the introduction to the "World as
Will and Representation", Arthur Schopenhauer claimed that the rediscovery of
the ancient Indian tradition would be one of the great events in the history of
the West. Goethe and Schopenhauer were riding a crest of scholarly discovery,
most notably the work done by Sir William Jones. (Goethe likely read Kalidasa's
"The Recognition of Sakuntala" in Jones' translation.) However, the discovery
of the world of Sanskrit literature moved beyond German and British scholars
and intellectuals — Henry David Thoreau was a sympathetic reader of the
Bhagavad Gita — and even beyond the humanities. In the early days of the
Periodic Table, scientists referred to as yet undiscovered elements with the
use of Sanskrit prefixes (see Mendeleev's predicted elements). Scholars like
Schlegel also influenced some historians like Friedrich Creuzer, Joseph Görres
and Carl Ritter, who wrote history books that laid more emphasis on India than
usual. Helena Blavatsky moved to India in 1879, and her Theosophical Society,
founded in New York in 1875, evolved into a peculiar mixture of western
occultism and Hindu mysticism over the last years of her life. Hinduism-
inspired elements in Theosophy were also inherited by the spin-off movements of
Ariosophy and Anthroposophy and ultimately contributed to the renewed New Age
boom of the 1960s to 1980s, the term "New Age" itself deriving from Blavatsky's
1888 "The Secret Doctrine". 20th century. The Hindu reform movements reached
Western audiences in the wake of the sojourn of Vivekananda to the World
Parliament of Religions in Chicago in 1893. Vivekananda founded the Ramakrishna
Mission, a Hindu missionary organization still active today. Influential in
spreading Hinduism to a western audience were A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami
Prabhupada (Hare Krishna movement), Sri Aurobindo, Meher Baba, Osho, Maharishi
Mahesh Yogi (Transcendental Meditation), Sathya Sai Baba, Mother Meera, among
others. During the 1960s and 1970s, there was a similar phase of Indomania in
the Western world, with a rise of interest in Indian culture. This was largely
associated with the hippie counterculture movement; the hippie trail, for
example, was a journey that many Westerners undertook to India during this
period. The Hare Krishna movement gained popularity in the 1960s. Indian
filmmakers such as the Bengali auteur Satyajit Ray as well as Bengali musicians
such as Ravi Shankar gained increasing exposure in the Western world. Indian
musical influence, particularly the use of the sitar, became evident in jazz
(see Indo jazz) and rock music, among popular Western artists such as The
Beatles (see The Beatles in India), The Rolling Stones, and Jimi Hendrix, among
others, leading to the development of psychedelic music genres such as raga
rock and psychedelic rock, which in turn paved the way for heavy metal music.
