Industrial organization Industrial organization is the field of economics that
builds on the theory of the firm in examining the structure of, and boundaries
between, firms and markets.¬ ¬ ‚Ä¢ Jean Tirole, 1988. "The Theory of Industrial
Organization". "The Theory of the Firm," pp. 15‚Äì60. MIT Press.¬ ¬  ‚Ä¢ Bengt
R. Holmstr√∂m and John Roberts, 1998. "The Boundaries of the Firm Revisited,"
"Journal of Economic Perspectives", 12(4), pp. 73‚Äì94 (close Pages tab). The
subject has been described as concerned with markets that "cannot easily be
analyzed using the standard textbook competitive model." Industrial
organization adds to the perfectly competitive model real-world frictions such
as transaction costs,¬ ¬  ‚Ä¢_____, 1988. "The Nature of the Firm: Influence,"
"Journal of Law, Economics, & Organization", 4(1), pp. 33-47. Reprinted in "The
Nature of the Firm: Origins, Evolution, and Development", 1993, O. E.
Williamson and S, G. Winter, ed., pp. 61-74.¬ ¬  ‚Ä¢ _____, 1991. "The
Institutional Structure of Production," Nobel Lecture, reprinted in 1992,
"American Economic Review", 82(4), pp. 713-719.¬ ¬  ‚Ä¢ Oliver E. Williamson,
1981. "The Economics of Organization: The Transaction Cost Approach," "The
American Journal of Sociology", 87(3), pp. 548-577.¬ ¬  ‚Ä¢ _____, 2009.
"Transaction Cost Economics: The Natural Progression," Nobel Lecture. Reprinted
in 2010, "American Economic Review", 100(3), pp. 673‚Äì90. limited information,
and barriers to entry of new firms that may be associated with imperfect
competition. It analyzes determinants of firm and market organization and
behavior as between competition and monopoly,¬ ¬  ‚Ä¢ Oliver E. Williamson,
2002. "The Theory of the Firm as Governance Structure: From Choice to
Contract," "Journal of Economic Perspectives", 16(3), pp. 171-195.¬ ¬  ‚Ä¢
Frederic M. Scherer and David Ross, 1990. "Industrial Market Structure and
Economic Performance", 3rd ed. Description and 1st ed. review extract.¬ ¬  ‚Ä¢
Dennis W. Carlton and Jeffery M. Perloff, 2004. "Modern Industrial
Organization", 4th edition, pp. 2-3. Description. including from government
actions. There are different approaches to the subject. One is descriptive in
providing an overview of industrial organization, such as measures of
competition and the size-concentration of firms in an industry. A second uses
microeconomic models to explain internal firm organization and market
strategy.¬ ¬  ‚Ä¢ Dennis W. Carlton and Jeffery M. Perloff, 2004. "Modern
Industrial Organization", 4th edition, pp. 2-3. Description.¬ ¬  ‚Ä¢ Jean
Tirole, 1988. "The Theory of Industrial Organization", MIT Press. Description,
p. 3, and [http://books.google.com/
books?id=HIjsF0XONF8C&printsec=find&pg=PR7=onepage&q&f=false#v=onepage&q&f=false
I, "The Exercise of Monopoly Power." As to strategic firm interaction, non-
cooperative game theory has become the standard unifying method of analysis. A
third aspect is oriented to public policy as to economic regulation and
antitrust law.¬ ¬  ‚Ä¢ D. L. Rubinfeld, 2001. "Antitrust Policy,"
"International Encyclopedia of the Social & Behavioral Sciences",
pp.¬ 553‚Äì560. Abstract. The development of industrial organization as a
separate field owes much to Edward Chamberlin,¬ ¬  ‚Ä¢ R. Rothschild, 1987.
"The Theory of Monopolistic Competition: E.H. Chamberlin's Influence on
Industrial Organisation Theory over Sixty Years," "Journal of Economic
Studies", 14(1), pp.34-54. Abstract.¬ ¬  ‚Ä¢ William L. Baldwin, 2007. "Edward
Hastings Chamberlin," in "Pioneers of Industrial Organization", H. W. de Jong,
W. G. Shepherd, ed., pp. 199-. Edward S. Mason,¬ ¬  ‚Ä¢ _____, 1949. "The
Current Status of the Monopoly Problem in the United States," 'Harvard Law
Review", 62(8), pp. 1265-1285.¬ ¬  ‚Ä¢ _____, 1957. "Economic Concentration and
the Monopoly Problem", Harvard University Press. Review extract.¬ ¬  ‚Ä¢
William G. Shepherd, 2007. "Edward S. Mason," in "Pioneers of Industrial
Organization", H. W. de Jong, W. G. Shepherd, ed. and Joe S. Bain.¬ ¬  ‚Ä¢
_____, 1968. "Industrial Organization", John Wiley & Sons.¬ ¬  ‚Ä¢ Richard E.
Caves, 2007. "Joe S. Bain," in "Pioneers of Industrial Organization", H. W. de
Jong, W. G. Shepherd, ed., pp. 224-231. Structure, conduct, performance.
According to the structure-conduct-performance approach, an industry's
performance (the success of an industry in producing benefits for the consumer)
depends on the conduct of its firms, which then depends on the structure
(factors that determine the competitiveness of the market). The structure of
the industry then depends on basic conditions, such as technology and demand
for a product.¬ ¬  ‚Ä¢ Dennis W. Carlton and Jeffery M. Perloff, 2004. "Modern
Industrial Organization", 4th edition, pp. 2-3. Description. For example: in an
industry with technology that the average cost of production falls as output
increases, the industry tends to have one firm, or possibly a small number of
firms. Industrial organization The subject of industrial organization applies
the economics‚Äô model of price theory to the real world industries. The goal
of industrial organization study is to increase the understanding of how
industries operate, improve the industries contribution to the economic
welfare, and to improve government policy toward these industries. Structure
Conduct Performance Paradigm (SCPP) SCPP is an approach used to analyze the
relation among market performance, market conduct, and market structure. The
SCPP indicates that market structure determines the market conduct, and thereby
sets the level of market performance. Working backward, we find that market
performance is determined by market conduct, which in return depends on market
structure. SCP has been applied to a diverse range of problems, from helping
businesses become more profitable to helping understand the subprime mortgage
crisis in the United States. Economists are especially interested in studying
the SCPP because they tend to believe that seller concentration affects the
industry‚Äôs social performance. The economic theorists express that effect in
terms of higher profits earned by the monopoly. On the other hand, Industrial
Organization economists express the effect in terms of locative inefficiency.
However, economists who use the Structure Conduct Performance (SCP) approach
disagree on the emphases that they give to each of the three elements. Some
give market structure and market conduct an equal importance in determining
market performance. Others argue that market conduct is largely determined by
market structure, hence, market performance depends heavily on market
structure, and that leads them to pay little attention to market conduct.
Market Structure Conduct and Performance SCP framework was derived from the
neo-classical analysis of markets. The SCPP was the brainchild of the Harvard
school of thought and popularized during 1940-60 with its empirical work
involving the identification of correlations between industry structure and
performance. This SCP hypothesis has led to the implementation of most anti-
trust legislation. The Chicago school of thought followed this from 1960 to
1980. They emphasized on the rationale for firms becoming big, price theory and
econometric estimation. During 1980-90 game theory took center stage with
emphasis on strategic decision-making and Nash equilibrium concept. After 1990,
empirical industrial organization with the use of economic theory and
econometrics led to complex empirical modeling of technological changes, merger
analysis, entry-exit and identification of market power. Market structure The
Market structure consists of the relatively stable features of the market
environment that influence rivalry among the buyers and sellers operating
within this market. The main elements that influence market structure are,
seller concentration, product differentiation, barriers to entry, barriers to
exit, buyer concentration, and the growth rate of market demand. Other elements
of market structure exist, but they are usually unstable and therefore ignored
either because they can‚Äôt be measured or because they are hard to observe.
Elements of market structure Seller concentration Refers to the number and size
distribution of firms in the market. The most widely used device is determining
seller concentration is the Concentration Ratio. To compute the concentration
ratio, the firms are ranked in order of size ‚Äúusually measured in terms of
sale‚Äù, starting from the largest in the industry at the top and going down to
the smallest firm at the bottom. Concentration ratios are usually given for the
largest 4, largest 8, and sometimes the largest 20 firms. Usually industries
that are highly concentrated in one advanced economy tend to be highly
concentrated in another. Product differentiation A differentiation or
distinguishing a product from the products of other competing firms.
Differentiation of products along key features and minor details is an
important strategy for firms to defend their price from leveling down to
marginal cost. Horizontal differentiation When products are different according
to features that can't be ordered in an objective way, or in other words, at
the same price, some consumers would prefer the product while others would
prefer a different substitute Horizontal differentiation can be differentiation
in colors (different color version for the same good), in styles (e.g. modern/
antique), or in tastes. A typical example is the ice cream offered in different
tastes. Chocolate is not better than Mango. Vertical differentiation Vertical
differentiation occurs in a market where the several goods that are present can
be ordered according to their objective quality from the highest to the lowest.
It's possible to say in this case that one good is "better" than another. Mixed
differentiation Certain markets are characterized by both horizontal and
vertical differentiation. For instance, apparel, and shoes have a rich
combination of shapes, colors, materials, and appropriateness to social events.
In such markets, the differences in colors or shapes are horizontal
differentiation, while the quality of the materials is usually perceived as
vertical differentiation. Barriers to entry A set of economic forces that
create a disadvantage to new competitors attempting to enter the market. These
forces could be government regulation such as IP rights, or patent, or they
could be large economies of scale in a specific industry, or high sunk costs
required to enter the market. Sometimes firms within a specific industry adopt
certain pricing strategies to create barriers to entry, one of the most widely
adopted strategy is limit pricing by lowering prices to a level that would
force any new entrants to operate at a loss, this strategy is especially
effective when the existing firms have a cost advantage over potential
entrants. Barriers to exit A set of economics forces that influence the firms
decision of exiting the market, such forces make it cheaper for the existing
firm to stay in the market than to exit the market. Although sunk costs could
be barriers to entry, especially when the sunk costs are too large, sunk costs
could be a huge barrier to exit as well, because large investments in fixed
plant and equipments commits the firm to stay in the market. Barriers to exit
increase the intensity of competition in an industry because existing firms
have little choice but to stay and fight when market conditions have
deteriorated. The loss of business reputation and consumer goodwill, could be a
barrier to exit especially if the firm is planning on reentering the market
later, or when the firm exits a specific market but still operating in other
markets. In such a situation, the decision to leave the market can seriously
hurt the reputation of the firm among current consumers in other markets, and
affect the goodwill among previous customers, not least those who have bought a
product which is then withdrawn and for which replacement parts become
difficult or impossible to obtain. Buyer concentration The number of buyers in
a market. Buyer concentration is as equally important as seller concentration,
especially in markets with a few buyers. The term was used by Michael E. Porter
in 1979 in his ‚ÄúFive Forces Analysis‚Äù. Porter‚Äôs analysis proposes that in
markets with high buyer concentration, the firms earn lower level of profits
than in markets with low buyer concentration The growth rate of market demand
The market structure in industries with a relatively static demand or low
growth rate of demand is different from the market structure in industries with
an accelerated demand growth. That‚Äôs because when the demand grows fast
enough, the firms have their hands full just expanding their production
capacities, in this case, if new entrants are coming in, there will be little
incentive to fight for market share. Also, firms are likely to honor
oligopolistic agreements with each other, and profits tend to be high. All
these elements of market structure tend to be stable over time. However, they
are all interrelated. Any change in one tends to bring about changes in
another. By realizing this relation among the different elements of market
structure, it becomes easier to understand why market structures change over
time. Conduct Conduct means what firms do to compete with each other. It
includes pricing, advertising, research and development investment, decisions
on product dimensions, merger and acquisition, etc. Conduct also can include
collusion both explicit or tacit. Performance The performance of an industry or
firm is measured by profitability. Profit is the difference between revenue and
cost, and revenue is determined by price. Thus performance can be influenced
through changing costs or prices. Profitability can also be affected by a
firm‚Äôs agility (i.e. ability to adjust to things like changes in market
demand). Research and development, and availability of capitol and resources
are factors that greatly influence whether or not a firm is agile. The ability
to measure performance between industries is important in understanding the SCP
relationships. For example, if an industry is dominated by one firm or cartel
does not see higher costs than a competitive industry yet has monopoly prices,
then that non-competitive industry will see higher profits, whereas if costs
increase, then profitability levels will be relatively similar. This comparison
is the driving force behind anti-trust legislation. SCPP predicts that
performance increases with concentration of the industry. This is in contrast
with the efficiency hypothesis that states that a firms performance is based on
how well and efficiently it produces its product for the consumer. '"SCP
Interaction Overview"' There are two competing hypotheses in the SCP paradigm:
the traditional ‚Äústructure performance hypothesis‚Äù and ‚Äúefficient
structure hypothesis‚Äù. The structure performance hypothesis states that the
degree of market concentration is inversely related to the degree of
competition. This is because market concentration encourages firms to collude.
This hypothesis will be supported if positive relationship between market
concentration (measured by concentration ratio) and performance (measured by
profits) exist, regardless of efficiency of the firm (measured by market
share). Thus firms in more concentrated industries will earn higher profits
than firms operating in less concentrated industries, irrespective of their
efficiency. The efficiency structure hypothesis states that performance of the
firm is positively related to its efficiency. This is because market
concentration emerges from competition where firms with low cost structure
increase profits by reducing prices and expanding market share. A positive
relationship between firm profits and market structure is attributed to the
gains made in market share by more efficient firms, but not to the collusive
activities, as the traditional SCP paradigm would suggest (Molyneux and Forbes,
1995). Relationship of structure to performance Early studies by Bain (1951;
1956) hypothesized a positive relationship between industry concentration,
barriers to entry and profits. Though his studies are flawed in the measurement
of profit rates and choice of industries (Brozen 1971), later papers supported
this hypothesis (Mann 1966; Weiss 1974). However, the differential in the
performance measures between concentrated and non-concentrated industries fell
substantially overtime (Brozen 1971; Hubbard and Petersen 1986). Moreover,
studies based on more recent data tend to find only a weak relationship or no
relationship between the structural variables and performance (Salinger 1984;
Kwoka and Ravenscraft 1985). As a result, some econometric studies began to
look at other factors impacting industry performance. These studies commonly
found that high rates of return and industry growth are related. Other
researchers studied the structure-performance relationship using alternative
measures of performance, for example, the speed of adjustment of capital. They
found that the capital-output ratio is positively related to concentration. The
explanation for this phenomenon has not been verified, but it is possible that
in highly concentrated markets, there are more specialized capital which is
more difficult to adjust, thus in these markets high profits take longer to
fall back to the industry average. Similarly, if concentrated industries take
longer time to react to demand changes, then, all else equal, good economic
news should raise the value of a company more in a concentrated industry than
in an non-concentrated industry (Lustgarten and Thomadakis 1980). Relationship
between structure and conduct Conduct is influenced by market structure since
firm strategies differ with competition. Inversely, conduct can influence
market structure because firms can make entry cost endogenous by choosing
different levels of quality, advertising and so on, thus affect the potential
entrant number. Relationship between conduct and performance Conduct is related
to performance. For example, advertising expenditure is usually higher in
highly profitable industries, because firms with more profits can afford higher
advertising costs, and in order to keep their profits and prevent new entrants
into the profitable market, these firms would use advertising investments as
endogenous sunk costs. Econometric studies linking profit to market structure
often conclude that measured profitability is correlated with the advertising-
to-sales ratio and with the R&D expenditures-to-sales ratio. Conclusion In
essence, with the SCPP we seek to find the answer to how firms interact and
compete with each other in different situations, and the results of these
interactions, and are these results consistent with an ideal competition or
not. That way, an argument can be supported on whether or not action should be
taken to alter the market structure or regulate market conduct. It is
interesting there is such a debate on the emphasis on market structure vs.
market conduct on the influence of performance since it is clear that structure
and conduct are themselves influenced by each other. Joseph Bain was one of the
first to realize this and his work led to the re-evaluation of public policy
that had been fostered by the SCP framework. In industrial organization, real
world, imperfect competition is studied, and there are so many different
examples that the way markets are evaluated is continually evolving and
changing. Thus every school of thought must be constantly re-evaluated as more
data is generated. Carlton and Perloff, 2005, Modern Industrial Organization,
4th Edition, Pearson, Addison Wesley. Charles C. Fisher. ‚ÄúWhat can economics
learn from marketing‚Äôs market structure analysis?‚Äù. Contribution of
Marketing MSA to Economics MSA. http://www.westga.edu/~bquest/1997/ecnmkt.html
Caves, E Richard (January 1992). ‚ÄúAmerican Industry: Structure, Conduct,
Performance‚Äù. Prentice Hall, 7th E. pp 3‚Äì36 Edwards, Allen and Shaik
(2006), "Market Structure Conduct Performance (SCP) Hypothesis Revisited using
Stochastic Frontier Efficiency Analysis," presentation at the American
Agricultural Economics Association Annual Meeting, Long Beach, California.
Marion, Bruce. "Structure, Conduct, Performance Paradigm to Subsector
Ananlysis." : Print. Michael E. Porter, Interbrand Choice, strategy, and
bilateral market power (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1976). Pepall,
Lynne, Dan Richards, and George Norman. Industrial Organization Contemporary
Theory and Empirical Applications. 4th ed. Malden, MA: Blackwll Publishing,
2008. Print. Piana, Valentino. ‚ÄúProduct differentiation.‚Äù http://
economicswebinstitute.org/glossary/product.htm Weiss, Leonard W. ‚ÄúThe
Structure-Conduct-Performance Paradigm and Antitrust.‚Äù Apr., 1979
pp.¬ 1104‚Äì1140. The University of Pennsylvania Law Review. http://
www.jstor.org/stable/3311794 Areas of study. Industrial organization
investigates the outcomes of these market structures in environments with A
competitive market structure has the performance outcome of lower costs and
lower prices, (Shepherd, W: 1997:4). The subject has a theoretical side and a
practical side. According to one text book: "On one plane the field is
abstract, a set of analytical concepts about competition and monopoly. On a
second plane the topic is about real markets, teeming with the excitement and
drama of struggles among real firms" (Shepherd, W.; 1985; 1). The extensive use
of game theory in industrial economics has led to the export of this tool to
other branches of microeconomics, such as behavioral economics and corporate
finance. Industrial organization has also had significant practical impacts on
antitrust law and competition policy. History of the field. A 2009 book
"Pioneers of Industrial Organization" traces the development of the field from
Adam Smith to recent times and includes dozens of short biographies of major
figures in Europe and North America who contributed to the growth and
development of the discipline. Other reviews by publication year and earliest
available cited works those in 1970/1937, 1972/1933, 1974, 1987/7 from 1968 on,
3 from 1937 to 1956, and 2009/c. 1900.
