Induced demand Induced demand, or latent demand, is the phenomenon that after
supply increases, more of a good is consumed. This is entirely consistent with
the economic theory of supply and demand; however, this idea has become
important in the debate over the expansion of transportation systems, and is
often used as an argument against widening roads, such as major commuter roads.
It is considered by some to be a contributing factor to urban sprawl. Effect in
transportation systems. He went on to give an example of the observed effect
following the opening of the Doncaster Bypass section of the A1(M) in 1961.
Price of road travel. A journey on a road can be considered as having an
associated cost or "price" (the generalised cost, "g") which includes the out-
of-pocket cost (e.g. fuel costs and tolls) and the opportunity cost of the time
spent travelling, which is usually calculated as the product of travel time and
the value of travellers' time. When road capacity is increased, initially there
is more road space per vehicle travelling than there was before, so congestion
is reduced, and therefore the time spent travelling is reduced - reducing the
generalised cost of every journey (by affecting the second "cost" mentioned in
the previous paragraph). In fact, this is one of the key justifications for
construction of new road capacity (the reduction in journey times). A change in
the cost (or price) of travel results in a change in the quantity consumed.
This can be explained using the simple supply and demand theory, illustrated
below. Elasticity of transport demand. For roads or highways, the supply
relates to capacity and the quantity consumed refers to vehicle-kilometres
travelled. The size of the increase in quantity consumed depends on the
elasticity of demand. A review of transport research suggests that the
elasticity of traffic demand with respect to travel time is around -0.5 in the
short-term and -1.0 in the long-term. This indicates that a 1.0% saving in
travel time will generate an additional 0.5% increase in traffic within the
first year. In the longer-term, a 1.0% saving in travel time will result in a
1.0% increase in traffic volume. Sources of induced traffic. In the short term,
increased travel on new road space can come from one of two sources: diverted
travel and induced traffic. Diverted travel occurs when people divert their
trip from another road (change in route) or retime their travel (change in
timing). For example, people might travel to work earlier than they would
otherwise like, in order to avoid peak period congestion - but if road capacity
is expanded, peak congestion is lower and they can travel at the time they
prefer. Induced traffic occurs when new automobile trips are generated. This
can occur when people choose to travel by car instead of public transport, or
decide to travel when they otherwise would not have. Shortening travel times
can also encourage longer trips as reduced travel costs encourage people to
choose farther destinations. Although this may not increase the number of
trips, it increases vehicle-kilometres travelled. In the long term, this effect
alters land use patterns as people choose homes and workplace locations farther
away than they would have without the expanded road capacity. These development
patterns encourage automobile dependency which contributes to the high long-
term demand elasticities of road expansion. Induced demand and transport
planning. Although planners take into account future traffic growth when
planning new roads (this often being an apparently reasonable justification for
new roads in itself - that traffic growth will mean more road capacity is
required), this traffic growth is calculated from increases in car ownership
and economic activity, and does not take into account traffic induced by the
presence of the new road (i.e. it is assumed that traffic will grow, regardless
of whether a road is built or not). In the UK, the idea of induced traffic was
used as a grounds for protests against government policy of road construction
in the 1970s, 1980s and early 1990s, until it became accepted as a given by the
government as a result of their own SACTRA (Standing Advisory Committee on
Trunk Road Assessment) study of 1994 [http://www.dft.gov.uk/stellent/groups/
dft_econappr/documents/divisionhomepage/031568.hcsp]. However, despite the
concept of induced traffic now being accepted, it is not always considered. A
classic example of induced demand was the construction of an orbital motorway
around London, the M25, in the late 1980s and early 1990s. In the short term
(almost from opening), the motorway became extremely busy and often congested
(as planners underestimated the level of demand, because some was induced, and
thus the road did not have high enough levels of capacity to accommodate it).
In the long term (over a few years), new development occurred around the new
motorway and people adjusted their home and work locations to depend upon it,
further increasing demand. Reduced demand (the inverse effect). Just as
increasing road capacity reduces the cost of travel and thus increases demand,
the reverse is also true - "decreasing" road capacity "increases" the cost of
travel, so demand is reduced. This observation, for which there is much
empirical evidence, has been called Disappearing Traffic, also traffic
evaporation or traffic suppression. So the closure of a road or reduction in
its capacity (e.g. reducing the number of available lanes) will result in the
adjustment of traveller behaviour to compensate - for example, people might
stop making particular trips, condense multiple trips into one, retime their
trips to a less congested time, or switch to public transport, walking or
bicycling, depending upon the values of those trips or of the schedule delay
they experience. Reduced demand has been demonstrated in a number of studies
associated with bridge closings (to be repaired) or major roads rehabilitation
projects. These studies have demonstrated that the total volume of traffic,
considering the road or bridge closed and alternative roads which this traffic
is diverted through, is lower than that in the previous situation. In fact,
this is an argument to convert roads previously open to vehicle traffic into
pedestrian areas, with a positive impact on the environment and congestion, as
in the example of the central area of Florence, Italy. Similarly, reducing
public transit services will reduce to some extent the use of those facilities,
where trips again may be abandoned or switched to private transport. The
debate. Opponents of roadway widening argue that evidence shows encouraging
development many kilometres away from jobs and services, freeways contribute to
increasing traffic flows, and thus the freeway ends up just as congested as
previously, thus requiring the freeway to be widened (again). Proponents of
roadway widening will note that the fact that there is additional travel
indicates that the roadway construction or expansion is adding value to those
users (consumer surplus). This argument ignores that consumer surplus of a
group of road users does not guarantee an increase in aggregate utility. It
also ignores that some negative externalities such as global pollution often go
unvalued in economic analyses of road projects (some countries ignore these
externalities altogether, and others evaluate them qualitatively). Some roadway
advocates note that because of underlying factors (e.g. population and income
growth), traffic will grow anyway, whether or not freeways are expanded (this
being the argument mentioned previously in relation to traffic forecasts).
Thus, without widening, traffic would be even worse than it is, contributing
even more pollution, something which occurred in Sydney, Australia, during the
New South Wales state government's "No Freeways" era in the late 1970s and
early 1980s. Opponents reply that the new induced traffic will generate more
pollution and exacerbate the greenhouse effect more than leaving the road
unbuilt or unwidened.
