Industrial policy The Industrial Policy plan of a country, sometimes shortened
IP, is its official strategic effort to encourage the development and growth of
the manufacturing sector of the economy. The government takes measures "aimed
at improving the competitiveness and capabilities of domestic firms and
promoting structural transformation." A country's infrastructure
(transportation, telecommunications and energy industry) is a major part of the
manufacturing sector that usually has a key role in IP. Industrial policies are
sector specific, unlike broader macroeconomic policies. They are sometimes
labeled as interventionist as opposed to laissez-faire economics. Examples of
horizontal, economywide policies are tightening credit or taxing capital gain,
while examples of vertical, sector-specific policies comprise protecting
textiles from foreign imports or subsidizing export industries. Free market
advocates consider industrial policies as interventionist measures typical of
mixed economy countries. Many types of industrial policies contain common
elements with other types of interventionist practices such as trade policy and
fiscal policy. An example of a typical industrial policy is import-
substitution-industrialization (ISI), where trade barriers are temporarily
imposed on some key sectors, such as manufacturing. By selectively protecting
certain industries, these industries are given time to learn (learning by
doing) and upgrade. Once competitive enough, these restrictions are lifted to
expose the selected industries to the international market. History. The
traditional arguments for industrial policies go back as far as the 18th
century. Prominent early arguments in favor of selective protection of
industries were contained in the 1791 "Report on the Subject of Manufactures"
of US economist and politician Alexander Hamilton, as well as the work of
German economist Friedrich List. List's views on free trade were in explicit
contradiction to those of Adam Smith, who, in "The Wealth of Nations", said
that "the most advantageous method in which a landed nation can raise up
artificers, manufacturers, and merchants of its own is to grant the most
perfect freedom of trade to the artificers, manufacturers, and merchants of all
other nations." The arguments of List and others were subsequently picked up by
scholars of early development economics such as Albert Hirschman and Alexander
Gerschenkron, who called for the selective promotion of "key sectors" in
overcoming economic backwardness. The relationship between government and
industry in the United States has never been a simple one, and the labels used
in categorizing these relationships at different times are often misleading if
not false. In the early nineteenth century, for example, "it is quite clear
that the laissez faire label is an inappropriate one." In the US, an industrial
policy was explicitly presented for the first time by the Jimmy Carter
administration in August 1980, but it was subsequently dismantled with the
election of Ronald Reagan the following year. Historically, there is a growing
consensus that most developed countries, including United Kingdom, United
States, Germany and France, have intervened actively in their domestic economy
through industrial policies. These early examples are followed by
interventionist ISI strategies pursued in Latin American countries such as
Brazil, Mexico or Argentina. More recently, the rapid growth of East Asian
economies, or the newly industrialized countries (NICs), has also been
associated with active industrial policies that selectively promoted
manufacturing and facilitated technology transfer and industrial upgrading. The
success of these state-directed industrialization strategies are often
attributed to developmental states and strong bureaucracies such as the
Japanese MITI. According to Princeton's Atul Kohli, the reason Japanese
colonies such as South Korea developed so rapidly and successfully was down to
Japan exporting to its colonies the same centralised state development that it
had used to develop itself. Many of these domestic policy choices, however, are
now seen as detrimental to free trade and are hence limited by various
international agreements such as WTO, TRIM or TRIPS. Instead, the recent focus
for industrial policy has shifted towards the promotion of local business
clusters and the integration into global value chains. During the Reagan
Administration, an economic development initiative called Project Socrates was
initiated to address US decline in ability to compete in world markets. Project
Socrates, directed by Michael Sekora, resulted in a computer-based competitive
strategy system that was made available to private industry and all other
public and private institutions that impact economic growth, competitiveness
and trade policy. A key objective of Socrates was to utilize advanced
technology to enable US private institutions and public agencies to cooperate
in the development and execution of competitive strategies without violating
existing laws or compromising the spirit of "free market". President Reagan was
satisfied that this objective was fulfilled in the Socrates system. Through the
advances of innovation age technology, Socrates would provide "voluntary" but
"systematic" coordination of resources across multiple "economic system"
institutions including industry clusters, financial service organizations,
university research facilities and government economic planning agencies. While
the view of one president and the Socrates team was that technology made it
virtually possible for both to exist simultaneously, the industrial policy vs.
free market debate continued as later under the George H. W. Bush
administration, Socrates was labeled as industrial policy and de-funded. In
August 2010, "The Economist" highlighted a renewed trend of industrial policy
in rich countries, with examples of active government intervention in the
United States, Britain, France, Germany, Japan and South Korea. The revival has
been driven by four main forces: pressure to reduce unemployment and stimulate
growth; a desire to 'rebalance' certain economies away from financial services;
popular demands for increased government action; and the perceived need to
respond to apparently successful policies being pursued in China. Criticism.
The main criticism against industrial policy arises from the concept of
government failure. Industrial policy is seen as harmful as governments lack
the required information, capabilities and incentives to successfully determine
whether the benefits of promoting certain sectors above others exceeds the
costs and in turn implement the policies. The East Asian Tigers provided
successful examples of heterodox interventions and protectionist industrial
policies, industrial policies such as import-substitution-industrialization
(ISI) has failed in many other regions such as Latin America and Sub-Saharan
Africa. Governments in making decisions with regard to electoral or personal
incentives can be captured by vested interests, leading to industrial policy
would only supporting rent-seeking the political elite, while distorting the
efficient allocation of resources by market forces at the same time. Debates on
the 'How to' of Industrial Policy. Despite existing criticism, there is a
growing consensus in recent development theory that state interventions are
often necessary when market failures prevail. Market failures often exist in
presence of externalities and natural monopolies. These market failures hinder
the emergence of a well-functioning market and corrective industrial policies
are required to ensure the allocative efficiency of a free market. Even
relatively sceptical economists now recognise that public action can boost
certain development factors "beyond what market forces on their own would
generate." In practice, these interventions are often aimed at regulating
networks, public infrastructure, R&D or correcting information asymmetries.
While the current debate has shifted away from dismissing industrial policies
overall, the best ways of promoting industrial policy are still widely debated.
One key question is which kinds of industrial policy are most effective in
promoting economic development. For example, economists debate whether
developing countries should focus on their comparative advantage by promoting
mostly resource- and labour-intensive products and services, or invest in
higher-productivity industries, which may only become competitive in the longer
term. Much debate also still surrounds the issue whether government failures
are more pervasive and severe than market failures. Some argue that the lower
government accountability and capabilities, the higher the risk of political
capture of industrial policies, which may be economically more harmful than
existing market failures. Of particular relevance for developing countries are
the conditions under which industrial policies may also contribute to poverty
reduction, such as a focus on specific industries or the promotion of linkages
between larger companies and smaller local enterprises.
