Industrialisation Industrialisation (or industrialization) is the period of
social and economic change that transforms a human group from an agrarian
society into an industrial one. It is a part of a wider modernisation process,
where social change and economic development are closely related with
technological innovation, particularly with the development of large-scale
energy and metallurgy production. It is the extensive organisation of an
economy for the purpose of manufacturing. Industrialisation also introduces a
form of philosophical change where people obtain a different attitude towards
their perception of nature, and a sociological process of ubiquitous
rationalisation. There is considerable literature on the factors facilitating
industrial modernisation and enterprise development. Key positive factors
identified by researchers have ranged from favourable political-legal
environments for industry and commerce, through abundant natural resources of
various kinds, to plentiful supplies of relatively low-cost, skilled and
adaptable labour. As industrial workers incomes rise, markets for consumer
goods and services of all kinds tend to expand and provide a further stimulus
to industrial investment and economic growth. The first country to
industrialise was the United Kingdom during the Industrial Revolution,
commencing in the eighteenth century. By the end of the 20th century, East Asia
had become one of the most recently industrialised regions of the world .
Description. According to the original sector classification of Jean
Fourastié, an economy consists of a "Primary sector" of commodity production
(farming, livestock breeding, exploitation of mineral resources), a "secondary
sector" of manufacturing and processing (as paid work), and a "Tertiary Sector"
of service industries. The industrialisation process is historically based on
the expansion of the secondary sector in an economy dominated by primary
activities. The first transformation to an industrial economy from an
agricultural one is called the Industrial Revolution and took place from the
mid 18th to early 19th century in certain areas in Europe and North America;
starting in Great Britain, followed by Belgium, Germany, and France. This now
is called the first industrial revolution. The Second Industrial Revolution
describes the later changes that came about in the mid 19th century after the
invention of steam engine, internal combustion engine, electricity and the
construction of canals, railways and electric power lines. The invention of the
assembly line gave this phase a boost. The lack of an industrial sector in a
country can be a handicap in improving the country's economy and power, so
governments encourage or enforce industrialisation. On the other hand, the
presence of industry in a country does not mean in general that it will bring
wealth and prosperity to the people of that country. And third, the presence of
an industry in one country can make it more difficult for other countries to
develop the same type of industry. This can be seen in the computer software,
and internet industries. Started from the U.S.A. around the 1990s these
industries seemed to spread over the world. But after a period of
monopolisation less than a decade long, the globally leading companies are
concentrated in the U.S.A. Their economic power and capacity to dominate the
media work against the developing of the same types of industry in other
states. History of industrialisation. Most pre-industrial economies had
standards of living not much above subsistence, among that the majority of the
population were focused on producing their means of survival. For example, in
medieval Europe, as much as 80% of the labour force was employed in subsistence
agriculture. Some pre-industrial economies, such as classical Athens, had trade
and commerce as significant factors, so native Greeks could enjoy wealth far
beyond a sustenance standard of living through the use of slavery. Famines were
frequent in most pre-industrial societies, although some, such as the
Netherlands and England of the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, the
Italian city states of the fifteenth century, the medieval Islamic Caliphate,
and the ancient Greek and Roman civilisations were able to escape the famine
cycle through increasing trade and commercialisation of the agricultural
sector. It is estimated that during the seventeenth century Netherlands
imported nearly 70% of its grain supply and in the fifth century BC Athens
imported three quarters of its total food supply. Industrialisation through
innovation in manufacturing processes first started with the Industrial
Revolution in the north-west and Midlands of England in the eighteenth century.
It spread to Europe and North America in the nineteenth century. Industrial
revolution in Europe. In the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, the United
Kingdom experienced a massive increase in agricultural productivity known as
the British Agricultural Revolution, which enabled an unprecedented population
growth, freeing a significant percentage of the workforce from farming, and
helping to drive the Industrial Revolution. Due to the limited amount of arable
land and the overwhelming efficiency of mechanised farming, the increased
population could not be dedicated to agriculture. New agricultural techniques
allowed a single peasant to feed more workers than previously; however, these
techniques also increased the demand for machines and other hardware, which had
traditionally been provided by the urban artisans. Artisans, collectively
called bourgeoisie, employed rural exodus workers to increase their output and
meet the country's needs. The growth of their business coupled with the lack of
experience of the new workers pushed a rationalisation and standardisation of
the duties the in workshops, thus leading to a division of labour, that is, a
primitive form of Fordism. The process of creating a good was divided into
simple tasks, each one of them being gradually mechanised in order to boost
productivity and thus increase income. The accumulation of capital allowed
investments in the conception and application of new technologies, enabling the
industrialisation process to continue to evolve. The industrialisation process
formed a class of industrial workers who had more money to spend than their
agricultural cousins. They spent this on items such as tobacco and sugar,
creating new mass markets that stimulated more investment as merchants sought
to exploit them. The mechanisation of production spread to the countries
surrounding England geographically in Europe such as France and to British
settler colonies, helping to make those areas the wealthiest, and shaping what
is now known as the Western world. Some economic historians argue that the
possession of so-called ‘exploitation colonies’ eased the accumulation of
capital to the countries that possessed them, speeding up their development.
The consequence was that the subject country integrated a bigger economic
system in a subaltern position, emulating the countryside, which demands
manufactured goods and offers raw materials, while the colonial power stressed
its urban posture, providing goods and importing food. A classical example of
this mechanism is said to be the triangular trade, which involved England,
southern United States and western Africa. Critics argue that this polarity
still affects the world, and has deeply retarded industrialisation of what is
now known as the Third World. Some have stressed the importance of natural or
financial resources that Britain received from its many overseas colonies or
that profits from the British slave trade between Africa and the Caribbean
helped fuel industrial investment. Early industrialisation in other countries.
After the Convention of Kanagawa issued by Commodore Matthew C. Perry forced
Japan to open the ports of Shimoda and Hakodate to American trade, the Japanese
government realised that drastic reforms were necessary to stave off Western
influence. The Tokugawa shogunate abolished the feudal system. The government
instituted military reforms to modernise the Japanese army and also constructed
the base for industrialisation. In the 1870s, the Meiji government vigorously
promoted technological and industrial development that eventually changed Japan
to a powerful modern country. In a similar way, Russia suffered during the
Allied intervention in the Russian Civil War. The Soviet Union's centrally
controlled economy decided to invest a big part of its resources to enhance its
industrial production and infrastructures to assure its survival, thus becoming
a world superpower. During the Cold war, the other European socialist
countries, organised under the Comecon framework, followed the same developing
scheme, albeit with a less emphasis on heavy industry. Southern European
countries such as Spain or Italy saw a moderate industrialisation during the
1950s-1970s, caused by a healthy integration of the European economy, though
their level of development, as well as those of Socialist European Countries,
do not match the more advanced standards of other European countries like
Germany. The Third World. A similar state-led developing programme was pursued
in virtually all the Third World countries during the Cold War, including the
socialist ones, but especially in Sub-Saharan Africa after the decolonisation
period. The primary scope of those projects was to achieve self-sufficiency
through the local production of previously imported goods, the mechanisation of
agriculture and the spread of education and health care. However, all those
experiences failed bitterly due to a lack of realism: most countries did not
have a pre-industrial bourgeoisie able to carry on a capitalistic development
or even a stable and peaceful state. Those aborted experiences left huge debts
toward western countries and fuelled public corruption. Petrol-producing
countries. Oil-rich countries saw similar failures in their economic choices.
An EIA report stated that OPEC member nations were projected to earn a net
amount of $1.251 trillion in 2008 from their oil exports. Because oil is both
important and expensive, regions that had big reserves of oil had huge
liquidity incomes. However, this was rarely followed by economic development.
Experience shows that local elites were unable to re-invest the petrodollars
obtained through oil export, and currency is wasted in luxury goods. This is
particularly evident in the Persian Gulf states, where the per capita income is
comparable to those of western nations, but where no industrialisation has
started. Apart from two little countries (Bahrain and the United Arab
Emirates), Arab states have not diversified their economies, and no replacement
for the upcoming end of oil reserves is envisaged. Industrialisation in Asia.
Apart from Japan, where industrialisation began in the late 19th century, a
different pattern of industrialisation followed in East Asia. One of the
fastest rates of industrialisation occurred in the late 20th century across
four countries known as the Asian tiger (Hong Kong, Singapore, South Korea and
Taiwan), thanks to the existence of stable governments and well structured
societies, strategic locations, heavy foreign investments, a low cost skilled
and motivated workforce, a competitive exchange rate, and low custom duties. In
the case of South Korea, the largest of the four Asian tigers, a very fast
paced industrialisation took place as it quickly moved away from the
manufacturing of value added goods in the 1950s and 60s into the more advanced
steel, shipbuilding and automobile industry in the 1970s and 80s, focusing on
the high-tech and service industry in the 1990s and 2000s. As a result, South
Korea became a major economic power. This starting model was afterwards
successfully copied in other larger Eastern and Southern Asian countries,
including communist ones. The success of this phenomenon led to a huge wave of
offshoring – i.e., Western factories or Tertiary Sector corporations choosing
to move their activities to countries where the workforce was less expensive
and less collectively organised. China and India, while roughly following this
development pattern, made adaptations in line with their own histories and
cultures, their major size and importance in the world, and the geo-political
ambitions of their governments (etc.). Meanwhile, India's government is
investing in economic sectors such as bioengineering, nuclear technology,
pharmaceutics, informatics, and technologically-oriented higher education,
exceeding its needs, with the goal of creating several specialisation poles
able to conquer foreign markets. Both China and India have also started to make
significant investments in other developing countries, making them significant
players in today's world economy. Newly industrialised countries. In recent
decades, a few countries in Latin America, Asia, and Africa, such as Indonesia,
Turkey, South Africa, Malaysia, Philippines, Mexico, Costa Rica, and El
Salvador have experienced substantial industrial growth, fueled by exporting to
countries that have bigger economies: the United States, China, India and the
EU. They are sometimes called newly industrialised countries. Despite this
trend being artificially influenced by the oil price increases since 2003, the
phenomenon is not entirely new nor totally speculative (for instance see:
Maquiladora). Japan and Russia both were successful in the fact that they
imitated many other societies giving them flexibility. Yet they both had very
little in common before the 19th century. Japan was isolated from the world
with its ongoing traditions and forms of centralised government. Russia
featured a more strong centralised government under the emperor. Both would
soon discover that westernisation and industrialism were expanding and their
own ways would not hold up against the new changing world of industrialisation.
In the late 19th century the force for them to being industrializing would
become even more prevalent for the success of their nation in this new growing
societies. Social and environmental consequences. Urbanisation. The
concentration of labour into factories has brought about the rise of large
towns to serve and house the factory workers. Exploitation. Workers have to
leave their family in order to come to work in the towns and cities where the
industries are found. Change to family structure. The family structure changes
with industrialisation. The sociologist Talcott Parsons noted that in pre-
industrial societies there is an extended family structure spanning many
generations who probably remained in the same location for generations. In
industrialised societies the nuclear family, consisting of only of parents and
their growing children, predominates. Families and children reaching adulthood
are more mobile and tend to relocate to where jobs exist. Extended family bonds
become more tenuous. Current situation. Currently the "international
development community" (World Bank, OECD, many United Nations departments, and
some other organizations) endorses development policies like water purification
or primary education. The community does not recognize traditional
industrialization policies as being adequate to the Third World or beneficial
in the longer term, with the perception that it could only create inefficient
local industries unable to compete in the free-trade dominated political order
which it has erected. The relationship between economic growth, employment and
poverty reduction is complex. Higher productivity is argued to be leading to
lower employment (see jobless recovery). There are differences across sectors,
whereby manufacturing is less able than the tertiary sector to accommodate both
increased productivity and employment opportunities; over 40% of the world's
employees are "working poor" whose incomes fail to keep themselves and their
families above the $2 a day poverty line. There is also a phenomenon of
deindustrialization, such as in the former USSR countries' transition to market
economies, and the agriculture sector often is the key sector in absorbing the
resultant unemployment.
