Inferior good In Economics, an inferior good is a good that decreases in demand
when consumer income rises, unlike normal goods, for which the opposite is
observed. Normal goods are those for which consumers' demand increases when
their income increases. This would be the opposite of a superior good, one that
is often associated with wealth and the wealthy, whereas an inferior good is
often associated with lower socio-economic groups. Inferiority, in this sense,
is an observable fact relating to affordability rather than a statement about
the quality of the good. As a rule, these goods are affordable and adequately
fulfill their purpose, but as more costly substitutes that offer more pleasure
(or at least variety) become available, the use of the inferior goods
diminishes. Depending on consumer or market indifference curves, the amount of
a good bought can either increase, decrease, or stay the same when income
increases. Examples. There are many examples of inferior goods. Several
economists have suggested that shopping at large discount chains such as
Walmart vastly represent a large percentage of goods referred to as "inferior".
Cheaper cars are examples of the inferior goods. Consumers will generally
prefer cheaper cars when their income is constricted. As a consumer's income
increases the demand of the cheap cars will decrease, while demand of costly
cars will increase, so cheap cars are inferior goods. Inter-city bus service is
also an example of an inferior good. This form of transportation is cheaper
than air or rail travel, but is more time-consuming. When money is constricted,
traveling by bus becomes more acceptable, but when money is more abundant than
time, more rapid transport is preferred. Inexpensive foods like bologna,
hamburger, mass-market beer, frozen dinners, and canned goods are additional
examples of inferior goods. As incomes rise, one tends to purchase more
expensive, appealing and nutritious foods. Likewise, goods and services used by
poor people for which richer people have alternatives exemplify inferior goods.
As a rule, used and obsolete goods (but not antiques) marketed to persons of
low income as closeouts are inferior goods at the time even if they had earlier
been normal goods or even luxury goods. Others are very inconsistent across
geographic regions or cultures. The potato, for example, generally conforms to
the demand function of an inferior good in the Andean region where the crop
originated. People of higher incomes and/or those who have migrated to coastal
areas are more likely to prefer other staples such as rice or wheat products as
they can afford them. However, in several countries of Asia, such as
Bangladesh, potato is not an inferior good, but rather a relatively expensive
source of calories and a high-prestige food, especially when eaten in the form
of "French fries" by urban elites. Some inferior goods are so consistent that
they can be seen as economic indicators. One such is instant noodles, where an
early 2005 increase in the Thai "Mama Noodles Index" (the number of the popular
Mama-brand instant noodles sold in that country) was seen as a sign of weakness
after about ten years of stability. Giffen goods. A special type of inferior
good may exist known as the Giffen good, which would disobey the "law of
demand". Quite simply, when the price of a Giffen good increases, the demand
for that good increases. This would have to be a good that is such a large
proportion of a person or market's consumption that the income effect of a
price increase would produce, effectively, more demand. The observed demand
curve would slope "upward", indicating positive elasticity.
