Informal sector The informal sector or informal economy is that part of an
economy that is not taxed, monitored by any form of government, or included in
any gross national product (GNP), unlike the formal economy. Other terms used
to refer to the informal sector can include the black market, the shadow
economy, the underground economy and System D. Associated idioms include under
the table and "off the books". Definition. The original use of the term
‘informal sector’ is attributed to the economic development model put
forward by W. Arthur Lewis, used to describe employment or livelihood
generation primarily within the developing world. It was used to describe a
type of employment that was viewed as falling outside of the modern industrial
sector. An alternative definition uses job security as the measure of
formality, defining participants in the informal economy as those 'who do not
have employment security, work security and social security.” While both of
these definitions imply a lack of choice or agency in involvement with the
informal economy, participation may also be driven by a wish to avoid
regulation or taxation. This may manifest as unreported employment, hidden from
the state for tax, social security or labour law purposes, but legal in all
other aspects. The term is also useful in describing and accounting for forms
of shelter or living arrangements that are similarly unlawful, unregulated, or
not afforded protection of the state. ‘Informal economy’ is increasingly
replacing ‘informal sector’ as the preferred descriptor for this activity.
Informality, both in housing and livelihood generation has often been seen as a
social ill, and described either in terms of what participant’s lack, or wish
to avoid. A countervailing view, put forward by prominent Dutch sociologist
Saskia Sassen is that the modern or new ‘informal’ sector is the product
and driver of advanced capitalism and the site of the most entrepreneurial
aspects of the urban economy, led by creative professionals such as artists,
architects, designers and soft-ware developers. While this manifestation of the
informal sector remains largely a feature of developed countries, increasingly
systems are emerging to facilitate similarly qualified people in developing
countries to participate History. Governments have tried to regulate
(formalize) aspects of their economies for as long as surplus wealth has
existed which is at least as early as Sumer. Yet no such regulation has ever
been wholly enforceable. Archaeological and anthropological evidence strongly
suggests that people of all societies regularly adjust their activity within
economic systems in attempt to evade regulations. Therefore, if informal
economic activity is that which goes unregulated in an otherwise regulated
system then informal economies are as old as their formal counterparts, if not
older. The term itself, however, is much more recent. The optimism of the
modernization theory school of development had led most people in the 1950s and
1960s to believe that traditional forms of work and production would disappear
as a result of economic progress in developing countries. As this optimism
proved to be unfounded, scholars turned to study more closely what was then
called the traditional sector. They found that the sector had not only
persisted, but in fact expanded to encompass new developments. In accepting
that these forms of productions were there to stay, scholars began using the
term informal sector, which is credited to the British anthropologist Keith
Hart in a study on Ghana in 1973 but also alluded to by the International
Labour Organization in a widely read study on Kenya in 1972. Since then the
informal sector has become an increasingly popular subject of investigation,
not just in economics, but also in sociology, anthropology and urban planning.
With the turn towards so called post-fordist modes of production in the
advanced developing countries, many workers were forced out of their formal
sector work and into informal employment. In a seminal collection of articles,
"The Informal Economy. Studies in Advanced and Less Developed Countries",
Alejandro Portes and collaborators emphasized the existence of an informal
economy in all countries by including case studies ranging from New York City
and Madrid to Uruguay and Colombia. Arguably the most influential book on
informal economy is Hernando de Soto's "El otro sendero" (1986), which was
published in English in 1989 as "The Other Path" with a preface by Peruvian
writer Mario Vargas Llosa. De Soto and his team argue that excessive regulation
in the Peruvian (and other Latin American) economies force a large part of the
economy into informality and thus prevent economic development. While accusing
the ruling class of 20th century mercantilism, de Soto admires the
entrepreneurial spirit of the informal economy. In a widely cited experiment,
his team tried to legally register a small garment factory in Lima. This took
more than 100 administrative steps and almost a year of full-time work. Whereas
de Soto's work is popular with policymakers and champions of free market
policies like "The Economist", many scholars of the informal economy have
criticized it both for methodological flaws and normative bias. In the second
half of the 1990s many scholars have started to consciously use the term
"informal economy" instead of "informal sector" to refer to a broader concept
that includes enterprises as well as employment in developing, transition, and
advanced industrialized economies. Statistics. The informal economy under any
governing system is diverse and includes small-scaled, occasional members
(often street vendors and garbage recyclers) as well as larger, regular
enterprises (including transit systems such as that of Lima, Peru). Informal
economies include garment workers working from their homes, as well as
informally employed personnel of formal enterprises. Employees working in the
informal sector can be classified as wage workers, non-wage workers, or a
combination of both. The above definition does not include criminal activities,
that are irregular by nature. Crime cannot be included because such acts have
no regulated counterpart against which they may be compared. (Of course, by
their nature, informal economic activities escape regulation but that does not
necessarily imply that they are unlawful or criminal). Domestic labor, such as
childcare and cooking, is in general not included when performed in the natural
course of daily living. These activities are either formal or informal.
Statistics on the informal economy are unreliable by virtue of the subject, yet
they can provide a tentative picture of its relevance: For example, informal
employment makes up 48% of non-agricultural employment in North Africa, 51% in
Latin America, 65% in Asia, and 72% in sub-Saharan Africa. If agricultural
employment is included, the percentages rises, in some countries like India and
many sub-Saharan African countries beyond 90%. Estimates for developed
countries are around 15%. In developing countries, the largest part of informal
work, around 70%, is self-employed, in developed countries, wage employment
predominates. The majority of informal economy workers are women. Policies and
developments affecting the informal economy have thus a distinctly gendered
effect. A report from World Bank estimates the informal economies of 162
countries for the years of 1999 to 2007. Estimated size of countries' informal
economy. The table below shows the estimated values of the size of the informal
economy in 110 developing, transition and OECD countries. The average size of
the informal economy, as a percent of official GNI in the year 2000, in
developing countries is 41%, in transition countries 38% and in OECD countries
18%. Gender. Women tend to make up the greatest portion of the informal sector,
often ending up in the most erratic and corrupt segments of the sector. Sixty
percent of female workers in developing countries are employed by the informal
sector. The reasoning behind why women make up majority of the informal sector
is two-fold. Firstly, it could be attributed to the fact that employment in the
informal sector is the source of employment that is most readily available to
women. Secondly, a vast majority of women are employed from their homes (most
likely due to the large number of women who are involved in care work) or are
street vendors, which both are classified in the informal sector Furthermore,
men tend to be overrepresented in the top segment of the sector and women
overpopulate the bottom segment. For example, very few women are employers who
hire others and more women are likely to be involved in smaller scale
operations. Labor markets, household decisions, and states all propagate this
gender inequality. The gender gap in terms of wage is even higher in the
informal sector than the formal sector Issues from within. Workers in the
informal sector typically earn less income, have unstable income, and don’t
have access to basic protections and services. Informal businesses also lack
the potential for growth, trapping employees in menial jobs indefinitely. On
the other hand the informal sector can allow a large proportion of the
population to escape extreme poverty and earn an income that is satisfactory
for survival. From the viewpoint of governments, the informal sector can create
a vicious cycle. Being unable to collect taxes from the informal sector, the
government may be hindered in financing public services, which in turn makes
the sector more attractive. Conversely, some governments view informality as a
benefit, enabling excess labor to be absorbed, mitigating unemployment issues.
Expansion. The informal sector has been expanding as more economies have
started to liberalize. This pattern of expansion began in the 1960s when a lot
of developing countries didn’t create enough formal jobs in their economic
development plans, which lead to the formation of an informal sector that
didn’t solely include marginal work and actually contained profitable
opportunities. In the 1980s, the sector grew alongside formal industrial
sectors. In the 1990s, an increase in global communication and competition lead
to a restructuring of production and distribution, often relying more heavily
on the informal sector. Over the past decade, the informal economy is said to
account for more than half of the newly created jobs in Latin America. In
Africa it accounts for around eighty percent. Many explanations exist as to why
the informal sector has been expanding in the developing world throughout the
past few decades. It is possible that the kind of development that has been
occurring has failed to support the increased labor force in a formal manner.
Expansion can also be explained by the increased subcontracting due to
globalization and economic liberalization. Finally, employers could be turning
toward the informal sector to lower costs and cope with increased competition.
Poverty. The relationship between the informal sectors and poverty certainly
isn’t simple nor does a clear, causal relationship exist. An inverse
relationship between an increased informal sector and slower economic growth
has been observed though. Average incomes are substantially lower in the
informal economy and there is a higher preponderance of impoverished employees
working in the informal sector. Possible improvements. Ways to improve the
informal sector include formalizing informal jobs through regulation by the
state. The issue with this policy is that so many different types of
informality exist. It would be extremely difficult to create solutions to meet
so many diverse circumstances. Another possible improvement would be to provide
better protections and benefits in the informal sector, but creating protection
programs could lead to a disconnect between the labor market and protections,
which may not actually improve informal employment. It might also be possible
to create other methods of generating income through microloans or land rights
when access to the formal sector is limited. This is not a satisfactory
solution to effectively combat the issues underlying the informal sector
though. Informal Housing. The term informal housing can include any form of
shelter or settlement (or lack thereof) which is illegal, falls outside of
government control or regulation, or is not afforded protection by the state.
To have informal housing status is to exist in ‘a state of deregulation, one
where the ownership, use, and purpose of land cannot be fixed and mapped
according to any prescribed set of regulations or the law.’ While there is no
global unified law of property ownership typically, the informal occupant or
community will lack security of tenure, and with this ready or reliable access
to civic amenities (potable water, electricity and gas supply, sanitation and
waste collection). Due to the informal nature of occupancy, the state will
typically be unable to extract rent or land taxes. The term informal housing is
useful in capturing informal populations other than those living slum
settlements or shanty towns, which are defined more narrowly by the UN Habitat
as ‘contiguous settlement where the inhabitants are characterizes as having
inadequate housing and basic services..often not recognised or addressed by the
public authorities an integral or equal part of the city”. Common categories
or terms for informal housing include slums, slum settlements, shanty towns,
squats, homelessness and pavement dwellers. Informal housing in developing
countries. Homelessness and insecurity of tenure are issues faced by
populations around the world. However there are particularly pernicious
circumstances in developing countries that lead to a large proportion of the
population resorting to informal housing. According to Saskia Sassen, in the
race to become a ‘global city’ (wiki ref) with the requisite state-of-the-
art economic and regulatory platforms for handling the operations of
international firms and markets’, radical physical interventions in the
existing fabric of the city are often called for, displacing ‘modest, low-
profit firms and households’. If these households lack the economic
resilience to repurchase within the same area, or relocate to a place that
offers similar economic opportunity, they are prime candidates for informal
housing options. For example, in Mumbai, India, this fast-paced economic
growth, coupled with inadequate infrastructure, endemic corruption and the
legacy of the restrictive tenancy laws have left the city unable to house the
estimated 54% who now live informally. Many cities in the developing world are
currently experiencing a rapid increase in informal housing, driven by mass
migration to cities in search of employment, or fleeing from war or
environmental disaster. According to Robert Neuwirth, already there are over 1
billion, or one in six squatters worldwide. If current trends continue, this
will increase to 2 billion by 2030 (one in four), and 3 billion by 2050 (one in
three). Informal housing, and the often informal livelihoods that accompany
them, are set to be defining features of the cities of the future.
