Initiative In political science, an initiative (also known as a popular or
citizens' initiative) is a means by which a petition signed by a certain
minimum number of registered voters can force a public vote (plebiscite). The
vote may be on a proposed statute, constitutional amendment, charter amendment
or ordinance, or, in its minimal form, to simply oblige the executive or
legislative bodies to consider the subject by submitting it to the order of the
day. It is a form of direct democracy. The initiative may take the form of
either the direct initiative or indirect initiative. Under the direct
initiative, a measure is put directly to a vote after being submitted by a
petition. Under the indirect initiative, a measure is first referred to the
legislature, and then put to a popular vote only if not enacted by the
legislature. In United States usage, a popular vote on a specific measure is
referred to as a "referendum" only when originating with the legislature. Such
a vote is known, when originating in the initiative process, as an
"initiative," "ballot measure" or "proposition." In New Zealand a vote
initiated by the public is called a citizen initiated referendum. Canada.
British Columbia. The Canadian province of British Columbia has a citizen
initiative law known as the Recall and Initiative Act. The original proposal
was put to voters in a referendum held in October 1991 and was supported by
over 83% of voters. It was subsequently put into force by the incoming NDP
governmen securing signatures of 10% of registered voters in each riding
throughout British Columbia. The first referendum to be held under this
legislation is currently scheduled for September 2011 on the subject of
repealing the Harmonized Sales Tax. Details of its use in BC are available on
the Elections BC website. European Union. Union level. Europe]] (TCE) included
a limited indirect initiative right (Article I-46(4)). The proposal of
introducing the European Citizens' Initiative (ECI) was that 1,000,000
citizens, from minimal numbers of different member states, could invite the
executive body of the European Union (EU), the European Commission, to consider
any proposal "on matters where citizens consider that a legal act of the Union
is required for the purpose of implementing the Constitution." The precise
mechanism had not been agreed upon. Critics underlined the weakness of this
right of initiative, which did not ultimately entail any vote or referendum. A
similar scheme under the same name, European Citizens' Initiative (ECI), has
been put forward in the now ratified European Lisbon Treaty (which entered into
force on 1 December 2009), enabling a limited indirect initiative right. It
follows very similar rules to the ones outlined in the European Constitution,
requiring the signatures of 1,000 000 European Nationals. These citizens would
thereby obtain the same right to request the Commission to submit a legislative
proposal as the Council has had since the establishment of the European
Communities in 1957. This, however, does require that the signatures come from
a "significant number" of Member States. It is suggested that this significant
number will need to be around a quarter of member states, with at least 1/500
of the citizens in those member states supporting the initiative. With the
variety of languages within the European Union, this creates a significant
hurdle for people to navigate. The treaty also makes it clear that right of
initiative should not be confused with the right to petition, particularly
since a petition is directed to Parliament while a citizens' initiative is
directed to the Commission; whereas a petition is a method of remonstrance,
usually focussing on perceived infringements of European Law, an initiative is
a grassroots proposal for new legislation. It remains to be seen if the ECI
evolves into a full initiative or remains in its present state of a "de facto"
petition. France. A limited, indirect form of local initiative was added to the
French Constitution (article 72-1, "référendum d'initiative locale") on 28
March 2003 as part of decentralization reforms. However, the only power these
"local referendum initiatives" confer on citizens is the ability to add
propositions to their local assembly's meeting agenda. The decision as to
whether to submit citizen propositions to a popular vote (referendum) rests
with the local assembly. Germany. All German states have the right to
initiative. However, there is no constitutional citizens' initiative in Germany
at a federal level. Ireland. Provision for the initiative was included in the
1922 constitution of the Irish Free State but was hastily eliminated when
republicans organised a drive to instigate a vote that would abolish the Oath
of Allegiance, which was nevertheless later abolished by the government. The
current 1937 constitution has no initiative. Philippines. The law also provides
"indirect initiative" defining the exercise of people's initiative through a
proposition sent to congress or local legislative body for action. Switzerland.
It was included in the Swiss Federal Constitution in 1891, permitting a certain
number of citizens (currently 100,000) to make a request to amend a
constitutional article, or even to introduce a new article into the
constitution. The right of initiative is also used at the cantonal and communal
level in Switzerland (all cantons, all communes where the direct democratic
citizens' participation originates); many cantons allow initiatives to enact
regular non-constitutional law, but the federal system does not. If the
necessary number of supporters is reached, the initiative will be put to a
referendum about two or three years later; the delay helps prevent short-term
political moods from getting into the constitution. The parliament and
government will both issue their official opinions on whether they recommend
voting for or against the proposed amendment, and these opinions will be
published. The parliament may also pass an alternative amendment suggestion
which will also be included on the ballot; in this case, the voters cast two
votes, one for whether or not they want an amendment, and one for which one
they want, the original one from the initiative or the one introduced in
parliament, in case a majority decides for amending. A citizen-proposed change
to the constitution in Switzerland at the national level needs to achieve both
a majority of the national popular vote and a majority of the canton-wide vote
to pass. The vast majority of national initiatives introduced since 1891, when
the system started, have failed to receive voter support. United States. The
United States has no initiative process at the national level, but the
initiative is in use at the level of state government in 24 states and the
District of Columbia, and is also in common use at the local government level.
Article I, Section I of the United States Constitution vests "all legislative
powers herein granted" to the Congress of the United States." Establishing a
national initiative procedure would likely require an amendment to the
Constitution, which would under Article V require two-thirds of both houses of
Congress or the application of two-thirds of the state legislatures to propose,
and three-fourths of all state legislatures (or conventions in three-fourths of
the states) to ratify. The Constitution itself was not ratified by referendum,
but pursuant to Article VII was instead ratified by state conventions elected
by the people. Several proposals have been made to institute a national
referendum. The Ludlow Amendment, introduced several times to the House of
Representatives by Louis Ludlow of Indiana between 1935 and 1940 during an era
of heightened isolationist tendencies, proposed an amendment to the
Constitution that would require a national referendum to declare war, except in
the case of invasion and attack. The amendment came closest to overcoming a
discharge petition on January 10, 1938, when it was defeated in the House by a
vote of 209 to 188, far short of the two-thirds vote required. Unsuccessful
attempts to get initiatives have nevertheless occurred, but since the proposals
were bills, not a constitutional amendments, probably no initiative could have
lawfully been voted on notwithstanding the bills' passage. The first attempt to
get national ballot initiatives occurred in 1907 when House Joint Resolution 44
was introduced by Rep. Elmer Fulton of Oklahoma; the proposal was never put to
a vote. In 1977, both the Abourezk-Hatfield National Voter Initiative and the
Jagt Resolutions never got out of committee. Senator Mike Gravel was part of
that effort. The modern U.S. system of initiative and referendum originated in
the state of South Dakota. South Dakota adopted initiative and referendum in
1898 by a vote of 23,816 to 16,483. Oregon was the second state to adopt and
did so in 1902, when the state's legislators adopted it by an overwhelming
majority. The "Oregon System", as it was at first known, subsequently spread to
many other states, and became one of the signature reforms of the Progressive
Era (1890s-1920s).
