Input-output model In economics, an input-output model is a quantitative
economic technique that represents the interdependencies between different
branches of the national economy or between branches of different, even
competing economies. Wassily Leontief (1906-1999) developed this type of
analysis and took the Nobel Prize in Economics for his development of this
model. Earlier Francois Quesnay developed a cruder version of this technique
called Tableau économique. And, in essence, Léon Walras's work "Elements of
Pure Economics" on general equilibrium theory is both a forerunner and
generalization of Leontief's seminal concept. Leontief's main contribution was
that he was able to simplify Walras's piece so that it could be implemented
empirically. The International Input-Output Association is dedicated to
advancing knowledge in the field of input-output study, which includes
"improvements in basic data, theoretical insights and modelling, and
applications, both traditional and novel, of input-output techniques."
Understanding the input-output model. An understanding of the economy as
consisting of linked sectors goes back to the French economist François
Quesnay, but was developed in full generality by Léon Walras in 1874.
Leontief's contribution was to state the model in such a way as to make
computation feasible. He used a matrix representation of a nation's (or a
region's) economy. His model depicts inter-industry relations of an economy. It
shows how the output of one industry is an input to each other industry.
Leontief put forward the display of this information in the form of a matrix. A
given input is typically enumerated in the column of an industry and its
outputs are enumerated in its corresponding row. This format, therefore, shows
how dependent each industry is on all others in the economy both as customer of
their outputs and as supplier of their inputs. Each column of the input-output
matrix reports the monetary value of an industry's inputs and each row
represents the value of an industry's outputs. Usefulness. Because the input-
output model is fundamentally linear in nature, it lends itself well to rapid
computation as well as flexibility in computing the effects of changes in
demand. The structure of the input-output model has been incorporated into
national accounting in many developed countries, and as such forms an important
part of measures such as GDP. An understanding of the economy as consisting of
linked sectors goes back to the French economist François Quesnay, but was
developed in full generality by Léon Walras in 1874. Leontief's contribution
was to state the model in such In addition to studying the structure of
national economies, input-output economics has been used to study regional
economies within a nation, and as a tool for national and regional economic
planning. Indeed a main use of input-output analysis is for measuring the
economic impacts of events as well as public investments or programs as shown
by IMPLAN and RIMS-II. But it is also used to identify economically related
industry clusters and also so-called "key" or "target" industries--industries
that are most likely to enhance the internal coherence of a specified economy.
By linking industrial output to satellite accounts articulating energy use,
effluent production, space needs, and so on, input-output analysts have
extended the approaches application to a wide variety of uses. Basic
derivation. Say that we have an economy with formula_1 sectors. Each sector
produces a single homogeneous good, formula_2. Assume that the formula_3th
sector, in order to produce 1 unit, must use formula_4 units from sector
formula_5. Furthermore, assume that each sector sells some of its output to
other sectors (intermediate output) and some of its output to consumers (final
output, or final demand). Call final demand in the formula_3th sector
formula_7. Then we might write or total output equals intermediate output plus
final output. If we let formula_9 be the matrix of coefficients formula_4,
formula_11 be the vector of total output, and formula_12 be the vector of final
demand, then our expression for the economy becomes which after re-writing
becomes formula_14. If the matrix formula_15 is invertible then this is a
linear system of equations with a unique solution, and so given some final
demand vector the required output can be found. Furthermore, if the principal
minors of the matrix formula_15 are all positive (known as the Hawkins-Simon
Condition), the required output vector formula_11 is non-negative. Example.
Consider an economy with two goods, A and B. The matrix of coefficients and the
final demand is given by Intuitively, this corresponds to finding the amount of
output each sector should produce given that we want 7 units of good A and 4
units of good B. Then solving the system of linear equations derived above
gives us For practical purposes it might be challenging to actually compute the
inverse matrix, given that some input-output tables are in excess of hundreds
of sectors. Further research. There are many interesting aspects of the
Leontief system, and there is an extensive literature. There is the Hawkins-
Simon Condition on producibility. There has been interest in disaggregation to
clustered inter-industry flows, and the study of constellations of industries.
A great deal of empirical work has been done to identify coefficients, and data
have been published for the national economy as well as for regions. This has
been a healthy, exciting area for work by economists because the Leontief
system can be extended to a model of general equilibrium; it offers a method of
decomposing work done at a macro level. Introducing transportation.
Transportation is implicit in the notion of inter-industry flows. It is
explicitly recognized when transportation is identified as an industry – how
much is purchased from transportation in order to produce. But this is not very
satisfactory because transportation requirements differ, depending on industry
locations and capacity constraints on regional production. Also, the receiver
of goods generally pays freight cost, and often transportation data are lost
because transportation costs are treated as part of the cost of the goods.
Walter Isard and his student, Leon Moses, were quick to see the spatial economy
and transportation implications of input-output, and began work in this area in
the 1950s developing a concept of interregional input-output. Take a one region
versus the world case. We wish to know something about interregional commodity
flows, so introduce a column into the table headed “exports” and we
introduce an “import” row. A more satisfactory way to proceed would be to
tie regions together at the industry level. That is, we could identify both
intra-region inter-industry transactions and inter-region inter-industry
transactions. The problem here is that the table grows quickly. Input-output is
conceptually simple. Its extension to a model of equilibrium in the national
economy is also relatively simple and attractive but requires great skill and
high-quality data. One who wishes to do work with input-output systems must
deal skillfully with industry classification, data estimation, and inverting
very large, ill-conditioned matrices. Moreover, changes in relative prices are
not readily handled by this modeling approach alone. Of course, input-output
accounts are part and parcel to a more flexible form of modeling, Computable
general equilibrium models. Two additional difficulties are of interest in
transportation work. There is the question of substituting one input for
another, and there is the question about the stability of coefficients as
production increases or decreases. These are intertwined questions. They have
to do with the nature of regional production functions. Measuring input-output
tables. The mathematics of input-output economics is straightforward, but the
data requirements are enormous because the expenditures and revenues of each
branch of economic activity have to be represented. As a result, not all
countries collect the required data and data quality varies, even though a set
of standards for the data's collection has been set out by the United Nations
through its System of National Accounts (SNA): the most recent standard is the
2008 SNA. Because the data collection and preparation process for the input-
output accounts is necessarily labor and computer intensive, input-output
tables are often published long after the year in which the data were
collected--typically as much as 5-7 years after. Moreover, the economic
"snapshot" that the benchmark version of the tables provides of the economy's
cross-section is typically taken only once every few years, at best. However,
many developed countries estimate input-output accounts annually and with much
greater recency. This is because while most uses of the input-output analysis
focus on the matrix set of interindustry exchanges, the actual focus of the
analysis from the perspective of most national statistical agencies is the
benchmarking of gross domestic product. Input-output tables therefore are an
instrumental part of national accounts. As suggested above, the core input-
output table reports only intermediate goods and services that are exchanged
among industries. But an array of row vectors, typically aligned below this
matrix, record non-industrial inputs by industry like payments for labor;
indirect business taxes; dividends, interest, and rents; capital consumption
allowances (depreciation); other property-type income (like profits); and
purchases from foreign suppliers (imports). At a national level, although
excluding the imports, when summed this is called "gross product originating"
or "gross domestic product by industry." Another array of column vectors is
called "final demand" or "gross product product consumed." This displays
columns of spending by households, governments, changes in industry stocks, and
industries on investment, as well as net exports. (See also Gross domestic
product.) In any case, by employing the results of an economic census which
asks for the sales, payrolls, and material/equipment/service input of each
establishment, statistical agencies back into estimates of industry-level
profits and investments using the input-output matrix as a sort of double-
accounting framework. Input-output Analysis Versus Consistency Analysis.
Despite the clear ability of the input-output model to depict and analyze the
dependence of one industry or sector on another, Leontief and others never
managed to introduce the full spectrum of dependency relations in a market
economy. In 2003, Mohammad Gani[http://sb.iub.edu.bd/
Dr_Mohammad_Osman_Gani.html], a pupil of Leontief, introduced Consistency
Analysis in his book 'Foundations of Economic Science' (ISBN 984320655X), which
formally looks exactly like the input-output table but explores the dependency
relations in terms of payments and intermediation relations. Consistency
analysis explores the consistency of plans of buyers and sellers by decomposing
the input-output table into four matrices, each for a different kind of means
of payment. It integrates micro and macroeconomics in one model and deals with
money in an ideology-free manner. It deals with the flow of funds via the
movement of goods.
