Institutional analysis Institutional analysis is that part of the social
sciences which studies how institutions—i.e., structures and mechanisms of
social order and cooperation governing the behavior of two or more
individuals—behave and function according to both empirical rules (informal
rules-in-use and norms) and also theoretical rules (formal rules and law). This
field deals with how individuals and groups construct institutions, how
institutions function in practice, and the effects of institutions on society.
Since institutional analysis is focused on the systematic study of people's
collective behaviour in institutions, its ability to explain major political,
social, or historical events is sometimes contrasted with the use of conspiracy
theory to explain such events, since the latter focuses on explaining such
events by a secret, and often deceptive, plot by a covert coalition of small
numbers of powerful or influential individuals rather than by the systematic,
regular, publicly documented behaviour of the institutions. Use in various
disciplines. The term "institutional analysis" is used by several academic
disciplines, and has several meanings and connotations. One meaning of
institutional analysis refers to actual formal institutions. In the biomedical
sciences, “institutional analysis” often refers to analyzing data coming
from concrete institutions such as health authorities, hospitals networks, etc.
Similarly, in the fields of education and public administration and governance
studies, the term usually refers to how school boards and governmental agencies
implement policies. Another meaning refers to institutions as "ways of
thinking" that have a direct impact on behaviors. Under this approach, there
are several variations and usages of institutional analysis. In economics, it
is used to explain why economic behaviors do not conform to the theory of
supply and demand. This is a relatively old school of thought that has its
roots in the work of early 20th-century economists like Pareto. One of the most
prominent contemporary figures of institutional analysis in economics is
Douglass North, who received the Nobel Prize for Economics in 1993. Sociology
has also used institutional analysis since its inception to study how social
institutions such as the laws or the family evolve over time. The foundational
author of this approach is Émile Durkheim, also founder of sociology as a
discipline. Since the 1980s, however, there are cross-pollinations between the
sociological and economic traditions in institutional analysis. A new focus is
to explain how organizations and individuals within organizations make economic
and managerial decisions, particularly by investigating the non-rational, non-
economic, and non-psychological factors. This movement produced what is known
as the New Institutional Analysis. The neoinstitutional approach has several
variants. One of them tries to improve economic models based on the theory of
public choice, and one of its applications is known as the "institutional
analysis and development" (IAD) framework developed by Elinor Ostrom 2009 Nobel
Prize for Economics. Another variant is influenced by organizational sociology
and seeks to integrate Max Weber’s work on bureaucratic mentality. There is
also a French school of institutional analysis influenced by the Durkheimian
analysis of social institutions, and the anthropological school of thought
established by Marcel Mauss. This approach to institutional analysis is also
influenced by post-structuralist thinkers such as Cornelius Castoriadis and
Michel Foucault. The main thrust of this approach is the identification of
hidden forms of power that institute behaviors and organizational procedures.
