Institute for Humane Studies The Institute for Humane Studies (IHS) is a
libertarian non-profit organization that offers educational and career
programs. The educational programs include seminars for university students,
awarding scholarships to undergraduate and graduate students, an interactive
website based on a multi-axis model of political thought, and an archive of
recorded lectures. The career assistance programs include paid internships for
students and recent graduates, recognition of alumni accomplishments, and a
networking website for classical liberal academics. Founded by F. A. "Baldy"
Harper in 1961, the organization later began an association with George Mason
University and in 1985 moved to Fairfax, Virginia. The institute is currently
located in Hazel Hall on the Arlington campus of George Mason University.
History. The Institute for Humane Studies was founded in 1961 in Menlo Park,
California by F. A. "Baldy" Harper, in his garage, in order to promote peace,
prosperity, and social harmony by fostering a greater understanding of human
affairs and freedom. Initially serving as the secretary and treasurer, Harper
became the Institute's president in 1966, a position he held until his death in
1973. Following Harper in the role of president were Louis M. Spadaro and
Leonard Liggio, who served as president from 1980 to 1989. From 1998 to 2000
Stanford graduate David C. Nott, now with the Reason Foundation, led the
organization as president. The current president Marty Zupan, a former editor
of "Reason" magazine, was appointed in 2001, after serving as vice-president
since 1989. After beginning an association with George Mason University,
Liggio, Walter Grinder, and John Blundell moved the institute to Fairfax,
Virginia in 1985. The organization is currently located in Hazel Hall on the
George Mason University Arlington campus, along with sister organization the
Mercatus Center. Organization and funding. The institute is governed by a board
of directors, currently chaired by Charles G. Koch. The other members of the
board of directors are John Blundell, Richard H. Fink, Jerome Fullinwider,
Timothy Otis Browne, Tyler Cowen, Art Pope, David Humphreys, Eric O'Keefe, Todd
Zywicki, William Sumner, Kristina Kendall, and Craig Johnson. IHS has received
funding from a number of foundations, including the Sarah Scaife Foundation,
the Koch Family Foundations, and the Lynde and Harry Bradley Foundation. In
March 2012, in the midst of a legal dispute between Charles Koch and the Cato
Institute that caused renewed scrutiny of Koch's political philanthropy, IHS's
chief financial officer told the "New York Times" that Koch is "a longtime and
generous supporter of ours, but we’re not involved as a political
organization." Programs. Seminars. Each summer, IHS runs a series of free,
week-long summer seminars for university students from around the world.
Seminars are interdisciplinary and include lectures on history, economics,
philosophy, law, and political science. Seminar themes include the value of
property rights, limited government, peace, natural rights, free trade,
individual autonomy, and free markets. There are introductory and advanced
seminars, as well as seminars geared toward students planning careers in public
policy, academia, and journalism. IHS also runs weekend on-campus seminars
during the academic year. IHS and Liberty Fund co-sponsor the Advanced Topics
in Liberty program, which is an invitation-only, discussion-based weekend
conference series. For graduate students pursuing academic careers, IHS
sponsors invitation-only Career Development Seminars designed to help students
"land a job in academia, gain tenure, and contribute to the academic and
intellectual conversation." Scholarships. Through its Humane Studies Fellowship
program, IHS awards scholarships to undergraduate and graduate students
embarking on "liberty-advancing careers in ideas." Each summer, through the
Summer Graduate Research Fellowship, IHS gives $5,000 stipends to young
academics "to refine and complete a publishable scholarly article or thesis
chapter that engages ideas within the classical liberal tradition." In the
"Daily Caller", Matthew Zwolinski wrote that IHS trains professors to expose
students to libertarian ideas: " mentors graduate students through the process
of finishing their classes and writing their dissertations. And it helps them
find jobs. In the 50 years of its existence, IHS has put over 1,200 professors
into classrooms across the country where they teach over a quarter of a million
students each year. And those students are exposed to libertarian ideas not
just in a 30-second advertisement or debate answer, but for an entire semester,
rigorously and in depth." Online projects. In 2010, IHS launched
LearnLiberty.org, a website providing educational videos on libertarian ideas.
The site's stated goals are “to provide a starting point for conversations on
important questions: What is the nature of man and society? What are the best
ways to organize human society? What is the proper role for government?”
Notable guest lecturers featured on LearnLiberty include David Schmidtz of the
University of Arizona and Jeffrey Miron of Harvard University. IHS also
operates Politopia.com, an educational interactive website based on the Nolan
Chart. Through a series of questions, the website places participants on a
four-sided political map. Its purpose is to help individuals conceptualize
political views. IHS maintains Kosmosonline.org, a networking website for
classical liberal academics. The site's goal is to "provide career advice and
intellectual resources for liberty advancing academics." The term "kosmos"
comes from Friedrich Hayek's use of the term in Law, Legislation and Liberty.
Internships. Each summer, IHS runs the Charles G. Koch Summer Fellow Program.
The program runs for 10 weeks, and includes a paid public policy internship
with two career and policy seminars. Fellows are placed at one of 80 partner
think tanks and policy organizations across the United States. IHS also runs a
year-round journalism internship program that places aspiring journalists who
support individual liberty, free markets, and peace at media companies and non-
profit newsrooms. Alum award. Each year, IHS awards an alumnus of its programs
with the Charles G. Koch Outstanding IHS Alum Award. The award is given in
recognition of "significant contributions to advancing liberty." Past award
winners include libertarian legal theorist and law professor Randy Barnett;
Kris Mauren, co-founder of the Acton Institute; law professor Todd Zywicki;
Kristina Kendall, executive producer for John Stossel; political science
professor John Tomasi; Scott Bullock, senior attorney at the Institute for
Justice; economist Peter Boettke; John Hood, president of the John Locke
Foundation; and David Schmidtz, a professor of philosophy and economics.
