International Falcon Movement – Socialist Educational International The
International Falcon Movement – Socialist Educational International (IFM-SEI)
is an international non-profit organisation that campaigns for children's
rights based in Belgium. It is a fraternal organisation of Socialist
International and works closely with International Union of Socialist Youth
(IUSY) and ECOSY - Young European Socialists. IFM - SEI is a full member of the
European Youth Forum (YFJ) which operates within the Council of Europe and
European Union area and works closely with both these bodies. In Latin-America
it is a full member of the Foro Latin-America de Juventud (FLAJ). And it is
part of the International Coordination Meeting of Youth Organisations (ICMYO)
which consists of worldwide active youth organisations and regional youth
platforms coordinating their activities towards the UN and its agencies. It has
member organisations all over the world and is strongest in Europe and South
America. Many of its member organisations work with children and young people
of all ages through activities, groups and camping. IFM - SEI members are
children and youth self-organizations, family organisations and other
organisations who are working for the benefit of children and youngsters. IFM -
SEI organise campaigns, for example against child labour or child pornography,
seminars, trainings, camps and other educational activities. Their activities
are carried out by member organisation, and international seminars are held
regularly in cooperation with the other fraternal organization. A recent
activity was the Peace Camp with Israelis and Palestinians. The LGBT event of
IFM is called Queer Easter. Officers. Congress is held every 3 years where
members can elected the President, Secretary General and up to 9 Vice
Presidents. Republics and Camps of the IFM-SEI. Since the end of World War II
the IFM-SEI organises international camps as well as encouraging bi- and multi-
lateral camps between members. The following is a list of official IFM-SEI
camps held since 1945:. Member Organizations. Full and associate members are
listed here, organisations seeking to become members are called observers and
in the separate section below.
