Integral humanism (India) Integral humanism is the political philosophy
practised by the Bharatiya Janata Party and the former Bharatiya Jana Sangh of
India. It was first propounded by Deendayal Upadhyayain a brief volume entitled
"Integral Humanism" in 1965, attempting to find a "third path" rejecting both
communism and capitalism, centered on "swadeshi and decentralization". Concept
in the 1960s. It was first presented by Pandit Deendayal Upadhyaya in the form
of four lectures delivered in Bombay on April 22-25, 1965. It distinguishes
Indian systems from other prevalent systems like communism and capitalism.
"Pre-occupation with materialism". Upadhyaya has argued that Western political
philosophies are not acceptable as a blueprint for society because of their
"preoccupation" with materialism, and their overlooking of the social wellbeing
of the individual. He saw both capitalism and socialism as essentially flawed
– stimulating as they do greed, class antagonisms, exploitation and social
anarchy. His proposal was an "integral" approach that attempts to create a
harmonious society. This could be done, he argued, by satisfying the needs of
the body (hunger, shelter), the mind (traditions), intelligence (reforms), and
the soul (common aspirations of a people that shape their unique culture).
Upadhyaya said that each nation creates institutions to satisfy needs, and
these must be reshaped so that group solidarity can be sustained and maintained
under changing circumstances. He argues that Indian tradition builds on the
social nature of people and obliges them to create institutions meant to
enhance social solidarity. Advaita vedanta, or the principle of recognising
ourselves in all life, is seen as the philosophic underpinning of this view.
Pledge for party members. According to the membership form of the Bharatiya
Janata Party (2003–2008), anyone seeking primary membership of the party has
to pledge that he or she "believe in Integral Humanism which is the basic
philosophy of party", apart from also pledging commitment to nationalism,
national integration, democracy, Gandhian Socialism, positive secularism and
value-based politics, among other issues. Changes during the BJP era. Around
1980, the then newly-formed Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) adopted Gandhian
socialism rather than the Deendayal Upadhyaya-crafted principles of integral
humanism, as the party's statement of first principles. But the BJP gave an
honoured place to Upadhyaya's ideological statement as well. At its July 1985
national executive session however, integral humanism once again replaced
Gandhian socialism as the BJP's philosophy. But the party's economic policy
remained the same substantially. Criticism of Integral Humanism. The most
important criticism of Integral Humanism is that it is essentially another form
of socialism with less central planning. Integral Humanism goes closer to
social engineering and completely ignores the spontaneous order that emerges
from continuous evolutionary interaction on the part of individuals,
organizations and institutions. Integral Humanism is perhaps as old as Indian
civilization. However, Integral Humanism was formalized into a nationalistic
political approach by Shri. Deen Dayal Upadhyay in mid 1960s. This was
surprising as it completely ignored knowledge and ideas (e.g. spontaneous
order, transactions costs, role of technology, moral hazard, adverse selection,
cost of culture, theory of economic growth, property rights, risk management)
that were proven by the mid 1960s. The other criticism of Integral Humanism is
that it dismisses socialism, communism, capitalism and individualism as western
fads and that they will not work in India. The main problem with this claim is
that it does not provide a consistent logical or fact based argument against
any of these approaches. Regarding individualism it completely ignores the fact
that India had already accepted individualism in 1947 in the form of individual
voting rights.
