International Working Union of Socialist Parties The International Working
Union of Socialist Parties (IWUSP; also known as 2½ International or the
Vienna International; , IASP) was a political international for the co-
operation of socialist parties. History. IWUSP was founded on February 27,
1921, at a conference in Vienna, Austria, by ten parties, including the
Independent Social Democratic Party of Germany (USPD), the French Section of
the Workers' International (SFIO), the Independent Labour Party (ILP), the
Social Democratic Party of Switzerland (SPS), the Social Democratic Party of
Austria (SPÖ), and the Federation of Romanian Socialist Parties (FPSR,
successor to the Socialist Party of Romania). In April 1921, it was joined by
the Spanish Socialist Workers' Party. The Maximalist faction of the Italian
Socialist Party (PSI) also joined. Members. The secretary of IWUSP was the
Austrian Friedrich Adler of the SPÖ; other prominent members were Victor
Adler, Otto Bauer and Julius Martov. The group was heavily influenced by
Austromarxism. It published "Nachrichten der Internationalen
Arbeitsgemeinschaft Sozialistischen Parteien" ("News of IWUSP"). Poale Zion
(labour Zionist) leaders David Ben-Gurion and Shlomo Kaplansky were active in
the movement behind the Two and a Half International. Ideology. The founders of
IWUSP were parties that saw neither the reformist Second International nor the
Communist and pro-Soviet Third International as alternatives for affiliation.
The IWUSP criticized the other two Internationals for what it perceived to be
dogmatism, and advocated that more consideration should be given to the
particularities of the political situation in each country. It worked for the
unification of the Second and Third Internationals. From April 2 to April 5,
1922 a meeting was held in Berlin with delegations from the three different
international bodies to discuss a merger, but unity could not be achieved and
the Comintern withdrew from the talks. Dissolution. In Germany on September 24,
1922, the USPD, one of the main components of IWUSP, merged with the Social
Democratic Party of Germany (SPD), a member of the Second International.
Discouraged by the intransigent position of the Third International, at the
joint congress with the Second International held in Hamburg in May 1923 IWUSP
merged with it to form the Labour and Socialist International. Some, such as
the FPSR, refused to join the new body. In the 1930s, a similar effort was made
to create an international between the reformism of the Second and the
Stalinism of the Third, as the London Bureau of left-wing socialist parties.
Sometimes called the "Three-and-a-Half International", it involved many of the
same parties.
