Internal security Internal security, or IS, is the act of keeping peace within
the borders of a sovereign state or other self-governing territories. generally
by upholding the national law and defending against internal security threats.
Responsibility for internal security may range from police to paramilitary
forces, and in exceptional circumstances, the military itself. Threats to
internal security. Threats to the general peace may range from low-level civil
disorder, large scale violence, or even an armed insurgency. Threats to
internal security may be directed at either the state's citizens, or the organs
and infrastructure of the state itself, and may range from petty crime, serious
organised crime, political or industrial unrest, or even domestic terrorism.
Foreign powers may also act as a threat to internal security, by either
committing or sponsoring terrorism or rebellion, without actually declaring
war. Forces and agencies. Governmental responsibility for internal security
will generally rest with an interior ministry, as opposed to a defence
ministry. Depending on the state, a state's internal security will be
maintained by either the ordinary police or law enforcement agencies or more
militarised police forces (known as Gendarmerie). Other specialised internal
security agencies may exist to augment these main forces, such as border
guards, special police units, or aspects of the state's List of intelligence
agencies. In some states, internal security may be the primary responsibility
of a secret police force. The level of authorised force used by agencies and
forces responsible for maintaining internal security might range from unarmed
police to fully armed paramilitary organisations, or employ some level of less-
lethal weaponry in between. For violent situations, internal security forces
may contain some element of military type equipment such as non-military
armored vehicles. Justice aspects. Depending on the organisation of the state,
internal security forces may have jurisdiction on national or federal levels.
As the concept of internal security refers to the entity of the state and its
citizens, persons who are threats to internal security may be designated as an
enemy of the state or enemy of the people. Persons detained by internal
security forces may either be dealt with by the normal criminal justice system,
or for more serious crimes against internal security such as treason, they may
face special measures such as secret trials. In times of extreme unrest,
internal security actions may include measures such as internment (detention
without trial). Relationship with the military. Depending on the nature of the
specific state's form of government, enforcing internal security will generally
not be carried out by a country's military forces, whose primary role is
external defence, except in times of extreme unrest or other state of
emergency, short of civil war. Often, military involvement in internal security
is explicitly prohibited, or is restricted to authorised military aid to the
civil power as part of the principle of civilian control of the military.
Military special forces units may in some cases be put under the temporary
command of civilian powers, for special internal security situations such as
counter terrorism operations.
