International law International law is the set of rules generally regarded and
accepted as binding in relations between states and nations. It serves as the
indispensable framework for the practice of stable and organized international
relations. International law differs from national legal systems in that it
primarily concerns nations rather than private citizens. National law may
become international law when treaties delegate national jurisdiction to
supranational tribunals such as the European Court of Human Rights or the
International Criminal Court. Treaties such as the Geneva Conventions may
require national law to conform. International law is consent-based governance.
This means that a state member of the international community is not obliged to
abide by international law unless it has expressly consented to a particular
course of conduct. This is an issue of state sovereignty. Sources of
international law. A source of international law is where an international
decision maker or researcher looks to verify the substantive legal rule
governing a legal dispute or academic discourse. The sources of international
law applied by the community of nations to find the content of international
law are listed under Article 38.1 of the Statute of the International Court of
Justice: Treaties, international customs, and general principles are stated as
the three primary sources; and judicial decisions and scholarly writings are
expressly designated as the subsidiary sources of international law. Many
scholars agree that the fact that the sources are arranged sequentially in the
Article 38 of the ICJ Statute suggests an implicit hierarchy of sources.
However, there is no concrete evidence, in the decisions of the international
courts and tribunals, to support such strict hierarchy, at least when it is
about choosing international customs and treaties. In addition, unlike the
Article 21 of the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court, which
clearly defines hierarchy of applicable law (or sources of international law),
the language of the Article 38 do not explicitly support hierarchy of sources.
The sources have been influenced by a range of political and legal theories.
During the 20th century, it was recognized by legal positivists that a
sovereign state could limit its authority to act by consenting to an agreement
according to the principle "pacta sunt servanda". This consensual view of
international law was reflected in the 1920 Statute of the Permanent Court of
International Justice, which was succeeded by the United Nations Charter and is
preserved in the United Nations Article 7 of the 1946 Statute of the
International Court of Justice. Public international law. Article 13 of the
United Nations Charter obligates the UN General Assembly to initiate studies
and make recommendations which encourage the progressive development of
international law and its codification. Evidence of consensus or state practice
can sometimes be derived from intergovernmental resolutions or academic and
expert legal opinions (sometimes collectively termed soft law). International
law has existed since the Middle Ages but much of its modern corpus began
developing from the mid-19th century.Two sophisticated legal systems developed
in the Western World: the codified systems of continental European states
(Civil Law) and the judge-made law of England (Common Law). The fall of the
Roman civilization did not result in the loss of the concepts of Roman Law.
Starting in the later Middle Ages, unlegislated Roman law (ius commune or lex
mercatoria) was applied by merchants in northern Italian city states and north-
western European countries as the basis for commercial (and other)
relationships. In the 20th century, the two World Wars and the formation of the
League of Nations (and other international organizations such as the
International Labor Organization) all contributed to accelerate this process
and established much of the foundations of modern public international law.
After the failure of the Treaty of Versailles and World War II, the League of
Nations was replaced by the United Nations, founded under the UN Charter. The
UN has also been the locus for the development of new advisory (non-binding)
standards, such as the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. Other
international norms and laws have been established through international
agreements, including the Geneva Conventions on the conduct of war or armed
conflict, as well as by agreements implemented by other international
organizations such as the ILO, the World Health Organization, the World
Intellectual Property Organization, the International Telecommunication Union,
UNESCO, the World Trade Organization, and the International Monetary Fund. The
development and consolidation of such conventions and agreements has proven to
be of great importance in the realm of international relations. Conflict of
laws. Conflict of laws, often called "private international law" in civil law
jurisdictions, is less international than public international law. It is
distinguished from public international law because it governs conflicts
between private persons, rather than states (or other international bodies with
standing). It concerns the questions of which jurisdiction should be permitted
to hear a legal dispute between private parties, and which jurisdiction's law
should be applied, therefore raising issues of international law. Today
corporations are increasingly capable of shifting capital and labor supply
chains across borders, as well as trading with overseas corporations. This
increases the number of disputes of an inter-state nature outside a unified
legal framework, and raises issues of the enforceability of standard practices.
Increasing numbers of businesses use commercial arbitration under the "New York
Convention 1958". Supranational law. The Term "International Law" refers to
treaty law made in and between sovereign states. "Law" is defined as "a rule of
conduct or action prescribed or formally recognized as binding or enforced by a
controlling authority," whereas "Sovereign" is defined as "supreme power or
authority." Given this contradiction, nations have at times abrogated
"International Laws" when they considered doing so in their national interest.
The term "World Law" is the evolution of a system of law at the global level
representing the sovereignty of the whole. Initial steps have been taken to
evolve a system of supra-national laws, but true "World Law" may await the
evolution of a legislative body of, by and for the people of the planet.
International courts. There are numerous international bodies created by
treaties adjudicating on legal issues where they may have jurisdiction. The
only one claiming universal jurisdiction is the United Nations Security
Council. Others are: the United Nations International Court of Justice, and the
International Criminal Court (when national systems have totally failed and the
Treaty of Rome is applicable) and the Court of Arbitration for Sport East
Africa Community. There were ambitions to make the East African Community,
consisting of Kenya, Tanzania, Uganda, Burundi and Rwanda, a political
federation with its own form of binding supranational law but this effort has
not been completed. Union of South American Nations. The Union of South
American Nations is for the South American continent. It intends to establish a
framework akin to the European Union by the end of 2019. It is envisaged to
have its own passport and currency, and limit barriers to trade. Andean
Community of Nations. The Andean Community of Nations is the first attempt the
countries around the Andes Mountains in South America. It started with the
Cartagena Agreement of 26 May 1969, and nowadays consists in four countries:
Bolivia, Colombia, Ecuador and Peru. It does have a supranational law, called
Agreements, which are mandatory for these countries.
