International relations theory International relations theory is the study of
international relations from a theoretical perspective; it attempts to provide
a conceptual framework upon which international relations can be analyzed. Ole
Holsti describes international relations theories act as a pair of coloured
sunglasses, allowing the wearer to see only the salient events relevant to the
theory. An adherent of realism may completely disregard an event that a
constructivist might pounce upon as crucial, and vice versa. The three most
popular theories are realism, liberalism and constructivism. International
relations theories can be divided into "positivist/rationalist" theories which
focus on a principally state-level analysis, and "post-positivist/reflectivist"
ones which incorporate expanded meanings of security, ranging from class, to
gender, to postcolonial security. Many often conflicting ways of thinking exist
in IR theory, including constructivism, institutionalism, Marxism, neo-
Gramscianism, and others. However, two positivist schools of thought are most
prevalent: realism and liberalism; though increasingly, constructivism is
becoming mainstream. Introduction. The study of International relations as
theory can be traced to E.H. Carr's "The Twenty Years' Crisis" which was
published in 1939 and to Hans Morgenthau's "Politics Among Nations" published
in 1948. International relations as a discipline is believed to have emerged
after the First World War with the establishment of a Chair of International
Relations at the University of Wales, Aberystwyth. Early international
relations scholarship in the Interwar years focused on the need for the balance
of power system to be replaced with a system of collective security. These
thinkers were later described as "Idealists". The leading critique of this
school of thinking was the "realist" analysis offered by Carr. Explanatory and
constitutive approaches in international relations theory is a distinction made
when classifying international relations theories. Explanatory theories are
ones which see the world as something external to theorize about it. A
constitutive theory is one which believes that theories actually help construct
the world. Realism. Realism or political realism has been the dominant theory
of international relations since the conception of the discipline. The theory
claims to rely upon an ancient tradition of thought which includes writers such
as Thucydides, Machiavelli, and Hobbes. Early realism can be characterized as a
reaction against interwar idealist thinking. The outbreak of World War II was
seen by realists as evidence of the deficiencies of idealist thinking. There
are various strands of modern day realist thinking. However, the main tenets of
the theory have been identified as statism, survival, and self-help. Realism
makes several key assumptions. It assumes that nation-states are unitary,
geographically-based actors in an anarchic international system with no
authority above capable of regulating interactions between states as no true
authoritative world government exists. Secondly, it assumes that sovereign
states, rather than IGOs, NGOs or MNCs, are the primary actors in international
affairs. Thus, states, as the highest order, are in competition with one
another. As such, a state acts as a rational autonomous actor in pursuit of its
own self-interest with a primary goal to maintain and ensure its own
security—and thus its sovereignty and survival. Realism holds that in pursuit
of their interests, states will attempt to amass resources, and that relations
between states are determined by their relative levels of power. That level of
power is in turn determined by the state's military, economic, and political
capabilities. Some realists ("human nature realists") believe that states are
inherently aggressive, that territorial expansion is constrained only by
opposing powers, while others ("offensive/defensive realists") believe that
states are obsessed with the security and continuation of the state's
existence. The defensive view can lead to a security dilemma where increasing
one's own security can bring along greater instability as the opponent(s)
builds up its own arms, making security a zero-sum game where only "relative
gains" can be made. Neorealism. Neorealism or structural realism is a
development of realism advanced by Kenneth Waltz in "Theory of International
Politics". It is, however, only one strand of neorealism. Joseph Grieco has
combined neo-realist thinking with more traditional realists. This strand of
theory is sometimes called "modern realism". Waltz's neorealism contends that
the effect of structure must be taken into account in explaining state
behavior. Structure is defined twofold as a) the ordering principle of the
international system which is anarchy and b) the distribution of capabilities
across units. Waltz also challenges traditional realism's emphasis on
traditional military power, instead characterizing power in terms of the
combined capabilities of the state. Liberalism. The precursor to liberal
international relations theory was "idealism". Idealism (or utopianism) was a
critical manner by those who saw themselves as 'realists', for instance E. H.
Carr. In international relations, idealism (also called "Wilsonianism" because
of its association with Woodrow Wilson who personified it) is a school of
thought that holds that a state should make its internal political philosophy
the goal of its foreign policy. For example, an idealist might believe that
ending poverty at home should be coupled with tackling poverty abroad. Wilson's
idealism was a precursor to liberal international relations theory, which would
arise amongst the "institution-builders" after World War II. Liberalism holds
that state preferences, rather than state capabilities, are the primary
determinant of state behavior. Unlike realism, where the state is seen as a
unitary actor, liberalism allows for plurality in state actions. Thus,
preferences will vary from state to state, depending on factors such as
culture, economic system or government type. Liberalism also holds that
interaction between states is not limited to the political/security ("high
politics"), but also economic/cultural ("low politics") whether through
commercial firms, organizations or individuals. Thus, instead of an anarchic
international system, there are plenty of opportunities for cooperation and
broader notions of power, such as cultural capital (for example, the influence
of films leading to the popularity of the country's culture and creating a
market for its exports worldwide). Another assumption is that absolute gains
can be made through co-operation and interdependence—thus peace can be
achieved. The democratic peace theory argues that liberal democracies have
never (or almost never) made war on one another and have fewer conflicts among
themselves. This is seen as contradicting especially the realist theories and
this empirical claim is now one of the great disputes in political science.
Numerous explanations have been proposed for the democratic peace. It has also
been argued, as in the book "Never at War", that democracies conduct diplomacy
in general very differently from nondemocracies. (Neo)realists disagree with
Liberals over the theory, often citing structural reasons for the peace, as
opposed to the state's government. Sebastian Rosato, a critic of democratic
peace theory points to America's behavior towards left-leaning democracies in
Latin America during the Cold War to challenge democratic peace. One argument
is that economic interdependence makes war between trading partners less
likely. In contrast realists claim that economic interdependence increases
rather than decreases the likelihood of conflict. Neoliberalism. Neoliberalism,
liberal institutionalism or neo-liberal institutionalism is an advancement of
liberal thinking. It argues that international institutions can allow nations
to successfully cooperate in the international system. Post-Liberalism. Post-
liberal theory argues that within the modern, globalized world, states in fact
are driven to cooperate, in order to ensure security and sovereign interests.
The departure from classical liberal theory is most notably felt in the re-
interpretation of the concepts of Sovereignty and Autonomy. Autonomy becomes a
problematic concept, shifting away from a notion of freedom of self-
determination and agency to a heavily responsibility and duty laden concept.
Importantly, autonomy is linked to a capacity for good governance. Similarly,
sovereignty also experiences a shift from a right to a duty. In the global
economy, International organisations hold sovereign states to account, leading
to a situation where sovereignty is co-produced among 'sovereign' states. The
concept becomes a variable capacity of good governance and can no longer be
accepted as an absolute right. One possible way to interpret this theory, is
the idea that in order to maintain global stability and security and solve the
problem of the anarchic world system in International Relations, no
overarching, global, sovereign authority is created. Instead, states
collectively abandon some rights for full autonomy and sovereignty.
Constructivism. Constructivism or social constructivism has been described as a
challenge to the dominance of neo-liberal and neo-realist international
relations theories. Michael Barnett describes constructivist international
relations theories as being concerned with how ideas define international
structure, how this structure defines the interests and identities of states
and how states and non-state actors reproduce this structure. The key tenet of
constructivism is the belief that "International politics is shaped by
persuasive ideas, collective values, culture, and social identities."
Constructivism argues that international reality is socially constructed by
cognitive structures which give meaning to the material world. The theory
emerged out of debates concerning the scientific method of international
relations theories and theories role in the production of international power.
Emanuel Adler states that constructivism occupies a middle ground between
rationalist and interpretative theories of international relations. The failure
of either realism or liberalism to predict the end of the Cold War boosted the
credibility of constructivist theory. Constructivist theory criticises the
static assumptions of traditional international relations theory and emphasize
that international relations is a social construction. Constructivism is a
theory critical of the ontological basis of rationalist theories of
international relations. Whereas realism deals mainly with security and
material power, and liberalism looks primarily at economic interdependence and
domestic-level factors, constructivism most concerns itself with the role of
ideas in shaping the international system (indeed it is possible there is some
overlap between constructivism and realism or liberalism, but they remain
separate schools of thought). By "ideas" constructivists refer to the goals,
threats, fears, identities, and other elements of perceived reality that
influence states and non-state actors within the international system.
Constructivists believe that these ideational factors can often have far-
reaching effects, and that they can trump materialistic power concerns. For
example, constructivists note that an increase in the size of the US military
is likely to be viewed with much greater concern in Cuba, a traditional
antagonist of the US, than in Canada, a close US ally. Therefore, there must be
perceptions at work in shaping international outcomes. As such, constructivists
do not see as the invariable foundation of the international system, but rather
argue, in the words of Alexander Wendt, that "anarchy is what states make of
it". Constructivists also believe that social norms shape and change foreign
policy over time rather than security which realists cite. Marxism and Critical
Theory. Marxist and Neo-Marxist international relations theories are
structuralist paradigms which reject the realist/liberal view of state conflict
or cooperation; instead focusing on the economic and material aspects. Marxist
approaches argue the position of historical materialism and make the assumption
that the economic concerns transcend others; allowing for the elevation of
"class" as the focus of study. Marxists view the international system as an
integrated capitalist system in pursuit of capital accumulation. A sub-
discipline of Marxist IR is Critical Security Studies. Gramscian approaches
rely on the ideas of Italian Antonio Gramsci whose writings concerned the
hegemony that capitalism holds as an ideology. Marxist approaches have also
inspired Critical Theorists such as Robert W. Cox who argues that "Theory is
always for someone and for some purpose". One notable Marxist approach to
international relations theory is Immanuel Wallerstein's World-system theory
which can be traced back to the ideas expressed by Lenin in Imperialism: The
Highest Stage of capitalism. World-system theory argues that globalized
capitalism has created a core of modern industrialized countries which exploit
a periphery of exploited "Third World" countries. These ideas were developed by
the Latin American Dependency School. "Neo-Marxist" or "New Marxist" approaches
have return to the writings of Karl Marx for their inspiration. Key "New
Marxists" include Justin Rosenberg and Benno Teschke. Marxist approaches have
enjoyed a renaissance since the collapse of communism in Eastern Europe.
Criticisms of Marxists approaches to international relations theory include the
narrow focus on material and economic aspects of life. Feminism. Feminist
approaches to international relations became popular in the early 1990s. Such
approaches emphasises that women's experiences continue to be excluded from the
study of international relations. International Relations Feminists who argue
that gender relations are integral to international relations focus on the role
of diplomatic wives and marital relationship that facilitate sex trafficking.
Early feminist IR approaches were part of the "Third Great Debate" between
positivists and post-positivists. They argued against what they saw as the
positivism and state-centrism of mainstream international relations. Christian
Reus-Smit argues that these approaches did not describe what a feminist
perspective on world politics would look like. The feminist international
relations scholar Jacqui True differentiates between empirical feminism,
analytical feminism and normative feminism. Empirical feminism sees women and
gender relations as empirical aspects of international relations. It is argued
that mainstream international relations emphasis on anarchy and statecraft mean
that areas of study that make the reproduction of the state system possible are
marginalized. Analytical feminism claims that the theoretical framework of
international relations has a gender bias. Here gender refers not to the
"biological" differences between men and women but the social constructs of
masculine and feminine identity. It is claimed that in mainstream international
relations masculinity is associated with objectivity. Analytical feminists
would see neo-realism's dislike of domestic explanations for explaining
interstate behaviour as an example of this bias. Normative feminist sees
theorizing as part of an agenda for change. Criticisms of feminist
international relations theory include its portrayal of third world women.
English School. The 'English School' of international relations theory, also
known as International Society, Liberal Realism, Rationalism or the British
institutionalists, maintains that there is a 'society of states' at the
international level, despite the condition of 'anarchy' (literally the lack of
a ruler or world state). Despite being called the English School many of the
academics from this school were neither English nor from the United Kingdom. A
great deal of the work of the English School concerns the examination of
traditions of past international theory, casting it, as Martin Wight did in his
1950s-era lectures at the London School of Economics, into three divisions: 1.
Realist or Hobbesian (after Thomas Hobbes), 2. Rationalist (or Grotian, after
Hugo Grotius), 3. Revolutionist (or Kantian, after Immanuel Kant). In broad
terms, the English School itself has supported the rationalist or Grotian
tradition, seeking a middle way (or via media) between the 'power politics' of
realism and the 'utopianism' of revolutionism. The English School reject
behavioralist approaches to international relations theory. Functionalism.
Functionalism is a theory of international relations that arose principally
from the experience of European integration. Rather than the self-interest that
realists see as a motivating factor, functionalists focus on common interests
shared by states. Integration develops its own internal dynamic: as states
integrate in limited functional or technical areas, they increasingly find that
momentum for further rounds of integration in related areas. This "invisible
hand" of integration phenomenon is termed "spill-over." Although integration
can be resisted, it becomes harder to stop integration's reach as it
progresses. This usage, and the usage in functionalism in international
relations, is the less common meaning of "functionalism". More commonly,
however, functionalism is an argument that explains phenomena as functions of a
system rather than an actor or actors. Immanuel Wallerstein employed a
functionalist theory when he argued that the Westphalian international
political system arose to secure and protect the developing international
capitalist system. His theory is called "functionalist" because it says that an
event was a function of the preferences of a system and not the preferences of
an agent. Functionalism is different from structural or realist arguments in
that while both look to broader, structural causes, realists (and
structuralists more broadly) say that the structure gives incentives to agents,
while functionalists attribute causal power to the system itself, bypassing
agents entirely. State Cartel Theory. State cartel theory in international
relations is derived from an old institutional theory of economics, from the
theory of private or enterprise cartels. It has a German background, because
Germany was formerly the land of highest developed economic cartels and the
motherland of classical cartel theory. State cartel theory uses a mix of
methods ranging from positivist data evaluation to critical socioeconomic
analyses or reflexive methods like criticism of thinking or ideology. Among the
other theories of International Relations, State cartel theory has most in
common with Functionalism in international relations. A bit more than the
latter, state cartel theory has its focus on a theory of international
organizations. Post-structuralism. Post-structuralism differs from most other
approaches to international politics because it does not see itself as a
theory, school or paradigm which produces a single account of the subject
matter. Instead, post-structuralism is an approach, attitude, or ethos that
pursues critique in particular way. Post-structuralism sees critique as an
inherently positive exercise that establishes the conditions of possibility for
pursuing alternatives. Post-modernism. Post-modernist approaches to
international relations are critical of metanarratives and denounces
traditional IR's claims to truth and neutrality. Postcolonialism. Postcolonial
International relations scholarship posits a critical theory approach to
International relations (IR), and is a non-mainstream area of international
relations scholarship. Post-colonialism focuses on the persistence of colonial
forms of power and the continuing existence of racism in world politics.
Evolutionary perspectives. Evolutionary perspectives, such as from evolutionary
psychology, have been argued to help explain many features of international
relations. Humans in the ancestral environment did not live in states and
likely rarely had interactions with groups outside of a very local area.
However, a variety of evolved psychological mechanisms, in particular those for
dealing with intergroup interactions, are argued to influence current
international relations. These include evolved mechanisms for social exchange,
cheating and detecting cheating, status conflicts, leadership, ingroup and
outgroup distinction and biases, coalitions, and violence. Evolutionary
concepts such as inclusive fitness may help explain seeming limitations of a
concept such as egoism which is of fundamental importance to realist and
rational choice international relations theories.
