Internet censorship Internet censorship is the control or suppression of the
publishing of, or access to information on the Internet. It may be carried out
by governments or by private organizations at the behest of government,
regulators, or on their own initiative. Individuals and organizations may
engage in self-censorship for moral, religious, or business reasons, to conform
to societal norms, due to intimidation, or out of fear of legal or other
consequences. Opinions on the topic of Internet censorship vary, with arguments
being made both for and against censorship. Moreover, the extent of Internet
censorship varies on a country-to-country basis. While some countries have
little Internet censorship, other countries go as far as to limit the access of
information such as news and suppress discussion among citizens. Internet
censorship also occurs in response to or in anticipation of events such as
elections, protests, and riots. An example is the increased censorship due to
the events of the Arab Spring. Other areas of censorship includes copyrights,
defamation, harassment, and obscene material. Overview. The events associated
with Internet censorship are similar to those for online/offline censorship of
traditional/modern media such as newspapers or internet. One difference is that
national borders are more permeable online: residents of a country that bans
certain information can find it on websites hosted outside the country. Thus
censors must work to prevent access to information even though they lack
physical or legal control over the websites themselves. This in turn requires
the use of technical censorship methods that are unique to the Internet, such
as site blocking and content filtering. Blocking and filtering can be based on
relatively static blacklists or be determined more dynamically based on a real-
time examination of the information being exchanged. Blacklists may be produced
manually or automatically and are often not available to non-customers of the
blocking software. Blocking or filtering can be done at a centralized national
level, at a decentralized sub-national level, or at an institutional level, for
example in libraries, universities or Internet cafes. Blocking and filtering
may also vary within a country across different ISPs. Countries may filter
sensitive content on an on-going basis and/or introduce temporary filtering
during key time periods such as elections. In some cases the censoring
authorities may surreptitiously block content to mislead the public into
believing that censorship has not been applied. This is achieved by returning a
fake "Not Found" error message when an attempt is made to access a blocked web.
Unless the censor has total control over all Internet-connected computers, such
as in North Korea or Cuba, total censorship of information is very difficult or
impossible to achieve due to the underlying distributed technology of the
Internet. Pseudonymity and data havens (such as Freenet) protect free speech
using technologies that guarantee material cannot be removed and prevents the
identification of authors. Technologically savvy users can often find ways to
access blocked content. Nevertheless, blocking remains an effective means of
limiting access to sensitive information for most users when censors, such as
those in China, are able to devote significant resources to building and
maintaining a comprehensive censorship system. The term "splinternet" is
sometimes used to describe the effects of national firewalls. The verb
"rivercrab" colloquially refers to censorship of the Internet, particularly in
Asia. Around the world. [Censorship World Map.svg|right|500px|thumb|OpenNet
Initiative [http://opennet.net/research/data "Summarized global Internet
filtering data spreadsheet", 8 November 2011 and "Country Profiles", the
OpenNet Initiative is a collaborative partnership of the Citizen Lab at the
Munk School of Global Affairs, University of Toronto; the Berkman Center for
Internet & Society at Harvard University; and the SecDev Group, Ottawa As more
people in more places begin using the Internet for important activities, there
is an increase in online censorship, using more sophisticated techniques. The
motives, scope, and effectiveness of Internet censorship vary widely from
country to country. The countries engaged in state-mandated filtering are
clustered in three main regions of the world: east Asia, central Asia, and the
Middle East/North Africa. A few countries in other regions also practice
certain forms of filtering. In the United States state-mandated Internet
filtering occurs on some computers in libraries and K-12 schools. Content
related to Nazism or Holocaust denial is blocked in France and Germany. Child
pornography, hate speech, and sites that encourage the infringement of
intellectual property rights are blocked in many countries throughout the
world. In fact, many countries throughout the world, including some democracies
with long traditions of strong support for freedom of expression and freedom of
the press, are engaged in some amount of online censorship, often with
substantial public support. Reports, ratings, and trends. Detailed country by
country information on Internet censorship is provided by the OpenNet
Initiative, Reporters Without Borders, Freedom House, and in the U.S. State
Department Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights, and Labor's "Human Rights
Reports". The ratings produced by several of these organizations are summarized
in the Internet censorship by country and the Censorship by country articles.
OpenNet Initiative reports. Through 2010 the OpenNet Initiative had documented
Internet filtering by governments in over forty countries worldwide. The level
of filtering in 26 countries in 2007 and in 25 countries in 2009 was classified
in the political, social, and security areas. Of the 41 separate countries
classified, seven were found to show no evidence of filtering in all three
areas (Egypt, France, Germany, India, Ukraine, United Kingdom, and United
States), while one was found to engage in pervasive filtering in all three
areas (China), 13 were found to engage in pervasive filtering in one or more
areas, and 34 were found to engage in some level of filtering in one or more
areas. Of the 10 countries classified in both 2007 and 2009, one reduced its
level of filtering (Pakistan), five increased their level of filtering
(Azerbaijan, Belarus, Kazakhstan, South Korea, and Uzbekistan), and four
maintained the same level of filtering (China, Iran, Myanmar, and Tajikistan).
Freedom on the Net reports. In the 2011 edition of Freedom House's report
"Freedom on the Net", of the 37 countries surveyed, 8 were rated as "free"
(22%), 18 as "partly free" (49%), and 11 as "not free" (30%). In their 2009
report, of the 15 countries surveyed, 4 were rated as "free" (27%), 7 as
"partly free" (47%), and 4 as "not free" (27%). And of the 15 countries
surveyed in both 2009 and 2011, 5 were seen to be moving in the direction of
more network freedom (33%), 9 moved toward less freedom (60%), and one was
unchanged (7%). "Internet enemies" and "countries under surveillance" lists. In
2006, Reporters Without Borders ("Reporters sans frontières", RSF), a Paris-
based international non-governmental organization that advocates freedom of the
press, started publishing a list of "Enemies of the Internet". The organization
classifies a country as an enemy of the internet because "all of these
countries mark themselves out not just for their capacity to censor news and
information online but also for their almost systematic repression of Internet
users." In 2007 a second list of countries "Under Surveillance" (originally
"Under Watch") was added. Both lists are updated annually. When the "Enemies of
the Internet" list was introduced in 2006, it listed 13 countries. From 2006 to
2012 the number of countries listed fell to 10 and then rose to 12. Belarus,
Egypt, and Tunisia moved to the "Countries under surveillance" list in 2009,
2011, and 2011 respectively. Belarus moved back and Bahrain was added to the
list in 2012. When the "Countries under surveillance" list was introduced in
2008, it listed 10 countries. Between 2008 and 2012 the number of countries
listed grew to 16 and then fell to 14. In addition to the moves to and from the
"Enemies of the Internet" list noted earlier, Jordan in 2009, Tajikistan in
2009, and Yemen in 2010 were dropped from the list and Australia in 2009,
France in 2011, Russia in 2010, South Korea in 2009, Turkey in 2010 were added.
Bahrain, Eritrea, Malaysia, and Sri Lanka dropped from the list in 2010, but
were added again in 2011. Libya dropped from the list in 2009, added again in
2011, and then dropped in 2012. Venezuela was added in 2011 and then dropped in
2012. Arab Spring. During the Arab Spring of 2011, media jihad (media struggle)
was extensive. Internet and mobile technologies, particularly social networks
such as Facebook and Twitter, played and are playing important new and unique
roles in organizing and spreading the protests and making them visible to the
rest of the world. An activist in Egypt tweeted, “we use Facebook to schedule
the protests, Twitter to coordinate, and YouTube to tell the world”. This
successful use of digital media in turn led to increased censorship including
the complete loss of Internet access for periods of time in Egypt and Libya in
2011. In Syria, the Syrian Electronic Army (SEA), an organization that operates
with at least tacit support of the government, claims responsibility for
defacing or otherwise compromising scores of websites that it contends spread
news hostile to the Syrian regime. SEA disseminates denial of service (DoS)
software designed to target media websites including those of Al Jazeera, BBC
News, Syrian satellite broadcaster Orient TV, and Dubai-based al-Arabia TV. In
response to the greater freedom of expression brought about by the Arab Spring
revolutions in countries that were previously subject to very strict
censorship, in March 2011, Reporters Without Borders moved Tunisia and Egypt
from its "Internet enemies" list to its list of countries "under surveillance"
and in 2012 dropped Libya from the list entirely. At the same time, there were
warnings that Internet censorship might increase in other countries following
the events of the Arab Spring. Common targets. There are several motives or
rationales for Internet censorship: politics and power, social norms and
morals, and security concerns. Protecting intellectual property rights and
existing economic interests are two additional motives for Internet censorship.
In addition, networking tools and applications that allow the sharing of
information related to these motives are themselves subjected to filtering and
blocking. And while there is considerable variation from country to country,
the blocking of web sites in a local language is roughly twice that of web
sites available only in English or other international languages. Politics and
power. Censorship directed at political opposition to the ruling government is
common in authoritarian and repressive regimes. Some countries block web sites
related to religion and minority groups, often when these movements represent a
threat to the ruling regimes. Social norms and morals. Social filtering is
censorship of topics that are held to be antithetical to accepted societal
norms. In particular censorship of child pornography and to protect children
enjoys very widespread public support and such content is subject to censorship
and other restrictions in most countries. Security concerns. Many organisations
implement filtering as part of a defence in depth strategy to protect their
environments from malware, and to protect their reputations in the event of
their networks being used, for example, to carry out sexual harassment.
Internet filtering related to threats to national security that targets the Web
sites of insurgents, extremists, and terrorists often enjoys wide public
support. Protection of intellectual property and existing economic interests.
Sites that share content that violates copyright or other intellectual property
rights are often blocked, particularly in western Europe and North America. In
addition the protection of existing economic interests is sometimes the
motivation for blocking new Internet services such as low-cost telephone
services that use Voice over Internet Protocol (VoIP). These services can
reduce the customer base of telecommunications companies, many of which enjoy
entrenched monopoly positions and some of which are government sponsored or
controlled. Christian Engström, Rick Falkvinge and Oscar Swartz reported on a
copyright lobby organization’s intent to use child pornography as a pretext
to get politicians to implement site blocking, to later use it for copyright-
related blocking. Network tools. Blocking the intermediate tools and
applications of the Internet that can be used to assist users in accessing and
sharing sensitive material is common in many countries. Content suppression
methods. Technical censorship. Over- and under-blocking. Technical censorship
techniques are subject to both over- and under-blocking since it is often
impossible to always block exactly the targeted content without blocking other
permissible material or allowing some access to targeted material and so
providing more or less protection than desired. An example is that automatic
censorship against sexual words in matter for children, set to block the word
"cunt", has been known to block the Lincolnshire placename Scunthorpe. Another
example is blocking an IP-address of a server that hosts multiple websites,
which prevents access to all of the websites rather than just those that
contain content deemed offensive. According to a report produced in 1997 by the
gay rights group GLAAD, many 90s-era Internet censorship software products
prevent access to non-pornographic LGBT-related material. GLAAD argued that
this is disempowering and dangerous for young LGBT people. Use of commercial
filtering software. Writing in 2009 Ronald Deibert, professor of political
science at the University of Toronto and co-founder and one of the principal
investigators of the OpenNet Initiative, and, writing in 2011, Evgeny Morzov, a
visiting scholar at Stanford University and an Op-Ed contributor to the "New
York Times", explain that companies in the United States, Finland, France,
Germany, Britain, Canada, and South Africa are in part responsible for the
increasing sophistication of online content filtering worldwide. While the off-
the-shelf filtering software sold by Internet security companies are primarily
marketed to businesses and individuals seeking to protect themselves and their
employees and families, they are also used by governments to block what they
consider sensitive content. Among the most popular filtering software programs
is SmartFilter by Secure Computing in California, which was bought by McAfee in
2008. SmartFilter has been used by Tunisia, Saudi Arabia, Sudan, the UAE,
Kuwait, Bahrain, Iran, and Oman, as well as the United States and the UK.
Myanmar and Yemen have used filtering software from Websense. The Canadian-made
commercial filter Netsweeper is used in Qatar, the UAE, and Yemen. In a U.S.
lawsuit filed in May 2011, Cisco Systems is accused of helping the Chinese
Government build a firewall, known widely as the Golden Shield, to censor the
Internet and keep tabs on dissidents. Cisco said it had made nothing special
for China. Cisco is also accused of aiding the Chinese government in monitoring
and apprehending members of the banned Falun Gong group. Many filtering
programs allow blocking to be configured based on dozens of categories and sub-
categories such as these from Websense: "abortion" (pro-life, pro-choice),
"adult material" (adult content, lingerie and swimsuit, nudity, sex, sex
education), "advocacy groups" (sites that promote change or reform in public
policy, public opinion, social practice, economic activities, and
relationships), "drugs" (abused drugs, marijuana, prescribed medications,
supplements and unregulated compounds), "religion" (non-traditional religions
occult and folklore, traditional religions), ... The blocking categories used
by the filtering programs may contain errors leading to the unintended blocking
of websites. The blocking of DailyMotion in early 2007 by Tunisian authorities
was, according to the OpenNet Initiative, due to Secure Computing wrongly
categorizing DailyMotion as pornography for its SmartFilter filtering software.
It was initially thought that Tunisia had blocked DailyMotion due to satirical
videos about human rights violations in Tunisia, but after Secure Computing
corrected the mistake access to DailyMotion was gradually restored in Tunisia.
Organizations such as the Global Network Initiative, the Electronic Frontier
Foundation, Amnesty International, and the American Civil Liberties Union have
successfully lobbied some vendors such as Websense to make changes to their
software, to refrain from doing business with repressive governments, and to
educate schools who have inadvertently reconfigured their filtering software
too strictly. Nevertheless, regulations and accountability related to the use
of commercial filters and services are often non-existent, and there is
relatively little oversight from civil society or other independent groups.
Vendors often consider information about what sites and content is blocked
valuable intellectual property that is not made available outside the company,
sometimes not even to the organizations purchasing the filters. Thus by relying
upon out-of-the-box filtering systems, the detailed task of deciding what is or
is not acceptable speech may be outsourced to the commercial vendors.
Circumvention. Internet censorship circumvention is the processes used by
technologically savvy Internet users to bypass the technical aspects of
Internet filtering and gain access to otherwise censored material.
Circumvention is an inherent problem for those wishing to censor the Internet,
because filtering and blocking do not remove content from the Internet but
rather block access to it. Therefore, as long as there is at least one publicly
accessible uncensored system, it will often be possible to gain access to
otherwise censored material. However circumvention may not be possible by non
tech-savvy users, so blocking and filtering remain effective means of censoring
the Internet access of large numbers of users. Different techniques and
resources are used to bypass Internet censorship, including proxy websites,
virtual private networks, sneakernets, and circumvention software tools.
Solutions have differing ease of use, speed, security, and risks. Most,
however, rely on gaining access to an Internet connection that is not subject
to filtering, often in a different jurisdiction not subject to the same
censorship laws. There are risks to using circumvention software or other
methods to bypass Internet censorship. In some countries individuals that gain
access to otherwise restricted content may be violating the law and if caught
can be expelled, fired, jailed, or subject to other punishments and loss of
access. In June 2011 the "New York Times" reported that the U.S. is engaged in
a "global effort to deploy 'shadow' Internet and mobile phone systems that
dissidents can use to undermine repressive governments that seek to silence
them by censoring or shutting down telecommunications networks." Major web
portal official statements on site and content removal. Most major web service
operators reserve to themselves broad rights to remove or pre-screen content,
sometimes without giving a specific list or only a vague general list of the
reasons allowing the removal. The phrases "at our sole discretion", "without
prior notice", and "for other reasons" are common in Terms of Service
agreements. References. "This article incorporates licensed material from the
OpenNet Initiative web site.
