International relations International Relations (IR) (occasionally referred to
as International Studies (IS), although the two terms are not perfectly
synonymous) is the study of relationships between countries, including the
roles of states, inter-governmental organizations (IGOs), international
nongovernmental organizations (INGOs), non-governmental organizations (NGOs)
and multinational corporations (MNCs). It is both an academic and public policy
field, and can be either positive or normative as it both seeks to analyze as
well as formulate the foreign policy of particular states. It is often
considered a branch of political science (especially after 1988 UNESCO
nomenclature), but an important sector of academia prefer to treat it as an
interdisciplinary field of study. Aspects of international relations have been
studied for thousands of years, since the time of Thucydides, but IR became a
separate and definable discipline in the early 20th century. Apart from
political science, IR draws upon such diverse fields as economics, history,
international law, philosophy, geography, social work, sociology, anthropology,
criminology, psychology, gender studies, and cultural studies / culturology. It
involves a diverse range of issues including but not limited to: globalization,
state sovereignty, international security, ecological sustainability, nuclear
proliferation, nationalism, economic development, global finance, terrorism,
organized crime, human security, foreign interventionism and human rights.
History. The history of international relations can be traced thousands of
years ago; Barry Buzan and Richard Little, for example, consider the
interaction of ancient Sumerian city-states, starting in 3,500 BC, as the first
fully-fledged international system. The history of international relations
based on sovereign states is often traced back to the Peace of Westphalia of
1648, a stepping stone in the development of the modern state system. Prior to
this, the European medieval organization of political authority was based on a
vaguely hierarchical religious order. Contrary to popular belief, Westphalia
still embodied layered systems of sovereignty, especially within the Holy Roman
Empire. More than the Peace of Westphalia, the Treaty of Utrecht of 1713 is
thought to reflect an emerging norm that sovereigns had no internal equals
within a defined territory and no external superiors as the ultimate authority
within the territory's sovereign borders. The centuries of roughly 1500 to 1789
saw the rise of the independent, sovereign states, the institutionalization of
diplomacy and armies. The French Revolution added to this the new idea that not
princes or an oligarchy, but the citizenry of a state, defined as the nation,
should be defined as sovereign. Such a state in which the nation is sovereign
would thence be termed a nation-state (as opposed to a monarchy, or a religious
state). The term republic increasingly became its synonym. An alternative model
of the nation-state was developed in reaction to the French republican concept
by the Germans and others, who instead of giving the citizenry sovereignty,
kept the princes and nobility, but defined nation-statehood in ethnic-
linguistic terms, establishing the rarely if ever fulfilled ideal that all
people speaking one language should belong to one state only. The same claim to
sovereignty was made for both forms of nation-state. (It is worth noting that
in Europe today, few states conform to either definition of nation-state: many
continue to have royal sovereigns, and hardly any are ethnically homogeneous.)
The particular European system supposing the sovereign equality of states was
exported to the Americas, Africa, and Asia via colonialism and the "standards
of civilization". The contemporary international system was finally established
through decolonization during the Cold War. However, this is somewhat over-
simplified. While the nation-state system is considered "modern", many states
have not incorporated the system and are termed "pre-modern". Further, a
handful of states have moved beyond insistence on full sovereignty, and can be
considered "post-modern". The ability of contemporary IR discourse to explain
the relations of these different types of states is disputed. "Levels of
analysis" is a way of looking at the international system, which includes the
individual level, the domestic state as a unit, the international level of
transnational and intergovernmental affairs, and the global level. What is
explicitly recognized as International Relations theory was not developed until
after World War I, and is dealt with in more detail below. IR theory, however,
has a long tradition of drawing on the work of other social sciences. The use
of capitalizations of the "I" and "R" in International Relations aims to
distinguish the academic discipline of International Relations from the
phenomena of international relations. Many cite Sun Tzu's "The Art of War" (6th
century BC), Thucydides' "History of the Peloponnesian War" (5th century BC),
Chanakya's "Arthashastra" (4th century BC), as the inspiration for realist
theory, with Hobbes' "Leviathan" and Machiavelli's "The Prince" providing
further elaboration. Similarly, liberalism draws upon the work of Kant and
Rousseau, with the work of the former often being cited as the first
elaboration of democratic peace theory. Though contemporary human rights is
considerably different than the type of rights envisioned under natural law,
Francisco de Vitoria, Hugo Grotius and John Locke offered the first accounts of
universal entitlement to certain rights on the basis of common humanity. In the
twentieth century, in addition to contemporary theories of liberal
internationalism, Marxism has been a foundation of international relations.
Study of IR. Initially, international relations as a distinct field of study
was almost entirely British-centered. IR only emerged as a formal academic
‘discipline’ in 1918 with the founding of the first ‘chair’
(professorship) in IR - the Woodrow Wilson Chair at Aberystwyth, University of
Wales (now Aberystwyth University), from an endowment given by David Davies,
became the first academic position dedicated to IR. This was rapidly followed
by establishment of IR at US universities and Geneva, Switzerland. In the early
1920s, the London School of Economics' department of International Relations
was founded at the behest of Nobel Peace Prize winner Philip Noel-Baker, and
was the first institute to offer a wide range of degrees in the field.
Furthermore, the International History department at LSE, developed as
primarily focused on the history of IR in the early modern, colonial and Cold
War periods. The first university entirely dedicated to the study of IR was the
Graduate Institute of International Studies (now the Graduate Institute of
International and Development Studies), which was founded in 1927 to form
diplomats associated to the League of Nations, established in Geneva some years
before. The Graduate Institute of International Studies offered one of the
first Ph.D. degrees in international relations. Georgetown University's Edmund
A. Walsh School of Foreign Service is the oldest international relations
faculty in the United States, founded in 1919. The Committee on International
Relations at the University of Chicago was the first to offer a graduate
degree, in 1928. Theory. Epistemology and IR theory. IR theories can be roughly
divided into one of two epistemological camps: "positivist" and "post-
positivist". Positivist theories aim to replicate the methods of the natural
sciences by analysing the impact of material forces. They typically focus on
features of international relations such as state interactions, size of
military forces, balance of powers etc. Post-positivist epistemology rejects
the idea that the social world can be studied in an objective and value-free
way. It rejects the central ideas of neo-realism/liberalism, such as rational
choice theory, on the grounds that the scientific method cannot be applied to
the social world and that a 'science' of IR is impossible. A key difference
between the two positions is that while positivist theories, such as neo-
realism, offer causal explanations (such as why and how power is exercised),
post-positivist theories focus instead on constitutive questions, for instance
what is meant by 'power'; what makes it up, how it is experienced and how it is
reproduced. Often, post-positivist theories explicitly promote a normative
approach to IR, by considering ethics. This is something which has often been
ignored under 'traditional' IR as positivist theories make a distinction
between 'facts' and normative judgments, or 'values'. During the late 1980s and
the 1990s, debate between positivists and post-positivists became the dominant
debate and has been described as constituting the Third "Great Debate" (Lapid
1989). Positivist Theories. Realism. Realism focuses on state security and
power above all else. Early realists such as E.H. Carr and Hans Morgenthau
argued that states are self-interested, power-seeking rational actors, who seek
to maximize their security and chances of survival. Cooperation between states
is a way to maximize each individual state's security (as opposed to more
idealistic reasons). Similarly, any act of war must be based on self-interest,
rather than on idealism. Many realists saw World War II as the vindication of
their theory. It should be noted that classical writers such as Thucydides,
Machiavelli, Hobbes and Theodore Roosevelt, are often cited as "founding
fathers" of realism by contemporary self-described realists. However, while
their work may support realist doctrine, it is not likely that they would have
classified themselves as realists (in this sense o Political realism believes
that politics, like society in general, is governed by objective laws that have
their roots in human nature. To improve society, it is first necessary to
understand the laws by which society lives. The operation of these laws being
impervious to our preferences, persons will challenge them only at the risk of
failure. Realism, believing as it does in the objectivity of the laws of
politics, must also believe in the possibility of developing a rational theory
that reflects, however imperfectly and one-sidedly, these objective laws. It
believes also, then, in the possibility of distinguishing in politics between
truth and opinion-between what is true objectively and rationally, supported by
evidence and illuminated by reason, and what is only a subjective judgment,
divorced from the facts as they are and informed by prejudice and wishful
thinking. The placement of Realism under positivism is far from unproblematic
however. E.H. Carr's 'What is History' was a deliberate critique of positivism,
and Hans Morgenthau's aim in 'Scientific Man vs Power Politics' - as the title
implies - was to demolish any conception that international politics/power
politics can be studied scientifically. Liberalism/idealism/Liberal
Internationalism. Liberal international relations theory arose after World War
I in response to the inability of states to control and limit war in their
international relations. Early adherents include Woodrow Wilson and Norman
Angell, who argued vigorously that states mutually gained from cooperation and
that war was so destructive as to be essentially futile. Liberalism was not
recognized as a coherent theory as such until it was collectively and
derisively termed idealism by E. H. Carr. A new version of "idealism" that
focused on human rights as the basis of the legitimacy of international law was
advanced by Hans Köchler. Neoliberalism. Neoliberalism seeks to update
liberalism by accepting the neorealist presumption that states are the key
actors in international relations, but still maintains that non-state actors
(NSAs) and intergovernmental organizations (IGOs) matter. Proponents such as
Maria Chattha argue that states will cooperate irrespective of relative gains,
and are thus concerned with absolute gains. This also means that nations are,
in essence, free to make their own choices as to how they will go about
conducting policy without any international organizations blocking a nation's
right to sovereignty. Neoliberalism also contains an economic theory that is
based on the use of open and free markets with little, if any, government
intervention to prevent monopolies and other conglomerates from forming. The
growing interdependence throughout and after the Cold War through international
institutions led to neo-liberalism being defined as institutionalism, this new
part of the theory being fronted by Robert Keohane and also Joseph Nye. Regime
Theory. Regime theory is derived from the liberal tradition that argues that
international institutions or regimes affect the behavior of states (or other
international actors). It assumes that cooperation is possible in the anarchic
system of states, indeed, regimes are by definition, instances of international
cooperation. While realism predicts that conflict should be the norm in
international relations, regime theorists say that there is cooperation despite
anarchy. Often they cite cooperation in trade, human rights and collective
security among other issues. These instances of cooperation are regimes. The
most commonly cited definition of regimes comes from Stephen Krasner. Krasner
defines regimes as "institutions possessing norms, decision rules, and
procedures which facilitate a convergence of expectations." Not all approaches
to regime theory, however are liberal or neoliberal; some realist scholars like
Joseph Greico have developed hybrid theories which take a realist based
approach to this fundamentally liberal theory. (Realists do not say cooperation
"never" happens, just that it is not the norm; it is a difference of degree).
Post-positivist/reflectivist theories. International society theory (the
English school). International society theory, also called the English School,
focuses on the shared norms and values of states and how they regulate
international relations. Examples of such norms include diplomacy, order, and
international law. Unlike neo-realism, it is not necessarily positivist.
Theorists have focused particularly on humanitarian intervention, and are
subdivided between solidarists, who tend to advocate it more, and pluralists,
who place greater value in order and sovereignty. Nicholas Wheeler is a
prominent solidarist, while Hedley Bull and Robert H. Jackson are perhaps the
best known pluralists. Social Constructivism. Social Constructivism encompasses
a broad range of theories that aim to address questions of ontology, such as
the Structure and agency debate, as well as questions of epistemology, such as
the "material/ideational" debate that concerns the relative role of material
forces versus ideas. Constructivism is not a theory of IR in the manner of neo-
realism, but is instead a social theory which is used to better explain the
actions taken by states and other major actors as well as the identities that
guide these states and actors. Constructivism in IR can be divided into what
Hopf (1998) calls 'conventional' and 'critical' constructivism. Common to all
varieties of constructivism is an interest in the role that ideational forces
play. The most famous constructivist scholar, Alexander Wendt noted in a 1992
article in International Organization (later followed up by a book, "Social
Theory of International Politics" (1999)), that "anarchy is what states make of
it". By this he means that the anarchical structure that neo-realists claim
governs state interaction is in fact a phenomenon that is socially constructed
and reproduced by states. For example, if the system is dominated by states
that see anarchy as a life or death situation (what Wendt terms a "Hobbesian"
anarchy) then the system will be characterised by warfare. If on the other hand
anarchy is seen as restricted (a "Lockean" anarchy) then a more peaceful system
will exist. Anarchy in this view is constituted by state interaction, rather
than accepted as a natural and immutable feature of international life as
viewed by neo-realist IR scholars. Critical Theory. Critical international
relations theory is the application of 'critical theory' to international
relations. Proponents such as Andrew Linklater, Robert W. Cox and Ken Booth
focus on the need for human emancipation from States. Hence, it is "critical"
of mainstream IR theories that tend to be state-centric. Marxism. Marxist and
Neo-Marxist theories of IR reject the realist/liberal view of state conflict or
cooperation; instead focusing on the economic and material aspects. It makes
the assumption that the economy trumps other concerns; allowing for the
elevation of class as the focus of study. Marxists view the international
system as an integrated capitalist system in pursuit of capital accumulation.
Thus, the period of colonialism brought in sources for raw materials and
captive markets for exports, while decolonialization brought new opportunities
in the form of dependence. Linked in with Marxist theories is dependency theory
and the Core-Periphery Model, which argue that developed countries, in their
pursuit of power, appropriate developing states through international banking,
security and trade agreements and unions on a formal level, and do so through
the interaction of political & financial advisors, missionaries, relief aid
workers, and multinational corporations on the informal level, in order to
integrate them into the capitalist system, strategically appropriating under-
valued natural resources and labor hours and fostering economic & political
dependence. Marxist theories receive little attention in the United States
where no significant Socialist party has flourished. It is more common in parts
of Europe and is one of the more important theoretic contributions of Latin
American academia to the study of global networks. Leadership Theories.
Interest Group perspective. Interest Group theory posits that the driving force
behind state behavior is sub-state interest groups. Examples of interest groups
include political lobbyists, the military, and the corporate sector. Group
theory argues that although these interest groups are constitutive of the
state, they are also causal forces in the exercise of state power. Strategic
Perspective. Strategic Perspective is a theoretical approach that views
individuals as choosing their actions by taking into account the anticipated
actions and responses of others with the intention of maximizing their own
welfare. Inherent bad faith model in international relations and political
psychology. The "inherent bad faith model" of information processing is a
theory in political psychology that was first put forth by Ole Holsti to
explain the relationship between John Foster Dulles’ beliefs and his model of
information processing. It is the most widely studied model of one's opponent.
A state is presumed to be implacably hostile, and contra-indicators of this are
ignored. They are dismissed as propaganda ploys or signs of weakness. Examples
are John Foster Dulles’ position regarding the Soviet Union, or Israel’s
initial position on the Palestinian Liberation Organization. Poststructuralist
theories. Poststructuralist theories of IR developed in the 1980s from
postmodernist studies in political science. Post-structuralism explores the
deconstruction of concepts traditionally not problematic in IR, such as 'power'
and 'agency' and examines how the construction of these concepts shapes
international relations. The examination of 'narratives' plays an important
part in poststructuralist analysis, for example feminist poststructuralist work
has examined the role that 'women' play in global society and how they are
constructed in war as 'innocent' and 'civilians'. Concepts in international
relations. Conjuncture. In decision making in international relations, the
concept of Conjuncture (international relations), together with freedom of
action and equality are important elements. Decision makers must take into
account the set of international conditions in taking initiatives that would
create different types of responses. Systemic level concepts. International
relations is often viewed in terms of levels of analysis. The systemic level
concepts are those broad concepts that define and shape an international
milieu, characterised by Anarchy. Power. The concept of power in international
relations can be described as the degree of resources, capabilities, and
influence in international affairs. It is often divided up into the concepts of
hard power and soft power, hard power relating primarily to coercive power,
such as the use of force, and soft power commonly covering economics, diplomacy
and cultural influence. However, there is no clear dividing line between the
two forms of power. Polarity. Polarity in International Relations refers to the
arrangement of power within the international system. The concept arose from
bipolarity during the Cold War, with the international system dominated by the
conflict between two superpowers, and has been applied retrospectively by
theorists. However, the term bipolar was notably used by Stalin who said he saw
the international system as a bipolar one with two opposing powerbases and
ideologies. Consequently, the international system prior to 1945 can be
described as multi-polar, with power being shared among Great powers. The
collapse of the Soviet Union in 1991 had led to what some would call
unipolarity, with the United States as a sole superpower. However, due to
China's continued rapid economic growth (in 2010 it became the world's second
largest economy), combined with the respectable international position they
hold within political spheres and the power that the Chinese Government exerts
over their people (consisting of the largest population in the world), there is
debate over whether China is now a superpower or a possible candidate in the
future. Several theories of international relations draw upon the idea of
polarity. The balance of power was a concept prevalent in Europe prior to the
First World War, the thought being that by balancing power blocs it would
create stability and prevent war. Theories of the balance of power gained
prominence again during the Cold War, being a central mechanism of Kenneth
Waltz's Neorealism. Here, the concepts of balancing (rising in power to counter
another) and bandwagonning (siding with another) are developed. Hegemonic
stability theory (developed by Robert Gilpin) also draws upon the idea of
Polarity, specifically the state of unipolarity. Hegemony is the preponderance
of power at one pole in the international system, and the theory argues this is
a stable configuration because of mutual gains by both the dominant power and
others in the international system. This is contrary to many Neorealist
arguments, particularly made by Kenneth Waltz, stating that the end of the Cold
War and the state of unipolarity is an unstable configuration that will
inevitably change. This can be expressed in Power transition theory, which
states that it is likely that a great power would challenge a hegemon after a
certain period, resulting in a major war. It suggests that while hegemony can
control the occurrence of wars, it also results in the creation of one. Its
main proponent, A.F.K. Organski, argued this based on the occurrence of
previous wars during British, Portuguese and Dutch hegemony. Interdependence.
Many advocate that the current international system is characterized by growing
interdependence; the mutual responsibility and dependency on others. Advocates
of this point to growing globalization, particularly with international
economic interaction. The role of international institutions, and widespread
acceptance of a number of operating principles in the international system,
reinforces ideas that relations are characterized by interdependence.
Dependency. Dependency theory is a theory most commonly associated with
Marxism, stating that a set of Core states exploit a set of weaker Periphery
states for their prosperity. Various versions of the theory suggest that this
is either an inevitability (standard dependency theory), or use the theory to
highlight the necessity for change (Neo-Marxist). Unit-level concepts in
international relations. As a level of analysis the unit level is often
referred to as the state level, as it locates its explanation at the level of
the state, rather than the international system. Regime type. It is often
considered that a state's form of government can dictate the way that a state
interacts with others in the international system. Democratic Peace Theory is a
theory that suggests that the nature of democracy means that democratic
countries will not go to war with each other. The justifications for this are
that democracies externalise their norms and only go to war for just causes,
and that democracy encourages mutual trust and respect. Communism justifies a
world revolution, which similarly would lead to peaceful coexistence, based on
a proletarian global society. the power politics is also considered
Revisionism/Status quo. States can be classified by whether they accept the
international status quo, or are revisionist, i.e. want change. Revisionist
states seek to fundamentally change the rules and practices of international
relations, feeling disadvantaged by the status quo. They see the international
system as a largely western creation which serves to reinforce current
realities. Japan is an example of a state that has gone from being a
revisionist state to one that is satisfied with the status quo, because the
status quo is now beneficial to it. Religion. It is often considered that
religion can have an effect on the way a state acts within the international
system. Religion is visible as an organising principle particularly for Islamic
states, whereas secularism sits at the other end of the spectrum, with the
separation of state and religion being responsible for the Liberal
international relations theory. Individual or sub-unit level concepts. The
level beneath the unit (state) level can be useful both for explaining factors
in International Relations that other theories fail to explain, and for moving
away from a state-centric view of international relations. Institutions in
international relations. International institutions form a vital part of
contemporary International Relations. Much interaction at the system level is
governed by them, and they outlaw some traditional institutions and practices
of International Relations, such as the use of war (except in self-defence). As
humanity enters the Planetary phase of civilization, some scientists and
political theorists see a global hierarchy of institutions replacing the
existing system of sovereign nation-states as the primary political community.
They argue that nations are an imagined community that cannot resolve such
modern challenges as the “Dogville” effect (strangers in a homogeneous
community), the legal and political status of stateless people and refugees,
and the need to address worldwide concerns like climate change and pandemics.
Futurist Paul Raskin has hypothesized that a new, more legitimate form of
global politics could be based on “constrained pluralism.” This principle
guides the formation of institutions based on three characteristics:
irreducibility, where some issues must be adjudicated at the global level;
subsidiarity, which limits the scope of global authority to truly global issues
while smaller-scope issues are regulated at lower levels; and heterogeneity,
which allows for diverse forms of local and regional institutions as long as
they meet global obligations. Generalist Inter-State Organizations. The United
Nations (UN) is an international organization that describes itself as a
"global association of governments facilitating co-operation in international
law, international security, economic development, and social equity"; It is
the most prominent international institution. Many of the legal institutions
follow the same organizational structure as the UN. The Organization of Islamic
Cooperation (OIC) is an international organization consisting of 57 member
states. The organisation attempts to be the collective voice of the Muslim
world (Ummah) and attempts to safeguard the interests and ensure the progress
and well-being of Muslims.
