Internationalism (politics) Internationalism is a political movement which
advocates a greater economic and political cooperation among nations for the
theoretical benefit of all. Partisans of this movement, such as supporters of
the World Federalist Movement, claim that nations should cooperate because
their long-term mutual interests are of greater value than their individual
short term needs. Internationalism is by nature opposed to ultranationalism,
jingoism, realism and national chauvinism. Internationalism teaches that the
people of all nations have more in common than they do differences, and thus
that nations should treat each other as equals. The term internationalism is
often wrongly used as a synonym for cosmopolitanism. 'Cosmopolitanist' is also
sometimes used as a term of abuse for internationalists. Internationalism is
not necessarily anti-nationalism, as in the People's Republic of China and
stalinist countries. Modern expression. Internationalism is most commonly
expressed as an appreciation for the diverse cultures in the world, and a
desire for world peace. People who express this view believe in not only being
a citizen of their respective countries, but of being a citizen of the world.
Internationalists feel obliged to assist the world through leadership and
charity. Internationalists also advocate the presence of an international
organization, such as the United Nations, and often support a stronger form of
a world government. Contributors to the current version of internationalism
include Albert Einstein, who believed in a world government, and classified the
follies of nationalism as "an infantile sickness". International Organizations
and Internationalism. For both intergovernmental organizations and
international non-governmental organizations to emerge, nations and peoples had
to be strongly aware that they shared certain interests and objectives across
national boundaries and they could best solve their many problems by pooling
their resources and effecting transnational cooperation, rather than through
individual countries' unilateral efforts. Such a view, such global
consciousness, may be termed internationalism, the idea that nations and
peoples should cooperate instead of preoccupying themselves with their
respective national interests or pursuing uncoordinated approaches to promote
them. Sovereign nations vs. supernational powers balance. Internationalism, in
the strict meaning of the word, is still based on the existence of sovereign
nations. Its aims are to encourage multilateralism (world leadership not held
by any single country) and create some formal and informal interdependence
between countries, with some limited supranational powers given to
international organisations controlled by those nations via intergovernmental
treaties and institutions. The ideal of many internationalists, among them
world citizens, is to go a step further towards democratic globalization by
creating a world government. However, this idea is opposed and/or thwarted by
other internationalists, who believe any World Government body would be
inherently too powerful to be trusted, or because they dislike the path taken
by supranational entities such as the United Nations or the European Union and
fear that a world government inclined towards fascism would emerge from the
former. These internationalists are more likely to support a loose world
federation in which most power resides with the national governments. United
States. The United States of America is a member of the North American Free
Trade Agreement, the United Nations, Central American Free Trade Agreement, the
Security and Prosperity Partnership, among others. The United States nearly
became a member in the Free Trade Agreement of the Americas, which would have
initially opened trade with all nations in North and South America except Cuba.
However, many economic nationalists suspect that "free" trade, one of the
aspects of internationalism, with China is not "free" and not under control.
What assists in this argument is the fact that China subsidizes their
industries 17% to keep their currency artificially low and to tariff American
goods. George Washington and Thomas Jefferson. Washington advised the United
States, in his Farewell Address, to remain a neutral player in the
international political game. He urged the new republic to avoid conflicts and
alliances with other nations. Although he felt that economic ties with other
nations should be promoted to encourage trade and commerce, political ties
should be minimal. He was concerned that having close relations could force the
United States to unite with allies to promote their interest and be drawn into
their war, such as what later occurred in World War I and World War II.
Likewise, he was concerned that strongly discordant relations would do the same
and that both situations could force the US into conflicts that may not be
important to the US. In addition, he was concerned that these types of
relations would cause passion-driven foreign policy rather than policy based
upon the nation's interest. Quoting him, "It is our true policy to steer clear
of permanent alliances with any portion of the foreign world." However, George
Washington was not the only Founding Father of the United States to advise
neutrality in foreign affairs. Thomas Jefferson, stated as early as 1799 that
"Commerce with all nations, alliance with none, should be our motto", and in
1801 "I deem of the essential principles of our government be peace, commerce,
and honest friendship with all nations, entangling alliances with none."
However, Jefferson did believe that nations could work together when faced with
common threats. As a diplomat in Europe during the 1780s, Jefferson
unsuccessfully attempted to organize a multi-national coalition to mount a
naval campaign against the Barbary Pirates of North Africa. Britain. "Free
Trade! What is it? Why, breaking down the barriers that separate nations; those
barriers behind which nestle the feelings of pride, revenge, hatred and
jealously, which every now and then burst their bounds and deluge whole
countries with blood..." Cobden therefore believed that Free Trade would pacify
the world by interdependence (see Cobdenism), an idea also expressed by Adam
Smith in his The Wealth of Nations and common to many liberals of the time. A
belief in the idea of the moral law and an inherent goodness in human nature
also inspired their faith in internationalism. In the twentieth century a
Gladstonian liberal who became a socialist after World War I, J. A. Hobson in
his book "Imperialism" (1902), anticipated the growth of international courts
and congresses which would hopefully settle international disputes between
nations in a peaceful way. Sir Norman Angell in his work "The Great Illusion"
(1910) claimed that the world was united by trade, finance, industry and
communications and that therefore nationalism was an anachronism and that war
would not profit anyone involved but would only result in destruction. "the
voluntary federation of the free civilised nations which will eventually
exorcise the spectre of competitive armaments and give lasting peace to
mankind.". In September 1915 he thought the British Empire was 'the perfect
example of the eventual world Commonwealth'. Internationalism expressed itself
in Britain through the endorsement of the League of Nations by such people as
Gilbert Murray. Both the Liberal Party and more so the Labour Party had
prominent internationalist members, like the Labour Prime Minister Ramsay
Macdonald who believed that our true nationality is mankind. See also. ==
References ==
