Interest rate parity Interest rate parity is a no-arbitrage condition
representing an equilibrium state under which investors will be indifferent to
interest rates available on bank deposits in two countries. The fact that this
condition does not always hold allows for potential opportunities to earn
riskless profits from covered interest arbitrage. Two assumptions central to
interest rate parity are capital mobility and perfect substitutability of
domestic and foreign assets. Given foreign exchange market equilibrium, the
interest rate parity condition implies that the expected return on domestic
assets will equal the exchange rate-adjusted expected return on foreign
currency assets. Investors cannot then earn arbitrage profits by borrowing in a
country with a lower interest rate, exchanging for foreign currency, and
investing in a foreign country with a higher interest rate, due to gains or
losses from exchanging back to their domestic currency at maturity. Interest
rate parity takes on two distinctive forms: "uncovered interest rate parity"
refers to the parity condition in which exposure to foreign exchange risk
(unanticipated changes in exchange rates) is uninhibited, whereas "covered
interest rate parity" refers to the condition in which a forward contract has
been used to "cover" (eliminate exposure to) exchange rate risk. Each form of
the parity condition demonstrates a unique relationship with implications for
the forecasting of future exchange rates: the forward exchange rate and the
future spot exchange rate. Economists have found empirical evidence that
covered interest rate parity generally holds, though not with precision due to
the effects of various risks, costs, taxation, and ultimate differences in
liquidity. When both covered and uncovered interest rate parity hold, they
expose a relationship suggesting that the forward rate is an unbiased predictor
of the future spot rate. This relationship can be employed to test whether
uncovered interest rate parity holds, for which economists have found mixed
results. When uncovered interest rate parity and purchasing power parity hold
together, they illuminate a relationship named "real interest rate parity",
which suggests that expected real interest rates represent expected adjustments
in the real exchange rate. This relationship generally holds strongly over
longer terms and among emerging market countries. Assumptions. Interest rate
parity rests on certain assumptions, the first being that capital is mobile -
investors can readily exchange domestic assets for foreign assets. The second
assumption is that assets have perfect substitutability, following from their
similarities in riskiness and liquidity. Given capital mobility and perfect
substitutability, investors would be expected to hold those assets offering
greater returns, be they domestic or foreign assets. However, both domestic and
foreign assets are held by investors. Therefore, it must be true that no
difference can exist between the returns on domestic assets and the returns on
foreign assets. That is not to say that domestic investors and foreign
investors will earn equivalent returns, but that a single investor on any given
side would expect to earn equivalent returns from either investment decision.
Uncovered interest rate parity. When the no-arbitrage condition is satisfied
"without" the use of a forward contract to hedge against exposure to exchange
rate risk, interest rate parity is said to be "uncovered". Risk-neutral
investors will be indifferent among the available interest rates in two
countries because the exchange rate between those countries is expected to
adjust such that the dollar return on dollar deposits is equal to the dollar
return on foreign deposits, thereby eliminating the potential for uncovered
interest arbitrage profits. Uncovered interest rate parity helps explain the
determination of the spot exchange rate. The following equation represents
uncovered interest rate parity. where The dollar return on dollar deposits,
formula_3, is shown to be equal to the dollar return on euro deposits,
formula_4. Approximation. Uncovered interest rate parity asserts that an
investor with dollar deposits will earn the interest rate available on dollar
deposits, while an investor holding euro deposits will earn the interest rate
available in the eurozone, but also a potential gain or loss on euros depending
on the rate of appreciation or depreciation of the euro against the dollar.
Economists have extrapolated a useful approximation of uncovered interest rate
parity that follows intuitively from these assumptions. If uncovered interest
rate parity holds, such that an investor is indifferent between dollar versus
euro deposits, then any excess return on euro deposits must be offset by some
expected loss from depreciation of the euro against the dollar. Conversely,
some shortfall in return on euro deposits must be offset by some expected gain
from appreciation of the euro against the dollar. The following equation
represents the uncovered interest rate parity approximation.
