Inter-Parliamentary Union The Inter-Parliamentary Union (IPU; ) is an
international organization established in 1889 by William Randal Cremer (United
Kingdom) and Frédéric Passy (France). It was the first permanent forum for
political multilateral negotiations. Initially, the organization was for
individual parliamentarians, but has since transformed into an international
organization of the parliaments of sovereign states. The national parliaments
of 162 countries are members of the IPU, and 10 regional parliamentary
assemblies are associate members. The IPU has permanent observer status at the
United Nations. History. The organisation's initial objective was the
arbitration of conflicts. The IPU played an important part in setting up the
Permanent Court of Arbitration in The Hague. Over time, its mission has evolved
towards the promotion of democracy and inter-parliamentary dialogue. The IPU
has worked for establishment of institutions at the inter-governmental level,
including the United Nations, an organization with which it cooperates and with
which it has permanent observer status. Numerous bodies have expressed interest
in the possibility of transforming the IPU into a United Nations Parliamentary
Assembly, among them the Committee for a Democratic UN, the German Bundestag
and the Socialist International. The Liberal International also considers this
as an option. The headquarters of the union have been moved several times since
its inception. Members and organization. Members. It is the duty of the Members
of the Union to submit the resolutions of the Union within their respective
Parliament, in the most appropriate form; to communicate them to the
Government; to stimulate their implementation and to inform the Secretariat of
the Union, as often and fully as possible, particularly in its annual reports,
as to the steps taken and the results obtained. Organs. The Association of
Secretaries General of Parliaments shall be a consultative body of the Inter-
Parliamentary Union. Amendments to the Statutes. Any proposal to amend the
Statutes shall be submitted in writing to the Secretariat of the Union at least
three months before the meeting of the Assembly. The Secretariat will
immediately communicate all such proposals to the Members of the Union. The
consideration of such proposed amendments shall be automatically placed on the
agenda of the Assembly. Any sub-amendments shall be submitted in writing to the
Secretariat of the Union at least six weeks before the meeting of the Assembly.
The Secretariat will immediately communicate all such sub-amendments to the
Members of the Union. After hearing the opinion of the Governing Council,
expressed through a simple majority vote, the Assembly shall decide on such
proposals by a two-thirds majority vote. The IPU and the United Nations. The
IPU marked the 50th anniversary of the United Nations by holding a special
session in the General Assembly Hall before the start of the session, where
they planned for closer cooperation with the United Nations. The General
Assembly Resolution passed during that session requested the Secretary-General
to put this into action. An agreement was signed between the IPU and the
Secretary-General on 24 July 1996 and subsequently ratified by a General
Assembly Resolution, where the United Nations recognizes IPU as the world
organization of parliaments. to this resolution, the Secretary-General
submitted a report which was noted with appreciation by the General Assembly,
who requested further strengthening of cooperation and another report. This
report detailed the measures that had been taken, including opening a liaison
office in New York, and cooperation on issues such land-mines and the promotion
of representative democracy. Following an entire morning of debate the General
Assembly passed a resolution which simply stated that it "looks forward to
continued close cooperation". The following year (1999) the Secretary-General
reported on an increased number of areas of cooperation, the issue was debated
for an entire afternoon (interrupted by a minute of silence held for tribute to
Vazgen Sargsyan, the Prime Minister of Armenia who had just at that time been
killed by gunmen), and passed a resolution requesting the IPU be allowed to
address the Millennium General Assembly directly. Following another report, and
another half-day debate, the General Assembly welcomed the IPU declaration
entitled "The Parliamentary vision for international cooperation at the dawn of
the third millennium" and called for the Secretary-General to explore new and
further ways in which the relationship could be strengthened. On 19 November
2002 the IPU was granted observer status to the General Assembly. In the
Resolution "59/19, Cooperation between the United Nations and the Inter-
Parliamentary Union", the UN General Assembly takes note of the recommendations
in regard to engaging parliamentarians more systematically in the work of the
United Nations. The final declaration of the Second World Conference of
Speakers of Parliament, hosted at United Nations headquarters, took place in
September 2005, was entitled "Bridging the democracy gap in international
relations: A stronger role for parliament". In the Resolution adopted by the UN
General Assembly, "61/6, Cooperation between the United Nations and the Inter-
Parliamentary Union", in 27 November 2006, it calls for "the further
development of the annual parliamentary hearing at the United Nations and other
specialized parliamentary meetings in the context of major United Nations
meetings as joint United Nations-Inter-Parliamentary Union events". Every year
during the fall session of the General Assembly the IPU organises a
Parliamentary Hearing. A resolution on cooperation between the United Nations
and the IPU allowed for circulation of official IPU documents in the General
Assembly. UN and the IPU cooperate closely in various fields, in particular
peace and security, economic and social development, international law, human
rights, and democracy and gender issues, but IPU has not obtained the status of
UN General Assembly subsidiary organ.
