Intergovernmental organization An intergovernmental organization, sometimes
rendered as an international governmental organization and both abbreviated as
IGO, is an organization composed primarily of sovereign states (referred to as
"member states"), or of other intergovernmental organizations.
Intergovernmental organizations are often called international organizations,
although that term may also include international nongovernmental organization
such as international non-profit organizations or multinational corporations.
Intergovernmental organizations are an important aspect of public international
law. IGOs are established by treaty that acts as a charter creating the group.
Treaties are formed when lawful representatives (governments) of several states
go through a ratification process, providing the IGO with an international
legal personality. Intergovernmental organizations in a legal sense should be
distinguished from simple groupings or coalitions of states, such as the G8 or
the Quartet. Such groups or associations have not been founded by a constituent
document and exist only as task groups. Intergovernmental organizations must
also be distinguished from treaties. Many treaties (such as the North American
Free Trade Agreement, or the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade before the
establishment of the World Trade Organization) do not establish an organization
and instead rely purely on the parties for their administration becoming
legally recognized as an "ad hoc" commission. Other treaties have established
an administrative apparatus which was not deemed to have been granted
international legal personality. Types and purposes. Intergovernmental
organizations differ in function, membership and membership criteria. They have
various goals and scopes, often outlined in the treaty or charter. Some IGOs
developed to fulfill a need for a neutral forum for debate or negotiation to
resolve disputes. Others developed to carry out mutual interests in a unified
aims are to preserve peace through conflict resolution and better international
relations, promote international cooperation on matters such as environmental
protection, to promote human rights, to promote social development (education,
health care), to render humanitarian aid, and to economic development. Some are
more general in scope (the United Nations) while others may have subject-
specific missions (such as Interpol or the International Organization for
Standardization and other standards organizations). Common types include: Some
organizations, such as NATO, have collective security or mutual defense
provisions. The Union of International Associations publishes an annual
directory of organizations and provides ancillary information on most
international organizations, both intergovernmental and non-governmental.
Examples. The United Nations 193 Member States. Membership is "...open to all
other peace-loving states which accept the obligations contained in the present
Charter and, in the judgment of the Organization, are able and willing to carry
out these obligations." World Bank 186 Members made up of government-owned
organizations. North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) They are determined to
safeguard the freedom, common heritage and civilization of their peoples,
founded on the principles of democracy, individual liberty and the rule of law.
They seek to promote stability and well-being in the North Atlantic area. They
are resolved to unite their efforts for collective defence and for the
preservation of peace and security. They therefore agree to this North Atlantic
Treaty." "NATO is an Alliance that consists of 28 independent member
countries." History. While treaties, alliances, and multilateral conferences
had existed for centuries, IGOs only began to be established in the 19th
century. Among the first were the Central Commission for Navigation on the
Rhine, initiated in the aftermath of the Napoleonic Wars, and the future
International Telegraph Union, which was founded by the signing of the
International Telegraph Convention by 20 countries in May 1865. Of notable
significance was the emergence of the League of Nations following World War
One, designed as an institution to foster collective security in order to
sustain peace. Expansion and growth. There currently are more than 250 IGOs
worldwide, and this number continues to rise. This increase may be attributed
to globalization, which increases and encourages the cooperation among and
within states. Globalization has also provided easier means for IGO growth, as
a result of increased international relations. This is seen economically,
politically, militarily, as well as on the domestic level. Economically, IGOs
gain material and non-material resources for economic prosperity. IGOs also
provide more political stability within the state and among differing states.
Military alliances are also formed by establishing common standards in order to
ensure security of the members to ward off outside threats. Lastly, the
formation has encouraged autocratic states to develop into democracies in order
to form an effective and internal government. Participation and involvement.
There are several different reasons a state may choose membership in an
intergovernmental organization. But there are also reasons membership may be
rejected. These reasons are explored in the sections below. Strengths and
weaknesses. They can be deemed unfair as countries with a higher percentage
voting power have the right to veto any decision that is not in their favor,
leaving the smaller countries powerless. Further readings and external
references. http://untreaty.un.org/English/Seminar/Laos_03/
intorganizations.ppthttp://www.aallnet.org/sis/fcilsis/Syllabi/kuehl/
Introduction%20to%20Intergovernmental%20Organizations%20and%20Non-
Governmental.ppt
