Internet taxes From the inception of the Internet until the late 1990s, the
Internet was free of regulation by government in the United States at all
levels, and also free of any specially targeted tax levies, duties, imposts, or
license fees. By 1996, however, that began to change, as several U.S. states
and municipalities began to see Internet services as a potential source of tax
revenue. The 1998 Internet Tax Freedom Act halted the expansion of direct
taxation of the Internet, grandfathering existing taxes in ten states. In the
United States alone, some 30,000 taxing jurisdictions could otherwise have laid
claim to taxes on a piece of the Internet. The law, however, did not affect
sales taxes applied to online purchases. These continue to be taxed at varying
rates depending on the jurisdiction, in the same way that phone and mail orders
are taxed. The enactment of this legislation has coincided with the beginning
of a period of spectacular Internet growth. Its proponents argue that the
benefits of knowledge, trade, and communications that the Internet is bringing
to more people in more ways than ever before are worth the tax revenue losses,
if any, and that the economic and productivity growth attributable to the
Internet may well have contributed more revenues to various governments than
would otherwise have been received. Opponents, on the other hand, have argued
that the Internet would continue to prosper even if taxed, and that the current
federal ban on Internet-specific levies denies government at all levels a much-
needed source of revenue. It must be emphasized that the absence of direct
taxation of the Internet does not mean that all transactions taking place
online are free of tax, or even that the Internet is free of all tax. In the
United States, nearly all online transactions are subject to one form of tax or
the other. The Internet Tax Freedom Act merely precludes states in the United
States from imposing their sales tax, or any other kind of gross receipts tax,
on certain online services. For example, a state may impose an income or
franchise tax on the net income earned by the provider of online services,
while the same state may be precluded from imposing its sales tax on the gross
receipts of that provider. In addition, as noted above, the Internet Tax
Freedom Act does not prevent taxation of the sale of goods through the
Internet. Forms of Internet taxation. Internet access tax. Internet access
taxes normally take the form of taxation on Internet service provider (ISP)
access charges. ISPs levy these charges on users. Currently, these fees are
typically imposed at the state level. There is no national tax on ISP user
charges. No uniform description of Internet access taxes is possible; they fall
within the category of sales taxes in some states, and telecommunications taxes
in others; and they are considered service charges, which are usually exempt
from taxation, in still other states. Ten states (which were grandfathered
under the Internet Tax Freedom Act as part of a political compromise) are
allowed to provide for some manner of taxation on ISP charges. The ten states
are Hawaii, New Hampshire, New Mexico, North Dakota, Ohio, South Dakota,
Tennessee, Texas, Washington & Wisconsin. Under the grandfather clause included
in the Internet Tax Freedom Act, Texas is currently collecting a tax on
Internet access charges over $25.00 per month. Texas collected tax on internet
access prior to the enactment of ITFA under the "Taxables Services" provision
of its Tax Code, see older § 151.0101(a). Texas has refined its tax code to
define "Internet access service", include it under "Taxable Services" and
exempted the first $25.00 on a monthly basis, See current Texas Tax Code §
151.325 & 151.0101(a) Telecommunications tax. Some states, such as Tennessee
and Wisconsin, treat Internet access charges as telecommunications services,
thus subjecting them to often high telecommunications taxes. Different methods
of accessing the Internet (regular phone, ISDN, DSL, cable, wireless,
satellite) are often subject to different levels of taxation, for a similar
service. Opponents of these taxes say this distorts the market and creates
unfair advantages for certain businesses, and penalizes certain types of users
disproportionately. Franchise tax. Both states and localities have
traditionally levied franchise taxes on utilities and cable television
operators. Prior to the Internet Tax Freedom Act, many municipalities were
studying the possibility of extending their franchise taxes to either ISPs,
their customers, or both. The greatest practical problem associated with the
collection of franchise taxes is the multiplicity of potential levies on a
single retail customer; the ban on multiple taxation in the Internet Tax
Freedom Act is a response, in part, to this issue. A correlative issue is the
compliance burden on ISPs who must deal with competing franchise taxes in
thousands of local jurisdictions, although the likelihood is such a burden
would be passed on to customers. Bit tax. Several countries have proposed
taxing Internet usage by volume. The bit tax would not discriminate between
telephony, data, voice, images, or other content; it would apply based on the
volume of data transferred. Because this is an Internet-specific tax that has
no analog in the offline world, it is specifically banned in the U.S. by the
Internet Tax Freedom Act. E-mail tax. E-mail tax is a specific type of bit-tax,
which would tax based on volume of email sent or received, quantified either by
number of messages or data size of the messages. This type of tax was mentioned
in a 1996 report by the United Nations Development Program entitled
"Globalization With a Human Face", as a type of bit tax which would raise an
estimated $70 billion dollars (US) if implemented globally. The e-mail tax has
been the subject of numerous internet and political hoaxes. Imposition of e-
mail taxes by the U.S. government or any of its political subdivisions is
banned by the Internet Tax Freedom Act. Bandwidth tax. The concept behind the
bandwidth tax is progressivity; it would apply on a graduated scale according
to the speed of one's Internet connection. It is also clearly banned by the
Internet Tax Freedom Act. Conceptual issues. There are many conceptual issues
involved in the determination of which of several jurisdictions have the
authority to tax the Internet, or transactions on it, in some way. Internet
taxation has essentially been banned in the United States since 1998, except
for those jurisdictions that were grandfathered under existing federal law.
Most of which involves Internet access taxes, franchise taxes, and
telecommunications taxes, although a smattering of other taxes currently exist.
Beyond the questions of direct taxation of Internet access through levies such
as bit taxes, bandwidth taxes, email taxes, and franchise fees, a related issue
concerns the imposition of sales taxes on Internet sales of goods and services.
This taxation is not prohibited by federal statute, but rather by a series of
U.S. Supreme Court decisions including "Quill Corp. v. North Dakota" (1992).
Those cases held that state taxation of in-state sales by vendors with no
significant physical presence in the state violates the Commerce Clause of the
U.S. Constitution. Because of this constitutional prohibition on collecting
sales tax from so-called "remote" sales on the Internet, the issue of local
jurisdictions taxing goods and services purchased from out of state by their
residents using the Internet has not yet raised the conceptual questions
discussed below. See tax-free shopping." Location. The issue of location—of
the Internet user, the user's counterparties in a commercial transaction, the
headquarters facilities of any involved commercial entities, and even the
servers and switches—is important for tax purposes. For example, of the nine
U.S. states that currently tax access in some manner, four make reference to
location. In each case, both the provision of service and the billing must take
place within the state. Connecticut places the burden of determining whether
this is so upon the Internet service provider. But in general, there is no
simple way to determine location, owing largely to the Internet's lack of
boundaries. Users can and routinely do access their accounts from remote
locations; providers are almost always located in multiple taxing
jurisdictions; and the data traffic itself, via the Internet's packet-switched
architecture, is routed through myriad locations. Such issues are important not
only for practical reasons of determining the incidence of the tax and its
enforcement, but also because the U.S. Constitution requires that a state or
taxing sub-jurisdiction have "nexus" with the transaction in order to exert its
taxing power, and that determination rests precisely upon such considerations.
Setup v. monthly fee. In the United States, some states and taxing authorities
distinguish between the initial setup fee for Internet access and the monthly,
hourly, or per-minute billing fee for actual access. Nebraska taxes the initial
setup, but only if software is provided. It does not tax subsequent monthly
billing. Tennessee, on the other hand, taxes both. Good vs. service. A basic
issue in determining whether Internet access and Internet usage of various
kinds is subject to sales tax, use tax, telecommunications tax, a combination
of these taxes, or no taxes at all, is whether Internet access and usage is
determined to be a "good" or a "service." If access to the Internet or usage is
deemed a service, in general no sales or use taxation applies, while the rates
and variants of telecommunications taxes that apply can be different. However,
if access requires downloading of user software, some U.S. states (e.g.,
Massachusetts) may deem that to be a "taxable sale" of goods for their
residents. Collection. Collection of Internet taxes presents a complex array of
issues. These include whether states themselves should collect the tax; whether
the burden instead should be placed on the Internet service provider; the
extent to which retailers or value-added intermediaries can be required to
perform collection duties; and in all cases, the ways in which this collection
can be accurately and meaningfully enforced by the taxing jurisdiction. Current
law and future prospects. The 1998 Internet Tax Freedom Act was authored by
Representative Christopher Cox, R-CA and Senator Ron Wyden, D-OR and signed
into law on October 21, 1998 by President Bill Clinton in an effort to promote
and preserve the commercial potential of the Internet. This law bars federal,
state, and local governments from taxing Internet access and from imposing
discriminatory Internet-only taxes such as bit taxes, bandwidth taxes, and e-
mail taxes. The law also bars multiple taxes on electronic commerce. The bill
has been extended three times by the United States Congress since its original
enactment and was last renewed on October 30, 2007 for 7 years.[http://
www.usatoday.com/money/industries/technology/2007-10-30-internet-tax_N.htm]
Propositions outside the United States. French President Nicolas Sarkozy
announced on January 8, 2008, that he would propose taxing the Internet as a
way to fund the country's state-owned television stations. The proposition came
as part of a broader plan for the French audiovisual network; the plan also
included provisions such as the "total suppression of advertising on public
channels" whose funding would then be aided by "an infinitesimal sales tax on
new communication methods, like Internet access and mobile telephony.".
