Intersectionality Intersectionality is a feminist sociological theory first
highlighted by Kimberlé Crenshaw (1989). Intersectionality is a methodology of
studying "the relationships among multiple dimensions and modalities of social
relationships and subject formations" (McCall 2005). The theory suggests—and
seeks to examine how—various biological, social and cultural categories such
as gender, race, class, ability, sexual orientation, and other axes of identity
interact on multiple and often simultaneous levels, contributing to systematic
social inequality. Intersectionality holds that the classical
conceptualizations of oppression within society, such as racism, sexism,
homophobia, and religion-based bigotry, do not act independently of one
another; instead, these forms of oppression interrelate, creating a system of
oppression that reflects the "intersection" of multiple forms of
discrimination. Concept. A standard textbook example of intersectionality
theory might be "the view that women experience oppression in varying
configurations and in varying degrees of intensity" (Ritzer, 2007, pg. 204).
Cultural patterns of oppression are not only interrelated, but are bound
together and influenced by the intersectional systems of society. Examples of
this include race, gender, class, and ethnicity (Collins, 2000, pg. 42).
Intersectionality is an important paradigm not only for sociological and
cultural studies, but there have been many challenges in utilizing it to its
fullest capacity. Difficulties arise due to the many complexities involved in
making "multidimensional conceptualizations" that explain the way in which
socially constructed categories of differentiation interact to create a social
hierarchy. For example, intersectionality holds that knowing a woman lives in a
sexist society is insufficient information to describe her experience; instead,
it is also necessary to know her race, sexual orientation, class, etc., as well
as her society's attitude toward each of these. The theory of intersectionality
also suggests that discrete forms and expressions of oppression actually shape,
and are shaped by, one another. Thus, in order to fully understand the
racialization of oppressed groups, one must investigate the ways in which
racializing structures, social processes, and social representations (or ideas
purporting to represent groups and group members in society) are shaped by
gender, class, sexuality, etc. While the theory began as an exploration of the
oppression of women within society, today sociologists strive to apply it to
all people and to many different intersections of group membership. Historical
background of intersectionality. A comprehensive historical study of the
development of intersectionality theory has yet to be documented. From the
little documentation that exists, it is understood that the concept of
intersectionality came to the forefront of sociological circles in the late
1960s and early 1970s in conjunction with the multiracial feminist movement. It
came as part of a critique of radical feminism that had developed in the late
1960s known as the "re-visionist feminist theory." This re-visionist feminist
theory "challenged the notion that 'gender' was the primary factor determining
a woman's fate". The movement led by women of color disputed the idea that
women were a homogeneous category sharing essentially the same life
experiences. This argument stemmed from the realization that white middle-class
women did not serve as an accurate representation of the feminist movement as a
whole. Recognizing that the forms of oppression experienced by white middle-
class women were different from those experienced by black, poor, or disabled
women, feminists sought to understand the ways in which gender, race, and class
combined to "determine the female destiny." Leslie McCall, a leading
intersectionality theorist, argues that the introduction of the
intersectionality theory was vital to sociology, claiming that before its
development, there was little research in existence that addressed specifically
the experiences of people who are subjected to multiple forms of subordination
within society. The term also has historical and theoretical links to the
concept of "simultaneity" advanced during the 1970s by members of the Combahee
River Collective, in Boston, Massachusetts. Members of this group articulated
an awareness that their lives—and their forms of resistance to
oppression—were profoundly shaped by the simultaneous influences of race,
class, gender, and sexuality. Thus, the women of the Combahee River Collective
advanced an understanding of African American experiences that challenged
analyses emerging from Black and male-centered social movements; as well as
those from mainstream White, middle-class, heterosexual feminists. Theories of
intersectionality increasingly also address the more than human. Examples of
posthuman intersectionality include ecofeminism and are under development in
the field of animal studies. Intersectionality theory and feminist thought. The
term "intersectionality theory" was first coined by Kimberlé Crenshaw in 1989.
Crenshaw mentioned that the intersectionality experience within black women is
more powerful than the sum of their race and sex, that any observations that do
not take intersectionality into consideration cannot accurately address the
manner where black women are "subordinated". The term gained prominence in the
1990s when sociologist Patricia Hill Collins reintroduced the idea as part of
her discussion on black feminism. This term replaced her previously coined
expression "black feminist thought", "and increased the general applicability
of her theory from African American women to all women" (Mann and Huffman,
2005, pg. 61). Much like her predecessor Crenshaw, Collins argued that cultural
patterns of oppression are not only interrelated, but are bound together and
influenced by the intersectional systems of society, such as race, gender,
class, and ethnicity (Collins, 2000, pg. 42). According to feminists of color,
and many white feminists, experiences of class, gender, sexuality, etc., cannot
be adequately understood unless the influences of racialization are carefully
considered. Feminists argue that an understanding of intersectionality is a
vital element to gaining political and social equality and improving our
democratic system. Collins' theory is one of particular interest because it
represents the sociological crossroads between modern and post-modern feminist
thought. The complexities of intersectionality. There are three different
approaches to studying intersectionality. The three approaches are
anticategorical complexity, intercategorical complexity, and intracategorical
complexity, and they serve to represent the broad spectrum of current
methodologies that are used to better understand and apply the
intersectionality theory. Anticategorical complexity: The anti-categorical
approach is based on the deconstruction of categorical divisions. It argues
that social categories are an arbitrary construction of history and language
and that they contribute little to understanding the ways in which people
experience society. Furthermore the anticategorical approach states that,
"inequalities are rooted in relationships that are defined by race, class,
sexuality, and gender," therefore the only way to eliminate oppression in
society is to eliminate the categories used to section people into differing
groups. This analysis claims that society is too complex to be reduced down
into finite categories and instead recognizes the need for a holistic approach
in understanding intersectionality. Intercategorical (aka categorical)
complexity: The intercategorical approach to intersectionality begins by
addressing the fact that inequality exists within society, and then uses this
as the base of its discussion of intersectionality. According to
intercategorical complexity, "the concern is with the nature of the
relationships among social groups and, importantly, how they are changing."
Proponents of this methodology use existing categorical distinctions to
document inequality across multiple dimensions and measure its change over
time. Intracategorical complexity: The intracategorical approach can best be
explained as the midpoint between the anticategorical and intercategorical
approaches. It recognizes the apparent shortcomings of existing social
categories and it questions the way in which they draw boundaries of
distinction. Yet, this approach does not completely reject the importance of
categories like the anticategorical approach; rather the intracategorical
approach recognizes the relevance of social categories to the understanding of
the modern social experience. Moreover it attempts to reconcile these
contrasting views by focusing on people who cross the boundaries of constructed
categories, in an effort to understand the ways in which the complexity and
intersectionality the human experience unfold. Key concepts. Interlocking
matrix of oppression. Collins refers to the various intersections of social
inequality as the matrix of domination. This is also known as "vectors of
oppression and privilege" (Ritzer, 2007, pg. 204). These terms refer to how
differences among people (sexual orientation, class, race, age, etc.) serve as
oppressive measures towards females, and ultimately change the experiences of
living as a woman in society. Collins, Audre Lorde (in Sister Outsider), and
bell hooks point towards either/or thinking as an influence on this oppression
and as further intensifying these differences. Specifically, Collins refers to
this as the construct of dichotomous oppositional difference. This construct is
characterized by its focus on differences rather than similarities (Collins,
1986, pg. S20). For example, society commonly uses dichotomies as descriptors
such as black/white or male/female. Additionally, these dichotomies are
directly opposed to each other and intrinsically unstable, meaning they rarely
represent equal relationships. In a 1986 article, Collins further relates this
to why Black women experience oppression. Notice in the dichotomies mentioned
above, Black women typically fall into what is seen by society as the inferior
halves. Internalization of this leads to further the oppression faced by women
(most notably Black women) in society. Standpoint epistemology and the outsider
within. Both Collins and Dorothy Smith have been instrumental in providing a
sociological definition of standpoint theory. A standpoint is an individual's
unique world perspective. The theoretical basis of this approach involves
viewing societal knowledge as being located within an individual's specific
geographic location. In turn, knowledge becomes distinctly unique and
subjective—it varies depending upon the social conditions under which it was
produced (Mann and Kelley, 1997, pg. 392). The concept of the outsider within
refers to a special standpoint encompassing the self, family, and society
(Collins, 1986, pg. S14). This relates to the specific experiences to which
people are subjected as they move from a common cultural world (i.e. family) to
that of the modern society (Ritzer, 2007, pg. 207). Therefore, even though a
woman (especially a Black woman) may become influential in a particular field,
she may feel as though she never quite belongs. Essentially, their
personalities, behaviors, and cultural beings overshadow their true value as an
individual; thus, they become the outsider within (Collins, 1986, pg. S14).
Resisting oppression. Speaking from a critical standpoint, Collins points out
that Brittan and Maynard claim "domination always involves the objectification
of the dominated; all forms of oppression imply the devaluation of the
subjectivity of the oppressed" (Collins, 1986, pg S18). She later notes that
self-evaluation and self-definition are two ways of resisting oppression.
Participating in self-awareness methods helps to preserve the self-esteem of
the group that is being oppressed and help them avoid any dehumanizing outside
influences. Marginalized groups often gain a status of being an "other"
(Collins, 1986, pg. S18). In essence, you are "an other" if you are different
from what Audre Lorde calls the mythical norm. "Others" are virtually anyone
that differs from the societal schema of an average white male. Gloria
Anzaldúa theorizes that the sociological term for this is "othering", or
specifically attempting to establish a person as unacceptable based on certain
criterion that fails to be met (Ritzer, 2007, pg. 205). Individual subjectivity
is another concern for marginalized groups. Differences can be used as a weapon
of self-devaluation by internalizing stereotypical societal views, thus leading
to a form of psychological oppression. (In psychology this is known as a self-
fulfilling prophecy.) The point Collins effectively makes is that having a
sense of self-value and a stable self-definition not obtained from outside
influences helps to overcome these oppressive societal methods of domination.
Applications of intersectionality. Intersectionality and social work. In the
field of social work, proponents of intersectionality hold that unless service
providers take intersectionality into account, they will be of less use, and
may in fact be detrimental, for various segments of the population. Thus,
service providers have an obligation to be aware of the seemingly unrelated
factors that can impact a person's life experience and response to the service
and to adapt their methods accordingly. For instance, according to
intersectionality, domestic violence counselors in the United States that urged
all women to report their abusers to police would be of little use to women of
color due to the history of racially-motivated police brutality in that
population, and those counselors should therefore develop a different approach
appropriate for women of color. Intersectionality and psychology. Research in
psychology has lagged behind other social and behavioral science fields in
fully incorporating intersectionality into their theory or methods.
Psychologists who study social processes and organization tend to think of
intersecting identities as separable categories. That is, they assume that the
research project can separate, for example, the effects of gender and
socioeconomic status from one another. Some recent publications point to the
development of a more sophisticated psychology of intersecting identities.
Intersectionality and the labor market. The intersectionality of race and
gender has been shown to have a visible impact on the labor market.
"Sociological research clearly shows that accounting for education, experience,
and skill does not fully explain significant differences in labor market
outcomes." The three main domains on which we see the impact of
intersectionality are wages, discrimination, and domestic labor. Most studies
have shown that people who fall into the bottom of the social hierarchy in
terms of race or gender are more likely to receive lower wages, to be subjected
to stereotypes and discriminated against, or be hired for exploitive domestic
positions. Through the study of the labor market and intersectionality we gain
a better understanding of economic inequalities and the implications of the
multidimensional impact of race and gender on social status within society. A
Marxist-feminist critical theory. Collins’ intersectionality theory and its
relative principles have a wide range of applicability in the sociological
realm, especially in topics such as politics and violence (see, for instance,
Collins, 1998). A central tenet of interest is on the struggle faced by Black
women in the economic sector. This provides a wonderful example of how the
interrelated principles of Collins’ theory come together to add a new twist
to a Marxist economic theory. A brief historical perspective will allow for
better understanding of how Collins used her insight and built a dynamic theory
of political oppression as related to Black women in particular. W. E. B. Du
Bois theorized that the intersectional paradigms of race, class, and nation
might explain certain aspects of Black political economy. Collins writes "Du
Bois saw race, class, and nation not primarily as personal identity categories
but as social hierarchies that shaped African American access to status,
poverty, and power" (2000, pg. 42). Interestingly, Du Bois omitted gender from
his theory, and considered it more of a personal identity category. Cheryl
Townsend Gilkes further expands upon this by pointing out the value of
centering upon the experiences of Black Women. Joy James takes things one step
further by "using paradigms of intersectionality in interpreting social
phenomena" (Collins, 2000, pg. 44). Collins later integrated these three views
by examining a Black political economy through both the centering of Black
women's experiences and using a theoretical framework of intersectionality
(Collins, 2000, pg. 44). Collins uses a "Marxist feminist" approach and applies
her intersectional principles to what she calls the "work/family nexus and
black women's poverty". In her 2000 article "Black Political Economy" she
describes how the intersections of consumer racism, gender hierarchies, and
disadvantages in the labor market can be centered on Black women's unique
experiences (pg. 45–46). Considering this from a historical perspective
examining interracial marriage laws and property inheritance laws creates what
Collins terms a "distinctive work/family nexus that in turn influences the
overall patterns of Black political economy" (pg. 46). A historical example
will clarify this and provide a more precise case of this application.
Essentially, anti-interracial marriage laws effectively suppressed the
potential economic rising of black women. Many times, a marriage can be
economically stabilizing for both husband and wife. However, since Black women
were outlawed from marrying White men, Black women were denied access to
sharing the prosperities of White male property. In essence, their biracial
children were deprived of this as well. A perhaps latent consequence of this
was the regulation of wealth for Black women.
