International trade International trade is the exchange of capital, goods, and
services across international borders or territories. In most countries, such
trade represents a significant share of gross domestic product (GDP). While
international trade has been present throughout much of history (see Silk Road,
Amber Road), its economic, social, and political importance has been on the
rise in recent centuries. Industrialization, advanced transportation,
globalization, multinational corporations, and outsourcing are all having a
major impact on the international trade system. Increasing international trade
is crucial to the continuance of globalization. Without international trade,
nations would be limited to the goods and services produced within their own
borders. International trade is, in principle, not different from domestic
trade as the motivation and the behavior of parties involved in a trade do not
change fundamentally regardless of whether trade is across a border or not. The
main difference is that international trade is typically more costly than
domestic trade. The reason is that a border typically imposes additional costs
such as tariffs, time costs due to border delays and costs associated with
country differences such as language, the legal system or culture. Another
difference between domestic and international trade is that factors of
production such as capital and labor are typically more mobile within a country
than across countries. Thus international trade is mostly restricted to trade
in goods and services, and only to a lesser extent to trade in capital, labor
or other factors of production. Trade in goods and services can serve as a
substitute for trade in factors of production. Instead of importing a factor of
production, a country can import goods that make intensive use of that factor
of production and thus embody it. An example is the import of labor-intensive
goods by the United States from China. Instead of importing Chinese labor, the
United States imports goods that were produced with Chinese labor. One report
in 2010 suggested that international trade was increased when a country hosted
a network of immigrants, but the trade effect was weakened when the immigrants
became assimilated into their new country. International trade is also a branch
of economics, which, together with international finance, forms the larger
branch of international economics. History. The history of international trade
chronicles notable events that have affected the trade between various
countries. In the era before the rise of the nation state, the term
'international' trade cannot be literally applied, but simply means trade over
long distances; the sort of movement in goods which would represent
international trade in the modern world. Models. There have been several models
for international trade. Adam Smith's model. Adam Smith displays trade taking
place on the basis of countries exercising absolute cost advantage over one
another. Ricardian model. The Ricardian model focuses on comparative advantage,
which arises due to differences in technology or natural resources. The
Ricardian model does not directly consider factor endowments, such as the
relative amounts of labor and capital within a country. Heckscher-Ohlin model.
In the early 1900s a theory of international trade was developed by two Swedish
economists, Eli Heckscher and Bertil Ohlin. This theory has subsequently been
known as the Heckscher-Ohlin model (H-O model). The results of the H-O model
are that countries will produce and export goods that require resources
(factors) which are relatively abundant and import goods that require resources
which are in relative short supply. In the Heckscher-Ohlin model the pattern of
international trade is determined by differences in factor endowments. It
predicts that countries will export those goods that make intensive use of
locally abundant factors and will import goods that make intensive use of
factors that are locally scarce. Empirical problems with the H-O model, such as
the Leontief paradox, were noted in empirical tests by Wassily Leontief who
found that the United States tended to export labor-intensive goods despite
having an abundance of capital. Reality and Applicability of the Heckscher-
Ohlin Model. In 1953, Wassily Leontief published a study in which he tested the
validity of the Heckscher-Ohlin theory. The study showed that the U.S was more
abundant in capital compared to other countries, therefore the U.S would export
capital-intensive goods and import labor-intensive goods. Leontief found out
that the U.S's exports were less capital intensive than its imports. After the
appearance of Leontief's paradox, many researchers tried to save the Heckscher-
Ohlin theory, either by new methods of measurement, or either by new
interpretations. Leamer emphasized that Leontief did not interpret H-O theory
properly and claimed that with a right interpretation, the paradox did not
occur. Brecher and Choudri found that, if Leamer was right, the American
workers' consumption per head should be lower than the workers' world average
consumption. Many textbook writers, including Krugman and Obstfeld and Bowen,
Hollander and Viane, are negative about the validity of H-O model. After
examining the long history of empirical research, Bowen, Hollander and Viane
concluded: "Recent tests of the factor abundance theory theory and its
developed form into many-commodity and many-factor case that directly examine
the H-O-V equations also indicate the rejection of the theory." Specific
factors model. In the specific factors model, labor mobility among industries
is possible while capital is assumed to be immobile in the short run. Thus,
this model can be interpreted as a short-run version of the Heckscher-Ohlin
model. The "specific factors" name refers to the assumption that in the short
run, specific factors of production such as physical capital are not easily
transferable between industries. The theory suggests that if there is an
increase in the price of a good, the owners of the factor of production
specific to that good will profit in real terms. Additionally, owners of
opposing specific factors of production (i.e., labor and capital) are likely to
have opposing agendas when lobbying for controls over immigration of labor.
Conversely, both owners of capital and labor profit in real terms from an
increase in the capital endowment. This model is ideal for understanding income
distribution but awkward for discussing the pattern of trade. New Trade Theory.
New Trade Theory tries to explain empirical elements of trade that comparative
advantage-based models above have difficulty with. These include the fact that
most trade is between countries with similar factor endowment and productivity
levels, and the large amount of multinational production (i.e. foreign direct
investment) that exists. New Trade theories are often based on assumptions such
as monopolistic competition and increasing returns to scale. One result of
these theories is the home-market effect, which asserts that, if an industry
tends to cluster in one location because of returns to scale and if that
industry faces high transportation costs, the industry will be located in the
country with most of its demand, in order to minimize cost. Although new trade
theory can explain the growing trend of trade volumes of intermediate goods,
Krugman's explanation depends too much on the strict assumption that all firms
are symmetrical, meaning that they all have the same production coefficients.
Shiozawa, based on much more general model, succeeded in giving a new
explanation on why the traded volume increases for intermediate goods when the
transport cost decreases. Gravity model. The Gravity model of trade presents a
more empirical analysis of trading patterns. The gravity model, in its basic
form, predicts trade based on the distance between countries and the
interaction of the countries' economic sizes. The model mimics the Newtonian
law of gravity which also considers distance and physical size between two
objects. The model has been proven to be empirically strong through econometric
analysis. Ricardian theory of international trade (modern development). The
Ricardian theory of comparative advantage became a basic constituent of
neoclassical trade theory. Any undergraduate course in trade theory includes a
presentation of Ricardo's example of a two-commodity, two-country model. A
common representation of this model is made using an Edgeworth Box. This model
has been expanded to many-country and many-commodity cases. Major general
results were obtained by McKenzie and Jones, including his famous formula. It
is a theorem about the possible trade pattern for N-country N-commodity cases.
Contemporary theories. Ricardo's idea was even expanded to the case of
continuum of goods by Dornbusch, Fischer, and Samuelson This formulation is
employed for example by Matsuyama and others. These theories use a special
property that is applicable only for the two-country case. Neo-Ricardian trade
theory. Inspired by Piero Sraffa, a new strand of trade theory emerged and was
named neo-Ricardian trade theory. The main contributors include Ian Steedman
(1941-) and Stanley Metcalfe (1946-). They have criticized neoclassical
international trade theory, namely the Heckscher-Ohlin model on the basis that
the notion of capital as primary factor has no method of measuring it before
the determination of profit rate (thus trapped in a logical vicious circle).
This was a second round of the Cambridge capital controversy, this time in the
field of international trade. The merit of neo-Ricardian trade theory is that
input goods are explicitly included. This is in accordance with Sraffa's idea
that any commodity is a product made by means of commodities. The limitation of
their theory is that the analysis is restricted to small-country cases. Traded
intermediate goods. Ricardian trade theory ordinarily assumes that the labor is
the unique input. This is a great deficiency as trade theory, for intermediate
goods occupy the major part of the world international trade. Yeats found that
30% of world trade in manufacturing involves intermediate inputs. Bardhan and
Jafee found that intermediate inputs occupy 37 to 38% of U.S. imports for the
years 1992 and 1997, whereas the percentage of intrafirm trade grew from 43% in
1992 to 52% in 1997. McKenzie and Jones emphasized the necessity to expand the
Ricardian theory to the cases of traded inputs. In a famous comment McKenzie
(1954, p.Â 179) pointed that "A moment's consideration will convince one that
Lancashire would be unlikely to produce cotton cloth if the cotton had to be
grown in England." Paul Samuelson coined a term "Sraffa bonus" to name the
gains from trade of inputs. Ricardo-Sraffa trade theory. John Chipman observed
in his survey that McKenzie stumbled upon the questions of intermediate
products and discovered that "introduction of trade in intermediate product
necessitates a fundamental alteration in classical analysis." It took many
years until Y. Shiozawa succeeded in removing this deficiency. The Ricardian
trade theory was now constructed in a form to include intermediate input trade
for the most general case of many countries and many goods. This new theory is
called Ricardo-Sraffa trade theory. Based on an idea of Takahiro Fujimoto, who
is a specialist in automobile industry and a philosopher of the international
competitiveness, Fujimoto and Shiozawa developed a discussion in which how the
factories of the same multi-national firms compete between them across borders.
International "intra-firm competition" reflects a really new aspect of
international competition in the age of so-called global competition. Largest
countries by total international trade. Source : Exports. Imports. The World
Factbook. Top traded commodities (exports). Source: International Trade Centre
External links. Data. Official statistics. The definitions and methdological
concepts applied for the various statistical collections on international trade
often differ in terms of definition (e.g. special trade vs. general trade) and
coverage (reporting thresholds, inclusion of trade in services, estimates for
smuggled goods and cross-border provision of illegal services). Metadata
providing information on definitions and methods are often published along with
the data.
