Investment Investment has different meanings in finance and economics. Finance
investment is putting money into something with the expectation of gain, that
upon thorough analysis, has a high degree of security for the principal amount,
as well as security of return, within an expected period of time. In contrast
putting money into something with an expectation of gain without thorough
analysis, without security of principal, and without security of return is
gambling. Putting money into something with an expectation of gain with
thorough analysis, without security of principal, and without security of
return is speculation. As such, those shareholders who fail to thoroughly
analyze their stock purchases, such as owners of mutual funds, could well be
called gamblers. Indeed, given the efficient market hypothesis, which implies
that a thorough analysis of stock data is irrational, most rational
shareholders are, by definition, not investors, but speculators. Investment is
related to saving or deferring consumption. Investment is involved in many
areas of the economy, such as business management and finance whether for
households, firms, or governments. To avoid speculation an investment must be
either directly backed by the pledge of sufficient collateral or insured by
sufficient assets pledged by a third party. A thoroughly analyzed loan of money
backed by collateral with greater immediate value than the loan amount may be
considered an investment. A financial instrument that is insured by the pledge
of assets from a third party, such as a deposit in a financial institution
insured by a government agency may be considered an investment. Examples of
these agencies include, in the United States, the Securities Investor
Protection Corporation, Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, or National
Credit Union Administration, or in Canada, the Canada Deposit Insurance
Corporation. In economics or macroeconomics. In economic theory or in
macroeconomics, investment is the amount purchased per unit time of goods which
are not consumed but are to be used for future production (i.e. capital).
Examples include railroad or factory construction. Investment in human capital
includes costs of additional schooling or on-the-job training. Inventory
investment is the accumulation of goods inventories; it can be positive or
negative, and it can be intended or unintended. In measures of national income
and output, "gross investment" (represented by the variable I) is also a
component of gross domestic product (GDP), given in the formula GDP = C + I + G
+ NX, where C is consumption, G is government spending, and NX is net exports.
Thus investment is everything that remains of total expenditure after
consumption, government spending, and net exports are subtracted (i.e. I = GDP
− C − G − NX). Non-residential fixed investment (such as new factories)
and residential investment (new houses) combine with inventory investment to
make up I. "Net investment" deducts depreciation from gross investment. Net
fixed investment is the value of the net increase in the capital stock per
year. Fixed investment, as expenditure over a period of time ("per year"), is
not capital. The time dimension of investment makes it a "flow". By contrast,
capital is a "stock"— that is, accumulated net investment "to a point" in
time (such as December 31). Investment is often modeled as a function of Income
and Interest rates, given by the relation I = f(Y, r). An increase in income
encourages higher investment, whereas a higher interest rate may discourage
investment as it becomes more costly to borrow money. Even if a firm chooses to
use its own funds in an investment, the interest rate represents an opportunity
cost of investing those funds rather than lending out that amount of money for
interest. In finance. In finance, investment is the commitment of funds through
collateralized lending, or making a deposit into a secured institution. In
contrast to investment; dollar cost averaging, market timing, and
diversification are phrases associated with speculation. Investments are often
made indirectly through intermediaries, such as banks, credit unions, brokers,
lenders, and insurance companies. Though their legal and procedural details
differ, an intermediary generally makes an investment using money from many
individuals, each of whom receives a claim on the intermediary. History. The
Code of Hammurabi 1700 B.C. provided a legal framework for investment
establishing a means for the pledge of collateral by codifying debtor and
creditor rights in regard to pledged land. Punishments for breaking financial
obligations were not as severe as those for crimes involving injury or death.
In the early 1900s purchasers of stocks, bonds, and other securities were
described in media, academia, and commerce as speculators. By the 1950s the
term investment had been co-opted by financial brokers and their advertising
agencies to promote speculation. By the late 1900s the terms speculation and
speculator were somewhat down played by the media, likely due to turmoil in the
capital markets ever since the tech boom bubble pop, and the historical
fascination with blaming wall street speculators for all the ills of the world,
had mysteriously returned to the newspapers. The public is instead fed the word
"investor" or "investment" instead of "speculator" or "speculation", even
though the bulk of the activities are not investment grade. Linguistic
significance. Common usage of "investment" to describe "speculation" has
reduced investor capacity to discern investment from speculation, reduced
investor awareness of risk associated with speculation, increased capital
available to speculation, and decreased capital available to investment. Real
estate as the instrument of investment. In real estate, investment money is
used to purchase property for the purpose of holding, reselling or leasing for
income and there is an element of capital risk. Residential real estate.
Investment in residential real estate is the most common form of real estate
investment measured by number of participants because it includes property
purchased as a primary residence. In many cases the buyer does not have the
full purchase price for a property and must engage a lender such as a bank,
finance company or private lender. Different countries have their individual
normal lending levels, but usually they will fall into the range of 70–90% of
the purchase price. Against other types of real estate, residential real estate
is the least risky. Commercial real estate. Commercial real estate consists of
multifamily apartments, office buildings, retail space, hotels and motels,
warehouses, and other commercial properties. Due to the higher risk of
commercial real estate, loan-to-value ratios allowed by banks and other lenders
are lower and often fall in the range of 50–70%. External links.
