Invisible hand In economics, the invisible hand of the market is a metaphor
conceived by Adam Smith to describe the self-regulating behavior of the
marketplace. The exact phrase is used just three times in Smith's writings, but
has come to capture his important claim that individuals' efforts to maximize
their own gains in a free market benefits society, even if the ambitious have
no benevolent intentions. Smith came up with the two meanings of the phrase
from Richard Cantillon who developed both economic applications in his model of
the isolated estate. He first introduced the concept in "The Theory of Moral
Sentiments", written in 1759. In this work, however, the idea of the market is
not discussed, and the word "capitalism" is never used. By the time he wrote
"The Wealth of Nations" in 1776, Smith had studied the economic models of the
French Physiocrats for many years, and in this work the invisible hand is more
directly linked to the concept of the market: specifically that it is
competition between buyers and sellers that channels the profit motive of
individuals on both sides of the transaction such that improved products are
produced and at lower costs. This process whereby competition channels ambition
toward socially desirable ends comes out most clearly in "The Wealth of
Nations", Book I, Chapter 7. The idea of markets automatically channeling self-
interest toward socially desirable ends is a central justification for the
laissez-faire economic philosophy, which lies behind neoclassical economics. In
this sense, the central disagreement between economic ideologies can be viewed
as a disagreement about how powerful the "invisible hand" is. In alternative
models, forces which were nascent during Smith's life, such as large-scale
industry, finance, and advertising, reduce its effectiveness. "The Theory of
Moral Sentiments". The first appearance of the invisible hand in Smith occurs
in "The Theory of Moral Sentiments" (1759) in Part IV, Chapter 1, where he
describes a selfish landlord as being led by an invisible hand to distribute
his harvest to those who work for him: "The proud and unfeeling landlord views
his extensive fields, and without a thought for the wants of his brethren, in
imagination consumes himself the whole harvest ... the capacity of his stomach
bears no proportion to the immensity of his desires ... the rest he will be
obliged to distribute among those, who prepare, in the nicest manner, that
little which he himself makes use of, among those who fit up the palace in
which this little is to be consumed, among those who provide and keep in order
all the different baubles and trinkets which are employed in the economy of
greatness; all of whom thus derive from his luxury and caprice, that share of
the necessaries of life, which they would in vain have expected from his
humanity or his justice...The rich...are led by an invisible hand to make
nearly the same distribution of the necessaries of life, which would have been
made, had the earth been divided into equal portions among all its inhabitants,
and thus without intending it, without knowing it, advance the interest of the
society..." Elsewhere in "The Theory of Moral Sentiments", Smith has described
the desire of men to be respected by the members of the community in which they
live, and the desire of men to feel that they are honorable beings. While Smith
does not mention these social pressures in the above-cited discussion of the
invisible hand, one might infer that the selfish and proud landlord hires
servants in order to feel himself respected, and displays his wealth in a fine
palace in order to gain the respect of others. In this sense, the invisible
hand is in its first stage, a sort of system of social pressure that persuades
the wealthy to do, of their own volition, what the society around them
requires. "The Wealth of Nations". The part of "The Wealth of Nations" (1776)
which describes what future generations would consider to be Smith's invisible
hand, ironically, does not use the term. The process by which market
competition channels individual greed is most clearly described in Book I,
Chapter 7. Adam Smith uses the metaphor in Book IV, chapter II, paragraph IX of
"The Wealth of Nations". In the often misquoted and poorly understood paragraph
quoted below Smith argues that a preference for the use of "domestic" industry
over "foreign" industry to gain individual profit constitutes an "invisible"
and benevolent hand which promotes the interests of the nation and society at
large while at the same time enriching the individual. The individual may have
a selfish motive but the use of domestic industry and labor enriches and
promotes the interests of society as a whole. Smith may have borrowed the
expression from Shakespeare's Macbeth. The expression is used in a dialogue in
which Macbeth informs Lady Macbeth of his fears for their safety. Macbeth asks
the night to destroy his enemy "with thy bloody and invisible hand" (Act 3,
Scene 2). Economists' interpretation of the "invisible hand" quotation. The
concept of the "invisible hand" is nearly always generalized beyond Smith's
original discussion of domestic versus foreign trade. Milton Friedman, a Nobel
Prize winner in economics, called Smith's Invisible Hand "the possibility of
cooperation without coercion." Kaushik Basu has called the First Welfare
Theorem the Invisible Hand Theorem. The theory of the Invisible Hand states
that if each consumer is allowed to choose freely what to buy and each producer
is allowed to choose freely what to sell and how to produce it, the market will
settle on a product distribution and prices that are beneficial to all the
individual members of a community, and hence to the community as a whole. The
reason for this is that self-interest drives actors to beneficial behavior in a
case of serendipity. Efficient methods of production are adopted to maximize
profits. Low prices are charged to maximize revenue through gain in market
share by undercutting competitors. Investors invest in those industries most
urgently needed to maximize returns, and withdraw capital from those less
efficient in creating value. All these effects take place dynamically and
automatically. It also works as a balancing mechanism. For example, the
inhabitants of a poor country will be willing to work very cheaply, so
entrepreneurs can make great profits by building factories in poor countries.
Because they increase the demand for labor, they will increase its price;
further, because the new producers also become consumers, local businesses must
hire more people to provide the things they want to consume. As this process
continues, the labor prices eventually rise to the point where there is no
advantage for the foreign countries doing business in the formerly poor
country. Overall, this mechanism causes the local economy to function on its
own. Some economists question the integrity of how the term "invisible hand" is
currently used. Gavin Kennedy, Professor Emeritus at Heriot-Watt University in
Edinburgh, Scotland, argues that its current use in modern economic thinking as
a symbol of free market capitalism is not reconcilable with the rather modest
and indeterminate manner in which it was employed by Smith. In conclusion of
their exchange, Kennedy insists that Smith's intentions are of utmost
importance to the current debate, which is one of Smith's association with the
term "invisible hand". If the term is to be used as a symbol of liberty and
economic coordination as it has been in the modern era, Kennedy argues that it
should exist as a construct completely separate from Adam Smith since there is
little evidence that Smith imputed any significance onto the term, much less
the meanings given it at present. D. H. MacGregor, "Economic Thought and
Policy" (London: Oxford University Press, 1949), pp. 81-82. Harvard economist
Stephen Marglin argues that while the "invisible hand" is the "most enduring
phrase in Smith's entire work", it is "also the most misunderstood." According
to Professor Emeritus William Grampp of the University of Chicago, According to
Emma Rothschild, Smith was actually being ironic in his use of the term. Warren
Samuels described it as "a means of relating modern high theory to Adam Smith
and, as such, an interesting example in the development of language."
Understood as a metaphor. Smith uses the metaphor in the context of an argument
against protectionism and government regulation of markets, but it is based on
very broad principles developed by Bernard Mandeville, Bishop Butler, Lord
Shaftesbury, and Francis Hutcheson. In general, the term "invisible hand" can
apply to any individual action that has unplanned, unintended consequences,
particularly those that arise from actions not orchestrated by a central
command, and that have an observable, patterned effect on the community.
Bernard Mandeville argued that private vices are actually public benefits. In
"The Fable of the Bees" (1714), he laments that the "bees of social virtue are
buzzing in Man's bonnet": that civilized man has stigmatized his private
appetites and the result is the retardation of the common good. Bishop Butler
argued that pursuing the public good was the best way of advancing one's own
good since the two were necessarily identical. Lord Shaftesbury turned the
convergence of public and private good around, claiming that acting in
accordance with one's self-interest produces socially beneficial results. An
underlying unifying force that Shaftesbury called the "Will of Nature"
maintains equilibrium, congruency, and harmony. This force, to operate freely,
requires the individual pursuit of rational self-interest, and the preservation
and advancement of the self. Francis Hutcheson also accepted this convergence
between public and private interest, but he attributed the mechanism, not to
rational self-interest, but to personal intuition, which he called a "moral
sense." Smith developed his own version of this general principle in which six
psychological motives combine in each individual to produce the common good. In
"The Theory of Moral Sentiments", vol. II, page 316, he says, ""By acting
according to the dictates of our moral faculties, we necessarily pursue the
most effective means for promoting the happiness of mankind."" Contrary to
common misconceptions, Smith did not assert that all self-interested labour
necessarily benefits society, or that all public goods are produced through
self-interested labour. His proposal is merely that in a free market, people
"usually" tend to produce goods desired by their neighbours. The tragedy of the
commons is an example where self-interest tends to bring an unwanted result.
Moreover, a free market arguably provides numerous opportunities for maximizing
one's own profit at the expense (rather than for the benefit) of others. The
tobacco industry is often cited as an example of this: the sale of cigarettes
and other tobacco products certainly brings a very good revenue, but the
industry's critics deny that the social benefits (the pleasures associated with
smoking, the camaraderie, the feeling of doing something "cool") can possibly
outbalance the social costs. Examples and arguments. Since Smith's time, the
principle of the invisible hand has been further incorporated into economic
theory. Léon Walras developed a four-equation general equilibrium model that
concludes that individual self-interest operating in a competitive market place
produces the unique conditions under which a society's total utility is
maximized. Vilfredo Pareto used an edgeworth box contact line to illustrate a
similar social optimality. Ludwig von Mises, in Human Action (see note 3 at the
bottom), claims that Smith believed that the invisible hand was that of God. He
did not mean this as a criticism, since he held that secular reasoning leads to
similar conclusions. The invisible hand is traditionally understood as a
concept in economics, but Robert Nozick argues in "Anarchy, State and Utopia"
that substantively the same concept exists in a number of other areas of
academic discourse under different names, notably Darwinian natural selection.
In turn, Daniel Dennett argues in "Darwin's Dangerous Idea" that this
represents a "universal acid" that may be applied to a number of seemingly
disparate areas of philosophical inquiry (consciousness and free will in
particular). See also Social Darwinism. Home bias interpretation. Noam Chomsky
argues that Smith (and more specifically David Ricardo) used the phrase to mean
a "home bias" for investing domestically in opposition to outsourcing
production and neoliberalism. In this interpretation, Smith meant that
merchants in the act of "preferring the support of domestic to that of foreign
industry" as if "led by an invisible hand", benefited society. The implications
are that Smith saw outsourcing and neoliberalism as damaging to society and
"the invisible hand" helped steer society away from these things. However, even
in this view Smith's objection is on practical grounds and outsourcing would
still be allowed in a market system. Other uses of the phrase by Smith. "Fire
burns, and water refreshes; heavy bodies descend, and lighter substances fly
upwards, by the necessity of their own nature; nor was the invisible hand of
Jupiter ever apprehended to be employed in those matters." In "The Theory of
Moral Sentiments" (1759) and in "The Wealth of Nations" (1776) Adam Smith
speaks of an invisible hand, never of the invisible hand. In "The Theory of
Moral Sentiments" Smith uses the concept to sustain a "trickling down" theory,
a concept also used in neoclassical development theory: The gluttony of the
rich serves to feed the poor. Smith's visit to France and his acquaintance to
the French Économistes (known as Physiocrats) changed his views from micro-
economic optimisation to macro-economic growth as the end of Political Economy.
So the "invisible hand" in "The Theory of Moral Sentiments" is denounced in the
"Wealth of Nations" as "unproductive labour". Walker, the first president (1885
to 92) of the American Economic Association, concurred: The domestic servant
… is not employed as a means to his master's profit. His master's income is
not due in any part to his employment; on the contrary, that income is first
acquired … and in the amount of the income is determined whether the servant
shall be employed or not, while to the full extent of that employment the
income is diminished. As Adam Smith expresses it "a man grows rich by employing
a multitude of manufacturers; he grows poor by maintaining a multitude of
menial servants." Smith's theoretical U-turn from a micro-economical to a
macro-economical view is not reflected in "The Wealth of Nations". Large parts
of this book are retaken from Smith's lectures before his visit to France. So
one must distinguish in "The Wealth of Nations" a micro-economical and a macro-
economical Adam Smith. Whether Smith's quotation of "an invisible hand" in the
middle of his work is a micro-economical statement or a macro-economical
statement condemning monopolies and government interferences as in the case of
tariffs and patents is debatable. Abusing Smith's statement of "an invisible
hand". That part of Smith's "The Wealth of Nations" that belongs to his views
prior to his acquaintance to the French Économistes (Physiocrats) can rightly
be claimed by neo-classical economists as their forerunner. The earlier Smith
and his teacher Hutcheson belong to a micro-economic strain in line with
Aristotle and Puffendorf. An agonising neoclassical theory had been reanimated
in the 30th [?] in Chicago against dominant Institutional economics, so claims
to be the heirs of Adam Smith are partially justified. In this line of reading
Smith, already Samuelson indicates that Smith should be an American citizen:
And at the bicentennial celebration of "The Wealth of Nations" 1976 at Glasgow
University, Stigler (from Chicago) was happy to declare: "I bring you greetings
from Adam Smith who is alive and well and living in Chicago". But this equation
of Smith's invisible hand statement and the American-led neoclassical General
equilibrium theory is obtained only by curtailing Smith. An example is Paul
Samuelson's Economics – published since 1948 with over 4 million copies. It
mentions Smith's invisible hand seven times. But the use Samuelson makes of
Smith's invisible hand is stated best by comparing Smith's text with how it is
cited in excerpts by Samuelson (Smith's text, with Samuelson's selections in
bold): "As every individual … therefore, endeavours as much as he can, both
to employ his capital in the support of domestic industry, and so to direct
that industry that its produce maybe of the greatest value; every individual
necessarily labours to render the annual revenue of the society as great as he
can. He generally, indeed, neither intends to promote the general said "public"
not general interest, nor knows how much he is promoting it. By preferring the
support of domestic to that of foreign industry, he intends only his own
security, and by directing that industry in such a manner as its produce may be
of the greatest value, he intends only his own gain; and he is in this, in many
other cases led by an invisible hand to promote an end which was no part of his
intention. Nor is it always the worse for the society that it was no part of
it. By pursuing his own interest, he frequently promotes that of the society
more effectually than when he really intends to promote it. Smith nowhere wrote
about "the invisible hand of the market" as is commonly assumed. He just used
the phrase "invisible hand". Furthermore, the qualifier, "By preferring the
support of domestic to that of a foreign industry", is not quoted when
referring to the "invisible hand" sentence. Criticisms. Joseph E. Stiglitz.
Adam Smith, the father of modern economics, is often cited as arguing for the
"invisible hand" and free markets: firms, in the pursuit of profits, are led,
as if by an invisible hand, to do what is best for the world. But unlike his
followers, Adam Smith was aware of some of the limitations of free markets, and
research since then has further clarified why free markets, by themselves,
often do not lead to what is best. As I put it in my new book, Making
Globalization Work, the reason that the invisible hand often seems invisible is
that it is often not there. Whenever there are "externalities"—where the
actions of an individual have impacts on others for which they do not pay, or
for which they are not compensated—markets will not work well. Some of the
important instances have long understood environmental externalities. Markets,
by themselves, produce too much pollution. Markets, by themselves, also produce
too little basic research. (The government was responsible for financing most
of the important scientific breakthroughs, including the internet and the first
telegraph line, and many bio-tech advances.) But recent research has shown that
these externalities are pervasive, whenever there is imperfect information or
imperfect risk markets—that is always. Government plays an important role in
banking and securities regulation, and a host of other areas: some regulation
is required to make markets work. Government is needed, almost all would agree,
at a minimum to enforce contracts and property rights. The real debate today is
about finding the right balance between the market and government (and the
third "sector"—non-governmental non-profit organizations.) Both are needed.
They can each complement each other. This balance differs from time to time and
place to place. Noam Chomsky. http://www.chomsky.info/articles/199303--.htm and
http://chomsky-must-read.blogspot.com/2011/11/chomsky-university-of-toronto-
april-7.html Stephen LeRoy. Stephen LeRoy, professor emeritus at the University
of California, Santa Barbara, and a visiting scholar at the Federal Reserve
Bank of San Francisco, offered a critique of the Invisible Hand: http://
www.frbsf.org/publications/economics/letter/2010/el2010-14.html Among the
conditions that were assumed, and which have since fallen into question, are
that information asymmetries, incentive distortions, and the failure of
government regulators to serve as a check.
