Irish Socialist Network The Irish Socialist Network (ISN) is a democratic
socialist organisation formed in 2001. It is a campaigning organisation which
works actively to fight for the rights of Irish workers and to help build a
socialist Ireland. It is based in Belfast and Dublin. Politically, the ISN
locates itself within the Marxist tradition, but it rejects both Leninism and
Trotskyism, partly because of its opposition to democratic centralist
organisational structures and to the concept of the vanguard party, which it
deems elitist. Most of the founding members were former members of the Workers'
Party, some being involved in the Official Republican Movement split in the
late 1990s. The ISN is organised in both the Republic of Ireland and Northern
Ireland. In July 2007, it had three branches: Dublin Central, Dublin
North–West and Belfast. It produces a bi-monthly, full-colour free paper
called "Resistance", the first issue of which was published in July/August
2007. The ISN's Dublin North–West branch also produces the "Finglas People",
a freesheet that is widely distributed in the area. Much of the group's
publications and articles are freely available on its website. Campaigning
activity. The ISN has been involved in many community campaigns playing a role
in campaigns against a poll tax-like refuse collection charge, commonly known
as the 'bin tax', in the Republic of Ireland and a similar water charge in
Northern Ireland. In autumn 2003, members John O'Neill,Colm Breathnach and
Bernadette Hughes were sent to Mountjoy Prison for two weeks for refusing to
abide by a High Court injunction relating to the blockading of bin lorries.
This was part of the Anti-Bin Tax Campaign. People from other groups, and non-
aligned activists also went to prison for varying amounts of time for similar
reasons. The ISN has been deeply involved in the movement against the wars in
Iraq, Afghanistan, and the occupation of Palestine. It disaffiliated from the
Irish Anti-War Movement in 2004, and has since joined Anti-War Ireland – a
group committed to anti-imperialism, a diversity of tactics in bringing an end
to imperialism, democratic internal structures, non-sectarian behavior, and
competence in its activity. The ISN held its first annual conference in June
2005. In summer 2003 the Irish Socialist Network organised discussions among
various small tendencies on the left about having a united front. The ISN
continues to be active in campaigns against fascism, racism, low pay
exploitation and religious sectarianism. The group also advocates
environmentalism and supports the rights of workers, women, ethnic minorities
and homosexuals. The ISN was also part of a leftist alliance that opposed the
Lisbon Treaty in 2008. In 2010 the ISN participated in the One Per Cent Network
along with other socialist groups such as éirígí, Seomra Spraoi and the
Workers Solidarity Movement which campaigns against the cut backs brought in by
the Irish Government due to the recession. Electoral Activity. The Irish
Socialist Network ran John O'Neill as a candidate in the 2004 local elections
(Finglas area). He also stood in the 2007 general election in the Dublin
North–West constituency. O'Neill ran unsuccessfully in the Finglas electoral
area in the 2009 local elections. The Irish Socialist Network announced it
would not stand candidates in the 2011 General Election due to fiscal
considerations, they did announce that they intend to run candidates in the
forthcoming local elections in Ireland North and South. The Irish Socialist
Network is a group of social revolutionaries, who wish to fundamentally
overturn capitalism and its political superstructure. It does not see its role
as that of radical social reformers, who wish simply to extend democratic
rights and fight for social change within the dominant socio-economic
formation. Although arguing and fighting for progressive reforms, the ISN does
not view these as a maximal objective.
