IS/LM model The IS/LM model (Investment—Saving / Liquidity preference—Money
supply) is a macroeconomic tool that demonstrates the relationship between
interest rates and real output in the goods and services market and the money
market. The intersection of the IS and LM curves is the "general equilibrium"
where there is simultaneous equilibrium in both markets. History. The IS/LM
model was born at the Econometric Conference held in Oxford during September,
1936. Roy Harrod, John R. Hicks, and James Meade all presented papers
describing mathematical models attempting to summarize John Maynard Keynes'
"General Theory of Employment, Interest, and Money". Hicks, who had seen a
draft of Harrod's paper, invented the IS/LM model (originally using the
abbreviation "LL", not "LM"). He later presented it in "Mr. Keynes and the
Classics: A Suggested Interpretation". Hicks later agreed that the model missed
important points of Keynesian theory, criticizing it as having very limited use
beyond "a classroom gadget", and criticizing equilibrium methods generally:
"When one turns to questions of policy, looking towards the future instead of
the past, the use of equilibrium methods is still more suspect." The first
problem was that it presents the real and monetary sectors as separate,
something Keynes attempted to transcend. In addition, an equilibrium model
ignores uncertainty – and that liquidity preference only makes sense in the
presence of uncertainty "For there is no sense in liquidity, unless
expectations are uncertain." A shift in one of the IS or LM curves will cause a
change in expectations, which shifts the other curve. Most modern
macroeconomists see the IS/LM model as being, at best, a starting approximation
for understanding the real world. Although disputed in some circles and
generally accepted as being imperfect, the model is widely employed and seen as
useful in gaining an understanding of macroeconomic theory. It is included in
most university undergraduate macroeconomics textbooks. Formation. The model is
presented as a graph of two intersecting lines in the first quadrant. The
horizontal axis represents national income or real gross domestic product and
is labelled "Y." The vertical axis represents the real interest rate, "i."
Since this is a non-dynamic model, there is a fixed relationship between the
nominal interest rate and the real interest rate (the former equals the latter
plus the expected inflation rate which is exogenous in the short run);
therefore variables such as money demand which actually depend on the nominal
interest rate can equivalently be expressed as depending on the real interest
rate. The point where these schedules intersect represents a short-run
equilibrium in the real and monetary sectors (though not necessarily in other
sectors, such as labor markets): both the product market and the money market
are in equilibrium. This equilibrium yields a unique combination of the
interest rate and real GDP. IS curve. For the Investment—Saving curve, the
independent variable is the interest rate and the dependent variable is the
level of income (even though the interest rate is plotted vertically). The IS
curve is drawn as downward-sloping with the interest rate (i) on the vertical
axis and GDP (gross domestic product: Y) on the horizontal axis. The initials
IS stand for "Investment and Saving equilibrium" but since 1937 have been used
to represent the locus of all equilibria where total spending (consumer
spending + planned private investment + government purchases + net exports)
equals an economy's total output (equivalent to real income, Y, or GDP). To
keep the link with the historical meaning, the IS curve can be said to
represent the equilibria where total private investment equals total saving,
where the latter equals consumer saving "plus" government saving (the budget
surplus) "plus" foreign saving (the trade surplus). In equilibrium, all
spending is desired or planned; there is no unplanned inventory accumulation.
The level of real GDP (Y) is determined along this line for each interest rate.
Thus the IS curve is a locus of points of equilibrium in the "real" (non-
financial) economy. Given expectations about returns on fixed investment, every
level of the real interest rate (i) will generate a certain level of planned
fixed investment and other interest-sensitive spending: lower interest rates
encourage higher fixed investment and the like. Income is at the equilibrium
level for a given interest rate when the saving that consumers and other
economic participants choose to do out of this income equals investment (or,
equivalently, when "leakages" from the circular flow equal "injections"). The
multiplier effect of an increase in fixed investment resulting from a lower
interest rate raises real GDP. This explains the downward slope of the IS
curve. In summary, this line represents the causation from falling interest
rates to rising planned fixed investment (etc.) to rising national income and
output. The IS curve is defined by the equation where Y represents income,
formula_2 represents consumer spending as an increasing function of disposable
income (income, Y, minus taxes, T(Y), which themselves depend positively on
income), formula_3 represents investment as a decreasing function of the real
interest rate, G represents government spending, and NX(Y) represents net
exports (exports minus imports) as a decreasing function of income (decreasing
because imports are an increasing function of income). In this equation, the
level of G (government spending) is presumed to be exogenous, meaning that it
is taken as a given. LM curve. For the Liquidity preference and Money supply
curve, the independent variable is "income" and the dependent variable is "the
interest rate." The LM curve shows the combinations of interest rates and
levels of real income for which the money market is in equilibrium. It is an
upward-sloping curve representing the role of finance and money. The LM
function is the set of equilibrium points between the liquidity preference (or
Demand for Money) function and the money supply function (as determined by
banks and central banks). The money supply function for this situation is
plotted on the same graph as the liquidity preference function. The money
supply is determined by the central bank decisions and willingness of
commercial banks to loan money. Though the money supply is related indirectly
to interest rates in the very short run, the money supply in effect is
perfectly inelastic with respect to nominal interest rates (assuming the
central bank chooses to control the money supply rather than focusing directly
on the interest rate). Thus the money supply function is represented as a
vertical line - money supply is a constant, independent of the interest rate,
GDP, and other factors. Mathematically, the LM curve is defined by the equation
formula_4, where the supply of money is represented as the real amount M/P (as
opposed to the nominal amount M), with P representing the price level, and L
being the real demand for money, which is some function of the interest rate i
and the level Y of real income. The LM curve shows the combinations of interest
rates and levels of real income for which money supply equals money
demand—that is, for which the money market is in equilibrium. For a given
level of income, the intersection point between the liquidity preference and
money supply functions implies a single point on the LM curve: specifically,
the point giving the level of the interest rate which equilibrates the money
market at the given level of income. Recalling that for the LM curve, the
interest rate is plotted against real GDP (whereas the liquidity preference and
money supply functions plot interest rates against the quantity of cash
balances), an increase in GDP shifts the liquidity preference function
rightward and hence raises the interest rate. Thus the LM function is
positively sloped. Shifts. One hypothesis is that a government's deficit
spending ("fiscal policy") has an effect similar to that of a lower saving rate
or increased private fixed investment, increasing the amount of demand for
goods at each individual interest rate. An increased deficit by the national
government shifts the IS curve to the right. This raises the equilibrium
interest rate (from i1 to i2) and national income (from Y1 to Y2), as shown in
the graph above. The equilibrium level of national income in the IS-LM diagram
is referred to as aggregate demand. By the above hypothesis, the graph
indicates one of the major criticisms of deficit spending as a way to stimulate
the economy: rising interest rates lead to crowding out – i.e.,
discouragement – of private fixed investment, which in turn may hurt long-
term growth of the supply side (potential output). Keynesians respond that
deficit spending may actually "crowd in" (encourage) private fixed investment
via the accelerator effect, which helps long-term growth. Further, if
government deficits are spent on productive public investment (e.g.,
infrastructure or public health) that directly and eventually raises potential
output, although not necessarily as much as the lost private investment might
have. The extent of any crowding out depends on the shape of the LM curve. A
shift in the IS curve along a relatively flat LM curve can increase output
substantially with little change in the interest rate. On the other hand, an
upward shift in the IS curve along a vertical LM curve will lead to higher
interest rates, but no change in output (this case represents the Treasury
View). Rightward shifts of the IS curve also result from exogenous increases in
investment spending (i.e., for reasons other than interest rates or income), in
consumer spending, and in export spending by people outside the economy being
modelled, as well as by exogenous decreases in spending on imports. Thus these
too raise both equilibrium income and the equilibrium interest rate. Of course,
changes in these variables in the opposite direction shift the IS curve in the
opposite direction. The IS/LM model also allows for the role of monetary
policy. If the money supply is increased, that shifts the LM curve downward,
lowering interest rates and raising equilibrium national income. Further,
exogenous decreases in liquidity preference, perhaps due to improved
transactions technologies, lead to downward shifts of the LM curve and thus
increases in income and decreases in interest rates. Changes in these variables
in the opposite direction shift the LM curve in the opposite direction.
Incorporation into larger models. By itself, the IS-LM model is used to study
the short run when prices are fixed or sticky and no inflation is taken into
consideration. But in practice the main role of the model is as a sub-model of
larger models (especially the Aggregate Demand-Aggregate Supply model) which
allow for a flexible price level. In the aggregate demand-aggregate supply
model, each point on the aggregate demand curve is an outcome of the IS-LM
model for aggregate demand Y based on a particular price level. Starting from
one point on the aggregate demand curve, at a particular price level and a
quantity of aggregate demand implied by the IS-LM model for that price level,
if one considers a higher potential price level, in the IS-LM model the real
money supply M/P will be lower and hence the LM curve will be shifted higher,
leading to lower aggregate demand; hence at the higher price level the level of
aggregate demand is lower, so the aggregate demand curve is negatively sloped.
