Islamic economic jurisprudence Islamic economics refers to the body of Islamic
studies literature that "identifies and promotes an economic order that
conforms to Islamic scripture and traditions," and in the economic world an
interest-free Islamic banking system, grounded in Sharia's condemnation of
interest ("riba"). The literature has been developed "since the late 1940s, and
especially since the mid-1960s." The banking system developed during the 1970s.
The central features of Islamic economic literature have been summarized as the
following: "behavioral norms" derived from the Quran and Sunna, zakat tax as
the basis of Islamic fiscal policy, and prohibition of interest. In Shia Islam,
scholars including Mahmoud Taleghani and Mohammad Baqir al-Sadr developed an
"Islamic economics" emphasizing the uplifting of the deprived masses, a major
role for the state in matters such as circulation and equitable distribution of
wealth, and a reward to participants in the marketplace for being exposed to
risk and/or liability. Islamist movements and authors generally describe an
Islamic economic system as neither socialist nor capitalist, but as a "third
way" with none of the drawbacks of the other two systems. History. These
concepts, like others in Islamic law, came from the "prescriptions, anecdotes,
examples, and words of Muhammad, gathered and systematized by commentators
according to an inductive, casuistic method." Sometimes other sources such as
al-urf (custom), al-aql (reason), or al-ijma (consensus of the jurists) were
employed. In addition, Islamic law has developed areas of law that correspond
to secular laws of contracts and torts. Early reforms under Islam. Some argued
that early Islamic theory and practice formed a "coherent" economic system with
"a blueprint for a new order in society, in which all participants would be
treated more fairly". Michael Bonner, for example, wrote that an "economy of
poverty" prevailed in Islam until the 13th and 14th century. Under this system
God's guidance made sure the flow of money and goods was "purified" by being
channeled from those who had much of it to those who had little by encouraging
zakat and discouraging riba (usury/interest) on loans. Bonner maintained that
Muhammad helped poor traders by allowing only tents (not permanent buildings)
in the market of Medina, and by not charging fees and rents there. Classical
Muslim economic thought. To some degree, the early Muslims based their economic
analyses on the Qur'an (such as opposition to riba, meaning usury/interest),
and from sunnah, the sayings and doings of Muhammad. Among the important early
Muslim scholars who made valuable contributions to economic theory are Abu
Yusuf (d. 798), Al-Mawardi (d. 1058), Ibn Hazm (d. 1064), Al-Sarakhsi (d.
1090), Al-Tusi (d. 1093), Al-Ghazali (d. 1111), Al-Dimashqi (d. after 1175),
Ibn Rushd (d. 1187), Ibn Taymiyyah (d.1328), Ibn al-Ukhuwwah (d. 1329), Ibn al-
Qayyim (d. 1350), Al-Shatibi (d. 1388), Ibn Khaldun (d. 1406), Al-Maqrizi (d.
1442), Al-Dawwani (d. 1501), and Shah Waliyullah (d. 1762). Perhaps the most
well–known Islamic scholar who wrote about economics was Ibn Khaldun, who is
considered a father of modern economics. Ibn Khaldun wrote on economic and
political theory in the introduction, or "Muqaddimah" ("Prolegomena"), of his
"History of the World" ("Kitab al-Ibar"). He discussed what he called
"asabiyya" (social cohesion), which he cited as the cause of some civilizations
becoming great and others not. Ibn Khaldun felt that many social forces are
cyclic, although there could be sudden sharp turns that break the pattern. His
idea about the benefits of the division of labor also relate to "asabiyya", the
greater the social cohesion, the more complex the successful division may be,
the greater the economic growth. He noted that growth and development
positively stimulates both supply and demand, and that the forces of supply and
demand are what determines the prices of goods. He also noted macroeconomic
forces of population growth, human capital development, and technological
developments effects on development. In fact, Ibn Khaldun thought that
population growth was directly a function of wealth. Economy in the Caliphate.
During the medieval Arab Agricultural Revolution, a social transformation took
place as a result of changing land ownership giving individuals of any gender,
ethnic or religious background the right to buy, sell, mortgage and inherit
land. Based on the Quran, signatures were required on contracts for major
financial transactions concerning agriculture, industry, commerce, and
employment. Copies of the contract were usually kept by both parties involved.
Ibn Abbas reported that Muhammad said: ""All Muslims are partners in three
things—in water, herbage and fire."" (Narrated in Abu Daud, & Ibn Majah) Anas
added to the above hadith, ""Its price is Haram (forbidden)"" Jurists have
argued by qiyas that the above restriction on privatization can be extended to
all essential resources that benefit the community as a whole. Aside from
similarities to socialism, early forms of proto-capitalism and free markets
were present in the Caliphate. An early market economy and early form of
merchant capitalism developed between the 8th and 12th centuries. circulating
capital, capital expenditure, revenue, cheques, promissory notes, trusts
("waqf"), savings accounts, transactional accounts, pawning, loaning, exchange
rates, bankers, money changers, ledgers, deposits, assignments, the double-
entry bookkeeping system, and lawsuits. Many of these concepts were adopted and
further advanced in medieval Europe from the 13th century onwards. The concepts
of welfare and pension were present in early Islamic law as forms of zakat one
of the Five Pillars of Islam, since the time of the Rashidun caliph Umar in the
7th century. The taxes (including zakat and jizya) collected in the treasury
("bayt al-mal") of an Islamic government were used to provide income for the
needy, including the poor, the elderly, orphans, widows, and the disabled.
According to the Islamic jurist Al-Ghazali (Algazel, 1058–1111), the
government was also expected to stockpile food supplies in every region in case
of disaster or famine. The Caliphate was thus one of the earliest welfare
states. Post-colonial era. During the modern post-colonial era, as Western
ideas (including Western economics) began to influence the Muslim world, some
Muslim writers sought to produce an Islamic economics discipline. Islamic
scholars who considered Islam to be a complete system of life in all its
aspects, rather than a spiritual formula believed that it logically followed
that Islam defined economic life, unique from and superior to non-Islamic
systems. To date, however, there has been no consensus as to its definition and
scope. Al-Sadr in particular was described as having "almost single-handedly
developed the notion of Islamic economics" In their writings Sadr and the other
authors "sought to depict Islam as a religion committed to social justice, the
equitable distribution of wealth, and the cause of the deprived classes," with
doctrines "acceptable to Islamic jurists," while refuting existing non-Islamic
theories of capitalism and Marxism. This version of Islamic economics, which
influenced the Iranian Revolution, called for public ownership of land and of
large "industrial enterprises," while private economic activity continued
"within reasonable limits." These ideas informed the large public sector and
public subsidy policies of the Iranian Revolution. In the 1980s and 1990s, as
the Islamic revolution failed to reach the per capita income level achieved by
the regime it overthrew, and Communist states and socialist parties in the non-
Muslim world turned away from socialism, Muslim interest shifted away from
government ownership and regulation. In Iran, ""eqtesad-e Eslami" (meaning both
Islamic economics and economy) ... once a revolutionary shibboleth, is
indubitably absent in all official documents and the media. It disapperared
from Iranian political discourse about 15 years ago ." But in other parts of
the Muslim world the term lived on, shifting form to the less ambitious goal of
interest-free banking. Some Muslim bankers and religious leaders suggested ways
to integrate Islamic law on usage of money with modern concepts of ethical
investing. In banking this was done through the use of sales transactions
(focusing on the fixed rate return modes) to support investing without
interest-bearing debt. Many modern writers have strongly criticized this
approach as a means of covering conventional banking with an Islamic facade.
Traditional approach. While many Muslims believe Islamic law is perfect by
virtue of its being revealed by God, Islamic law on economic issues was/is not
"economics" in the sense of a systematic study of production, distribution, and
consumption of goods and services. An example of the traditionalist ulama
approach to economic issues is Imam Khomeini's work "Tawzih al-masa'il" where
the term "economy" does not appear and where the chapter on selling and buying
(Kharid o forush) comes after the one on pilgrimage. As Olivier Roy put it, the
work "presents economic questions as individual acts open to moral analysis:
`To lend interest, on a note from the lender is among the good works that are
particularly recommended in the verses of the Quran and the in the
Traditions.`" Property. The Qur'an states that God is the sole owner of all
matter in the heavens and the earth. Man, however, is God's viceregent on earth
and holds God's possessions in trust ("amanat"). Islamic jurists divide
properties into public, state, private categories. Public property. Public
property in Islam refers to natural resources (forests, pastures, uncultivated
land, water, mines, oceanic resources etc.) to which all humans have equal
right. Such resources are considered the common property of the community. Such
property is placed under the guardianship and control of the Islamic state, and
can be used by any citizen, as long as that use does not undermine the rights
of other citizens. Some types of public property can not be privatized under
Islamic law. Muhammad's saying that "people are partners in three things:
water, fire and pastures", led some scholars to believe that the privatization
of water, energy and agricultural land is not permissible. Muhammad allowed
other types of public property, such as gold mines, to be privatized, in return
for tax payments to the Islamic state. The owner of the previously public
property that was privatized pays zakat and, according to Shi'ite scholars,
khums as well. In general the privatization and nationalization of public
property is subject to debate amongst Islamic scholars. Public property thus,
eventually, becomes state or private property. State property. State property
includes certain natural resources, as well as other property that can't
immediately be privatized. Islamic state property can be movable, or immovable,
and can be acquired through conquest or peaceful means. Unclaimed, unoccupied
and heir-less properties, including uncultivated land ("mawat"), can be
considered state property. During the life of Muhammad, one fifth of military
equipment captured from the enemy in the battlefield was considered state
property. During his reign, Umar (on the recommendation of Ali) considered
conquered land to be state rather than private property (as was usual
practice). The purported reason for this was that privatizing this property
would concentrate resources in the hands of a few, and prevent it from being
used for the general good. The property remained under the occupation of the
cultivators, but the taxes collected on it went to the state treasury. Muhammad
said "Old and fallow lands are for God and His Messenger (i.e. state property),
then they are for you". Jurists draw from this the conclusion that, ultimately,
private ownership takes over state property. Private property. There is
consensus amongst Islamic jurists and social scientists that Islam recognizes
and upholds the individual's right to private ownership. The Qur'an extensively
discusses taxation, inheritance, prohibition against stealing, legality of
ownership, recommendation to give charity and other topics related to private
property. Islam also guarantees the protection of private property by imposing
stringent punishments on thieves. Muhammad said that he who dies defending his
property was like a martyr. Islamic economists classify the acquisition of
private property into involuntary, contractual and non-contractual categories.
Involuntary means are inheritances, bequests, and gifts. Non-contractual
acquisition involves the collection and exploitation of natural resources that
have not previously been claimed as private property. Contractual acquisition
includes activities such as trading, buying, renting, hiring labor etc. A
tradition attributed to Muhammad, with which both Sunni and Shi'a jurists
agree, in cases where the right to private ownership causes harm to others,
then Islam favors curtailing the right in those cases. Maliki and Hanbali
jurists argue that if private ownership endangers public interest, then the
state can limit the amount an individual is allowed to own. This view, however,
is debated by others. Markets. Islam accepts markets as the basic coordinating
mechanism of the economic system. Islamic teaching holds that the market, given
perfect competition, allows consumers to obtain desired goods and producers to
sell their goods at a mutually acceptable price. Interference. Islam promotes a
market free from interferences such as price fixing and hoarding. Government
intervention, however, is tolerated under specific circumstances. Islam
prohibits price fixing by a dominating handful of buyers or sellers. During the
days of Muhammad, a small group of merchants met agricultural producers outside
the city and bought the entire crop, thereby gaining a monopoly over the
market. The produce was later sold at a higher price within the city. Muhammad
condemned this practice since it caused injury both to the producers (who in
the absence of numerous customers were forced to sell goods at a lower price)
and the inhabitants. The above mentioned reports are also used to justify the
argument that the Islamic market is characterized by free information.
Producers and consumers should not be denied information on demand and supply
conditions. Producers are expected to inform consumers of the quality and
quantity of goods they claim to sell. Some scholars hold that if an
inexperienced buyer is swayed by the seller, the consumer may nullify the
transaction upon realizing the seller's unfair treatment. The Qur'an also
forbids discriminatory transactions. Government interference in the market is
justified in exceptional circumstances, such as the protection of public
interest. Under normal circumstances, governmental non-interference should be
upheld. When Muhammad was asked to set the price of goods in a market he
responded, "I will not set such a precedent, let the people carry on on with
their activities and benefit mutually." Monetary & Fiscal Policy. Islamic
monetary and fiscal policy can guide a state in transition to an Islamic model
as well as when it reaches equilibrium. In Equilibrium. Monetary policy
emphasizes keeping inflation towards a theoretical zero rate. The currency is
maintained according to a basket of goods and services that is reflective of
the economy as well as the value of a basket of currencies that would be
represented by the level of trade with the Islamic state. The proportion of the
two are weighted to the proportion of foreign trade to domestic consumption.
This parallels classical and neo-classical ideals. Money supply expansion is
indexed directly to the population rather than through banking, to avoid an
unfair benefit to banking at the cost of the populace. Regulatory creep,
conflict of interest and political interference is avoided by a proposed
independence of banking and the statistical authority. Transition. Gradual
transition is preferred over drastic change, calling for a transitional state
similar to Communism's transitional state of Socialism. Impairment of banking,
staggered increases in reserve ratios and a gradual approach in the general
regulatory framework is considered preferable. A Keynesian fiscal policy is
called for to counteract the fall in the money supply caused by the
transitional policies. Timing and proportion is critical to the success of such
a transition. Banking. Interest. The Quran (3: 130) clearly condemns riba
usually translated as "interest": "O, you who believe! Devour not riba, doubled
and redoubled, and be careful of Allah; but fear Allah that you may be
successful." Debt arrangements. Most Islamic economic institutions advise
participatory arrangements between capital and labor. The latter rule reflects
the Islamic norm that the borrower must not bear all the cost of a failure, as
"it is God who determines that failure, and intends that it fall on all those
involved." Conventional debt arrangements are thus usually unacceptable—but
conventional venture investment structures are applied even on very small
scales. However, not every debt arrangement can be seen in terms of venture
investment structures. For example, when a family buys a home it is not
investing in a business venture—a person's shelter is not a business venture.
Similarly, purchasing other commodities for personal use, such as cars,
furniture, and so on, cannot realistically be considered as a venture
investment in which the Islamic bank shares risks and profits for the profits
of the venture. Savings-Investment. An alternative Islamic savings-investment
model can be built around venture capital; investment banks; restructured
corporations; and restructured stock market. This model looks at removing the
interest-based banking and in replacing market inefficiencies such as
subsidization of loans over profit-sharing investments due to double taxation
and restrictions on investment in private equity. Money changers. Due to
religious sanctions against odious debt, Tamil Muslims have historically been
money changers (not money lenders) throughout South and South East Asia.
Hybrids. Islamic banks have grown recently in the Muslim world but are a very
small share of the global economy compared to the Western debt banking
paradigm. Hybrid approaches, e.g. Grameen Bank which applies classical Islamic
values but uses conventional lending practices, are much lauded by some
proponents of modern human development theory. Natural capital. Perhaps due to
resource scarcity in most Islamic nations, Islamic economics emphasizes limited
(and some claim also sustainable) use of natural capital, i.e. producing land.
These latter revive traditions of haram and hima that were prevalent in early
Muslim civilization. Islamic stock index. In June 2005 Dow Jones Indexes, New
York, and RHB Securities, Kuala Lumpur, teamed up to launch a new "Islamic
Malaysia Index"—a collection of 45 stocks representing Malaysian companies
that comply with a variety of Sharia-based requirements. For example, total
debt, cash plus interest-bearing securities and accounts receivables must each
be less than 33% of the trailing 12-month average capitalization. Also,
"gambling" on derivatives and options, and on investing in firms that make
pornography or pork are also unacceptable. Islamic bonds, or sukuk, use asset
returns to pay investors to comply with the religion’s ban on interest and
are currently traded privately on the over-the-counter market. In late December
2009 Bursa Malaysia announced it was considering enabling individuals to trade
Shariah–compliant debt on its exchange as part of a plan to attract new
investors. Islamic economic modeling. Economic modeling in an Islamic context
looks to find alternative variables and parameters. For instance, many of the
key models in modern economic theory have interest (riba) as a key element.
According to one author, Tobin's q could replace Interest (I). Popularity and
availability. Today many financial institutions, even in the Western world,
that offer financial services and products in accordance with Islamic finance.
For example, Chancellor Gordon Brown in 2003 introduced legal changes that
enabled British banks and building societies to offer so-called Muslim
mortgages for house purchase. In 2004 the UK's first standalone
Sharia–compliant bank was launched, the Islamic Bank of Britain. Several
banks offer products and services to UK customers that adopt the Islamic
financial principles; such as Mudaraba, Murabaha, Musharaka and Qard. The
Islamic finance sector was worth 300–500 billion dollars (237 and 394 billion
euros) as of September 2006, compared with 200 billion dollars in 2004. Islamic
retail banks and investment funds number in the hundreds and many Western
financial institutions offer compliant products, including Citigroup, Deutsche
Bank, HSBC, Lloyds TSB and UBS. In 2008, at least $500 billion in assets around
the world were managed in accordance with Islamic law and the sector was
growing at more than 10% per year. Views. Sohrab Behada's study argued that the
economic system proposed by Islam is essentially a capitalist one. Criticism.
Islamic economics has been attacked for its alleged "incoherence,
incompleteness, impracticality, and irrelevance;" driven by "cultural identity"
rather than problem solving. Others have dismissed it as "a hodgepodge of
populist and socialist ideas," in theory and "nothing more than inefficient
state control of the economy and some almost equally ineffective redistribution
policies," in practice. In a political and regional context where Islamist and
ulema claim to have an opinion about everything, it is striking how little they
have to say about this most central of human activities, beyond repetitious
pieties about how their model is neither capitalist nor socialist. Interest-
bearing (Riba) and speculation-involving (Gharar) trading are clearly
prohibited by canonical texts. Based on this prohibition, presumably financial
structures of Islamic financial products should be interest and speculation
free. Nevertheless, some new empirical studies claim that “Islamic finance
products’ structure is based on the Islamic prohibitions; however, these
products’ risk management is still based on revoking the underlying
prohibitions”. The most prominent case is inter alia, Salam and Istisna’,
which are hedging methods for Sukuk. If Sukuk’s originator or investors wish
to hedge against interest rate or exchange rate risks, they use one of the
former methods. These methods mimic conventional risk management practice,
should involve either interest-bearing or speculation-bearing trading or even
both. Parallel Salam and synthetics are recent innovations that try to avoid
falling athwart the prohibitions.
