Islamic state An Islamic state ( "") is a type of government, in which the
primary basis for government is Islamic religious law. From the early years of
Islam, numerous governments have been founded as "Islamic", beginning most
notably with the Caliphate established by Mohammad himself and including
subsequent governments ruled under the direction of a caliph (meaning,
"successor" to the prophet Mohammad). However, the term "Islamic state" has
taken on a more specific modern connotation since the 20th century. The concept
of the modern Islamic state has been articulated and promoted by ideologues
such as Abul Ala Maududi, Ayatollah Ruhallah Khomeini, and Sayyid Qutb. Like
the earlier notion of the caliphate, the modern Islamic state is rooted in
Islamic law. It is modeled after the rule of Mohammad. However, unlike caliph-
led governments which were imperial despotisms or monarchies (Arabic: "mulk"),
a "modern" Islamic state can incorporate modern political institutions such as
elections, parliamentary rule, judicial review, and popular sovereignty. The
Historical Islamic state. Early Islamic Governments. The term caliphate refers
to the first system of government established by Muhammad (S.A.W) in 622 CE,
under the Constitution of Medina. It represented the political unity of the
Muslim Ummah (nation), although it did not always incorporate the full
"religious" community of Muslims (for example, Kharijites and Shia). It was
subsequently led by Muhammad's disciples who were known as the Rightly Guided
("Rashidun") Caliphs (632-661 CE). The Arabian Empire significantly expanded
under the Umayyad Caliphate (622-750) and the Abbasid Caliphate (750-1258). The
Essence of Islamic Governments. Prophet Muhammad himself respected the decision
of the shura members. He is the champion of the notion of al-shura, and this
was illustrated in one of the many historical events, such as, in the Battle of
Khandaq (Battle of the Ditch), where the Prophet was faced with two decisions,
i.e. to fight the unbelievers outside Medina or within Medina. After
consultation with the sahabahs (companions), it was suggested by Salman al-
Farsi that it would be better if the Muslim fought the unbelievers within
Medina by building a big ditch on the northern periphery of Medina to prevent
the enemies from entering Medina. This idea was later supported by the majority
of the sahabahs, and thereafter, the Prophet also approved it. The raison
d'être the Prophet placed great emphasis on the agreement of the decision of
the shura, is to respect the decree of the shura members, and because the
majority of opinion (by the sahabah) are supposedly better than the decision
made by one individual. However, it should be emphasized here that the decision
of the shura should not in any way violate the teaching of Islam, Quran and
Sunnah. The Revival and Abolition of the Ottoman Caliphate. The Ottoman Sultan
Selim I (1876–1909) reclaimed the title of Caliph, which had been in dispute
and asserted by a diversity of rulers and "shadow caliphs" in the centuries of
the Abbasid-Mamluk Caliphate since the Mongols' sacking of Baghdad and the
killing of the last Abbasid Caliph in Baghdad in Iraq 1258. The abolition of
the Ottoman Caliphate as an office of the Ottoman Empire occurred under Mustafa
Kemal Ataturk in 1924 as part of Ataturk's reforms. This move was most
vigorously protested in India, as Gandhi and Indian Muslims united behind the
"symbolism" of the Ottoman Caliph in the Khilafat (or "Caliphate") Movement,
which sought to reinstate the Caliph deposed by Ataturk. This Khilafat Movement
leveraged the Ottoman political resistance to the British Empire, and this
international anti-imperial connection proved to be a galvanizing force during
India's nascent nationalism movement of the early 1900s, for Hindus and Muslims
alike, even though India was far from the seat of the Ottoman Caliphate in
Istanbul. The Modern "Islamic State". Origins in 20th-century nationalist and
anti-imperialist movements. "The very term, 'Islamic State', was never used in
the theory or practice of Muslim political science, before the twentieth
century," a Pakistani scholar wrote, and western scholars of Islam agree. The
modern conceptualization of the "Islamic state" is attributed to Abul Ala
Maududi (1903–1979), an Indian Muslim theologian who founded the political
party Jamaat-e-Islami and inspired other Islamic revolutionaries such as
Ayatollah Ruhallah Khomeini. Abul Ala Maududi's early political career was
influenced greatly by anti-colonial agitation in India, especially after the
tumultuous abolition of the Ottoman Caliphate in 1924 stoked anti-British
sentiment (see Khilafat Movement). The Islamic state was perceived as a "third
way" between the rival political systems of democracy and socialism (see also
Islamic Modernism). Maududi's seminal writings on Islamic economics argued as
early as 1941 against free-market capitalism and socialist state intervention
in the economy, similar to Mohammad Baqir al-Sadr's later "Our Economics"
written in 1961. Maududi envisioned the ideal Islamic state as combining the
democratic principles of electoral politics with the socialist principles of
concern for the poor. Islamic States Today. Islamic republic is the official
name given to several Islamic modeled contemporary states in the Muslim world,
including the Islamic Republics of Pakistan, Iran and Afghanistan. Pakistan
adopted the title under the constitution of 1956. Mauritania adopted it on 28
November 1958. Iran adopted it after the 1979 Iranian Revolution that overthrew
the Pahlavi dynasty. In Iran, the form of government is known as "Guardianship
of the Islamic Jurists". Afghanistan was run as an Islamic state in areas
controlled by the Taliban from 1992–2001, and after the 2001 overthrow of the
Taliban the country is still known as the "Islamic Republic of Afghanistan".
Despite the similar name, the countries differ greatly in their governments and
laws. Saudi Arabia can be considered an Islamic state, but it is an absolute
monarchy ruled by a king and therefore not known as an "Islamic Republic". Pan-
Islamism is a form of religious nationalism within political Islam which
advocates the unification of the Muslim world under a single Islamic state,
often described as a caliphate. The Libyan interim Constitutional Declaration
of 3 August 2011 declares Islam to be official religion of Libya. Muslim
criticism of Islamic states. Prominent Muslim intellectuals have argued that
Islamic states destroy the purity of Islam. Indonesia. Indonesian scholar
Nurcholish Madjid (1939–2005) believed that the instrumental use of Islam for
political ends violates the central principle of Islamic theology, monotheism
(or "tawhid"), by mixing divine oneness with worldly politics. Iran. Leading up
to the Iranian Revolution of 1979, many of the highest-ranking clergy in Shi'a
Islam held to the standard doctrine of the Imamate, which allows political rule
only by the prophet Mohammad or one of his true successors. They were opposed
to creating an Islamic state (see Ayatollah Ha'eri Yazdi (Khomeini's own
teacher), Ayatollah Borujerdi, Grand Ayatollah Shariatmadari, and Grand
Ayatollah Khui). Today, contemporary theologians who were once part of the
Iranian Revolution have also become disenchanted and critical of the unity of
religion and state in Islamic Republic of Iran, and are advocating
secularization of the state to preserve the purity of the Islamic faith (see
Abdolkarim Soroush and Mohsen Kadivar).
