Islam Islam (; ""¬  ) is a monotheistic and Abrahamic religion articulated by
the Qur'an, a text considered by its adherents to be the word of God ( "Allah")
and by the teachings and normative example (called the "Sunnah" and composed of
"Hadith") of Muhammad, considered by them to be the last prophet of God. An
adherent of Islam is called a "Muslim". Muslims believe that God is one and
incomparable and the purpose of existence is to love and serve God. Muslims
also believe that Islam is the complete and universal version of a primordial
faith that was revealed at many times and places before, including through
Abraham, Moses and Jesus, whom they consider prophets. They maintain that
previous messages and revelations have been partially changed or corrupted over
time, but consider the Qur'an to be both the unaltered and the final revelation
of God. Religious concepts and practices include the five pillars of Islam,
which are basic concepts and obligatory acts of worship, and following Islamic
law, which touches on virtually every aspect of life and society, providing
guidance on multifarious topics from banking and welfare, to warfare and the
environment. The majority of Muslims are Sunni, being 75‚Äì90% of all Muslims.
The second largest sect, Shia, makes up 10‚Äì20%. The most populous Muslim-
majority country is Indonesia home to 12.7% of the world's Muslims followed by
Pakistan (11.0%), Bangladesh (9.2%), and Egypt (4.9%). Sizable minorities are
also found in India, China, Russia, and parts of Europe. With about 1.6 to 1.7
billion followers or 22 to 24% of earth's population, Islam is the second-
largest and one of the fastest-growing religions in the world. Etymology and
meaning. Islam is a verbal noun originating from the triliteral root s-l-
m which forms a large class of words mostly relating to concepts of wholeness,
completion and bonding/joining. In a religious context it means "voluntary
submission to God". Muslim, the word for an adherent of Islam, is the active
participle of the same verb of which "IslƒÅm" is the infinitive. Believers
demonstrate submission to God by serving God and following his commands, and
rejecting polytheism. The word sometimes has distinct connotations in its
various occurrences in the Qur'an. In some verses ("ayat"), there is stress on
the quality of Islam as an internal conviction: "Whomsoever God desires to
guide, He expands his breast to Islam." Other verses connect "islƒÅm" and
"dƒ´n" (usually translated as "religion"): "Today, I have perfected your
religion ("dƒ´n") for you; I have completed My blessing upon you; I have
approved Islam for your religion." Still others describe Islam as an action of
returning to God‚Äîmore than just a verbal affirmation of faith. Another
technical meaning in Islamic thought is as one part of a triad of "islam",
"imƒÅn" (faith), and "ihsƒÅn" (excellence) where it represents acts of service
("`ibƒÅdah") and Islamic law ("sharia"). Articles of faith. The core beliefs of
Islam are that there is only one god ‚Äì unitary and beyond comprehension ‚Äì
and that Muhammad is the prophet of God, the last in a series of prophets
beginning with Adam. The Qur'an is upheld as the eternal, literal word of God,
and revelations to earlier prophets, as seen in the Jewish Torah and Christian
Gospels, are believed to have become distorted by human intervention. Muslims
believe that the Qur‚Äôan was revealed to Muhammad through the angel Gabriel,
and belief in angels as God‚Äôs servants is part of the Islamic tradition.
Belief in the Day of Judgment, when all people will undergo bodily resurrection
and be judged by God, is another core tenet. While Sunni and Shi‚Äôa Muslims
adhere to these basic beliefs, Shi‚Äôa also believe in the Imamate, the line of
infallible spiritual and political leaders who succeeded Muhammad, beginning
with his cousin and son-in-law, Ali. God. Islam's most fundamental concept is a
rigorous monotheism, called tawhƒ´d (). God is described in chapter 112 of the
Qur'an as: "Say: He is God, the One and Only; God, the Eternal, Absolute; He
begetteth not, nor is He begotten; And there is none like unto Him." () Muslims
repudiate the Christian doctrine of the Trinity and divinity of Jesus,
comparing it to polytheism, but accept Jesus as a prophet. In Islam, God is
beyond all comprehension and Muslims are not expected to visualize God. God is
described and referred to by certain names or attributes, the most common being
"Al-RahmƒÅn", meaning "The Compassionate" and "Al-Rahƒ´m", meaning "The
Merciful" (See Names of God in Islam). Muslims believe that creation of
everything in the universe is brought into being by God‚Äôs sheer command
‚Äú‚ÄòBe‚Äô and so it is.‚Äù and that the purpose of existence is to love and
serve God. He is viewed as a personal god who responds whenever a person in
need or distress calls him. There are no intermediaries, such as clergy, to
contact God who states "We are nearer to him than (his) jugular vein" "AllƒÅh"
is the term with no plural or gender used by Muslims and Arabic-speaking
Christians and Jews to reference God, while "" () is the term used for a deity
or a god in general. Other non-Arab Muslims might use different names as much
as Allah, for instance "Tanrƒ±" in Turkish or "KhodƒÅ" in Persian. Angels.
Belief in angels is fundamental to the faith of Islam. The Arabic word for
angel ( "") means "messenger", like its counterparts in Hebrew ("malakh") and
Greek ("angelos"). According to the Qur'an, angels do not possess free will,
and worship God in total obedience. Angels' duties include communicating
revelations from God, glorifying God, recording every person's actions, and
taking a person's soul at the time of death. They are also thought to intercede
on man's behalf. The Qur'an describes angels as "messengers with wings‚Äîtwo,
or three, or four (pairs): He adds to Creation as He pleases..." Revelations.
The Islamic holy books are the records which most Muslims believe were dictated
by God to various prophets. Muslims believe that parts of the previously
revealed scriptures, the "Tawrat" (Torah) and the "Injil" (Gospels), had become
distorted‚Äîeither in interpretation, in text, or both. The Qur'an (literally,
‚ÄúReading‚Äù or ‚ÄúRecitation‚Äù) is viewed by Muslims as the final revelation
and literal word of God and is widely regarded as the finest piece of
literature work in the Arabic language. Muslims believe that the verses of the
Qur'an were revealed to Muhammad by God through the archangel Gabriel
("Jibrƒ´l") on many occasions between 610 CE until his death on June 8, 632 CE.
While Muhammad was alive, all of these revelations were written down by his
companions ("sahabah"), although the prime method of transmission was orally
through memorization. After the death of Muhammad, it was compiled in the time
of Abu Bakr, the first caliph, and was standardized under the administration of
Uthman, the third caliph. The Qur'an is divided into 114 suras, or chapters,
which combined, contain 6,236 "ƒÅyƒÅt", or verses. The chronologically earlier
suras, revealed at Mecca, are primarily concerned with ethical and spiritual
topics. The later Medinan suras mostly discuss social and moral issues relevant
to the Muslim community. The Qur'an is more concerned with moral guidance than
legal instruction, and is considered the "sourcebook of Islamic principles and
values". Muslim jurists consult the "hadith", or the written record of Prophet
Muhammad's life, to both supplement the Qur'an and assist with its
interpretation. The science of Qur'anic commentary and exegesis is known as
"tafsir". When Muslims speak in the abstract about "the Qur'an", they usually
mean the scripture as recited in Arabic rather than the printed work or any
translation of it. To Muslims, the Qur'an is perfect only as revealed in the
original Arabic; translations are necessarily deficient because of language
differences, the fallibility of translators, and the impossibility of
preserving the original's inspired style. Translations are therefore regarded
only as commentaries on the Qur'an, or "interpretations of its meaning", not as
the Qur'an itself. Prophets. Muslims identify the prophets of Islam ( "" ) as
those humans chosen by God to be his messengers. According to the Qur'an the
descendants of Abraham and Imran were chosen by God to bring the "Will of God"
to the peoples of the nations. Muslims believe that prophets are human and not
divine, though some are able to perform miracles to prove their claim. Islamic
theology says that all of God's messengers preached the message of
Islam‚Äîsubmission to the will of God. The Qur'an mentions the names of
numerous figures considered prophets in Islam, including Adam, Noah, Abraham,
Moses and Jesus, among others. Muslims believe that God finally sent Muhammad
("Seal of the Prophets") to convey the divine message to the whole world (to
sum up and to finalize the word of God). In Islam, the "normative" example of
Muhammad's life is called the Sunnah (literally "trodden path"). This example
is preserved in traditions known as hadith ("reports"), which recount his
words, his actions, and his personal characteristics. Hadith Qudsi is a sub-
category of hadith, regarded as the words of God repeated by Muhammad differing
from the Quran in that they are ""expressed in Muhammad's words"", whereas the
quran are the ""direct words of God"". The classical Muslim jurist ash-Shafi'i
(d. 820) emphasized the importance of the Sunnah in Islamic law, and Muslims
are encouraged to emulate Muhammad's actions in their daily lives. The Sunnah
is seen as crucial to guiding interpretation of the Qur'an. Six of these
collections, compiled in the 3rd century AH (9th century CE), came to be
regarded as especially authoritative by the largest group in IslƒÅm, the
Sunnites. Another large group, the Shƒ´ æah, has its own ·∏§adƒ´th contained in
four canonical collections. Resurrection and judgment. Belief in the "Day of
Resurrection", "Yawm al-QiyƒÅmah" () is also crucial for Muslims. They believe
the time of "QiyƒÅmah" is preordained by God but unknown to man. The trials and
tribulations preceding and during the "QiyƒÅmah" are described in the Qur'an
and the hadith, and also in the commentaries of scholars. The Qur'an emphasizes
bodily resurrection, a break from the pre-Islamic Arabian understanding of
death. On Yawm al-QiyƒÅmah, Muslims believe all mankind will be judged on their
good and bad deeds. The Qur'an lists several sins that can condemn a person to
hell, such as disbelief ( ""), and dishonesty; however, the Qur'an makes it
clear God will forgive the sins of those who repent if he so wills. Good deeds,
such as charity and prayer, will be rewarded with entry to heaven. Muslims view
heaven as a place of joy and bliss, with Qur'anic references describing its
features and the physical pleasures to come. Mystical traditions in Islam place
these heavenly delights in the context of an ecstatic awareness of God. "Yawm
al-QiyƒÅmah" is also identified in the Qur'an as "Yawm ad-Dƒ´n" (), "Day of
Religion"; "as-sƒÅ øah" (), "the Last Hour"; and "al-QƒÅri øah" (), "The
Clatterer." Predestination. In accordance with the Islamic belief in
predestination, or divine preordainment ("al-qadƒÅ wa'l-qadar"), God has full
knowledge and control over all that occurs. This is explained in Qur'anic
verses such as "Say: 'Nothing will happen to us except what Allah has decreed
for us: He is our protector'..." For Muslims, everything in the world that
occurs, good or evil, has been preordained and nothing can happen unless
permitted by God. According to Muslim theologians, although events are pre-
ordained, man possesses free will in that he has the faculty to choose between
right and wrong, and is thus responsible for his actions. According to Islamic
tradition, all that has been decreed by God is written in "al-Lawh al-Mahf≈´z",
the "Preserved Tablet". Five pillars. The Pillars of Islam ("arkan al-Islam";
also "arkan ad-din", "pillars of religion") are five basic acts in Islam,
considered obligatory for all believers. The Quran presents them as a framework
for worship and a sign of commitment to the faith. They are (1) the shahadah
(creed), (2) daily prayers (salat), (3) almsgiving (zakah), (4) fasting during
Ramadan and (5) the pilgrimage to Mecca (hajj) at least once in a lifetime. The
Shia and Sunni sects both agree on the essential details for the performance of
these acts. Testimony. The Shahadah, which is the basic creed of Islam that
must be recited under oath with the specific statement: """", or "I testify
there are no deities other than God alone and I testify that Muhammad is the
Messenger of God." This testament is a foundation for all other beliefs and
practices in Islam. Muslims must repeat the "shahadah" in prayer, and non-
Muslims wishing to convert to Islam are required to recite the creed. Prayer.
Ritual prayers, called ·π¢alƒÅh or ·π¢alƒÅt (Arabic: ), must be performed five
times a day. Salah is intended to focus the mind on God, and is seen as a
personal communication with him that expresses gratitude and worship. Salah is
compulsory but flexibility in the specifics is allowed depending on
circumstances. The prayers are recited in the Arabic language, and consist of
verses from the Qur'an. A mosque is a place of worship for Muslims, who often
refer to it by its Arabic name, "masjid". The word "mosque" in English refers
to all types of buildings dedicated to Islamic worship, although there is a
distinction in Arabic between the smaller, privately owned mosque and the
larger, "collective" mosque ("masjid jƒÅmi`"). Although the primary purpose of
the mosque is to serve as a place of prayer, it is also important to the Muslim
community as a place to meet and study. Modern mosques have evolved greatly
from the early designs of the 7th century, and contain a variety of
architectural elements such as minarets. Shia Islam permits combining prayers
in succession. Alms-giving. "ZakƒÅt" ( "" "") is giving a fixed portion of
accumulated wealth by those who can afford it to help the poor or needy, and
also to assist the spread of Islam. It is considered a religious obligation (as
opposed to voluntary charity) that the well-off owe to the needy because their
wealth is seen as a "trust from God's bounty". The Qur'an and the hadith also
suggest a Muslim give even more as an act of voluntary alms-giving ("sadaqah").
Fasting. Fasting, ( ""), from food and drink (among other things) must be
performed from dawn to dusk during the month of Ramadhan. The fast is to
encourage a feeling of nearness to God, and during it Muslims should express
their gratitude for and dependence on him, atone for their past sins, and think
of the needy. "Sawm" is not obligatory for several groups for whom it would
constitute an undue burden. For others, flexibility is allowed depending on
circumstances, but missed fasts usually must be made up quickly. Pilgrimage.
The pilgrimage, called the ' ( ') during the Islamic month of "Dhu al-Hijjah"
in the city of Mecca. Every able-bodied Muslim who can afford it must make the
pilgrimage to Mecca at least once in his or her lifetime. Rituals of the Hajj
include walking seven times around the Kaaba, touching the black stone if
possible, walking or running seven times between Mount Safa and Mount Marwah,
and symbolically stoning the Devil in Mina. Law and jurisprudence. The "Sharia"
(literally "the path leading to the watering place") is Islamic law formed by
traditional Islamic scholarship, which most Muslim groups adhere to. In Islam,
Sharia is the expression of the divine will, and "constitutes a system of
duties that are incumbent upon a Muslim by virtue of his religious belief".
Islamic law covers all aspects of life, from matters of state, like governance
and foreign relations, to issues of daily living. The Qur'an defines "hudud" as
the punishments for five specific crimes: unlawful intercourse, false
accusation of unlawful intercourse, consumption of alcohol, theft, and highway
robbery. Though not in the Qur'an , there are also laws against apostasy
(although Muslims disagree over punishment). The Qur'an and Sunnah also contain
laws of inheritance, marriage, and restitution for injuries and murder, as well
as rules for fasting, charity, and prayer. However, these prescriptions and
prohibitions may be broad, so their application in practice varies. Islamic
scholars (known as "ulema") have elaborated systems of law on the basis of
these rules and their interpretations. Over the years there have been changing
views on Islamic law but many such as Zahiri and Jariri have since died out.
"Fiqh", or "jurisprudence", is defined as the knowledge of the practical rules
of the religion. Much of it has evolved to prevent innovation or alteration in
the original religion, known as bid'ah. The method Islamic jurists use to
derive rulings is known as "usul al-fiqh" ("legal theory", or "principles of
jurisprudence"). According to Islamic legal theory, law has four fundamental
roots, which are given precedence in this order: the Qur'an, the Sunnah (the
practice of Muhammad), the consensus of the Muslim jurists ("ijma"), and
analogical reasoning ("qiyas"). For early Islamic jurists, theory was less
important than pragmatic application of the law. In the 9th century, the jurist
ash-Shafi'i provided a theoretical basis for Islamic law by codifying the
principles of jurisprudence (including the four fundamental roots) in his book
"ar-RisƒÅlah". Jurists. There are many terms in Islam to refer to religiously
sanctioned positions of Islam, but "jurist" generally refers to the educated
class of Muslim legal scholars engaged in the several fields of Islamic
studies. In a broader sense, the term "ulema" is used to describe the body of
Muslim clergy who have completed several years of training and study of Islamic
sciences, such as a mufti, qadi, faqih, or muhaddith. Some Muslims include
under this term the village mullahs, imams, and maulvis‚Äîwho have attained
only the lowest rungs on the ladder of Islamic scholarship; other Muslims would
say that clerics must meet higher standards to be considered ulama (singular
Aalim). Some Muslims practise ijtihad whereby they do not accept the authority
of clergy. Etiquette and diet. Many practices fall in the category of "adab",
or Islamic etiquette. This includes greeting others with ""as-salamu `alaykum""
("peace be unto you"), saying "bismillah" ("in the name of God") before meals,
and using only the right hand for eating and drinking. Islamic hygienic
practices mainly fall into the category of personal cleanliness and health.
Circumcision of male offspring is also practiced in Islam. Islamic burial
rituals include saying the "Salat al-Janazah" ("funeral prayer") over the
bathed and enshrouded dead body, and burying it in a grave. Muslims are
restricted in their diet. Prohibited foods include pork products, blood,
carrion, and alcohol. All meat must come from a herbivorous animal slaughtered
in the name of God by a Muslim, Jew, or Christian, with the exception of game
that one has hunted or fished for oneself. Food permissible for Muslims is
known as halal food. Family life. The basic unit of Islamic society is the
family, and Islam defines the obligations and legal rights of family members.
The father is seen as financially responsible for his family, and is obliged to
cater for their well-being. The division of inheritance is specified in the
Qur'an, which states that most of it is to pass to the immediate family, while
a portion is set aside for the payment of debts and the making of bequests.
With some exceptions, the woman's share of inheritance is generally half of
that of a man with the same rights of succession. Marriage in Islam is a civil
contract which consists of an offer and acceptance between two qualified
parties in the presence of two witnesses. The groom is required to pay a bridal
gift ("mahr") to the bride, as stipulated in the contract. A man may have up to
four wives if he believes he can treat them equally, while a woman may have
only one husband. In most Muslim countries, the process of divorce in Islam is
known as "talaq", which the husband initiates by pronouncing the word
"divorce". Scholars disagree whether Islamic holy texts justify traditional
Islamic practices such as veiling and seclusion (purdah). Starting in the 20th
century, Muslim social reformers argued against these and other practices such
as polygamy in Islam, with varying success. At the same time, many Muslim women
have attempted to reconcile tradition with modernity by combining an active
life with outward modesty. Certain Islamist groups like the Taliban have sought
to continue traditional law as applied to women. Government. Mainstream Islamic
law does not distinguish between "matters of church" and "matters of state";
the scholars function as both jurists and theologians. In practice, Islamic
rulers frequently bypassed the Sharia courts with a parallel system of so-
called "Grievance courts" over which they had sole control. As the Muslim world
came into contact with European secular ideals, Muslim societies responded in
different ways. Turkey has been governed as a secular state ever since the
reforms of Mustafa Kemal Atat√ºrk in 1923. In contrast, the 1979 Iranian
Revolution replaced a mostly secular regime with an Islamic republic led by the
Ayatollah Khomeini. Military. Jihad means "to strive or struggle" (in the way
of God) and is considered the "Sixth Pillar of Islam" by a minority of Sunni
Muslim authorities. Jihad, in its broadest sense, is classically defined as
"exerting one's utmost power, efforts, endeavors, or ability in contending with
an object of ." Depending on the object being a visible enemy, the devil, and
aspects of one's own self (such as sinful desires), different categories of
jihad are defined. Jihad, when used without any qualifier, is understood in its
military aspect. Jihad also refers to one's striving to attain religious and
moral perfection. Some Muslim authorities, especially among the Shi'a and
Sufis, distinguish between the "greater jihad", which pertains to spiritual
self-perfection, and the "lesser jihad", defined as warfare. Within Islamic
jurisprudence, jihad is usually taken to mean military exertion against non-
Muslim combatants in the defense or expansion of the Ummah. The ultimate
purpose of military jihad is debated, both within the Islamic community and
without, with some claiming that it only serves to protect the Ummah, with no
aspiration of offensive conflict, whereas others have argued that the goal of
Jihad is global conquest. Jihad is the only form of warfare permissible in
Islamic law and may be declared against terrorists, criminal groups, rebels,
apostates, and leaders or states who oppress Muslims or hamper proselytizing
efforts. Most Muslims today interpret Jihad as only a defensive form of
warfare: the external Jihad includes a struggle to make the Islamic societies
conform to the Islamic norms of justice. Under most circumstances and for most
Muslims, jihad is a collective duty ("fard kifaya"): its performance by some
individuals exempts the others. Only for those vested with authority,
especially the sovereign (imam), does jihad become an individual duty. For the
rest of the populace, this happens only in the case of a general mobilization.
For most Shias, offensive jihad can only be declared by a divinely appointed
leader of the Muslim community, and as such is suspended since Muhammad al-
Mahdi's occultation in 868 AD. History. Muhammad (610‚Äì632). Muhammad (c. 570
‚Äì June 8, 632) was a trader later becoming a religious, political, and
military leader. However, Muslims do not view Muhammad as the creator of Islam,
but instead regard him as the last messenger of God, through which the Qur'an
was revealed. Muslims view Muhammad as the restorer of the original,
uncorrupted monotheistic faith of Adam, Abraham, Moses, Jesus, and other
prophets. In Muslim tradition, Muhammad is viewed as the last in a series of
prophets. During the last 22 years of his life, beginning at age 40 in 610 CE,
according to the earliest surviving biographies, Muhammad reported revelations
that he believed to be from God. The content of these revelations, known as the
Qur'an, was memorized and recorded by his companions. During this time,
Muhammad preached to the people of Mecca, imploring them to abandon polytheism.
Although some converted to Islam, Muhammad and his followers were persecuted by
the leading Meccan authorities. After 12 years of preaching, Muhammad and the
Muslims performed the "Hijra" ("emigration") to the city of Medina (formerly
known as "Yathrib") in 622, after initially trying the Ethiopian Aksumite
Empire. There, with the Medinan converts ("Ansar") and the Meccan migrants
("Muhajirun"), Muhammad established his political and religious authority.
Within years, two battles had been fought against Meccan forces: the Battle of
Badr in 624, which was a Muslim victory, and the Battle of Uhud in 625, which
ended inconclusively. Conflict with Medinan Jewish clans who opposed the
Muslims led to their exile, enslavement, or death, and the Jewish enclave of
Khaybar was subdued. In 628, the Treaty of Hudaybiyyah was signed between Mecca
and the Muslims and was broken by Mecca two years later. At the same time,
Meccan trade routes were cut off as Muhammad brought surrounding desert tribes
under his control. By 629 Muhammad was victorious in the nearly bloodless
Conquest of Mecca, and by the time of his death in 632 (at the age of 62) he
united the tribes of Arabia into a single religious polity. Caliphate and civil
war (632‚Äì750). With Muhammad's death in 632, disagreement broke out over who
would succeed him as leader of the Muslim community. Umar ibn al-Khattab, a
prominent companion of Muhammad, nominated Abu Bakr, who was Muhammad's
companion and close friend. Others added their support and Abu Bakr was made
the first caliph. Abu Bakr's immediate task was to avenge a recent defeat by
Byzantine forces, although he first had to put down a rebellion by Arab tribes
in an episode known as the Ridda wars, or "Wars of Apostasy". His death in 634
resulted in the succession of Umar as the caliph, followed by Uthman ibn al-
Affan, Ali ibn Abi Talib and Hasan ibn Ali. The first caliphs are known as "al-
khulafƒÅ' ar-rƒÅshid≈´n" ("Rightly Guided Caliphs"). Under them, the territory
under Muslim rule expanded deeply into Persian and Byzantine territories. When
Umar was assassinated in 644, the election of Uthman as successor was met with
increasing opposition. In 656, Uthman was also killed, and Ali assumed the
position of caliph. After fighting off opposition in the first civil war (the
"First Fitna"), Ali was assassinated by Kharijites in 661. Following this,
Mu'awiyah seized power and began the Umayyad dynasty, with its capital in
Damascus. These disputes over religious and political leadership would give
rise to schism in the Muslim community. The majority accepted the legitimacy of
the three rulers prior to Ali, and became known as Sunnis. A minority
disagreed, and believed that Ali was the only rightful successor; they became
known as the Shi'a. After Mu'awiyah's death in 680, conflict over succession
broke out again in a civil war known as the "Second Fitna". The Umayyad dynasty
conquered the Maghrib, the Iberian Peninsula, Narbonnese Gaul and Sindh. The
local population of Jews and indigenous Christians, persecuted as religious
minorities and taxed heavily, often aided Muslims to take over their lands from
the Byzantines and Persians, resulting in exceptionally speedy conquests. The
Umayyad aristocracy viewed Islam as a religion for Arabs only; the economy of
the Umayyad empire was based on the assumption that a majority of non-Muslims
(Dhimmis) would pay taxes to the minority of Muslim Arabs. A non-Arab who
wanted to convert to Islam was supposed to first become a client of an Arab
tribe. Even after conversion, these new Muslims ("mawali") did not achieve
social and economic equality with the Arabs. The descendants of Muhammad's
uncle Abbas ibn Abd al-Muttalib rallied discontented "mawali", poor Arabs, and
some Shi'a against the Umayyads and overthrew them with the help of the general
Abu Muslim, inaugurating the Abbasid dynasty in 750 and moved the capital to
Baghdad. Abbasid era (750‚Äì1258). Expansion of the Muslim world continued by
both conquest and proselytism as both Islam and Muslim trade networks were
extending into sub-Saharan West Africa, Central Asia, Volga Bulgaria and the
Malay archipelago. The Ghaznavids and Ghurids conquered much of the Indian
subcontinent. Many Muslims went to China to trade, virtually dominating the
import and export industry of the Song Dynasty. The major hadith collections
were compiled. The Ja'fari jurisprudence was formed from the teachings of
Ja'far al-Sadiq while the four Sunni Madh'habs, the Hanafi, Hanbali, Maliki and
Shafi'i, were established around the teachings of Ab≈´ ·∏§anƒ´fa, Ahmad bin
Hanbal, Malik ibn Anas and al-Shafi'i respectively. Al-Shafi'i also codified a
method to establish the reliability of hadith. Al-Tabari and Ibn Kathir
completed the most commonly cited commentaries on the Quran, the Tafsir al-
Tabari in the 9th century and the Tafsir ibn Kathir in the 14th century,
respectively. Philosophers Al-Farabi and Ibn Sina (Avicenna) sought to
incorporate Greek principles into Islamic theology, while others like Al-
Ghazzali argued against them and ultimately prevailed. Caliphs such as Mamun al
Rashid and Al-Mu'tasim made the mutazilite philosophy an official creed and
imposed it upon Muslims to follow. Mu'tazila was a Greek influenced school of
speculative theology called kalam, which refers to dialectic. Many orthodox
Muslims rejected mutazilite doctrines and condemned their idea of the creation
of the Quran. In inquisitions, Imam Hanbal refused to conform and was tortured
and sent to an unlit Baghdad prison cell for nearly thirty months. The other
branch of kalam was the Ash'ari school founded by Al-Ash'ari. Some Muslims
began to question the piety of indulgence in a worldly life and emphasized
poverty, humility and avoidance of sin based on renunciation of bodily desires.
Ascetics such as Hasan al-Basri would inspire a movement that would evolve into
Sufism. Beginning in the 13th century, Sufism underwent a transformation,
largely because of efforts to legitimize and reorganize the movement by Al-
Ghazali, who developed the model of the Sufi order‚Äîa community of spiritual
teachers and students. Islamic civilization flourished in what is sometimes
referred to as the "Islamic Golden Age". Public hospitals established during
this time (called Bimaristan hospitals), are considered "the first hospitals"
in the modern sense of the word, and issued the first medical diplomas to
license doctors of medicine. The Guinness World Records recognizes the
University of Al Karaouine, founded in 859, as the world's oldest degree-
granting university. The doctorate is argued to date back to the licenses to
teach in law schools. Standards of experimental and quantification techniques,
as well as the tradition of citation, were introduced to the scientific
process. An important pioneer in this, Ibn Al-Haytham is regarded as the father
of the modern scientific method and often referred to as the "world‚Äôs first
true scientist." The government paid scientists the equivalent salary of
professional athletes today. Discoveries include gathering the data used by
Copernicus for his heliocentric conclusions and Al-Jahiz‚Äôs proposal of the
theory of natural selection. Rumi wrote some of the finest Persian poetry and
is still one of the best selling poets in America. Legal institutions
introduced include the trust and charitable trust (Waqf). The first Muslims
states independent of a unified Muslim state emerged from the Berber Revolt
(739/740-743). In 836, the capital was moved to Samarra by Caliph Al-Mu'tasim
and it was returned to Baghdad in 892. In 930, the Ismaili group known as the
Qarmatians unsuccessfully rebelled against the Abbassids, sacked Mecca and
stole the Black Stone. By 1055 the Seljuq Turks had eliminated the Abbasids as
a military power but continued the caliph's titular authority. The Mongol
Empire finally put an end to the Abbassid dynasty, killing its last Caliph at
the Battle of Baghdad in 1258. Fall of Abbasids to end of caliphate
(1258‚Äì1924). Expansion continued with independent powers moving into new
areas. An alliance of European Christian kingdoms mobilized to launch a series
of wars, known as the Crusades, aimed at recapturing the Holy Land, though
initially successful, was reversed by subsequent Muslim generals such as
Saladin, who recaptured Jerusalem in 1187. In Europe, the Crimean Khanate was
one of the strongest regional powers in Europe until the end of the 17th
century. In the 13th and 14th centuries the Ottoman Empire conquered the
Balkans, parts of Greece, Constantinople and reached as far as the gates of
Vienna in 1529. Under Ottoman rule, many people in the Balkans became Muslim.
While cultural styles used to radiate from Baghdad, the Mongol destruction of
Baghdad led Egypt to become the Arab heartland while Central Asia went its own
way and was experiencing another golden age. The Safavid dynasty of Persia made
ties with India and Persian poetry rose to new heights while Arabic poetry was
in state of decline. The Muslims in China who were descended from earlier
immigration began to assimilate by adopting Chinese names and culture while
Nanjing became an important center of Islamic study. The Muslim world was
generally in political decline, especially relative to the non-Islamic European
powers. Large areas of Islamic Central Asia were seriously depopulated largely
as a result of Mongol destruction. The Black Death ravaged much of the Islamic
world in the mid-14th century. This decline was evident culturally; while Taqi
al-Din founded an observatory in Istanbul and the Jai Singh Observatory was
built in the 18th century, there was not a single Muslim country with a major
observatory by the twentieth century. The Reconquista, launched against Muslim
principalities in Iberia, succeeded in 1492 and Muslim Italian states were lost
to the Normans. By the 19th century the British Empire had formally ended the
last Mughal dynasty. The Ottoman era ended after World War I and the Caliphate
was abolished in 1924. Reform and revival movements during this period include
an 18th century Salafi movement led by Ibn Abd al-Wahhab in today's Saudi
Arabia. Referred to as Wahhabi, their self designation is Muwahiddun
(unitarians). Building upon earlier efforts such as those by the logician Ibn
Taymiyyah and Ibn al-Qayyim, the movement seeks to uphold monotheism and purify
Islam of later innovations. Their zeal against idolatrous shrines led to the
destruction of sacred tombs in Mecca and Medina, including those of the Prophet
and his Companions. In the 19th century, the Deobandi and Barelwi movements
were initiated. Modern times (1924‚Äìpresent). Contact with industrialized
nations brought Muslim populations to new areas through economic migration.
Many Muslims migrated as indentured servants, from mostly India and Indonesia,
to the Caribbean, forming the largest Muslim populations by percentage in the
Americas. The resulting urbanization and increase in trade in sub-Saharan
Africa brought Muslims to settle in new areas and spread their faith, likely
doubling the Muslims population between 1869 and 1914. Muslim immigrants, many
as guest workers, began arriving, largely from former colonies, into several
European nations in the 1960s and 1970s, particularly France and the UK. New
Muslim intellectuals are beginning to arise, and are increasingly separating
perennial Islamic beliefs from archaic cultural traditions. Liberal Islam is a
movement that attempts to reconcile religious tradition with modern norms of
secular governance and human rights. Its supporters say that there are multiple
ways to read Islam's sacred texts, and stress the need to leave room for
"independent thought on religious matters". Women's issues receive a
significant weight in the modern discourse on Islam because the family
structure remains central to Muslim identity. Also of issue is the assimilation
of Muslim communities and Islamophobia in host countries. Andrew Rippin states
that while Muslims believe that Islam stands for both men and women, the social
reality suggests otherwise. Christopher Hitchens states that Islam is
"dogmatic," and "the fact remains that Islam's core claim ‚Äì to be
unimprovable and final ‚Äì is at once absurd." Such claims have been challenged
by many Muslim scholars and writers including Fazlur Rahman Malik, Syed Ameer
Ali, Ahmed Deedat, Yusuf Estes and Tariq Ramadan. Secular powers such as
Chinese Red Guards closed many mosques and destroyed Qurans and Communist
Albania became the first country to ban the practice of every religion. In
Turkey, the military carried out coups to oust Islamist governments and
headscarves were, as well as in Tunisia, banned in official buildings. About
half a million Muslims were killed in Cambodia by communists whom, it is
argued, viewed them as their primary enemy and wished to exterminate them since
they stood out and worshipped their own god. However, Islamist groups such as
the Muslim Brotherhood advocate Islam as a comprehensive political solution,
often in spite of being banned. Jamal-al-Din al-Afghani, along with his acolyte
Muhammad Abduh, have been credited as forerunners of the Islamic revival. In
Iran, revolution replaced secular regime with an Islamic state. In Turkey, the
Islamist AK Party has democratically been in power for about a decade, while
Islamist parties are doing well in elections following the Arab Spring. The
Organisation of Islamic Cooperation (OIC), consisting of Muslim countries, was
established in 1969 after the burning of the Al-Aqsa Mosque in Jerusalem. After
the collapse of the Soviet Union in 1991, Islam began to revive not only in
Central Asia but also in Russia. Piety appears to be deepening worldwide.
Orthodox groups are sometimes well funded and are growing at the expense of
traditional groups. In many places, the prevalence of the Islamic veil is
growing increasingly common and the percentage of Muslims favoring Sharia laws
has increased. With religious guidance increasingly available electronically,
Muslims are able to access views that are strict enough for them rather than
rely on state clerics who are often seen as stooges. Some organizations began
using the media to promote Islam such as the 24-hour TV channel, Peace TV.
Perhaps as a result of these efforts, most experts agree that Islam is growing
faster than any other faith in East and West Africa. Denominations. Sunni. The
largest denomination in Islam is Sunni Islam, which makes up over 75% to 90% of
all Muslims. Sunni Muslims also go by the name "Ahl as-Sunnah" which means
""people of the tradition Muhammad"". In Arabic language, "as-Sunnah" literally
means "tradition" or "path". The Qur'an and the Sunnah (the example of
Muhammad's life) as recorded in hadith are the primary foundations of Sunni
doctrine. According to Sunni Islam, the "normative" example of Muhammad's life
is called the "Sunnah" (literally "trodden path"). This example is preserved in
traditions known as Al-Kutub Al-Sittah (six major books) which are hadiths
("reports"), recounting his words, his actions, and his personal
characteristics. The classical Muslim jurist ash-Shafi'i (d. 820) emphasized
the importance of the Sunnah in Islamic law, and Muslims are encouraged to
emulate Muhammad's actions in their daily lives. The Sunnah is seen as crucial
to guiding interpretation of the Qur'an. Two major hadith collections are Sahih
Bukhari and Sahih Muslim. Sunnis believe that the first four caliphs were the
rightful successors to Muhammad; since God did not specify any particular
leaders to succeed him, those leaders had to be elected. Sunnis believe that a
caliph should be chosen by the whole community. There are four recognised
madh'habs (schools of thought): Hanafi, Maliki, Shafi'i, and Hanbali. All four
accept the validity of the others and a Muslim may choose any one that he or
she finds agreeable. The Salafi (also known as Ahl al-Hadith, or Wahhabi by its
adversaries) is an ultra-orthodox Islamic movement which takes the first
generation of Muslims as exemplary models. Shia. The Shi'a constitute 10‚Äì20%
of Islam and are its second-largest branch. While Sunnis believe that Muhammad
did not appoint a successor, Shias believe that during The Farewell Pilgrimage
the prophet appointed his son-in-law, Ali ibn Abi Talib, as his successor as
shown by the Hadith of the pond of Khumm. As a result, they believe that Ali
ibn Abi Talib was the first "Imam" (leader), rejecting the legitimacy of the
previous Muslim caliphs since they were not appointed by the prophet. Shias
believe that the political and religious leadership of Imams come from the
direct descendants of Muhammad and Ali, also known as the Ahl al-Bayt. To most
Shias, an Imam rules by right of divine appointment and holds "absolute
spiritual authority" among Muslims, having final say in matters of doctrine and
revelation. However, the Imams are not allowed to introduce new laws or
eradicate old ones; they are simply required to interpret and reflect the will
of Allah and the prophet. Shia Islam has several branches, the largest of which
is the Twelvers, followed by Zaidis and Ismailis. The Twelvers believe that
there were 12 Imams or caliphs after the Prophet. They often cite the Hadith of
the Twelve Successors as evidence. Shias prefer hadiths attributed to the Ahlul
Bayt and close associates. The Twelver Shi'a follow a legal tradition called
Ja'fari jurisprudence. Other smaller groups, include the Bohra, and Druze, as
well as the Alawites and Alevi. Branches of Shia Islam which deviate from
mainstream Shia doctrine are described by orthodox Shias as Ghulat. Sufism.
Sufism is a mystical-ascetic approach to Islam that seeks to find divine love
and knowledge through direct personal experience of God. By focusing on the
more spiritual aspects of religion, Sufis strive to obtain direct experience of
God by making use of "intuitive and emotional faculties" that one must be
trained to use. However, Sufism has been criticized by the Salafi sect for what
they see as an unjustified religious innovation. Many Sufi orders, or
"tariqas", can be classified as either Sunni or Shi'a, but others classify
themselves simply as 'Sufi'. Demographics. A comprehensive 2009 demographic
study of 232 countries and territories reported that 23% of the global
population, or 1.57¬ billion people, are Muslims. Of those, it's estimated over
75‚Äì90% are Sunni and 10‚Äì20% are Shi'a, with a small minority belonging to
other sects. Approximately 50 countries are Muslim-majority, and Arabs account
for around 20% of all Muslims worldwide. Between 1900 and 1970 the global
Muslim community grew from 200 million to 551¬ million; between 1970 and 2009
Muslim population increased more than three times to 1.57¬ billion. The
majority of Muslims live in Asia and Africa. Approximately 62% of the world's
Muslims live in Asia, with over 683¬ million adherents in Indonesia, Pakistan,
India, and Bangladesh. In the Middle East, non-Arab countries such as Turkey
and Iran are the largest Muslim-majority countries; in Africa, Egypt and
Nigeria have the most populous Muslim communities. Most estimates indicate that
the People's Republic of China has approximately 20 to 30 million Muslims (1.5%
to 2% of the population). However, data provided by the San Diego State
University's International Population Center to U.S. News & World Report
suggests that China has 65.3¬ million Muslims. Islam is the second largest
religion after Christianity in many European countries, and is slowly catching
up to that status in the Americas, with between 2,454,000, according to Pew
Forum, and approximately 7 million Muslims, according to the Council on
American-Islamic Relations (CAIR), in the United States. Culture. Architecture.
Perhaps the most important expression of Islamic art is architecture,
particularly that of the mosque (four-iwan and hypostyle). Through the
edifices, the effect of varying cultures within Islamic civilization can be
illustrated. The North African and Spanish Islamic architecture, for example,
has Roman-Byzantine elements, as seen in the Great Mosque of Kairouan which
contains marble and porphyry columns from Roman and Byzantine buildings, in the
Alhambra palace at Granada, or in the Great Mosque of Cordoba. Art. Islamic art
encompasses the visual arts produced from the 7th century onwards by people
(not necessarily Muslim) who lived within the territory that was inhabited by
Muslim populations. It includes fields as varied as architecture, calligraphy,
painting, and ceramics, among others. Making images of human beings and animals
is frowned on in many Islamic cultures and connected with laws against idolatry
common to all Abrahamic religions, as 'Abdullaah ibn Mas'ood reported that
Muhammad said, "Those who will be most severely punished by Allah on the Day of
Resurrection will be the image-makers." (Reported by al-Bukhaari, see al-Fath,
10/382). However this rule has been interpreted in different ways by different
scholars and in different historical periods, and there are examples of
paintings of both animals and humans in Mughal, Persian and Turkish art. The
existence of this aversion to creating images of animate beings has been used
to explain the prevalence of calligraphy, tessellation and pattern as key
aspects of Islamic artistic culture. Calendar. The formal beginning of the
Muslim era was chosen to be the Hijra in 622 CE, which was an important turning
point in Muhammad's fortunes. The assignment of this year as the year 1 AH
("Anno Hegirae") in the Islamic calendar was reportedly made by Caliph Umar. It
is a lunar calendar with days lasting from sunset to sunset. Islamic holy days
fall on fixed dates of the lunar calendar, which means that they occur in
different seasons in different years in the Gregorian calendar. The most
important Islamic festivals are "Eid al-Fitr" () on the 1st of "Shawwal",
marking the end of the fasting month "Ramadan", and "Eid al-Adha" () on the
10th of "Dhu al-Hijjah", coinciding with the pilgrimage to Mecca. Criticism of
Islam. Criticism of Islam has existed since Islam's formative stages. Early
written criticism came from Christians, prior to the ninth century, many of
whom viewed Islam as a radical Christian heresy. Later there appeared criticism
from the Muslim world itself, and also from Jewish writers and from
ecclesiastical Christians. Objects of criticism include the morality of the
life of Muhammad, the last prophet of Islam, both in his public and personal
life. Issues relating to the authenticity and morality of the Qur'an, the
Islamic holy book, are also discussed by critics. Other criticisms focus on the
question of human rights in modern Islamic nations, and the treatment of women
in Islamic law and practice. In wake of the recent multiculturalism trend,
Islam's influence on the ability of Muslim immigrants in the West to assimilate
has been criticized.
