Island country An island country is a country whose primary territory consists
of one or more islands or parts of islands. As of 2011, 47 (approximately 25%)
of the 193 UN member states are island countries. Politics. The percentage of
island countries that are democratic is higher than that of countries, although
historically they have been more prone to political instability. War. Island
countries have often been the basis of maritime conquest and historical rivalry
between other countries. Island countries are more susceptible to attack by
large, continental countries due to their size and dependence on sea lines of
communication and air lines of communication. Many island countries are also
vulnerable to predation by mercenaries and other foreign invaders, although
their isolation also makes them a difficult target. Powerful countries develop
a navy ("sea power") for protection and promotion of their interests. Natural
resources. Many island countries rely heavily on fish for their main supply of
food. Some are turning to renewable energy—such as wind power, hydropower,
geothermal power and biodiesel from copra oil—to combat the rise in oil
prices. Geography. Some island countries are more affected by climate change
than other countries. Some low-lying island countries are slowly being
submerged by the rising water levels of the Pacific Ocean. Climate change also
impacts island countries by causing natural disasters such as tropical
cyclones, hurricanes, flash floods and drought. . In 2011, the Center for
Climate Change Law (CCCL) held a conference attended by 272 registrants from 39
island nations titled Legal Issues for Threatened Island Nations. Economics.
Many island countries rely heavily on imports and are greatly affected by
changes in the global economy. The economies of island countries are usually
smaller and more vulnerable to shipping costs, environmental damage to
infrastructure, and isolation from other economies than those of larger,
continental countries, exceptions include Japan, Australia and the U.K. The
dominant industry for many island countries is tourism. Composition. Island
countries are typically small with relatively low populations. Some island
countries are centred on one or two major islands, such as the United Kingdom,
Trinidad and Tobago, New Zealand and Singapore. Others are spread out over
hundreds or thousands of smaller islands, such as the Philippines, Indonesia,
Seychelles, and the Maldives. Some island countries share their islands with
other countries; these include the United Kingdom and Ireland, Haiti and the
Dominican Republic, and Indonesia, which shares islands with Papua New Guinea,
Brunei, East Timor and Malaysia. Geographically, the country of Australia is
considered a continental landmass rather than an island, covering the largest
landmass of the Australian continent. In the past, however, it was considered
an island country for tourism purposes and is still often referred to as such.
Climate change. Climate change occasionally poses a threat to island nations.
Rising sea levels provide obstacles including reduced land use, water scarcity
and sometimes even resettlement issues for island nations. In 2011, the Center
for Climate Change Law (CCCL) held a conference which was attended by 272
registrants from 39 island nations titled Legal Issues for Threatened Island
Nations.
