Isolationism Introduction. "Isolationism" has always been a debated political
topic. Whether or not a country should be or should not be isolationist affects
both living standards and the ability of political rulers to benefit favored
firms and industries. All the First World countries (the UK, United States,
etc.) trade in a world economy, and experienced an expansion of the division of
labor, which generally raised living standards. However, some characterize this
as "a wage race to the bottom" in the manufacturing industries that should be
curtailed by protectionism. Some argue that isolating a country from a global
division of labor—i.e. employing protectionist trading policies—could be
potentially helpful. The consensus amongst most economists is that such a
policy is detrimental, and point to the mercantilism of the pre-industrial era
as the classic example. Others argue that as the world's biggest consumer, with
its own natural resources, the U.S. can wisely dictate what conditions can
apply to goods and services imported for U.S. consumption, misunderstanding the
nature of prices and their emergent, non-centrally planned, nature. Countries
and regions generally enjoy a comparative advantage over others in some area.
Free trade between countries allows each country to do what it does best, and
benefit from the products and services that others do best. But "best" too
often means monetary, excluding human and ecological costs, due to firms
externalizing costs as a result of inadequately defined property rights.
Protectionism allegedly interferes in the market process, making people poorer
than they would be otherwise. Isolationism by country. Albania. Albania was
isolated from other states while it was under communist control from 1944 to
1990. Known officially as the People's Republic of Albania from 1946 to 1976,
and then as the People's Socialist Republic of Albania from 1976 to 1991,
Albania spent much of this time under the regime of Enver Hoxha, who severely
restricted citizens' freedom and contact with the outside world. Bhutan. Before
1999, Bhutan had banned television and internet to preserve its culture,
environment, its identity etc. Eventually, Jigme Singye Wangchuck lifted the
ban on Television and Internet. His son, Jigme Khesar Namgyel Wangchuck was
elected as Druk Gyalpo of Bhutan which is being transformed into a democracy.
China. After the Zheng He voyages in the 15th century, the foreign policy of
the Ming Dynasty in China became increasingly isolationist. Hongwu Emperor was
the first to propose the policy to ban all maritime shipping in 1371. The Qing
Dynasty that came after the Ming often continued the latter dynasty's
isolationist policies. Wokou or Japanese pirates were one of the key primary
concerns, although the maritime ban was not without some control. At the end of
China’s bloody civil war, in the early and mid 1900s, the country quickly
closed off its borders to many outside countries and only maintained diplomatic
ties with the Soviet Union. For a period of time the Chinese attempted to
become self-reliant, but found that in doing so the country could not break
even economically, especially when attempting to maintain a communist vision
when it came to economics. In the 1970s the People Republic of China began
large radical economic reforms, which forced the country from a zero
competition nation to one of the most capitalistic in the world. In doing so it
quickly began to open its borders to the trade of various other countries thus
adding itself to a global trade economy. While the government still regulates
many of the country's cultural interactions with others, it is very open to the
concept of an open market and competition with other countries, allowing the
flow of technological innovations to flow in and out of its borders freely. Mao
in 1949 set China in an isolationist, and communist country, along with their
Soviet benefactors. FR Yugoslavia. During the Yugoslav Wars, nearly every
single nation that had ties with Serbia, had broken off diplomacy for the wars
in Yugoslavia, and the rule of Slobodan Milošević. Before Koštunica, the
country was placed under international sanctions. After the 1999 NATO bombing
of Yugoslavia, the only foreign aide Belgrade received from was from Russia,
Greece, and the PRC. It has been said that FR Yugoslavia was sometimes called
the "European North Korea". Japan. From 1641 to 1853, the Tokugawa shogunate of
Japan enforced a policy which it called "kaikin". The policy prohibited foreign
contact with most outside countries. However, the commonly held idea that Japan
was entirely closed is misleading. In fact, Japan maintained limited-scale
trade and diplomatic relations with China, Korea, the Ryukyu Islands and the
Netherlands. The culture of Japan developed with limited influence from the
outside world and had one of the longest stretches of peace in history. During
this period, Japan developed thriving cities and castle towns and increasing
commodification of agriculture and domestic trade, wage labor, increasing
literacy and concomitant print culture, laying the groundwork for
modernization, even as the shogunate itself grew weak. Korea. Joseon Dynasty.
In 1863, King Gojong took the throne of Joseon Dynasty when he was a child. His
father, Regent Heungseon Daewongun, ruled for him until Gojong reached
adulthood. During the mid 1860s he was the main proponent of isolationism and
the instrument of the persecution of native and foreign Catholics. North Korea.
The foreign relations of North Korea are often tense and unpredictable. Since
the ended the armed conflict that existed during the active part of the Korean
War in 1953, leaving a de facto truce in place ever since, the North Korean
government has been largely isolationist, becoming one of the world's most
authoritarian societies. While no formal peace treaty exists between North and
South Korea, both diplomatic discussions and clashes have occurred between the
two. North Korea has maintained close relations with China and often limited
ones with other nations. They have banned all media from other countries (such
as video games, newspapers, and goods), especially South Korea and the United
States and smuggling these products is illegal. Paraguay. Just after
independence was achieved, Paraguay was governed from 1814 by the dictator
José Gaspar Rodríguez de Francia, who closed the borders of the country and
prohibited trade or any relation with the exterior until his death in 1840.
Francia had a particular dislike of foreigners, and the recently pre-
independence settled Spanish had to intermarry with either the old colonists or
the Guarani, to create a single Paraguayan people. Any foreigners who came to
Paraguay during his rule (which would have been very difficult) were not
allowed to leave for the rest of their life. An independent character, he hated
European influences and the church, turning church courtyards into artillery
parks and confession boxes into border sentry posts, to keep foreigners at bay.
Switzerland. Switzerland is well known for staying neutral in foreign
relations. The Swiss did not participate in either World War I or World War II.
Switzerland also joined the United Nations much later than most other
countries, and is not a member of the European Union . United States.
Isolationist sentiment kept the US out of both World Wars until it found itself
under threat. Problems of the Old World were not relevant to the New World in
the eyes of many citizens.
