Isoquant In economics, an isoquant (derived from quantity and the Greek word
iso, meaning equal) is a contour line drawn through the set of points at which
the same quantity of output is produced while changing the quantities of two or
more inputs. While an indifference curve mapping helps to solve the utility-
maximizing problem of consumers, the isoquant mapping deals with the cost-
minimization problem of producers. Isoquants are typically drawn on capital-
labor graphs, showing the technological tradeoff between capital and labor in
the production function, and the decreasing marginal returns of both inputs.
Adding one input while holding the other constant eventually leads to
decreasing marginal output, and this is reflected in the shape of the isoquant.
A family of isoquants can be represented by an isoquant map, a graph combining
a number of isoquants, each representing a different quantity of output.
Isoquants are also called equal product curves. An isoquant shows the extent to
which the firm in question has the ability to substitute between the two
different inputs at will in order to produce the same level of output. An
isoquant map can also indicate decreasing or increasing returns to scale based
on increasing or decreasing distances between the isoquant pairs of fixed
output increment, as output increases. If the distance between those isoquants
increases as output increases, the firm's production function is exhibiting
decreasing returns to scale; doubling both inputs will result in placement on
an isoquant with less than double the output of the previous isoquant.
Conversely, if the distance is decreasing as output increases, the firm is
experiencing increasing returns to scale; doubling both inputs results in
placement on an isoquant with more than twice the output of the original
isoquant. As with indifference curves, two isoquants can never cross. Also,
every possible combination of inputs is on an isoquant. Finally, any
combination of inputs above or to the right of an isoquant results in more
output than any point on the isoquant. Although the marginal product of an
input decreases as you increase the quantity of the input while holding all
other inputs constant, the marginal product is never negative in the
empirically observed range since a rational firm would never increase an input
to decrease output. Shapes of Isoquants. If the two inputs are perfect
substitutes, the resulting isoquant map generated is represented in fig. A;
with a given level of production Q3, input X can be replaced by input Y at an
unchanging rate. The perfect substitute inputs do not experience decreasing
marginal rates of return when they are substituted for each other in the
production function. If the two inputs are perfect complements, the isoquant
map takes the form of fig. B; with a level of production Q3, input X and input
Y can only be combined efficiently in the certain ratio occurring at the kink
in the isoquant. The firm will combine the two inputs in the required ratio to
maximize profit. Isoquants are typically combined with isocost lines in order
to solve a cost-minimization problem for given level of output. In the typical
case shown in the top figure, with smoothly curved isoquants, a firm with fixed
unit costs of the inputs will have isocost curves that are linear and downward
sloped; any point of tangency between an isoquant and an isocost curve
represents the cost-minimizing input combination for producing the output level
associated with that isoquant. A line joining tangency points of isoquants and
isocosts (with input prices held constant) is called the expansion path. The
only relevant portion of the isoquant is the one that is convex to the origin,
part of the curve which is not convex to the origin implies negative marginal
product for factors of production. Higher isoQuant higher the production.
