Israeli‚ÄìPalestinian conflict The Israeli‚ÄìPalestinian conflict is the
ongoing struggle between Israelis and Palestinians that began in the early 20th
century. The conflict is wide-ranging, and the term is also used in reference
to the earlier phases of the same conflict, between the Zionist "yishuv" and
the Arab population living in Palestine under Ottoman and then British rule. It
forms part of the wider Arab‚ÄìIsraeli conflict. The remaining key issues are:
mutual recognition, borders, security, water rights, control of Jerusalem,
Israeli settlements, Palestinian freedom of movement and finding a resolution
to the refugee question. The violence resulting from the conflict has prompted
international actions, as well as other security and human rights concerns,
both within and between both sides, and internationally. In addition, the
violence has curbed expansion of tourism in the region, which is full of
historic and religious sites that are of interest to many people around the
world. Many attempts have been made to broker a two-state solution, involving
the creation of an independent Palestinian state alongside an independent
Jewish state or next to the State of Israel (after Israel's establishment in
1948). In 2007 a majority of both Israelis and Palestinians, according to a
number of polls, preferred the two-state solution over any other solution as a
means of resolving the conflict. Moreover, a considerable majority of the
Jewish public sees the Palestinians' demand for an independent state as just,
and thinks Israel can agree to the establishment of such a state. A majority of
Palestinians and Israelis view the West Bank and Gaza Strip as an acceptable
location of the hypothetical Palestinian state in a two-state solution.
However, there are significant areas of disagreement over the shape of any
final agreement and also regarding the level of credibility each side sees in
the other in upholding basic commitments. Within Israeli and Palestinian
society, the conflict generates a wide variety of views and opinions. This
highlights the deep divisions which exist not only between Israelis and
Palestinians, but also within each society. A hallmark of the conflict has been
the level of violence witnessed for virtually its entire duration. Fighting has
been conducted by regular armies, paramilitary groups, terror cells and
individuals. Casualties have not been restricted to the military, with a large
number of fatalities in civilian population on both sides. There are prominent
international actors involved in the conflict. The two parties engaged in
direct negotiation are the Israeli government, currently led by Benjamin
Netanyahu, and the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO), currently headed by
Mahmoud Abbas. The official negotiations are mediated by an international
contingent known as the Quartet on the Middle East (the "Quartet") represented
by a special envoy that consists of the United States, Russia, the European
Union, and the United Nations. The Arab League is another important actor,
which has proposed an alternative peace plan. Egypt, a founding member of the
Arab League, has historically been a key participant. Since 2003, the
Palestinian side has been fractured by conflict between the two major factions:
Fatah, the traditionally dominant party, and its later electoral challenger,
Hamas. Following Hamas' seizure of power in the Gaza Strip in June 2007, the
territory controlled by the Palestinian National Authority (the Palestinian
interim government) is split between Fatah in the West Bank, and Hamas in the
Gaza Strip. The division of governance between the parties has effectively
resulted in the collapse of bipartisan governance of the Palestinian National
Authority (PA). A round of peace negotiations began at Annapolis, Maryland,
United States, in November 2007. These talks were aimed at having a final
resolution by the end of 2008. Direct negotiations between the Israeli
government and Palestinian leadership began in September 2010 aimed at reaching
an official final status settlement. History. The Israeli‚ÄìPalestinian
conflict has its roots in the late 19th and early 20th centuries, with the
birth of two major nationalist movements of among the Jews and among the Arabs,
both geared towards attaining sovereignty for their people in the Middle East.
The collision between those two forces in southern Levant and the emergence of
the Palestinian nationalism in the 1920s, eventually escalated into the
Israeli‚ÄìPalestinian conflict in 1947, and expanded into the wider Arab-
Israeli conflict later on. With the outcome of First World War, the relations
between Zionism and the Arab national movement seemed to be potentially
friendly, and the Faisal‚ÄìWeizmann Agreement created a framework for both
aspirations to coexist on former Ottoman Empire's territories. However, with
the defeat and dissolution of the Arab Kingdom of Syria in July 1920, following
the Franco-Syrian War, a crisis fell upon the Damascus-based Arab national
movement. Return of several hard-line Palestinian Arab nationalists, under the
emerging leadership of Haj Amin al-Husseini, from Damascus to Mandatory
Palestine marked the beginning of Palestinian Arab nationalist struggle towards
establishment of national home for Arabs of Palestine. Amin al-Husseini, the
architect of the Palestinian Arab national movement, immediately marked Jewish
national movement and Jewish immigration to Palestine as the sole enemy to his
cause, initiating large-scale riots against the Jews as early as 1920 in
Jerusalem and in 1921 in Jaffa. Among the results of the violence was the
establishment of Jewish paramilitary force of Haganah. In 1929, a series of
violent anti-Jewish pogroms was initiated by the Arab leadership. The riots
resulted in massive Jewish casualties in Hebron and Safed, and evacuation of
Jews from Hebron and Gaza. In the early 1930s, the Arab national struggle in
Palestine had drawn many Arab nationalist militants from across the Middle
East, most notably Sheikh Izaddin al-Qassam from Syria, who established the
Black Hand terrorist group and had prepared the grounds for the 1936 Arab
revolt. Following, the death of al-Qassam by the hands of the British in late
1935, the tensions erupted in 1936 into the Arab general strike and general
boycott. The strike soon deteriorated into violence and the bloody revolt
against the British and the Jews. In the first wave of organized violence,
lasting until early 1937, much of the Arab gangs were defeated by the British
and a forced expulsion of much of the Arab leadership was performed. The revolt
led to the establishment of the Peel commission towards partitioning of
Palestine, though was subsequently rejected both by Palestinian Jews and
Palestinian Arabs. The renewed violence, which had sporadically lasted until
the beginning of WWII, ended with around 5,000 casualties, mostly from Arab
side. With the eruption of World War II, the situation in Mandatory Palestine
calmed down. It allowed a shift towards more moderate stance among Palestinian
Arabs, under the leadership of Nashashibi clan and even establishment of the
Jewish-Arab Palestine Regiment under British command, fighting Germans in North
Africa. The more radical exiled faction of al-Husseini however tended to
cooperation with Nazi Germany, and participated in the establishment of pro-
Nazi propaganda machine throughout the Arab world. Defeat of Arab nationalists
in Iraq and subsequent relocation of al-Husseini to Nazi-occupied Europe tied
his hands regarding field operations in Palestine, though he regularly demanded
the Italians and the Germans to bomb Tel Aviv. By the end of the World War II,
a crisis over the fate of the Holocaust survivors from Europe led to renewed
tensions between the Yishuv and the Palestinian Arab leadership. Immigration
quotas were established by the British, while on the other hand illegal
immigration and Zionist insurgency against the British was increasing. On 29
November 1947, the General Assembly adopted Resolution 181(II) recommending the
adoption and implementation of a plan to partition Palestine into an Arab
state, a Jewish state and the City of Jerusalem. On the next day, Palestine was
already swept by violence, with Arab insurgents attacking Jews and Jewish
militias executing counter-strikes. Arab League supported the Arab struggle by
forming the volunteer based Arab Liberation Army, supporting the Palestinian
Arab Army of the Holy War, under the leadership of Abd al-Qadir al-Husayni and
Hasan Salama. On the Jewish side, the civil war was managed by the major
underground militias - the Haganah, Irgun and Lehi, strengthened by numerous
Jewish veterans of World War II and foreign volunteers. By spring 1948, it was
already clear that the Arab forces were nearing a total collapse, while Yishuv
forces gained more and more territory, creating a large scale refugee problem
of Palestinian Arabs. Popular support to the Palestinian Arabs throughout the
Arab world led to sporadic violence against Jewish communities of Middle East
and North Africa, creating an opposite refugee wave. Following the Declaration
of the Establishment of the State of Israel on 14 May 1948, the Arab League
decided to intervene on behalf of Palestinian Arabs, marching their forces into
former British Palestine, beginning the main phase of the 1948 Arab-Israeli
War. The overall fighting, leading to around 15,000 casualties, resulted in
cease fire and armistice agreements of 1949, with Israel holding much of the
former Mandate territory, Jordan occupying and later annexing the West Bank and
Egypt taking over the Gaza Strip, where the All-Palestine Government was
declared by the Arab League on 22 September 1948. Through the 1950s, Jordan and
Egypt supported the Palestinian Fedayeen attacks against Israel, which
responded with retribution operations. The 1956 Suez Crisis resulted in short-
term Israeli occupation of the Gaza Strip and exile of the All-Palestine
Government, which was later restored with Israeli withdrawal. The All-Palestine
Government was completely abandoned by Egypt in 1959, officially merging it
into the United Arab Republic, a major blow to the Palestinian national
movement. In 1964, however, a new organization - the Palestinian Liberation
Organization was established by Yasser Arafat. It immidiately won the support
of most Arab League governments and won a seat in the Arab League. The 1967 Six
Day War was a major blow to Palestinian nationalism, as Israel took over the
West Bank from Jordan and the Gaza Strip from Egypt, practically cutting all
ability of PLO to establish any control on the ground. The PLO hence
established its headquarters in Jordan - home to hundreds of thousands of
Palestinians, and supported the Jordanian army during the War of Attrition,
most notably the Battle of Karameh. The Palestinian base in Jordan however
collapsed with the Jordanian-Palestinian civil war in 1970. The PLO defeat by
the Jordanians, urged most of Palestinian militants to relocate to South
Lebanon, where shortly they took over large areas, creating the so-called
"Fatahland". Palestinian insurgency in South Lebanon peaked through early
1970s, using Lebanon as their base to launch attacks on northern Israel and
airplane hijacking campaign worldwide, drawing Israeli retaliations. During the
Lebanese Civil War, Palestinian militants continued to launch fatal attacks
against Israel, while battling opponents within Lebanon. In 1978, the Coastal
Road massacre led to the Israeli full-scale invasion, known as Operation
Litani. Israeli forces however quickly withdrew, and the attacks against Israel
resumed. In 1982, following an assassination attempt on one of its diplomats by
Palestinians, Israeli government decided to take side in the Lebanese Civil
War, and the 1982 Lebanon War was begun. The initial results for the Israelis
were successful - most Palestinian militants were defeated within several
weeks, Beirut was captured, and the PLO headquarters were evacuated to Tunisia
in June by Yasser Arafat's decision. However, Israeli intervention in the civil
war led to unpredicted results, including low-scale conflict between Israel and
Syria. By 1985, Israel withdrew to a 10¬ km occupied strip of South Lebanon,
while the low-intensity conflict with Shia militants escalated. Those Iranian
supported Shia groups gradually consolidated into Hizbullah and Amal, operated
against Israel, allied with remains of Palestinian organizations to launch
attacks on Galilee through late 1980s. By 1990s Palestinian organizations in
Lebanon turned practically inactive. The first Palestinian uprising began in
1987, as a response to regional stagnation. By early 1990s, international
efforts to settle the conflict had begun, in light of the success of the
Egyptian-Israeli peace treaty of 1982. Eventually, the Israeli-Palestinian
peace process led to the Oslo Accords of 1993, allowing PLO to relocate from
Tunisia and take ground in the West Bank and Gaza Strip, establishing the
Palestinian National Authority. The peace process also had significant
opposition among radical Islamic elements of the Palestinian society, such as
Hamas and Palestinian Islamic Jihad, who immediately intitiated a campaign of
terror, targeting Israelis. Following hundreds of terror casualties, and a wave
of radical anti-government propaganda, Israeli Prime-Minister Rabin was killed
by an Israeli fanatic, who objected to the policy of the government. This
created a serious blow to the peace-process, significantly backed off by the
1996 elected right-wing government of Israel. Following, several years of
unsuccessful negotiations the conflict re-erupted as the Second Intifada on
September 2000. The violence, escalating into an open conflict between the
Palestinian Authority security forces and the IDF, lasted until 2004/2005 and
led to nearly 6,000 fatalities. Following the uprising, Israeli Prime-Minister
Sharon decided upon the Gaza disengagement plan, implemented in 2005 - leaving
all Gaza Strip to Palestinian control. One year later the Hamas party took
power in Palestinian elections, while Israel responded it would not continue
any peace negotiations as long as Hamas is taking part in the Palestinian
government. Clashes between Israel and Hamas in 2006, led Israel to impose a
naval blockade on the Gaza Strip, and cooperation with Egypt allowed also
ground blockade of the Egyptian border. After internal Palestinian political
struggle between Fatah and Hamas erupted into the Battle of Gaza (2007), Hamas
took full control over Gaza. The tensions between Israel and Hamas, who won
increasing financial and political support of Iran, escalated until late 2008,
when Israel launched operation Cast Lead or the Gaza War. By February 2009, a
cease-fire was signed with international mediation between the parties, though
sporadic eruptions of violence continue since at low-intensity. In 2011, the
Palestinian Authority attempt to gain UN membership as a fully sovereign state
failed. While no negotiations have lately taken place, the general situation
between Israel and the Palestinian Authority is calm, and the economic and
security cooperation continues as "status quo". In Hamas controlled Gaza,
sporadic rocket attacks on Israel and Israeli air raids still take place from
time to time, largely initiated by various militant groups, not controlled by
Hamas. Peace process. Oslo Accords (1993). In 1993, Israeli officials led by
Yitzhak Rabin and Palestinian leaders from the Palestine Liberation
Organization led by Yasser Arafat strove to find a peaceful solution through
what became known as the Oslo peace process. A crucial milestone in this
process was Arafat's letter of recognition of Israel's right to exist. In 1993,
the Oslo Accords were finalized as a framework for future Israeli‚ÄìPalestinian
relations. The crux of the Oslo agreement was that Israel would gradually cede
control of the Palestinian territories over to the Palestinians in exchange for
peace. The Oslo process was delicate and progressed in fits and starts, the
process took a turning point at the assassination of Yitzhak Rabin and finally
unraveled when Arafat and Ehud Barak failed to reach agreement at Camp David in
July 2000. Robert Malley, special assistant to US President Bill Clinton for
Arab‚ÄìIsraeli Affairs, has confirmed that while Barak made no formal written
offer to Arafat, the US did present concepts for peace which were considered by
the Israeli side yet left unanswered by Arafat "the Palestinians‚Äô principal
failing is that from the beginning of the Camp David summit onward they were
unable either to say yes to the American ideas or to present a cogent and
specific counterproposal of their own". Consequently, there are different
accounts of the proposals considered. Camp David Summit (2000). In July 2000,
US President Bill Clinton convened a peace summit between Palestinian leader
Yasser Arafat and Israeli Prime Minister Ehud Barak. Barak reportedly put
forward the following as 'bases for negotiation', via the U.S. to the
Palestinian leader; 92% of the West Bank and the entire Gaza Strip, as well as
a Palestinian capital in East Jerusalem, and that 69 Jewish settlements (which
comprise 85% of the West Bank's Jewish settlers) would be ceded to Israel. He
also proposed "temporary Israeli control" indefinitely over another 10% of the
West Bank territory‚Äîan area including many more Jewish settlements. According
to Palestinian sources, the remaining area would be under Palestinian control,
yet certain areas would be broken up by Israeli bypass roads and checkpoints.
Depending on how the security roads would be configured, these Israeli roads
might impede free travel by Palestinians throughout their proposed nation and
reduce the ability to absorb Palestinian refugees. Arafat rejected this offer.
According to the Palestinian negotiators the offer did not remove many of the
elements of the Israeli occupation regarding land, security, settlements, and
Jerusalem. President Clinton reportedly requested that Arafat make a counter-
offer, but he proposed none. Former Israeli Foreign Minister Shlomo Ben Ami who
kept a diary of the negotiations said in an interview in 2001, when asked
whether the Palestinians made a counterproposal: "No. And that is the heart of
the matter. Never, in the negotiations between us and the Palestinians, was
there a Palestinian counterproposal." No tenable solution was crafted which
would satisfy both Israeli and Palestinian demands, even under intense US
pressure. Clinton blamed Arafat for the failure of the Camp David Summit. In
the months following the summit, Clinton appointed former US Senator George J.
Mitchell to lead a fact-finding committee that later published the Mitchell
Report aimed at restoring the peace process. Developments following Camp David.
Following the failed summit Palestinian and Israeli negotiators continued to
meet in small groups through August and September 2000 to try to bridge the
gaps between their respective positions. The United States prepared its own
plan to resolve the outstanding issues. Clinton's presentation of the US
proposals was delayed by the advent of the Second Intifada at the end of
September. Clinton's plan, eventually presented on 23 December 2000, proposed
the establishment of a sovereign Palestinian state in the Gaza strip and
94‚Äì96 percent of the West Bank plus the equivalent of 1‚Äì3 percent of the
West Bank in land swaps from pre-1967 Israel. On Jerusalem the plan stated
that, "the general principle is that Arab areas are Palestinian and that Jewish
areas are Israeli." The holy sites were to be split on the basis that
Palestinians would have sovereignty over the Temple Mount/Noble sanctuary,
while the Israelis would have sovereignty over the Western Wall. On refugees
the plan suggested a number of proposals including financial compensation, the
right of return to the Palestinian state, and Israeli acknowledgement of
suffering caused to the Palestinians in 1948. Security proposals referred to a
"non-militarized" Palestinian state, and an international force for border
security. Both sides accepted Clinton's plan and it became the basis for the
negotiations at the Taba Peace summit the following January. Taba Summit
(2001). The Israeli negotiation team presented a new map at the Taba Summit in
Taba, Egypt in January 2001. The proposition removed the "temporarily Israeli
controlled" areas, and the Palestinian side accepted this as a basis for
further negotiation. With Israeli elections looming the talks ended without an
agreement but the two sides issued a joint statement attesting to the progress
they had made: "The sides declare that they have never been closer to reaching
an agreement and it is thus our shared belief that the remaining gaps could be
bridged with the resumption of negotiations following the Israeli elections."
The following month the Likud party candidate Ariel Sharon defeated Ehud Barak
in the Israeli elections and was elected as Israeli prime minister on 7
February 2001. Sharon‚Äôs new government chose not to resume the high-level
talks. Road Map for Peace. One peace proposal, presented by the Quartet of the
European Union, Russia, the United Nations and the United States on 17
September 2002, was the Road Map for Peace. This plan did not attempt to
resolve difficult questions such as the fate of Jerusalem or Israeli
settlements, but left that to be negotiated in later phases of the process. The
proposal never made it beyond the first phase, which called for a halt to
Israeli settlement construction and a halt to Israeli and Palestinian violence,
none of which was achieved. Arab Peace Initiative. The Arab Peace Initiative
( "MubƒÅdirat as-SalƒÅm al- øArabƒ´yyah") was first proposed by Crown Prince
Abdullah of Saudi Arabia in the Beirut Summit. The peace initiative is a
proposed solution to the Arab‚ÄìIsraeli conflict as a whole, and the
Israeli‚ÄìPalestinian conflict in particular. The initiative was initially
published on 28 March 2002, at the Beirut Summit, and agreed upon again in 2007
in the Riyadh Summit. Unlike the Road Map for Peace, it spelled out "final-
solution" borders based explicitly on the UN borders established before the
1967 Six-Day War. It offered full normalization of relations with Israel, in
exchange for the withdrawal of its forces from all the occupied territories,
including the Golan Heights, to recognize "an independent Palestinian state
with East Jerusalem as its capital" in the West Bank and Gaza Strip, as well as
a "just solution" for the Palestinian refugees. A number of Israeli officials
have responded to the initiative with both support and criticism. The Israeli
government has expressed reservations on 'red line,' issues such as the
Palestinian refugee problem, homeland security concerns, and the nature of
Jerusalem. However, the Arab League continues to raise it as a possible
solution, and meetings between the Arab League and Israel have been held.
Present status. The peace process has been predicated on a "two-state solution"
thus far, but questions have been raised towards both sides' resolve to end the
dispute. Israel's settlement policy. Israel has had its settlement growth and
policies in the Palestinian territories harshly criticized by the European
Union citing it as increasingly undermining the viability of the two-state
solution and running in contrary to the Israeli-stated commitment to resume
negotiations. In December 2011, all the regional groupings on the UN Security
Council named continued settlement construction and settler violence as
disruptive to the resumption of talks, a call viewed by Russia as a "historic
step". In April 2012 international outrage followed Israeli steps to further
entrench the Jewish settlements in the West Bank and East Jerusalem, which
included the publishing of tenders for further settler homes and the plan to
legalize settler outposts. Britain said that the move was a breach of Israeli
commitments under the road map to freeze all settlement expansion in the land
captured since 1967. The British Foreign Minister stated that the "Systematic,
illegal Israeli settlement activity poses the most significant and live threat
to the viability of the two state solution". In May 2012 the 27 foreign
ministers of the European Union issued a statement which condemned continued
Israeli settler violence and incitement. In a similar move, the Quartet
"expressed its concern over ongoing settler violence and incitement in the West
Bank," calling on Israel "to take effective measures, including bringing the
perpetrators of such acts to justice." The Palestinian Ma'an News agency
reported the PA Cabinet's statement on the issue stated that the West Bank and
East Jerusalem were seeing "an escalation in incitement and settler violence
against our people with a clear protection from the occupation military. The
last of which was the thousands of settler march in East Jerusalem which
included slogans inciting to kill, hate and supports violence". Palestinian
incitement. Israeli officials and other political figures have harshly
criticized what they regard as Palestinians inciting violence against Jews and
Israel. In 2011, Israeli PM Benyamin Netanyahu stated that the incitement
promulgated by the Palestinian Authority was destroying Israel‚Äôs confidence,
and he condemned what he regarded as the glorification of the murderers of the
Fogel family in Itamar on PA television. The perpetrator of the murders had
been described as a "hero" and a "legend" by members of his family, during a
weekly program. This occurred shortly after the official Palestinian Authority
Mufti in Jerusalem publicly read out an Islamic hadith that says killing Jews
will speed up the redemption, which was criticised by the UK's Minister for the
Middle East and North Africa as potentially stirring up "hatred and prejudice".
Following the Itamar massacre and a bombing in Jerusalem, 27 US senators sent a
letter requesting the US Secretary of State to identify the administration's
steps to end Palestinian incitement to violence against Jews and Israel that
was occurring within the "Palestinian media, mosques and schools, and even by
individuals or institutions affiliated with the Palestinian Authority." Media
watchdog, Palestinian Media Watch (PMW), reported in June 2012 that the
Palestinian media continually demonizes Israel and Jews and derogates Jewish
history. They stated that the Palestinian children are being taught hatred and
violence against Jews and Israelis and that only 7 percent of Palestinian
teenagers accept Israel's right to exist. They stated that a political peace
structure is contingent upon a proceeding educational peace process, which is
lacking. Children in a Gaza kindergarten were dressed up in uniforms of the
armed wing of the Palestinian Islamic Jihad organisation. They received a toy
rifles and chanted anti-Israeli slogans. A teacher stated that this was so the
children will "grow up to love the resistance and serve the cause of Palestine
and Holy Jihad, as well as to make them leaders and fighters to defend the holy
soil of Palestine." The head of the National Security Studies Center, Dan
Shiftan, said that this showed a "deep message of the total rejection of
Israel, legitimization of terror, and deep-seated victimization." The United
Nations body UNESCO stopped funding a children's magazine sponsored by the
Palestinian Authority that commended Hitler's killing of Jews. It deplored this
publication as contrary to its principles of building tolerance and respect for
human rights and human dignity. UN and the Palestinian state. The PLO's
campaign for full member status for the state of Palestine at the UN and have
recognition on the 1967 borders received widespread support though it was
criticised by some countries, as it avoided bilateral negotiation. Netanyahu
criticized the Palestinians for bypassing direct talks, while Abbas argued that
the continued construction of Jewish settlements was "undermining the realistic
potential" for the two-state solution. Public support. Polling data has
produced mixed results regarding the level of support among Palestinians for
the two-state solution. A poll was carried out in 2011 by the Hebrew
University; it indicated that support for a two-state solution was growing
among both Israelis and Palestinians. The poll found that 58% of Israelis and
50% of Palestinians supported a two-state solution based on the Clinton
Parameters, compared with 47% of Israelis and 39% of Palestinians in 2003, the
first year the poll was carried out. The poll also found that an increasing
percentage of both populations supported an end to violence‚Äî63% of
Palestinians and 70% of Israelis expressing their support for an end to
violence, an increase of 2% for Israelis and 5% for Palestinians from the
previous year. A poll commissioned by The Israel Project conducted in July 2011
by Greenberg Quinlan Rosner Research and fielded by the Palestinian Center for
Public Opinion in the West Bank and Gaza indicated a range of opinions on the
peace process that varied according to the wording of the questions. When asked
if they "accept a two-state solution" 44% of respondents said yes and 52% said
no. When asked if they accepted the following concept: "President Obama said
there should be two states: Palestine as the homeland for the Palestinian
people and Israel as the homeland of the Jewish people" 34% accepted and 61%
rejected. However, when asked if they favoured or opposed a two-state solution
in which "the border between Israel and Palestine should be based on the 1967
lines with mutually-agreed swaps of land to take account of realities on the
ground so both sides can achieve a secure and just peace", 57% said yes and
only 40% said no. When half the respondents were given a choice between two
sentences (a. Israel has a permanent right to exist as a homeland for the
Jewish people; b. Over time Palestinians must work to get back all the land for
a Palestinian state) 84% chose b. and 8% selected a. The other half were asked
to choose between a. I can accept permanently a two-state solution with one a
homeland for the Palestinian people living side-by-side with Israel, a homeland
for the Jewish people, or b. The real goal should to start with a two state
solution but then move to it all being one Palestinian state. 30% of those
asked selected the first option while 66% chose the second. When asked to
choose between a. The best goal is for a two-state solution that keeps two
states living side by side, and b. The real goal should be to start with two
states but then move to it all being one Palestinian state, 25% chose a. whilst
52% opted for b. According to the same poll, 65% of respondents preferred talks
and 20% preferred violence. More than 70% of those polled said they believed a
hadith, or saying, ascribed to Mohammed that is included as a clause of the
Hamas Charter and states, ‚ÄúThe Day of Judgment will not come about until
Muslims fight the Jews". The poll further reported that "72% of Palestinians
endorsed the denial of Jewish history in Jerusalem, 62% supported kidnapping
IDF soldiers and holding them hostage and 53% were in favor or teaching songs
about hating Jews in Palestinian schools." At the same time, only 29% supported
the killing of a settler family in Itamar and 22% supported rocket attacks on
Israeli cities and civilians. 64% support seeking UN recognition of a
Palestinian state outside of the framework of negotiations with Israel and 85%
believe that a settlement freeze should be a pre-requisite for continuing
negotiations. 81% rejected the suggestion that Israeli Prime Minister Netanyahu
was serious about wanting peace and a two-state solution whilst only 12%
accepted the notion. The methodology and neutrality of this poll has been
called into question by Paul Pillar, writing in the National Interest. However,
The Israeli Project has also been criticized as "a right-wing media advocacy
group" using "pro-settlement fear-mongering talking points" which are
"incendiary, dangerous, and counterproductive", by two-state advocacy groups
such as J Street, and argue that its rhetoric and alliance with figures "far
outside the mainstream of American politics" only serves to simultaneously
undermine the image of the State of Israel and TIP's stated purpose, by J-
Street which is itself far outside the mainstream of American and American
Jewish politics. Current issues in dispute. The following outlined positions
are the official positions of the two parties; however, it is important to note
that neither side holds a single position. Both the Israeli and the Palestinian
sides include both moderate and extremist bodies as well as dovish and hawkish
bodies. One of the primary obstacles to resolving the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict is a deepset and growing distrust between its participants. Unilateral
strategies and the rhetoric of hard-line political factions, coupled with
violence and incitements by civilians against one another, have fostered mutual
embitterment and hostility and a loss of faith in the peace process. Support
among Palestinians for Hamas is considerable, and as its members consistently
call for the destruction of Israel and violence remains a threat, security
becomes a prime concern for many Israelis. The expansion of Israeli settlements
in the West Bank has led the majority of Palestinians to believe that Israel is
not committed to reaching an agreement, but rather to a pursuit of establishing
permanent control over this territory in order to provide that security.
Jerusalem. The border of Jerusalem is a particularly delicate issue, with each
side asserting claims over this city. The three largest Abrahamic
religions‚ÄîJudaism, Christianity, and Islam‚Äîinclude Jerusalem as an
important setting for their religious and historical narratives. Israel asserts
that the city should not be divided and should remain unified within Israel's
political control. Palestinians claim at least the parts of the city which were
not part of Israel prior to June 1967. As of 2005, there were more than 719,000
people living in Jerusalem; 465,000 were Jews (mostly living in West Jerusalem)
and 232,000 were Muslims (mostly living in East Jerusalem). The Israeli
government, including the Knesset and Supreme Court, is centered in the "new
city" of West Jerusalem and has been since Israel's founding in 1948. After
Israel captured the Jordanian-controlled East Jerusalem in the Six-Day War, it
assumed complete administrative control of East Jerusalem. In 1980, Israel
issued a new law stating, "Jerusalem, complete and united, is the capital of
Israel." At the Camp David and Taba Summits in 2000‚Äì01, the United States
proposed a plan in which the Arab parts of Jerusalem would be given to the
proposed Palestinian state while the Jewish parts of Jerusalem were retained by
Israel. All archaeological work under the Temple Mount would be jointly
controlled by the Israeli and Palestinian governments. Both sides accepted the
proposal in principle, but the summits ultimately failed. Israel has grave
concerns regarding the welfare of Jewish holy places under possible Palestinian
control. When Jerusalem was under Jordanian control, no Jews were allowed to
visit the Western Wall or other Jewish holy places, and the Jewish cemetery on
the Mount of Olives was desecrated. In 2000, a Palestinian mob took over
Joseph's Tomb, a shrine considered sacred by both Jews and Muslims, looted and
burned the building and turned it into a mosque. There are unauthorized
Palestinian excavations for construction on the Temple Mount in Jerusalem,
which could threaten the stability of the Western Wall. Israel, on the other
hand, has seldom blocked access to holy places sacred to other religions.
Israeli security agencies routinely monitor and arrest Jewish extremists that
plan attacks, resulting in almost no serious incidents for the last 20 years.
Moreover, Israel has given almost complete autonomy to the Muslim trust (Waqf)
over the Temple Mount. Israel expresses concern over the security of its
residents if neighborhoods of Jerusalem are placed under Palestinian control.
Jerusalem has been a prime target for attacks by militant groups against
civilian targets since 1967. Many Jewish neighborhoods have been fired upon
from Arab areas. The proximity of the Arab areas, if these regions were to fall
in the boundaries of a Palestinian state, would be so close as to threaten the
safety of Jewish residents. Nadav Shragai states this idea in his study for the
Jerusalem Center for Public Affairs, "An Israeli security body that was tasked
in March 2000 with examining the possibility of transferring three Arab
villages just outside of Jerusalem ‚Äì Abu Dis, Al Azaria, and a-Ram ‚Äì to
Palestinian security control, assessed at the time that: 'Terrorists will be
able to exploit the short distances, sometimes involving no more than crossing
a street, to cause damage to people or property. A terrorist will be able to
stand on the other side of the road, shoot at an Israeli or throw a bomb, and
it may be impossible to do anything about it. The road will constitute the
border.' If that is the case for neighborhoods outside of Jerusalem's municipal
boundaries, how much more so for Arab neighborhoods within those boundaries.
Palestinians have voiced concerns regarding the welfare of Christian and Muslim
holy places under Israeli control. Some Palestinian advocates have made
statements alleging that the Western Wall tunnel was re-opened with the intent
of causing the mosque's collapse. Israel considers these statements to be
totally baseless and unfounded, and to be deliberately intended to incite
aggression and public disorder, and stated this in a 1996 speech at the UN.
Furthermore, the mosque has not collapsed. Palestinian refugees of the 1948
war. Palestinian refugees are people who lost both their homes and means of
livelihood as a result of the 1948 Arab-Israeli conflict. The number of
Palestinians who fled or were expelled from Israel following its creation was
estimated at 711,000 in 1949. Descendants of these original Palestinian
Refugees are also eligible for registration and services provided by the United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
(UNRWA), and as of 2010 number 4.7 million people. A third of the refugees live
in recognized refugee camps in Jordan, Lebanon, Syria, the West Bank and the
Gaza Strip. The remainder live in and around the cities and towns of these host
countries. Most of these people were born outside of Israel, but are
descendants of original Palestinian refugees. Palestinian negotiators, most
notably Yasser Arafat, have so far insisted that refugees have a right to
return to the places where they lived before 1948 and 1967, including those
within the 1949 Armistice lines, citing the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights and UN General Assembly Resolution 194 as evidence, although they have
privately countenanced the return of only 10,000 refugees and their families to
Israel as part of a peace settlement. Mahmoud Abbas, the current Chairman of
the Palestine Liberation Organization accepts that it is "illogical to ask
Israel to take 5 million, or indeed 1 million. That would mean the end of
Israel." The Arab Peace Initiative of 2002 declared that it proposed the
compromise of a "just resolution" of the refugee problem. Shlaim (2000) states
that from April 1948 the military forces of what was to become Israel had
embarked on a new offensive strategy which involved destroying Arab villages
and the forced removal of civilians. Israeli security concerns. Throughout the
conflict, Palestinian violence has been a concern for Israelis. Israel, along
with the United States and the European Union, refer to the violence against
Israeli civilians and military forces by Palestinian militants as terrorism.
The motivations behind Palestinian violence against Israeli civilians are
multiplex, and not all violent Palestinian groups agree with each other on
specifics, however a common motive is to eliminate the Jewish state and replace
it with a Palestinian Arab state. The most prominent Islamist groups, such as
Hamas, view the Israeli‚ÄìPalestinian conflict as a religious "jihad". Suicide
bombing is used as a tactic among Palestinian organizations like Hamas, Islamic
Jihad, and the Al-Aqsa Martyrs Brigade and is supported by as much as 68% of
the Palestinian people. In Israel, Palestinian suicide bombers have targeted
civilian buses, restaurants, shopping malls, hotels and marketplaces. From
1993‚Äì2003, 303 Palestinian suicide bombers attacked Israel. The Israeli
government initiated the construction of a security barrier following scores of
suicide bombings and terrorist attacks in July 2003. Israel's coalition
government approved the security barrier in the northern part of the green-line
between Israel and the West Bank. Since the erection of the fence, terrorist
acts have declined by more than 90%. Since 2001, the threat of Qassam rockets
fired from the Palestinian Territories into Israel is also of great concern for
Israeli defense officials. In 2006‚Äîthe year following Israel's disengagement
from the Gaza Strip‚Äîthe Israeli government recorded 1,726 such launches, more
than four times the total rockets fired in 2005. As of January 2009, over 8,600
rockets had been launched, causing widespread psychological trauma and
disruption of daily life. Over 500 rockets and mortars hit Israel between
January‚ÄìSeptember 2010. According to a study conducted by University of
Haifa, one in five Israelis have lost a relative or friend in a Palestinian
terrorist attack. There is significant debate within Israel about how to deal
with the country's security concerns. Options have included military action
(including targeted killings and house demolitions of terrorist operatives),
diplomacy, unilateral gestures toward peace, and increased security measures
such as checkpoints, roadblocks and security barriers. The legality and the
wisdom of all of the above tactics have been called into question by various
commentators. Since mid-June 2007, Israel's primary means of dealing with
security concerns in the West Bank has been to cooperate with and permit United
States-sponsored training, equipping, and funding of the Palestinian
Authority's security forces, which with Israeli help have largely succeeded in
quelling West Bank supporters of Hamas. Palestinian violence outside of Israel.
Some Palestinians have committed violent acts over the globe on the pretext of
a struggle against Israel. Many foreigners, including Americans and Europeans,
have been killed and injured by Palestinian militants. At least 53 Americans
have been killed and 83 injured by Palestinian violence since the signing of
the Oslo Accords. During the late 1960s, the PLO became increasingly infamous
for its use of international terror. In 1969 alone, the PLO was responsible for
hijacking 82 planes. El Al Airlines became a regular hijacking target. The
hijacking of Air France Flight 139 by the Popular Front for the Liberation of
Palestine culminated during a hostage-rescue mission, where Israeli special
forces successfully rescued the majority of the hostages. However, one of the
most well-known and notorious terrorist acts was the capture and eventual
murder of 11 Israeli athletes during the 1972 Olympic Games. Palestinian
violence against other Palestinians. Fighting among rival Palestinian and Arab
movements has played a crucial role in shaping Israel's security policy towards
Palestinian militants, as well as in the Palestinian leadership's own policies.
As early as the 1930s revolts in Palestine, Arab forces fought each other while
also skirmishing with Zionist and British forces, and internal conflicts
continue to the present day. During the Lebanese Civil War, Palestinian
baathists broke from the Palestine Liberation Organization and allied with the
Shia Amal Movement, fighting a bloody civil war that killed thousands of
Palestinians. In the First Intifada, more than a thousand Palestinians were
killed in a campaign initiated by the Palestine Liberation Organization to
crack down on suspected Israeli security service informers and collaborators.
The Palestinian Authority was strongly criticized for its treatment of alleged
collaborators, rights groups complaining that those labeled collaborators were
denied fair trials. According to a report released by the Palestinian Human
Rights Monitoring Group, less than 45 percent of those killed were actually
guilty of informing for Israel. "Palestinians who have maintained contact with
the Israeli authorities will not be subjected to acts of harassment, violence,
retribution, or prosecution." The provision was designed to prevent Palestinian
leaders from imposing retribution on fellow Palestinians who had worked on
behalf of Israel during the occupation of the West Bank and Gaza Strip. In the
Gaza Strip, Hamas officials have killed and tortured thousands of Fatah members
and other Palestinians who oppose their rule. During the Battle of Gaza, more
than 150 Palestinians died over a four day period. The violence among
Palestinians was described as a civil war by some commentators. By 2007, more
than 600 Palestinian people had died during the struggle between Hamas and
Fatah. International status. In the past, Israel has demanded control over
border crossings between the Palestinian territories and Jordan and Egypt, and
the right to set the import and export controls, asserting that Israel and the
Palestinian territories are a single economic space. In the interim agreements
reached as part of the Oslo Accords, the Palestinian Authority has received
control over cities (Area A) while the surrounding countryside has been placed
under Israeli security and Palestinian civil administration (Area B) or
complete Israeli control (Area C). Israel has built additional highways to
allow Israelis to traverse the area without entering Palestinian cities. The
initial areas under Palestinian Authority control are diverse and non-
contiguous. The areas have changed over time because of subsequent
negotiations, including Oslo II, Wye River and Sharm el-Sheik. According to
Palestinians, the separated areas make it impossible to create a viable nation
and fails to address Palestinian security needs; Israel has expressed no
agreement to withdrawal from some Areas B, resulting in no reduction in the
division of the Palestinian areas, and the institution of a safe pass system,
without Israeli checkpoints, between these parts. Because of increased
Palestinian violence to occupation this plan is in abeyance. Water resources.
In the Middle East, water resources are of great political concern. Since
Israel receives much of its water from two large underground aquifers which
continue under the Green Line, the use of this water has been contentious in
the Israeli‚ÄìPalestinian conflict. Critics of this argument say that even
though Israel withdraws most water from these areas, it also supplies the West
Bank with approximately 40¬ million cubic metres annually, contributing to 77%
of Palestinians' water supply in the West Bank, which is to be shared for a
population of about 2.3 million. While Israel's consumption of this water has
decreased since it began its occupation of the West Bank, it still consumes the
majority of it: in the 1950s, Israel consumed 95% of the water output of the
Western Aquifer, and 82% of that produced by the Northeastern Aquifer. Although
this water was drawn entirely on Israel's own side of the pre-1967 border, the
sources of the water are nevertheless from the shared groundwater basins
located under both West Bank and Israel. In the Oslo II Accord treaty, both
sides agreed to maintain "existing quantities of utilization from the
resources." In so doing, the Palestinian Authority established the legality of
Israeli water production in the West Bank. Moreover, Israel obligated itself in
this agreement to provide water to supplement Palestinian production, and
further agreed to allow additional Palestinian drilling in the Eastern Aquifer.
Many Palestinians counter that the Oslo II agreement was intended to be a
temporary resolution and that it was not intended to remain in effect more than
a decade later. Indeed its name is "The Israeli-Palestinian Interim Agreement."
This agreement also established the right of the Palestinian Authority to
explore and drill for natural gas, fuel and petroleum within its territory and
territorial waters. It also delineated the major terms of conduct regarding
regulations on the parties' facilities. In 1999, Israel's Ministry of Foreign
Affairs said it continued to honor its obligations under the Interim Agreement.
The water that Israel receives comes mainly from the Jordan River system, the
Sea of Galilee and two underground sources. According to a 2003 BBC article the
Palestinians lack access to the Jordan River system. Future and financing.
Numerous foreign nations and international organizations have established
bilateral agreements with the Palestinian and Israeli water authorities. It is
estimated that a future investment of about US$1.1bn for the West Bank and
$0.8bn is needed for the planning period from 2003 to 2015. In order to support
and improve the water sector in the Palestinian territories, a number of
bilateral and multilateral agencies have been supporting many different water
and sanitation programs. There are three large seawater desalination plants in
Israel and two more scheduled to open before 2014. When the fourth plant
becomes operational, 65% of Israel's water will come from desalination plants,
according to Minister of Finance Dr. Yuval Steinitz. Israeli military
occupation of the West Bank. "Occupied Palestinian Territory" is the term used
by the United Nations to refer to the West Bank, including East Jerusalem, and
the Gaza Strip‚Äîterritories which were captured by Israel during the 1967 Six-
Day War, having formerly been controlled by Egypt and Jordan. The Israeli
government uses the term "Disputed Territories", to argue that some territories
cannot be called occupied as no nation had clear rights to them and there was
no operative diplomatic arrangement when Israel acquired them in June 1967. The
area is still referred to as "Judea and Samaria" by some Israeli groups, based
on the historical regional names from ancient times. In 1980, Israel annexed
East Jerusalem. Israel has never annexed the West Bank or Gaza Strip, and the
United Nations has demanded the "ermination of all claims or states of
belligerency and respect for and acknowledgment of the sovereignty, territorial
integrity and political independence of every State in the area and their right
to live in peace within secure and recognized boundaries free from threats or
acts of force" and that Israeli forces withdraw "from territories occupied in
the recent conflict" ‚Äì the meaning and intent of the latter phrase is
disputed. See Interpretations. It has been the position of Israel that the most
Arab-populated parts of West Bank (without major Jewish settlements), and the
entire Gaza Strip must eventually be part of an independent Palestinian State.
However, the precise borders of this state are in question. At Camp David, for
example, then-Israeli Prime Minister Ehud Barak offered Yasser Arafat an
opportunity to establish an independent Palestinian State composed of 92% of
the West Bank, Arab neighborhood of East Jerusalem, and the entire Gaza Strip
and dismantling of most settlements. Yasser Arafat rejected the proposal
without providing a counter-offer. A subsequent settlement proposed by
President Clinton offered Palestinian sovereignty over 94 to 96 percent of the
West Bank but was similarly rejected. Some Palestinians claim they are entitled
to all of the West Bank, Gaza Strip, and East Jerusalem. Israel says it is
justified in not ceding all this land, because of security concerns, and also
because the lack of any valid diplomatic agreement at the time means that
ownership and boundaries of this land is open for discussion. Palestinians
claim any reduction of this claim is a severe deprivation of their rights. In
negotiations, they claim that any moves to reduce the boundaries of this land
is a hostile move against their key interests. Israel considers this land to be
in dispute, and feels the purpose of negotiations is to define what the final
borders will be. Other Palestinian groups, such as Hamas, have in the past
insisted that Palestinians must control not only the West Bank, Gaza Strip, and
East Jerusalem, but also all of Israel proper. For this reason, Hamas has
viewed the peace process "as religiously forbidden and politically
inconceivable". Israeli settlements in the West Bank. According to DEMA, "In
the years following the Six-Day War, and especially in the 1990s during the
peace process, Israel re-established communities destroyed in 1929 and 1948 as
well as established numerous new settlements in the West Bank." These
settlements are, as of 2009, home to about 301,000 people. DEMA added, "Most of
the settlements are in the western parts of the West Bank, while others are
deep into Palestinian territory, overlooking Palestinian cities. These
settlements have been the site of much inter-communal conflict." The issue of
Israeli settlements in the West Bank and, until 2005, the Gaza Strip, have been
described by the UK and the WEU as an obstacle to the peace process. The United
Nations and the European Union have also called the settlements "illegal under
international law." However, Israel disputes this; several scholars and
commentators disagree with the assessment that settlements are illegal, citing
in 2005 recent historical trends to back up their argument. Those who justify
the legality of the settlements use arguments based upon Articles 2 and 49 of
the Fourth Geneva Convention, as well as UN Security Council Resolution 242. On
a practical level, some objections voiced by Palestinians are that settlements
divert resources needed by Palestinian towns, such as arable land, water, and
other resources; and, that settlements reduce Palestinians' ability to travel
freely via local roads, owing to security considerations. In 2005, Israel's
unilateral disengagement plan, a proposal put forward by Israeli Prime Minister
Ariel Sharon, was enacted. All residents of Jewish settlements in the Gaza
strip were evacuated, and all residential buildings were demolished. Various
mediators and various proposed agreements have shown some degree of openness to
Israel retaining some fraction of the settlements which currently exist in the
West Bank; this openness is based on a variety of considerations, such as, the
desire to find real compromise between Israeli and Palestinian territorial
claims. Israel's position that it needs to retain some West Bank land and
settlements as a buffer in case of future aggression, and Israel's position
that some settlements are legitimate, as they took shape when there was no
operative diplomatic arrangement, and thus they did not violate any agreement.
Former US President George W. Bush has stated that he does not expect Israel to
return entirely to the 1949 armistice lines because of "new realities on the
ground." One of the main compromise plans put forth by the Clinton
Administration would have allowed Israel to keep some settlements in the West
Bank, especially those which were in large blocs near the pre-1967 borders of
Israel. In return, Palestinians would have received some concessions of land in
other parts of the country. The current US administration views a complete
freeze of construction in settlements on the West Bank as a critical step
toward peace. In May and June 2009, President Barack Obama said, "The United
States does not accept the legitimacy of continued Israeli settlements," and
the Secretary of State, Hillary Clinton, stated that the President "wants to
see a stop to settlements ‚Äî not some settlements, not outposts, not
‚Äònatural growth‚Äô exceptions.‚Äù However, Obama has since declared that the
United States will no longer press Israel to stop West Bank settlement
construction as a precondition for continued peace-process negotiations with
the Palestinian Authority. Actions toward stabilizing the conflict. In response
to a weakening trend in Palestinian violence and growing economic and security
cooperation between Israel and the Palestinian Authority, the Israeli military
has removed over 120 check points in 2010 and plans on disengaging from major
Palestinian population areas. According to the IDF, terrorist activity in the
West Bank decreased by 97% compared to violence in 2002. PA-Israel efforts in
the West Bank have "significantly increased investor confidence", and the
Palestinian economy grew 6.8% in 2009. Since the Second Intifada, Jewish
Israelis have been banned from entering Palestinian cities. However, Israeli
Arabs are allowed to enter West Bank cities on weekends. The Palestinian
Authority has petitioned the Israeli military to allow Jewish tourists to visit
West Bank cities as "part of an effort" to improve the Palestinian economy.
Israeli general Avi Mizrahi spoke with Palestinian security officers while
touring malls and soccer fields in the West Bank. Mizrahi gave permission to
allow Israeli tour guides into Bethlehem, a move intended to "contribute to the
Palestinian and Israeli economies." Mutual recognition. The Oslo peace process
was based upon Israel ceding authority to the Palestinians to run their own
political and economic affairs. In return, it was agreed that Palestinians
would promote peaceful co-existence, renounce violence and promote recognition
of Israel among their own people. Despite Yasser Arafat's official renunciation
of terrorism and recognition of Israel, some Palestinian groups continue to
practice and advocate violence against civilians and do not recognize Israel as
a legitimate political entity. Palestinians state that their ability to spread
acceptance of Israel was greatly hampered by Israeli restrictions on
Palestinian political freedoms, economic freedoms, civil liberties, and quality
of life. It is widely felt among Israelis that Palestinians did not in fact
promote acceptance of Israel's right to exist. One of Israel's major
reservations in regards to granting Palestinian sovereignty is its concern that
there is not genuine public support by Palestinians for co-existence and
elimination of terrorism and incitement. Some Palestinian groups, notably
Fatah, the political party founded by PLO leaders, initially claimed they were
willing to foster co-existence depending on the Palestinians being steadily
given more political rights and autonomy. However, in 2010, even Fatah leaders
such as Mahmoud Abbas refused to recognize Israel as a Jewish state, while the
leader of al-Aqsa Martyrs' Brigades, which is the official Fatah's military
wing, publicly disclosed Fatah's "ultimate goal" to be the destruction of the
Jewish state, and that Abbas would lie about recognition of Israel following
"Zionist and American pressure" for "political calculations" as one of the
means to achieve the aforementioned goal. In 2006, Hamas won a majority in the
Palestinian Legislative Council, where it remains the majority party. Hamas has
openly stated in the past that it completely opposed Israel's right to exist,
and its charter states this. Following the release of Gilad Shalit in 2011,
Abbas praised his capturing by Hamas and reassured the Arab public he would
"never recognize a Jewish state". Israel cites past concessions‚Äîsuch as
Israel‚Äôs disengagement from the Gaza Strip in August 2005, which did not lead
to a reduction of attacks and rocket fire against Israel‚Äîas an example of the
Palestinian people not accepting Israel as a state. Palestinian groups and
Israeli Human Rights organizations (namely B'Tselem) have pointed out that
while the military occupation in Gaza was ended, the Israeli government still
retained control of Gaza's airspace, territorial water, and borders, legally
making it still under Israeli control. They also say that mainly thanks to
these restrictions, the Palestinian quality of life in the Gaza Strip has not
improved since the Israeli withdrawal. Government. The Palestinian Authority is
considered corrupt by a wide variety of sources, including some Palestinians.
Some Israelis argue that it provides tacit support for militants via its
relationship with Hamas and other Islamic militant movements, and that
therefore it is unsuitable for governing any putative Palestinian state or
(especially according to the right wing of Israeli politics), even negotiating
about the character of such a state. Because of that, a number of
organizations, including the previously ruling Likud party, declared they would
not accept a Palestinian state based on the current PA. Societal attitudes.
Societal attitudes in both Israel and Palestine are a source of concern to
those promoting dispute resolution. According to a May 2011 poll carried out by
the Palestinian Center For Public Opinion that asked Palestinians from the Gaza
Strip and the West Bank including East Jerusalem, "which of the following means
is the best to end the occupation and lead to the establishing of an
independent Palestinian state", 5.0% supported "military operations", 25.0%
supported non-violent popular resistance, 32.1% favored negotiations until an
agreement could be reached, 23.1% preferred holding an international conference
that would impose a solution on all parties, 12.4% supported seeking a solution
through the United Nations, and 2.4% otherwise. Approximately three quarters of
Palestinians surveyed believed that a military escalation in the Gaza Strip
would be in Israel‚Äôs interest and 18.9% said it would be in Hamas‚Äôs
interest. Regarding the resumption of launching Al-Qassam missiles from Gaza
into Israel, 42.5% said "strongly oppose", 27.1% "somewhat oppose", 16.0%
"somewhat support", 13.8% "strongly support", and 0.2% expressed no opinion.
The Israel Ministry of Foreign Affairs has expressed concerns that Hamas
promote incitement against and overall non-acceptance of Israel, including
promotion of violence against Israel. Gaza blockade. According to Oxfam,
because of an import-export ban imposed on Gaza in 2007, 95% of Gaza‚Äôs
industrial operations were suspended. Out of 35,000 people employed by 3,900
factories in June 2005, only 1,750 people remained employed by 195 factories in
June 2007. By 2010, Gaza's unemployment rate had risen to 40% with 80% of the
population living on less than 2 dollars a day. The Israeli Government's
continued land, sea and air blockage is tantamount to collective punishment of
the population, according to the United Nations Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs In January 2008, the Israeli government calculated how
many calories per person were needed to prevent a humanitarian crisis in the
Gaza strip, and then subtracted eight percent to adjust for the "culture and
experience" of the Gazans. Details of the calculations were released following
Israeli human rights organization Gisha's application to the high court.
Israel's Coordinator of Government Activities in the Territories, who drafted
the plan, stated that the scheme was never formally adopted, this was not
accepted by Gisha. Starting 7 February 2008, the Israeli Government reduced the
electricity it sells directly to Gaza. This follows the ruling of Israel‚Äôs
High Court of Justice‚Äôs decision, which held, with respect to the amount of
industrial fuel supplied to Gaza, that, ‚ÄúThe clarification that we made
indicates that the supply of industrial diesel fuel to the Gaza Strip in the
winter months of last year was comparable to the amount that the Respondents
now undertake to allow into the Gaza Strip. This fact also indicates that the
amount is reasonable and sufficient to meet the vital humanitarian needs in the
Gaza Strip.‚Äù Palestinian militants killed two Israelis in the process of
delivering fuel to the Nahal Oz fuel depot. With regard to Israel‚Äôs plan, the
Court stated that, ‚Äúcalls for a reduction of five percent of the power supply
in three of the ten power lines that supply electricity from Israel to the Gaza
Strip, to a level of 13.5 megawatts in two of the lines and 12.5 megawatts in
the third line, we Court were convinced that this reduction does not breach the
humanitarian obligations imposed on the State of Israel in the framework of the
armed conflict being waged between it and the Hamas organization that controls
the Gaza Strip. Our conclusion is based, in part, on the affidavit of the
Respondents indicating that the relevant Palestinian officials stated that they
can reduce the load in the event limitations are placed on the power lines, and
that they had used this capability in the past." On 20 June 2010, Israel's
Security Cabinet approved a new system governing the blockade that would allow
practically all non-military or dual-use items to enter the Gaza strip.
According to a cabinet statement, Israel would "expand the transfer of
construction materials designated for projects that have been approved by the
Palestinian Authority, including schools, health institutions, water,
sanitation and more ‚Äì as well as (projects) that are under international
supervision." Despite the easing of the land blockade, Israel will continue to
inspect all goods bound for Gaza by sea at the port of Ashdod. Palestinian
army. The Israeli Cabinet issued a statement expressing that it does not wish
the Palestinians to build up an army capable of offensive operations,
considering that the only party against which such an army could be turned in
the near future is Israel itself. However, Israel has already allowed for the
creation of a Palestinian police that can conduct police operations and also
carry out limited-scale warfare. Palestinians have argued that the Israel
Defense Forces, a large and modern armed force, poses a direct and pressing
threat to the sovereignty of any future Palestinian state, making a defensive
force for a Palestinian state a matter of necessity. To this, Israelis claim
that signing a treaty while building an army is a show of bad intentions. Since
2006, the United States has been training, equipping, and funding the
Palestinian Authority's security forces, which have been cooperating with
Israel at unprecedented levels in the West Bank to quell supporters of Hamas,
the main Palestinian Islamist group that opposes direct negotiations with
Israel. The United States government has spent over 500 million building and
training the Palestinian National Security Forces and Presidential Guard. The
IDF believes the US-trained forces will soon be capable of "overrunning small
IDF outposts and isolated Israeli communities" in the event of a conflict.
Fatalities 1948‚Äìpresent. A variety of studies provide differing casualty data
for the Israeli‚ÄìPalestinian conflict. According to the Stockholm
International Peace Research Institute, 13,000 Israelis and Palestinians were
killed in conflict with each other between 1948 and 1997. Other estimations
give 14,500 killed between 1948‚Äì2009. Palestinian fatalities during the 1982
Lebanon War were 2,000 PLO combatants killed in armed conflict with Israel.
Note: Figures includes 1,593 Palestinian fatalities attributed to intra-
Palestinian violence. Figures do not include the 600 Palestinians killed by
other Palestinians in the Gaza Strip since 2006. Note: It is considerably more
difficult to distinguish precisely who amongst those Palestinians killed were
civilians. Numerous pro-Israel organizations as well as the Israeli army claim
the majority of Palestinians killed in armed conflict were combat-age males.
The Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs for the occupied
Palestinian territory (OCHAoPt) "was established in late 2000" by the United
Nations. The office monitors the conflict and presents figures relating to both
internal-violence and direct conflict clashes. All numbers refer to casualties
of direct conflict between Israelis and Palestinians including in IDF military
operations, artillery shelling, search and arrest campaigns, Barrier
demonstrations, targeted killings, settler violence etc. The figures do not
include events indirectly related to the conflict such as casualties from
unexploded ordnance, etc., or events when the circumstances remain unclear or
are in dispute. The figures include all reported casualties of all ages and
both genders. Figures include both Israeli civilians and security forces
casualties in West Bank, Gaza and Israel. Criticism of casualty statistics in
the Second Intifada. As reported by the Israeli human rights group B‚ÄôTselem,
since 29 September 2000 a total of 7,454 Palestinian and Israeli individuals
were killed due to the conflict. According to the report, 1,317 of the 6,371
Palestinians were minors, and at least 2,996 did not participate in fighting at
time of death. Palestinians killed 1,083 Israelis, including 741 civilians. 124
of those killed were minors. The International Policy Institute for Counter-
Terrorism criticized the methodology of Palestinian-based rights groups,
including B'tselem, and questioned their accuracy in classifying civilian/
combatant ratios. In a study published by Scholars for Peace in the Middle
East, Elihu D. Richter and Dr. Yael Stein examined B'tselem methods in
calculating casualties during Operation Cast Lead. They argue that B'tselem's
report contains "errors of omission, commission and classification bias which
result in overestimates of the ratio of non-combatants to combatants." Stein
and Richter claim the high male/female ratios among Palestinians, including
those in their mid-to-late teens, "suggests that the IDF classifications are
combatant and non-combatant status are probably far more accurate than those of
B‚ÄôTselem." Land mine and explosive remnants of war casualties. A
comprehensive collection mechanism to gather land mine and explosive remnants
of war (ERW) casualty data does not exist for the Palestinian territories. In
2009, the United Nations Mine Action Centre reported that more than 2,500 mine
and explosive remnants of war casualties occurred between 1967 and 1998, at
least 794 casualties (127 killed, 654 injured and 13 unknown) occurred between
1999 to 2008 and that 12 people have been killed and 27 injured since the Gaza
War. The UN Mine Action Centre identified the main risks as coming from "ERW
left behind by Israeli aerial and artillery weapon systems, or from militant
caches targeted by the Israeli forces." There are at least 15 confirmed
minefields in the West Bank on the border with Jordan. The Palestinian National
Security Forces do not have maps or records of the minefields. Attacks on
diplomatic missions and Israelis abroad. Numerous embassies and Israeli
travelers have been attacked by Palestinian militant groups during the
Israeli‚ÄìPalestinian conflict. External links. Peace proposals
