Jamil Hussein controversy The Jamil Hussein controversy was an instance where
bloggers disputed the fact checking of the mainstream media. In an Associated
Press (AP) article dated November 25, 2006, it was reported that "rampaging
militiamen burned and blew up four mosques" in the Hurriya neighborhood of
Baghdad and that six Sunnis had been dragged out of prayers and burned alive.
The AP report was attributed to "Jamil Hussein", identified as a captain in the
Iraqi police. In the words of the "Washington Post", the attacks " ...
illustrated Iraqi security forces' inability to rein in violence, at a time
when U.S. leaders want them to take greater responsibility for the country's
security, a vital benchmark for any strategy to withdraw U.S. troops."
Following up on the report, the Multinational Force Iraq claimed that an Iraqi
Army patrol investigating the area found only one mosque had been burned and
that the patrol had been unable to confirm media reports that six Sunni
civilians had been burned to death.". When Jamil Hussein was called upon to
substantiate his claims, the Interior Ministry initially denied that he was a
member of the Multinational Force Iraq. Attempts to locate and identify Hussein
failed, and it was later suggested by conservative bloggers, including Michelle
Malkin, that he did not exist. In January 2007, the Interior Ministry
recognized Hussein as an active member of the Multinational Force Iraq. Malkin
has issued a correction for her denial of Hussein's existence but contests AP
claims of destroyed mosques and civilians burned alive. Malkin visited Iraq and
verified that only one mosque had suffered significant damage. She further
stated that the AP's only corroborating witness had recanted and that no one
since has found any evidence of the claim about people being burned alive.
Background. A story in the "Washington Post", published on November 25, 2006,
seemed to confirm the reports that multiple mosques had been attacked on the
24th. An Iraqi army patrol of the area on November 25, 2006, discovered,
however, that " ... only one mosque had been burned in the neighborhood ...
(t)he patrol was also unable to confirm media reports that six Sunni civilians
were allegedly dragged out of Friday prayers and burned to death. Neither
Baghdad police nor Coalition forces have reports of any such incident." There
were inconsistencies between different AP versions of the story. In one
version, the dead were taken to the morgue at Al-Yarmouk hospital. In a later
version of the story, the six victims were taken away by residents and buried
in a nearby cemetery. On January 21, 2007, Malkin reported in an opinion
article in the "New York Post" that she had visited two of the six mosques on a
trip she had taken to Iraq. At her online HotAir magazine, Malkin posted video
taken during her trip to one of the mosques showing a substantially destroyed
dome. She reported that this mosque had also been hit with small-arms fire and
two of its inside rooms were burned out by a firebomb. Her published
photographs and video supported the assertions of the Multi-National Force that
the damage reported by Jamil Hussein was exaggerated. AP source identity. The
AP initially identified Jamil Hussein as a police captain with an office at the
Yarmouk police station in western Baghdad. The AP later identified their source
as Jamal Gholaiem Hussein of the al-Khadra district The AP issued a statement
to "Editor & Publisher" reporting that Ministry spokesman Abdul-Karim Khalaf,
who had previously denied Hussein's existence, had formally acknowledged that
Hussein was an officer assigned to the Khadra police station. The Ministry also
released information about the pending arrest and disciplinary action against
Hussein for "breaking police regulations against talking to reporters." On 15
February 2007, "Pajamas Media" reported that Iraqi Interior Ministry Spokesman
Brigadier General Abdul-Karim Khalaf said that an Associated Press reporter had
confirmed to him on two occasions that the real name of the AP source was Iraqi
Police Captain Jamil Gulaim Innad al-Jashami. Lack of additional sources.
According to Edward Wong, a "The New York Times" reporter who reported on the
events in Baghdad on November 24, 2006: Associated Press reaction. Associated
Press reporters returned and found "more witnesses who described the attack in
particular detail"; these new witnesses were all anonymous, AP stating that
they feared persecution if identified. AP reported that Captain Jamil Hussein
was a genuine police contact and argue that the Interior Ministry's files are
inaccurate. The Associated Press, which has lost four employees to violence in
Iraq so far, has questioned bloggers attacking their credibility. AP Executive
Editor Kathleen Carroll has said Carroll suggested that critics might be more
concerned that Hussein could face imprisonment for being a source to
journalists. "I think a little perspective is warranted here," she said. "While
this has been going on, hundreds if not thousands of Iraqi civilians have been
killed and hundreds of serviceman have died."
