Japanese succession controversy The Japanese imperial succession controversy
refers to desires to change the laws of succession to the Japanese Throne,
which is currently limited to males of the Japanese imperial family. Overview.
Traditionally, the imperial throne was passed on under custom which resembled
the rule of agnatic seniority. Theoretically, any male or female with
patrilineal lineage to early Japanese monarchs, who descended in direct male
line from the first emperor, Jimmu Tenno, could come to hold the Chrysanthemum
throne. In practice, preference was given to first-born male offspring of a
preceding male monarch, followed by his brothers, sons and other males of the
immediate male-line family; and ultimately followed by representatives of
Shinnoke houses, in other words, male-line relatives, occasionally very distant
male cousins. Because there existed no restrictions on remarriage or polygyny
in historical Japan, there existed usually a plenitude of male relatives who
could take over the throne. However, there are several historical instances of
women holding the throne. An empress' offspring does not have claim to the
throne from the said maternal lineage, so assigning a female to the throne had
the convenient effect of postponing succession disputes. On other occasions,
the direct male heir was yet a toddler and unable to perform imperial rituals.
In such instance, his mother, aunt or elder sister, if also held Imperial
lineage through her patriline, temporarily took over the throne until the child
came to puberty, which was deemed perfectly sufficient for a boy's accession.
However, after the Meiji restoration, Japan imported the Prussian model of
imperial succession, in which Imperial females were explicitly excluded from
the claim to succession. More significantly, as a part of the effort to
westernise and modernise Japan, the Japanese government banned polygamy, which
was previously allowed to any family with noble rank (samurai or kuge),
particularly if the first wife could not produce male offspring. After World
War II, a further restriction was instituted; new rules meant that only the
closest relatives of the then emperor Hirohito (children and descendants,
siblings and their descendants) could be part of the official Imperial family,
and have a claim to succession. The current emperor Akihito has two sons: Crown
Prince Naruhito and Prince Akishino; Prince Akishino is the father of the
Emperor's only grandson, Prince Hisahito of Akishino. The Emperor's brother
Prince Hitachi has no children. The Emperor's uncle Prince Mikasa has no male-
line grandsons and the Emperor's cousin Prince Katsura is unmarried and has no
children. Controversy exists as to what extent the current rule of succession
under "the Imperial Household Law of 1947" should be changed. Those on the
Right advocate a change, holding the Prussian-style agnatic primogeniture, but
bringing back the previously excluded male relatives into the Imperial
household. Liberals would advocate the adoption of absolute primogeniture.
Moderates would advocate re-adoption of earlier, indigenous customs of
succession, that is, that a female can succeed to the throne as long as she
holds precedence in seniority or proximity within the patrilineal kinship. The
late Imperial Princess Takamatsu, the last surviving Arisugawa-Takamatsu and
aunt to the current Emperor, advocated the traditional, customary rights of
female princesses to succession, in her media interviews and articles, after
the birth of princess Aiko. Adoption of absolute primogeniture would permit, as
has happened in history, unmarried or widowed female descendants in the male
line of the Imperial House to inherit the Chrysanthemum Throne, but would also
allow something unprecedented: it would allow married princesses and
princesses' children whose fathers are not descendants in the male line of the
earlier emperors, to ascend the throne. This scenario would mean that a new
dynasty would take over the Chrysanthemum Throne. Historical background. Ruling
Empresses in Japanese history. Eight women have served as "tennō", "i.e."
reigning empresses, during the recorded history of Japan on ten occasions. Two
of those empresses have, after abdicating, reascended the throne under
different names. The last time Japan had a reigning Empress was in 1771, when
Empress Toshiko "Go-Sakuramachi" abdicated in favor of her nephew, Emperor Go-
Momozono. Post Meiji-era laws. Women were barred from the throne for the first
time in 1889 by a Prussian-influenced constitution during the 19th century
Meiji Restoration. This prohibition was continued by the Imperial Household Law
of 1947, enacted under Japan's post-World War II constitution during the
American occupation. More importantly, as a part of reforming Japan, Japan
introduced a ban on polygyny and the Meiji Emperor was the last to have an
official secondary consort. The 1947 law further restricts the succession to
legitimate male descendants in the male line of Meiji only (excluding other
male lines of the imperial dynasty, such as Fushimi, Higashikuni,
Kitashirakawa, etc.), and specifically bars the emperor and other members of
the imperial family from adopting children. During the recent controversy over
the succession, commentators suggested that the current system could not
possibly function in the long term as it is unlikely that there will always be
a male prince to succeed to the throne. Current situation. Crown Prince
Naruhito and Crown Princess Masako have one child, Princess Toshi, born on
December 1, 2001. The child's birth, which occurred more than eight years after
her parents' marriage and after the Crown Princess had considerable (and widely
noted) difficulty in conceiving a child, sparked a lively debate in Japan about
imperial succession. To add to this dearth of male heirs, Crown Prince
Naruhito's brother, Prince Akishino, had only two daughters, Princess Mako of
Akishino, born on October 23, 1991, and Princess Kako of Akishino, born
December 29, 1994. The two other collateral members of the Imperial Family also
had only daughters. The late Prince Tomohito of Mikasa had two daughters,
Princess Akiko of Mikasa, born December 20, 1981, and Princess Yōko of Mikasa,
born October 25, 1983. The late Prince Takamado had three daughters, Princess
Tsuguko of Takamado, born March 8, 1986, Princess Noriko of Takamado, born July
22, 1988, and Princess Ayako of Takamado born September 15, 1990. No male heir
had been born into the Imperial Family in nearly 41 years. In the early 2000s
(decade), the succession controversy emerged as a political issue. The "Asahi
Shimbun" published an editorial in May 2006 suggesting that the current system
was unsustainable. In an Asahi Shimbun survey in March 2006, 82% of the
respondents supported the revision of the Imperial Household Law to allow a
woman to ascend to the Imperial Throne. Then Prime Minister Junichiro Koizumi
also strongly supported the revision, pledging to present a bill to the 2006
session of the parliament. Some conservative lawmakers opposed Koizumi and said
the debate was premature. The current emperor's cousin, HIH Prince Tomohito of
Mikasa, also opposed the proposal, saying that the official male members of the
Japanese imperial family might take up concubines in order to produce male
members because it was previously possible for a male illegitimate child to
assume the imperial throne. Later he said that this remark was just a joke.
Another solution would be to restore the Shinnoke (agnatic collateral branches
of the imperial dynasty which had been disinherited by the United States) to
the line of succession. Prince Akishino's wife, Princess Akishino, gave birth
to a baby boy on September 6, 2006. The child, Prince Hisahito of Akishino, is
now third in line to the Imperial Throne. Following the birth of Prince
Hisahito, the political debate surrounding succession subsided. Koizumi
withdrew his bill, though public opinion polling suggested that support for the
change was still around 68%.
