Jarislowsky Chair in Public Sector Management In November 2005, Stephen
Jarislowsky of Montreal made a donation to the University of Ottawa that
enabled the University to create the Jarislowsky Chair in Public Sector
Management. Centering the Chair in Canada's capital is an appropriate place to
establish a chair dedicated to studying and commenting on public sector
management. With the support of the School of Management and the Faculty of
Social Sciences, the Chair is not restricted to any one facet of public
management but encourages interdisciplinary work in a number of faculties at
the University of Ottawa and elsewhere. As a result, a special effort is made
to encourage work in all aspects of public management including governance,
human resources, policy-making, service standards and the implementation of
best practices. While research forms the basis of the work of the Chair holder,
efforts are also made to expand the range of executive courses and to encourage
more sharing of best practices in Canada. About the donor: Stephen Jarislowsky.
Stephen Jarislowsky is one of Canada’s most successful mutual fund managers
and is the chairman and CEO of the investment firm Jarislowsky, Fraser Limited.
As the co-founder of the Canadian Coalition for Good Governance, he has been a
champion for good governance and management in Canada. Public service
management is understandably an important topic to him since the public sector
occupies such a large role in Canadian society. A graduate of Harvard, Cornell,
and the University of Chicago, Dr. Jarislowsky’s accolades include the Order
of Canada and National Order of Quebec. He has also received honorary law
degrees from many Canadian Universities, including Queen’s, Concordia, and
McMaster. Notably, Dr. Jarislowsky is also an accomplished writer having
recently published, The Investment Zoo, Taming the Bulls and the Bears that was
a best seller across Canada in 2005. The University of Ottawa is not the only
recipient of Dr. Jarislowsky’s generosity. Nine other Canadian universities
are also home to a research chair that bears the Jarislowsky name. For example,
he has also contributed to the establishment of the Stephen A. Jarislowsky
Dance Studio in Vancouver, The Centre for the Study of Democratic Institutions,
the Jarislowsky Chair in Technology and International Competitiveness and the
Canada Research Chair in Corporate Governance and Financial Reporting. About
the Chair holder: David Zussman. David Zussman has enjoyed a diverse career in
the public service, private sector, and academia. He is an academic authority
on public service management and is a part-time Commissioner of the Public
Service Commission of Canada. During the course of his public sector career he
has been Assistant Secretary to the Cabinet for Program Review and Machinery of
Government in the Privy Council, and in 1993 and 1997 he was asked by Jean
Chrétien to help in the transition of his newly elected government. At the
University of Ottawa, Dr. Zussman has been Assistant and Associate Dean of
Graduate Programs as well as the Dean of the School of Management from 1988 to
1992. More recently, he was President of the Public Policy Forum from 1996 to
2003 and served as Executive Vice President and COO of EKOS Research Associates
Inc, a public opinion and public policy research firm located in Ottawa. In
2003, he received the Public Service Citation Award by the Association of
Professional Executives of the Public Service of Canada (APEX) in recognition
of his contribution to making the public sector better understood in Canada.
Dr. Zussman is also known for his writing; he has written several books,
including and The Vertical Solitude: Managing in the Public Service, as well
being responsible for a monthly column in the Ottawa Citizen on current
developments in public policy. He completed a PhD from McGill University, an
MSc from Florida State University and a BSc from McGill University.
