Jeffersonian democracy Jeffersonian democracy, named after its leading advocate
Thomas Jefferson, was one of two dominant political outlooks and movements in
the United States from the 1790s to the 1820s. The term was commonly used to
refer to the Democratic-Republican Party which Jefferson founded in opposition
to the Federalist Party of Alexander Hamilton. The Jeffersonians believed in
democracy and equality of political opportunity, with a priority for the
"yeoman farmer" and the "plain folk". They were antagonistic to the
aristocratic elitism of merchants and manufacturers, distrusted factory
workers, and were on the watch for supporters of the dreaded British system of
government. Above all, the Jeffersonians were devoted to the principles of
Republicanism, especially civic duty and opposition to privilege, aristocracy
and corruption. Positions. Jefferson has been called "the most democratic of
the fathers." The Jeffersonians advocated a narrow interpretation of the
Constitution's Article I provisions granting powers to the federal government.
They strenuously opposed the Federalist Party, led by Treasury Secretary
Alexander Hamilton. President George Washington generally supported Hamilton's
program for a financially strong national government. The election of Jefferson
in 1800, named by him as 'The revolution of 1800,' brought in the Presidency of
Thomas Jefferson and the permanent eclipse of the Federalists, apart from the
Supreme Court. Politics. The spirit of Jeffersonian democracy dominated
American politics from 1800 to 1824, the First Party System, under Jefferson
and succeeding presidents James Madison and James Monroe. Prominent spokesmen
for Jeffersonian principles included Madison, Albert Gallatin, John Randolph of
Roanoke, Nathaniel Macon, John Taylor of Caroline, James Monroe, John C.
Calhoun, John Quincy Adams and Henry Clay (with the last three taking new paths
after 1828). After 1830 the principles were still talked about but did not form
the basis of a political party. Thus editor Horace Greeley in 1838 started a
magazine, "The Jeffersonian," that he said "would exhibit a practical regard
for that cardinal principle of Jeffersonian Democracy, and the People are the
sole and safe depository of all power, principles and opinions which are to
direct the Government." Factions. The Jeffersonians occasionally split into
factions. John Randolph, after leading the party in Congress, formed the "Old
Republicans" or Tertium Quids or "Quid" faction, saying Jefferson had strayed
too far from the core values of republicanism. Jefferson never trusted Aaron
Burr, who became his vice president. They split and Jefferson put Burr on trial
for treason (he was acquitted and left the country). After the Madison
administration experienced serious trouble financing the War of 1812, and
discovered the Army and militia were unable to make war effectively, a new
generation of Republican nationalists emerged. They were supported by President
James Monroe, an original Jeffersonian, and included John Quincy Adams, Henry
Clay and John C. Calhoun. Adams defeated Andrew Jackson, who had support from
the Quids, in 1824 and in a few years two successor parties had emerged, the
Democratic Party, which formulated Jacksonian democracy and which still exists;
and Henry Clay's Whig Party. Their competition marked the Second Party System.
Westward expansion. Territorial expansion of the United States was a major goal
of the Jeffersonians because it would produce new farm lands for yeomen
farmers. The Jeffersonians wanted to integrate the Indians into American
society, or remove further west those tribes that refused to integrate. However
Sheehan (1974) argues that the Jeffersonians, with the best of goodwill toward
the Indians, destroyed their distinctive cultures with its misguided
benevolence. The Jeffersonians took enormous pride in the bargain they reached
with France in the Louisiana Purchase of 1803. It opened up vast new fertile
farmlands from Louisiana to Montana. However, established New England political
interests and many in the Federalist Party opposed the purchase. Jeffersonians,
however, thought the new territory would help maintain their vision of the
ideal republican society, based on agricultural commerce, governed lightly and
promoting self-reliance and virtue. Economics. Jeffersonian agrarians held that
the economy of the United States should rely more on agriculture for strategic
commodities than on industry. Jefferson specifically believed, "Those who labor
in the earth are the chosen people of God, if He ever had a chosen people,
whose breast He has made His peculiar deposit for substantial and genuine
virtue." However, Jeffersonian ideals are not opposed to all manufacturing;
rather, he believed that all people have the right to work to provide for their
own subsistence and that an economic system which undermines that right is
unacceptable. Jefferson's fear was that unlimited expansion of commerce and
industry would lead to the growth of a class of wage laborers who relied on
others for income and sustenance. The workers would no longer be independent
voters. Jefferson's belief was that unlimited expansion of commerce and
industry would lead to the growth of a class of wage laborers who relied on
others for income and sustenance. Such a situation, Jefferson feared, would
leave the American people vulnerable to political subjugation and economic
manipulation. The solution Jefferson came up with was, as scholar Clay
Jenkinson noted, "a graduated income tax that would serve as a disincentive to
vast accumulations of wealth and would make funds available for some sort of
benign redistribution downward." Limited government. While the Federalists
advocated for a strong central government, Jeffersonians argued for strong
state and local governments and a weak federal government. Self-sufficiency,
self-government, and individual responsibility, were, in the Jeffersonian
worldview, among the most important ideals that formed the basis of the
American Revolution. In Jefferson's opinion, nothing that could feasibly be
accomplished by individuals at the local level ought to be accomplished by the
federal government. The federal government would concentrate its efforts solely
on national and international projects. Jefferson's advocacy of limited
government led to sharp disagreements with Federalist figures such as Alexander
Hamilton. Jefferson felt that Hamilton favored plutocracy and the creation of a
powerful aristocracy in the United States which would accumulate increasingly
greater power until the political and social order of the United States became
indistinguishable from those of the Old World. After initial skepticism,
Jefferson supported the ratification of the United States Constitution and
especially supported its stress on checks and balances. The ratification of the
United States Bill of Rights, especially the First Amendment, gave Jefferson
even greater confidence in the document. Jeffersonians favored a strict
construction interpretation of federal government powers described in Article I
of the Constitution. For example, Jefferson once wrote a letter to Charles
Wilson Peale explaining that, although a Smithsonian-style national museum
would be a wonderful resource, he could not support the use of federal funds to
construct and maintain such a project. The 'strict constructionism' of today is
a remote descendant of Jefferson's views. Jefferson and Jeffersonian
principles. Jeffersonian democracy was not a one-man operation. It was a large
political party with many local and state leaders, and various factions, and
they did not always agree with Jefferson or with each other. Jefferson was
accused of inconsistencies by his opponents. The "Old Republicans" said that he
abandoned the Principles of 1798. He believed the national security concerns
were so urgent that it was necessary to purchase Louisiana without waiting for
a Constitutional amendment. He enlarged federal power through the intrusively-
enforced Embargo Act of 1807. He idealized the "yeoman farmer" despite being
himself a gentleman plantation owner. The disparities between Jefferson's
philosophy and practice have been noted by numerous historians: Staaloff
proposed that it was due to his being a proto-Romantic; John Quincy Adams
claimed that it was a manifestation of pure hypocrisy, or 'pliability of
principle;' and Bailyn asserts it simply represented a contradiction with
Jefferson, that he was “simultaneously a radical utopian idealist and a
hardheaded, adroit, at times cunning politician.” However, Jenkinson argued
that Jefferson's personal failings ought not to influence present day thinkers
to disregard Jeffersonian ideals. Kuehnelt-Leddihn, a European nobleman who
opposed democracy, argues that "Jeffersonian democracy" is a misnomer, because
Jefferson was not a democrat but in fact believed in rule by an elite:
"Jefferson actually was an Agrarian Romantic who dreamt of a republic governed
by an elite of character and intellect." Historian Sean Wilentz (2006) argues
that as a practical politician elected to serve the people Jefferson had to
negotiate solutions, not insist on his own version of abstract positions. The
result, Wilentz argues, was "flexible responses to unforeseen events...in
pursuit of ideals ranging from the enlargement of opportunities for the mass of
ordinary, industrious Americans to the principled avoidance of war."
