Jewish Socialists' Group The Jewish Socialists' Group (JSG) is a Jewish
socialist collective in Britain, formed in the 1970s. History. The Jewish
Socialists' Group (JSG) is a Jewish socialist collective in Britain, that was
founded in Manchester/Liverpool in 1974-1977 as lobby group campaigning against
the fascist National Front and for the left to relate more positively to Jewish
issues. A London branch formed in 1977. They describe themselves as "a
political organisation campaigning for Jewish rights and the rights of all
oppressed minorities in building a socialist future." The JSG supported the
original Anti-Nazi League and was active in street-level militant anti-fascism.
It participated in the Beyond the Fragments conference which sought to renew
democratic socialism. In the early 1980s, it was active in campaigning for
peace in Israel/Palestine, becoming a founding member of the International
Jewish Peace Union and the Campaign for Israel-Palestine Peace (CIPP). It
developed a perspective drawing on the tradition of the Bund, stressing
Yiddishism, cultural pluralism and a commitment to the vitality of the
diaspora. In this it worked with French neo-Bundist Richard Marienstrasse and
the Medem Jewish Socialist Group in New York. In the mid-1980s, it became
associated with the Greater London Council's municipal socialism and
multiculturalism, receiving funding to launch Jewish Cultural and Anti-Racist
Project (JCARP). It was frequently in conflict with the Jewish communal
leadership, and in particular the Association of Jewish Ex-Servicemen (AJEX).
Publications. A magazine, "Jewish Socialist", was launched in 1985, which
continues publication today. Some of the figures associated with the JSG in
this period included Battle of Cable Street veteran Charlie Goodman, Joe
Garman, veteran Jewish trade unionist Mick Mindel, poet Michael Rosen, and
Bundist veteran Majer Bogdanski. JSG affiliations. Bund, Enough! Coalition,
European Jews for a Just Peace, National Assembly Against Racism, Unite Against
Fascism, No One Is illegal, Iraq Occupation Focus, Stop the War Coalition.
