Job hunting Job hunting, job seeking, or job searching is the act of looking
for employment, due to unemployment or discontent with a current position. The
immediate goal of job seeking is usually to obtain a job interview with an
employer which may lead to getting hired. The job hunter or seeker typically
first looks for job vacancies or employment opportunities. Steps. Locating
jobs. As of 2010, less than 10% of U.S. jobs are filled through online ads.
Researching the employers. Many job seekers research the employers to which
they are applying, and some employers see evidence of this as a positive sign
of enthusiasm for the position or the company, or as a mark of thoroughness.
Information collected might include open positions, full name, locations, web
site, business description, year established, revenues, number of employees,
stock price if public, name of chief executive officer, major products or
services, major competitors, and strengths and weaknesses. Networking.
Contacting as many people as possible is a highly effective way to find a job.
It is estimated that 50% or higher of all jobs are found through networking.
Job recruiters and decision makers are increasingly using online social
networking sites to gather information about job applicants, according to a
mid-2011 Jobvite survey of 800 employers in the USA. Job seekers need to begin
to pay more attention to what employers and recruiters find when they do their
pre-interview information gathering about applicants, according to this 2010
study by Microsoft, "Online Reputation in a Connected World". Applying. One can
also go and hand out résumés or Curriculum Vitae to prospective employers.
Another recommended method of job hunting is cold calling or emailing companies
that one desires to work for and inquire to whether there are any job
vacancies. After finding a desirable job, they would then apply for the job by
responding to the advertisement. This may mean applying through a website,
emailing or mailing in a hard copy of your résumé to a prospective employer.
It is generally recommended that résumés be brief, organized, concise, and
targeted to the position being sought. With certain occupations, such as
graphic design or writing, portfolios of a job seeker's previous work are
essential and are evaluated as much, if not more than the person's résumé. In
most other occupations, the résumé should focus on past accomplishments,
expressed in terms as concretely as possible (e.g. number of people managed,
amount of increased sales or improved customer satisfaction). Interviewing.
Once an employer has received your résumé, they will make a list of potential
employees to be interviewed based on the résumé and any other information
contributed. During the interview process, interviewers generally look for
persons who they believe will be best for the job and work environment. The
interview may occur in several rounds until the interviewer is satisfied and
offers the job to the applicant. Onboarding. New employees begin their
onboarding into new organizations even before their first contact with
potential employers. While the best employers will invest in accommodating,
assimilating and accelerating new employees, those joining firms that don't
should take charge of their own onboarding, doing their best to get a head
start before their start, manage their messages, and help others deliver
results after they start. Job hunting in economic theory. Economists use the
term "frictional unemployment" to mean unemployment resulting from the time and
effort that must be expended before an appropriate job is found. This type of
unemployment is always present in the economy. Search theory is the economic
theory that studies the optimal decision of how much time and effort to spend
searching, and which offers to accept or reject (in the context of a job hunt,
or likewise in other contexts like searching for a low price).
