John Stuart Mill John Stuart Mill, (20 May 1806 – 8 May 1873) was a British
philosopher, political economist and civil servant. He was an influential
contributor to social theory, political theory, and political economy. He has
been called "the most influential English-speaking philosopher of the
nineteenth century". Mill's conception of liberty justified the freedom of the
individual in opposition to unlimited state control. He was a proponent of
utilitarianism, an ethical theory developed by Jeremy Bentham. Hoping to remedy
the problems found in an inductive approach to science, such as confirmation
bias, he clearly set forth the premises of falsification as the key component
in the scientific method. Mill was also a Member of Parliament and an important
figure in liberal political philosophy. Biography. John Stuart Mill was born on
Rodney Street in the Pentonville area of London, the eldest son of the Scottish
philosopher, historian and economist James Mill, and Harriet Burrow. John
Stuart was educated by his father, with the advice and assistance of Jeremy
Bentham and Francis Place. He was given an extremely rigorous upbringing, and
was deliberately shielded from association with children his own age other than
his siblings. His father, a follower of Bentham and an adherent of
associationism, had as his explicit aim to create a genius intellect that would
carry on the cause of utilitarianism and its implementation after he and
Bentham had died. Mill was a notably precocious child. He describes his
education in his autobiography. At the age of three he was taught Greek. By the
age of eight he had read "Aesop's Fables", Xenophon's "Anabasis", and the whole
of Herodotus, and was acquainted with Lucian, Diogenes Laërtius, Isocrates and
six dialogues of Plato. He had also read a great deal of history in English and
had been taught arithmetic. At the age of eight he began studying Latin, the
works of Euclid, and algebra, and was appointed schoolmaster to the younger
children of the family. His main reading was still history, but he went through
all the commonly taught Latin and Greek authors and by the age of ten could
read Plato and Demosthenes with ease. His father also thought that it was
important for Mill to study and compose poetry. One of Mill's earliest poetry
compositions was a continuation of the Iliad. In his spare time, he also
enjoyed reading about natural sciences and popular novels, such as "Don
Quixote" and "Robinson Crusoe". His father's work, "The History of British
India" was published in 1818; immediately thereafter, about the age of twelve,
Mill began a thorough study of the scholastic logic, at the same time reading
Aristotle's logical treatises in the original language. In the following year
he was introduced to political economy and studied Adam Smith and David Ricardo
with his father, ultimately completing their classical economic view of factors
of production. Mill's "comptes rendus" of his daily economy lessons helped his
father in writing "Elements of Political Economy" in 1821, a textbook to
promote the ideas of Ricardian economics; however, the book lacked popular
support. Ricardo, who was a close friend of his father, used to invite the
young Mill to his house for a walk in order to talk about political economy. At
age fourteen, Mill stayed a year in France with the family of Sir Samuel
Bentham, brother of Jeremy Bentham. The mountain scenery he saw led to a
lifelong taste for mountain landscapes. The lively and friendly way of life of
the French also left a deep impression on him. In Montpellier, he attended the
winter courses on chemistry, zoology, logic of the "Faculté des Sciences", as
well as taking a course of the higher mathematics. While coming and going from
France, he stayed in Paris for a few days in the house of the renowned
economist Jean-Baptiste Say, a friend of Mill's father. There he met many
leaders of the Liberal party, as well as other notable Parisians, including
Henri Saint-Simon. This intensive study however had injurious effects on Mill's
mental health, and state of mind. At the age of twenty he suffered a nervous
breakdown. In chapter V of his "Autobiography", he claims that this was caused
by the great physical and mental arduousness of his studies which had
suppressed any feelings he might have developed normally in childhood.
Nevertheless, this depression eventually began to dissipate, as he began to
find solace in the "Mémoires" of Jean-François Marmontel and the poetry of
William Wordsworth. Mill had been engaged in a pen-friendship with Auguste
Comte, the founder of positivism and sociology, since the two were both young
men in the early 1820s. Comte's "sociologie" was more an early philosophy of
science than we perhaps know it today, and the "positive" philosophy aided in
Mill's broad rejection of Benthamism. Mill refused to study at the University
of Oxford or the University of Cambridge, because he refused to take Anglican
orders. Instead he followed his father to work for the East India Company until
1858, and attended University College, London (UCL) to hear the lectures of
John Austin, the first Professor of Jurisprudence. He was elected a Foreign
Honorary Member of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences in 1856. In 1851,
Mill married Harriet Taylor after 21 years of an intimate friendship. Taylor
was married when they met, and their relationship was close but generally
believed to be chaste during the years before her first husband died. Brilliant
in her own right, Taylor was a significant influence on Mill's work and ideas
during both friendship and marriage. His relationship with Harriet Taylor
reinforced Mill's advocacy of women's rights. He cites her influence in his
final revision of "On Liberty", which was published shortly after her death.
Taylor died in 1858 after developing severe lung congestion, after only seven
years of marriage to Mill. Between the years 1865–1868 Mill served as Lord
Rector of the University of St. Andrews. During the same period, 1865-8, he was
a Member of Parliament for City and Westminster, and was often associated with
the Liberal Party. During his time as an MP, Mill advocated easing the burdens
on Ireland. In 1866, Mill became the first person in the history of Parliament
to call for women to be given the right to vote, vigorously defending this
position in subsequent debate. Mill became a strong advocate of such social
reforms as labour unions and farm cooperatives. In "Considerations on
Representative Government", Mill called for various reforms of Parliament and
voting, especially proportional representation, the Single Transferable Vote,
and the extension of suffrage. He was godfather to the philosopher Bertrand
Russell. Mill died in 1873 of erysipelas in Avignon, France, where he was
buried alongside his wife. Works. Theory of liberty. Mill's "On Liberty"
addresses the nature and limits of the power that can be legitimately exercised
by society over the individual. Mill states that it is alright for someone to
harm themself as long as they are not harming others. He does argue, however,
that individuals are prevented from doing lasting, serious harm to themselves
or their property by the harm principle. Because no-one exists in isolation,
harm done to oneself may also harm others, and destroying property deprives the
community as well as oneself. Mill excuses those who are "incapable of self-
government" from this principle, such as young children or those living in
"backward states of society". Mill argues that despotism is an acceptable form
of government for those societies that are "backward", as long as the despot
has the best interests of the people at heart, because of the barriers to
spontaneous progress. Though this principle seems clear, there are a number of
complications. For example, Mill explicitly states that "harms" may include
acts of omission as well as acts of commission. Thus, failing to rescue a
drowning child counts as a harmful act, as does failing to pay taxes, or
failing to appear as a witness in court. All such harmful omissions may be
regulated, according to Mill. By contrast, it does not count as harming someone
if – without force or fraud – the affected individual consents to assume
the risk: thus one may permissibly offer unsafe employment to others, provided
there is no deception involved. (Mill does, however, recognise one limit to
consent: society should not permit people to sell themselves into slavery). In
these and other cases, it is important to keep in mind that the arguments in
"On Liberty" are grounded on the principle of Utility, and not on appeals to
natural rights. The question of what counts as a self-regarding action and what
actions, whether of omission or commission, constitute harmful actions subject
to regulation, continues to exercise interpreters of Mill. It is important to
emphasise that Mill did not consider giving offence to constitute "harm"; an
action could not be restricted because it violated the conventions or morals of
a given society. "On Liberty" involves an impassioned defence of free speech.
Mill argues that free discourse is a necessary condition for intellectual and
social progress. We can never be sure, he contends, that a silenced opinion
does not contain some element of the truth. He also argues that allowing people
to air false opinions is productive for two reasons. First, individuals are
more likely to abandon erroneous beliefs if they are engaged in an open
exchange of ideas. Second, by forcing other individuals to re-examine and re-
affirm their beliefs in the process of debate, these beliefs are kept from
declining into mere dogma. It is not enough for Mill that one simply has an
unexamined belief that happens to be true; one must understand why the belief
in question is the true one. Social liberty and tyranny of majority. Mill
believed that "the struggle between Liberty and Authority is the most
conspicuous feature in the portions of history." For him, liberty in antiquity
was a "contest... between subjects, or some classes of subjects, and the
government." Mill defined "social liberty" as protection from "the tyranny of
political rulers." He introduced a number of different tyrannies, including
social tyranny, and also the tyranny of the majority. Social liberty for Mill
meant putting limits on the ruler's power so that he would not be able to use
his power on his own wishes and make decisions which could harm society; in
other words, people should have the right to have a say in the government's
decisions. He said that social liberty was "the nature and limits of the power
which can be legitimately exercised by society over the individual". It was
attempted in two ways: first, by obtaining recognition of certain immunities,
called political liberties or rights; second, by establishment of a system of
"constitutional checks". However, in Mill's view, limiting the power of
government was not enough. He stated, "Society can and does execute its own
mandates: and if it issues wrong mandates instead of right, or any mandates at
all in things with which it ought not to meddle, it practices a social tyranny
more formidable than many kinds of political oppression, since, though not
usually upheld by such extreme penalties, it leaves fewer means of escape,
penetrating much more deeply into the details of life, and enslaving the soul
itself." Liberty. John Stuart Mill's view on liberty, which was influenced by
Joseph Priestley and Josiah Warren, is that the individual ought to be free to
do as he wishes unless he harms others. Individuals are rational enough to make
decisions about their good being and choose any religion they want to.
Government should interfere when it is for the protection of society. Mill
explains, "The sole end for which mankind are warranted, individually or
collectively, in interfering with the liberty of action of any of their number,
is self-protection. That the only purpose for which power can be rightfully
exercised over any member of a civilized community, against his will, is to
prevent harm to others. His own good, either physical or moral, is not
sufficient warrant. He cannot rightfully be compelled to do or forbear because
it will be better for him to do so, because it will make him happier, because,
in the opinion of others, to do so would be wise, or even right...The only part
of the conduct of anyone, for which he is amenable to society, is that which
concerns others. In the part which merely concerns him, his independence is, of
right, absolute. Over himself, over his own body and mind, the individual is
sovereign." And yet immediately prior to the above referenced paragraph, Mill
also explains, "There is, in fact, no recognised principle by which the
propriety or impropriety of government interference is customarily tested.
People decide according to their personal preferences. Some, whenever they see
any good to be done, or evil to be remedied, would willingly instigate the
government to undertake the business; while others prefer to bear almost any
amount of social evil, rather than add one to the departments of human
interests amenable to governmental control.", thus, highlighting the highly
contestable nature of liberty in the sense of its relationship to conceptions
of both positive and negative rights. Freedom of speech. An influential
advocate of freedom of speech, Mill objected to censorship. He says: "I choose,
by preference the cases which are least favourable to me – In which the
argument against freedom of opinion, both on truth and that of utility, is
considered the strongest. Let the opinions impugned be the belief of God and in
a future state, or any of the commonly received doctrines of morality... But I
must be permitted to observe that it is not the feeling sure of a doctrine (be
it what it may) which I call an assumption of infallibility. It is the
undertaking to decide that question "for others", without allowing them to hear
what can be said on the contrary side. And I denounce and reprobate this
pretension not the less if it is put forth on the side of my most solemn
convictions. However, positive anyone's persuasion may be, not only of the
faculty but of the pernicious consequences, but (to adopt expressions which I
altogether condemn) the immorality and impiety of opinion. – yet if, in
pursuance of that private judgement, though backed by the public judgement of
his country or contemporaries, he prevents the opinion from being heard in its
defence, he assumes infallibility. And so far from the assumption being less
objectionable or less dangerous because the opinion is called immoral or
impious, this is the case of all others in which it is most fatal." Mill
outlines the benefits of 'searching for and discovering the truth' as a way to
further knowledge. He argued that even if an opinion is false, the truth can be
better understood by refuting the error. And as most opinions are neither
completely true nor completely false, he points out that allowing free
expression allows the airing of competing views as a way to preserve partial
truth in various opinions. Worried about minority views being suppressed, Mills
also argued in support of freedom of speech on political grounds, stating that
it is a critical component for a representative government to have in order to
empower debate over public policy. Mill also eloquently argued that freedom of
expression allows for personal growth and self-realization. He said that
freedom of speech was a vital way to develop talents and realise a person's
potential and creativity. He repeatedly said that eccentricity was preferable
to uniformity and stagnation. Human rights and slavery. In 1850, Mill sent an
anonymous letter (which came to be known under the title "The Negro Question"),
in rebuttal to Thomas Carlyle's anonymous letter to "Fraser's Magazine for Town
and Country". Carlyle had defended slavery on grounds of genetic inferiority
and claimed that the West Indies development was due to British ingenuity alone
and dismissed any notion that there was a debtedness to imported slaves for
building the economy there. Mill's rebuttal and references to the ongoing
debate in the US at the time regarding slavery were emphatic and eloquent. The
full text, as well as a link to the Carlyle letter that prompted it, is
available online. Connection to feminism. Mill saw women's issues as important
and began to write in favour of greater rights for women. With this, Mill can
be considered among the earliest feminists. In his article, "The Subjection of
Women" (1861, published 1869), Mill attempts to prove that the legal
subjugation of women is wrong and that it should give way to perfect equality.
He talks about the role of women in marriage and how he felt it needed to be
changed. There, Mill comments on three major facets of women's lives that he
felt are hindering them: society and gender construction, education, and
marriage. Mill is also famous for being one of the earliest and strongest
supporters of ever greater rights for women. His book "The Subjection of Women"
is one of the earliest written on this subject by a male author. He felt that
the oppression of women was one of the few remaining relics from ancient times,
a set of prejudices that severely impeded the progress of humanity. Mill's
ideas were opposed by Ernest Belfort Bax in his treatise, 'The Legal
Subjugation of Men'. Utilitarianism. The canonical statement of Mill's
utilitarianism can be found in "Utilitarianism." This philosophy has a long
tradition, although Mill's account is primarily influenced by Jeremy Bentham
and Mill's father James Mill. Mill's famous formulation of utilitarianism is
known as the "greatest-happiness principle". It holds that one must always act
so as to produce the greatest aggregate happiness among all sentient beings,
within reason. Mill's major contribution to utilitarianism is his argument for
the qualitative separation of pleasures. Bentham treats all forms of happiness
as equal, whereas Mill argues that intellectual and moral pleasures (higher
pleasures) are superior to more physical forms of pleasure (lower pleasures).
Mill distinguishes between happiness and contentment, claiming that the former
is of higher value than the latter, a belief wittily encapsulated in the
statement that "it is better to be a human being dissatisfied than a pig
satisfied; better to be Socrates dissatisfied than a fool satisfied. And if the
fool, or the pig, are of a different opinion, it is because they only know
their own side of the question." Mill defines the difference between higher and
lower forms of happiness with the principle that those who have experienced
both tend to prefer one over the other. This is, perhaps, in direct contrast
with Bentham's statement that "Quantity of pleasure being equal, push-pin is as
good as poetry", that, if a simple child's game like hopscotch causes more
pleasure to more people than a night at the opera house, it is more imperative
upon a society to devote more resources to propagating hopscotch than running
opera houses. Mill's argument is that the "simple pleasures" tend to be
preferred by people who have no experience with high art, and are therefore not
in a proper position to judge. Mill supported legislation that would have
granted extra voting power to university graduates on the grounds that they
were in a better position to judge what would be best for society. (For he
believed that education itself, not the intrinsic nature of educated people,
qualified them to have more influence in government.) The qualitative account
of happiness that Mill advocates thus sheds light on his account presented in
"On Liberty". As Mill suggests in that text, utility is to be conceived in
relation to humanity "as a progressive being", which includes the development
and exercise of rational capacities as we strive to achieve a "higher mode of
existence". The rejection of censorship and paternalism is intended to provide
the necessary social conditions for the achievement of knowledge and the
greatest ability for the greatest number to develop and exercise their
deliberative and rational capacities. Economic philosophy. Mill's early
economic philosophy was one of free markets. However, he accepted interventions
in the economy, such as a tax on alcohol, if there were sufficient utilitarian
grounds. He also accepted the principle of legislative intervention for the
purpose of animal welfare. Given an equal tax rate regardless of income, Mill
agreed that inheritance should be taxed. A utilitarian society would agree that
everyone should be equal one way or another. Therefore receiving inheritance
would put one ahead of society unless taxed on the inheritance. Those who
donate should consider and choose carefully where their money goes—some
charities are more deserving than others. Considering public charities boards
such as a government will disburse the money equally. However, a private
charity board like a church would disburse the monies fairly to those who are
in more need than others. Later he altered his views toward a more socialist
bent, adding chapters to his Principles of Political Economy in defence of a
socialist outlook, and defending some socialist causes. Within this revised
work he also made the radical proposal that the whole wage system be abolished
in favour of a co-operative wage system. Nonetheless, some of his views on the
idea of flat taxation remained, albeit in a slightly toned down form. Mill's
"Principles of Political Economy", first published in 1848, was one of the most
widely read of all books on economics in the period. As Adam Smith's "Wealth of
Nations" had during an earlier period, Mill's "Principles" dominated economics
teaching. In the case of Oxford University it was the standard text until 1919.
The text that replaced it was written by Cambridge's Alfred Marshall. Economic
democracy. Mill promoted economic democracy in the capitalist economy whereby
labourers would elect members of management. Political democracy. Mill’s
major work on political democracy, "Considerations on Representative
Government", defends two fundamental principles, extensive participation by
citizens and enlightened competence of rulers. The two values are obviously in
tension, and some readers have concluded that he is an elitist democrat, while
others count him as an earlier participatory democrat. In one section he
appears to defend plural voting, in which more competent citizens are given
extra votes (a view he later repudiated). But in chapter 3 he presents what is
still one of the most eloquent cases for the value of participation by all
citizens. He believed that the incompetence of the masses could eventually be
overcome if they were given a chance to take part in politics, especially at
the local level. Mill is one of the few political philosophers ever to serve in
government as an elected official. In his three years in Parliament, he was
more willing to compromise than the “radical” principles expressed in his
writing would lead one to expect. The environment. I cannot, therefore, regard
the stationary state of capital and wealth with the unaffected aversion so
generally manifested towards it by political economists of the old school. If
the earth must lose that great portion of its pleasantness which it owes to
things that the unlimited increase of wealth and population would extirpate
from it, for the mere purpose of enabling it to support a larger, but not a
better or a happier population, I sincerely hope, for the sake of posterity,
that they will be content to be stationary, long before necessity compel them
to it. Economic development. Mill regarded economic development as a function
of land, labour and capital. While land and labour are the two original factors
of production, capital is "a stock, previously accumulated of the products of
former labour." Increase in wealth is possible only if land and capital help to
increase production faster than the labour force. It is productive labour that
is productive of wealth and capital accumulation. "The rate of capital
accumulation is the function of the proportion of the labour force employed '
productively. Profits earned by employing unproductive labours are merely
transfers of income; unproductive labour does not generate wealth or income" .
It is productive labourers who do productive consumption. Productive
consumption is that "which maintains and increase the productive capacity of
the community." It implies that productive consumption is an input necessary to
maintain productive labourers. Control of population growth. Mill supported the
Malthusian theory of population. By population he meant the number of the
working class only. He was therefore concerned about the growth in number of
labourers who worked for hire. He believed that population control was
essential for improving the condition of the working class so that they might
enjoy the fruits of the technological progress and capital accumulation. He
propagated birth control as against moral restraint. Wage fund. According to
Mill, supply is very elastic in response to wages. Wages generally exceed the
minimum subsistence level, and are paid out of capital. Hence, wages are
limited by existing capital for paying wages. Thus, wage per worker can be
derived by dividing the total circulating capital by the size of the working
population. Wages can increase by an increase in the capital used in paying
wages, or by decrease in the number of workers. If wages rise, supply of labour
will rise. Competition among workers not only brings down wages, but also keeps
some workers out of employment. This is based on Mill's notion that "demand for
commodities is not demand for labourers". It means that income invested as
advances of wages to labour creates employment, and not income spent on
consumer goods. An increase in consumption causes a decline in investment. So
increased investment leads to increases in the wage fund and to economic
progress. Rate of capital accumulation. According to Mill, the rate of capital
accumulation depends on: (1) "the amount of fund from which saving can be made"
or "the size of the net produce of the industry", and (2) the " disposition to
save". Capital is the result of savings, and the savings come from the
"abstinence from present consumption for the sake of future goods". Although
capital is the result of saving, it is nevertheless consumed. This means saving
is spending. Since saving depends on the net produce of the industry, it grows
with profits and rent which go into making the net produce. On the other hand,
the disposition to save depends on (1) the rate of profit and (2) the desire to
save, or what Mill called "effective desire of accumulation". However, profit
also depends on the cost of labour, and the rate of profit is the ratio of
profits to wages. When profits rise or wages fall, the rate of profits
increases, which in turn increases the rate of capital accumulation. Similarly,
it is the desire to save which tends to increase the rate of capital
accumulation. Rate of profit. According to Mill, the ultimate tendency in an
economy is for the rate of profit to decline due to diminishing returns in
agriculture and increase in population at a Malthusian rate.
