John Rawls John Bordley Rawls (February 21, 1921 – November 24, 2002) was an
American philosopher and a leading figure in moral and political philosophy. He
held the James Bryant Conant University Professorship at Harvard University.
His "magnum opus", "A Theory of Justice" (1971), was hailed at the time of its
publication as "the most important work in moral philosophy since the end of
World War II," and is now regarded as "one of the primary texts in political
philosophy." His work in political philosophy, dubbed Rawlsianism, takes as its
starting point the argument that "most reasonable principles of justice are
those everyone would accept and agree to from a fair position." Rawls employs a
number of thought experiments — including the famous veil of ignorance — to
determine what constitutes a fair agreement in which "everyone is impartially
situated as equals," in order to determine principles of social justice. He is
one of the major thinkers in the tradition of liberal political philosophy.
English philosopher Jonathan Wolff argues that "while there might be a dispute
about the second most important political philosopher of the 20th century,
there could be no dispute about the most important: John Rawls. His student
Samuel Freeman says that Rawls’s work will be recognized 'for centuries to
come.'" Rawls received both the Schock Prize for Logic and Philosophy and the
National Humanities Medal in 1999, the latter presented by President Bill
Clinton, in recognition of how Rawls' work "helped a whole generation of
learned Americans revive their faith in democracy itself." Biography. Early
life. John Rawls was born in Baltimore, Maryland to William Lee Rawls, "one of
the most prominent attorneys in Baltimore," and Anna Abell Stump Rawls. The
second of five sons, tragedy struck Rawls at a young age. "Two of his brothers
died in childhood because they had contracted fatal illnesses from him. . . .
In 1928, the 7-year-old Rawls contracted diphtheria. His brother Bobby, younger
by 20 months, visited him in his room and was fatally infected. The next
winter, Rawls contracted pneumonia. Another younger brother, Tommy, caught the
illness from him and died." Rawls biographer Thomas Pogge calls the loss of the
brothers the "most important events in Jack’s childhood.” Rawls attended
school in Baltimore for a short time before transferring to Kent School, an
Episcopalian preparatory school in Connecticut. Upon graduation in 1939, Rawls
attended Princeton University, graduating "summa cum laude" and was accepted
into The Ivy Club and the American Whig-Cliosophic Society. During his last two
years at Princeton he "became deeply concerned with theology and its
doctrines". He considered attending a seminary to study for the Episcopal
priesthood. In 1943, he completed his Bachelor of Arts degree and immediately
enlisted in the Army. During World War II, Rawls served as an infantryman in
the Pacific, where he toured New Guinea, the Philippines, and occupied Japan;
there, he witnessed the aftermath of the bombing of Hiroshima. After this
experience, Rawls turned down an offer to become an officer and left the army
as a private in 1946. Shortly thereafter, he returned to Princeton to pursue a
doctorate in moral philosophy. Rawls married Margaret Fox, a Brown University
graduate, in 1949. Career. After earning his Ph.D. from Princeton in 1950,
Rawls taught there until 1952, when he received a Fulbright Fellowship to
Oxford University (Christ Church), where he was influenced by the liberal
political theorist and historian Isaiah Berlin and the legal theorist H. L. A.
Hart. After returning to the United States, he served first as an assistant and
then associate professor at Cornell University. In 1962, he became a full
professor of philosophy at Cornell, and soon achieved a tenured position at
MIT. That same year, he moved to Harvard University, where he taught for almost
forty years, and where he trained some of the leading contemporary figures in
moral and political philosophy, including Martha Nussbaum, Thomas Nagel, Onora
O'Neill, Adrian Piper, Christine Korsgaard, Susan Neiman, Claudia Card, Thomas
Pogge, T.M. Scanlon, Barbara Herman, Joshua Cohen, Thomas E. Hill, Jr. and Paul
Weithman. Later life. Rawls seldom gave interviews and, having both a stutter
and a "bat-like horror of the limelight", did not become a public intellectual
despite his fame. He instead remained committed mainly to his academic and
family life. In 1995 he suffered the first of several strokes, severely
impeding his ability to continue to work. He was nevertheless able to complete
a book entitled "The Law of Peoples", the most complete statement of his views
on international justice, and shortly before his death in November 2002
published "Justice As Fairness: A Restatement", a response to criticisms of "A
Theory of Justice." Contribution to political and moral philosophy. There is
general agreement in academia that the publication of "A Theory of Justice" in
1971 was important to a revival, following its release, in the academic study
of political philosophy. His work has crossed disciplinary lines, receiving
serious attention from economists, legal scholars, political scientists,
sociologists, healthcare resource allocators, and theologians. Rawls has the
unique distinction among contemporary political philosophers of being
frequently cited by the courts of law in the United States and Canada and
referred to by practicing politicians in the United States and United Kingdom.
Philosophical thought. In "A Theory of Justice", Rawls attempts to reconcile
freedom and equality in a principled way, offering an account of "justice as
fairness". Central to this effort is his famous approach to the seemingly
intractable problem of distributive justice. Justice as Fairness.
Contractarianism. Rawls utilizes the social contract device, asking what
principles of justice would individuals agree to when designing society.
Justice as fairness offers an account of human nature beyond the traditions of
saintly altruists or greedy egoists: human beings are to Rawls both "rational"
and "reasonable". Because we are rational we have ends we want to achieve, but
we are reasonable insofar as we are happy to achieve these ends cooperatively
if possible by adhering to mutually acceptable regulatory principles.
Individuals hold, however, quite different needs and aspirations of
individuals: the individual "conception of the good". Original Position.
Through this veil of ignorance, people may then agree upon principles of
justice independently of personal interests, meaning impartially and
rationally. Those collectively decided principles should thus be socially fair.
Principles of Justice. The first of these principles is the Liberty Principle,
establishing equal basic liberties for all citizens. 'Basic' liberty entails
the (familiar in the liberal tradition) freedoms of conscience, association,
and expression as well as democratic rights; Rawls also includes a "personal
property" right, but this is defended in terms of moral capacities and self-
respect, rather than an appeal to a natural right of self-ownership (this
distinguishes Rawls' account from the classical liberalism of John Locke and
the libertarianism of Robert Nozick). Rawls argues that a second principle of
equality would be agreed upon to guarantee liberties that represent meaningful
options for all in society and ensure distributive justice. For example, formal
guarantees of political voice and freedom of assembly are of little real worth
to the desperately poor and marginalized in society. Demanding that everyone
have exactly the same effective opportunities in life would almost certainly
offend the very liberties that are supposedly being equalized. Nonetheless, we
would want to ensure at least the "fair worth" of our liberties: wherever one
ends up in society, one wants life to be worth living, with enough effective
freedom to pursue personal goals. Thus participants would be moved to affirm a
two-part second principle comprising Fair Equality of Opportunity and the
famous (and controversial ) difference principle. This second principle ensures
that those with comparable talents and motivation face roughly similar life
chances and that inequalities in society work to the benefit of the least
advantaged. Rawls held that these principles of justice apply to the "basic
structure" of fundamental social institutions (such as the judiciary, the
economic structure, the political constitution), a qualification that has been
the source of some controversy and constructive debate (the work of Gerald
Cohen). Rawls further argued that these principles were to be 'lexically
ordered' to award priority to basic liberties over the more equality-oriented
demands of the second principle. This has also been a topic of much debate
among moral and political philosophers. Finally, Rawls took his approach as
applying in the first instance to what he called a "well-ordered society ...
designed to advance the good of its members and effectively regulated by a
public conception of justice". In this respect, he understood justice as
fairness as a contribution to "ideal theory", the determination of "principles
that characterize a well-ordered society under favorable circumstances". Much
recent work in political philosophy has asked what justice as fairness might
dictate (or indeed, whether it is very useful at all) for problems of "partial
compliance" under "nonideal theory." "Political Liberalism". Rawls' later work
focused on the question of stability: could a society ordered by the two
principles of justice endure? His answer to this question is contained in a
collection of lectures titled "Political Liberalism". In these lectures, Rawls
introduced the idea of an "overlapping consensus" — or agreement on "justice
as fairness" between citizens who hold different religious and philosophical
views (or "conceptions of the good"). "Political Liberalism" also introduced
the idea of "public reason" — the common reason of all citizens. In
"Political Liberalism" Rawls addressed the most common criticism levelled at "A
Theory of Justice" — the criticism that the principles of justice were simply
an alternative systematic conception of justice that was not superior to
utilitarianism or any other comprehensive theory. Critics viewed "justice as
fairness" as simply another reasonable, comprehensive doctrine that was
incompatible with other reasonable doctrines. In their view it failed to
distinguish between a comprehensive moral theory which addressed the problem of
justice and a political conception of justice that was independent of any
comprehensive theory. To address this charge Rawls introduces the political
conception of justice that people with conflicting, but reasonable,
metaphysical and/or religious views would accept to regulate the basic
structure of society. What distinguishes Rawls' account from previous
conceptions of liberalism is that it seeks to arrive at a consensus without
appealing to any one metaphysical source - hence the idea of "political
liberalism," contrary to John Locke or John Stuart Mill, who promote a more
robust cultural and metaphysical liberal philosophy. Rawls' account is an
attempt to secure the possibility of a liberal consensus regardless of the
"deep" religious or metaphysical values that the parties endorse (so long as
these remain open to compromise, i.e., are "reasonable"). The ideal result is
therefore conceived as an "overlapping consensus" because different and often
conflicting accounts of morality, nature, etc. are intended to "overlap" with
each other on the question of governance. These principles are subtly modified
from the principles in "Theory". The first principle now reads "equal claim"
instead of "equal right," and he also replaces the phrase "system of basic
liberties" with "a fully adequate scheme of equal basic rights and liberties."
More notably though, he switches the two parts of the second principle, so that
the difference principle becomes the latter of the three. "The Law of Peoples".
Although there were passing comments on international affairs in "A Theory of
Justice", it wasn't until late in his career that Rawls formulated a
comprehensive theory of international politics with the publication of "The Law
of Peoples". He claimed there that "well-ordered" peoples could be either
"liberal" or "decent." Rawls argued that the legitimacy of a liberal
international order is contingent on tolerating "decent peoples", which differ
from "liberal peoples", among other ways, in that they might have state
religions and deny adherents of minority faiths the right to hold positions of
power within the state, and might organize political participation via
consultation hierarchies rather than elections. However, no well-ordered
peoples may violate human rights or behave in an externally aggressive manner.
Peoples that fail to meet the criteria of "liberal" or "decent" peoples are
referred to as "outlaw states," "societies burdened by unfavourable conditions"
or "benevolent absolutisms" depending on their particular failings. Such
peoples do not have the right to mutual respect and toleration possessed by
liberal and decent peoples. Rawls' views on global distributive justice as they
were expressed in this work surprised many of his fellow egalitarian liberals.
Charles Beitz, for instance, had previously written a study that argued for the
application of Rawls' Difference Principles globally. Rawls denied that his
principles should be so applied, partly on the grounds that states, unlike
citizens, were self-sufficient in the cooperative enterprises that constitute
domestic societies. Although Rawls recognized that aid should be given to
governments who are unable to protect human rights for economic reasons, he
claimed that the purpose for this aid is not to achieve an eventual state of
global equality, but rather only to ensure that these societies could maintain
liberal or decent political institutions. He argued, among other things, that
continuing to give aid indefinitely would see nations with industrious
populations subsidize those with idle populations and would create a moral
hazard problem where governments could spend irresponsibly in the knowledge
that they will be bailed out by those nations who had spent responsibly. Rawls'
discussion of "non-ideal" theory, on the other hand, included a condemnation of
bombing civilians and of the American bombing of German and Japanese cities in
World War II, as well as discussions of immigration and nuclear proliferation.
Rawls also detailed here the ideal of the statesman, a political leader who
looks to the next generation and promotes international harmony, even in the
face of significant domestic pressure to do otherwise. Rawls also claimed,
controversially, that violations of human rights can legitimize military
intervention in the violating states, though he also expressed the hope that
such societies could be induced to reform peacefully by the good example of
liberal and decent peoples.
