John Carver (board policy) John Carver is an author noted for his development
of the policy model for boards of directors called Policy Governance. Carver
states his model is the only systematic theory of boards. He is Adjunct
Professor of Nonprofit Organizations in the Institute for Nonprofit
Organizations at the University of Georgia School of Social Work. Development
of model. Early in his career, Carver searched for a reliable guide to managing
the work of a board. His research turned up little on the proper role of the
board of directors. Carver noticed that board members often wonder what the
board's job is and where the line distinguishing the Boards job from that of
the Chief Executive Officer lies. Carver's model clarifies the separation by
having the board explicitly state the Boards and CEO's jobs in a set of written
policies (hence the name 'Policy Governance'). This set of policies is divided
in four types of policies. One type is about the organizations goals (or Ends),
and three of them are about the means board and CEO employ to attain those
ends. It is a common misunderstanding that in Policy Governance it is the
board's job to decide the goals and the Chief Executive Officer's job to
determine the means to achieve the board's ends. Both board and CEO decide
goals (Ends) and means, but in the written policies by the board, it is
explicitly stated where the room for interpretation of the CEO of the boards'
ends statements begins. Carver's model of boards originated with Carver. The
term "Policy Governance" is registered and trademarked. Carver permits others
to employ the term but he stops any efforts to redefine the term or to ignore
its methods and systems. Each application of the Policy Governance Model is
peculiar to the specific organization being governed. The Policy Governance
Model has universal meaning, and can be adopted in very different company
settings, profit and non-profit, although complex local legislation can make it
difficult to recognize the underlying logic of the model. In every true
application of Policy Governance the board represents the ownership of the
organization as it defines the good that the organization is to provide for the
recipients. Ownership and recipients can be the same group of people (as is the
case with most associations), but more often they are different groups. Dr.
John Carver and his wife, Miriam Carver, have trained several hundreds
consultants at the Policy Governance Academy. Works. Carver has written a
number of books. These include "Boards That Make a Difference" which is
probably the best known of his works. His book "Reinventing Your Board",
published in a new edition in 2006, is probably the easiest for a beginner to
understand. It also contains model board policies that can be modified to fit a
wider range of organizations.
