Joint session A joint session or joint convention is, most broadly, when two
normally-separate decision-making groups meet together, often in a special
session or other extraordinary meeting, for a specific purpose. Most often it
refers to when both houses of a bicameral legislature sit together. A joint
session typically occurs to receive foreign or domestic diplomats or leaders,
or to allow both houses to consider bills together. Some Constitutions give
special power to a joint session, voting by majority of all Members of the
Legislature regardless of which House/ chamber they belong to. For example, in
Switzerland a joint session of the two houses elects the members of the Federal
Council (cabinet). In India, disputes between Houses are resolved by a joint
sitting but without an intervening election. Australia. In Australia, if a Bill
is deadlocked, then following a double dissolution of both Houses, and if the
new Parliament is still unable to pass the Bill, then the Bill may be passed by
an absolute majority of a joint sitting. The only such example of this
occurring was the Joint Sitting of the Australian Parliament of 1974 under the
Whitlam Labor government. Canada. The Canadian government procedure is called a
joint address, with the members of the House of Commons attending the Senate as
guests. There is no procedure in Canada for both chambers of the Parliament to
sit in a true joint session. Various government agencies and non-governmental
organizations may also meet jointly to handle problems which each of the
involved parties has a stake in. France. The Congress of France is an assembly
of both houses of the French Parliament, convened at the Palace of Versailles,
which can approve certain amendments to the constitution by a three-fifth
majority of all members. Since 2008, the Congress may also be convened to hear
an address from the President of the Republic. India. In India, if a bill has
been rejected by the upper house (Rajya Sabha) of the parliament and more than
six months have lapsed, the President may summon a joint session for passing
the bill. The bill is passed by simple majority of a joint sitting. Since the
lower house (Lok Sabha) has more than twice the members in upper house, group
commanding majority in lower house i.e. Govt of India can get such a bill
passed although it was rejected by the upper house. Until now, only three bills
namely the Dowry Prohibition Act, 1961, the Banking Service Commission Repeal
Bill, 1978 and the Prevention of Terrorism Act, 2002 have been passed at joint
sessions. United States. The State of the Union Address of the president of the
United States is traditionally made before a "joint session" of the United
States Congress. Many states refer to an analogous event as a "joint
convention". Such assemblies are typically held in the chamber of the lower
house as the larger body. State constitutions of U.S. states may require joint
conventions for other purposes; for example Tennessee's requires such to elect
the secretary of state, the state treasurer, and the comptroller of the
treasury. United Kingdom. A similar event is the speech from the throne upon
the state opening of Parliament in Commonwealth Realms is made before a joint
sitting of the both Houses. In most cases this event occurs in the Upper
Chamber, due to the British constitutional convention that the monarch never
enters the Commons chamber. An exception was the Governor-General's Address in
the Irish Free State, which was made to the lower house, with Senators invited
to attend.
