Judiciary The judiciary (also known as the judicial system) is the system of
courts that interprets and applies the law in the name of the state. The
judiciary also provides a mechanism for the resolution of disputes. Under the
doctrine of the separation of powers, the judiciary generally does not make law
(that is, in a plenary fashion, which is the responsibility of the legislature)
or enforce law (which is the responsibility of the executive), but rather
interprets law and applies it to the facts of each case. This branch of the
state is often tasked with ensuring equal justice under law. It usually
consists of a court of final appeal (called the "Supreme court" or
"Constitutional court"), together with lower courts. In many jurisdictions the
judicial branch has the power to change laws through the process of judicial
review. Courts with judicial review power may annul the laws and rules of the
state when it finds them incompatible with a higher norm, such as primary
legislation, the provisions of the constitution or international law. Judges
constitute a critical force for interpretation and implementation of a
constitution, thus "de facto" in common law countries creating the body of
constitutional law. During last decades the judiciary became active in economic
issues related with economic rights established by constitution because
"economics may provide insight into questions that bear on the proper legal
interpretation". Since many a country with a transitional political and
economic system continues treating its constitution as an abstract legal
document disengaged from the economic policy of the state, practice of judicial
review of economic acts of executive and legislative branches began to grow. In
the 1980s, the Supreme Court of India for almost a decade had been encouraging
public interest litigation on behalf of the poor and oppressed by using a very
broad interpretation of several articles of the Indian Constitution. Budget of
the judiciary in many transitional and developing countries is almost
completely controlled by the executive. The latter undermines the separation of
powers, as it creates a critical financial dependence of the judiciary. The
proper national wealth distribution including the government spending on the
judiciary is subject of the constitutional economics. It is important to
distinguish between the two methods of corruption of the judiciary: the state
(through budget planning and various privileges), and the private. The term
"judiciary" is also used to refer collectively to the personnel, such as
judges, magistrates and other adjudicators, who form the core of a judiciary
(sometimes referred to as a "bench"), as well as the staffs who keep the system
running smoothly. History. After the French Revolution, lawmakers stopped
interpretation of law by judges, and the legislature was the only body
permitted to interpret the law; this prohibition was later overturned by the
Code Napoléon. In civil law jurisdictions at present, judges interpret the law
to about the same extent as in common law jurisdictions – however it is
different than the common law tradition which directly recognizes the limited
power to make law. For instance, in France, the "jurisprudence constante" of
the Court of Cassation or the Council of State is equivalent in practice with
case law. However, the Louisiana Supreme Court notes the principal difference
between the two legal doctrines: a single court decision can provide sufficient
foundation for the common law doctrine of "stare decisis", however, "a series
of adjudicated cases, all in accord, form the basis for "jurisprudence
constante"." Moreover, the Louisiana Court of Appeals has explicitly noted that
"jurisprudence constante" is merely a secondary source of law, which cannot be
authoritative and does not rise to the level of "stare decisis."
