Judicial activism Judicial activism describes judicial rulings suspected of
being based on personal or political considerations rather than on existing
law. It is sometimes used as an antonym of judicial restraint. The definition
of judicial activism, and which specific decisions are activist, is a
controversial political issue, particularly in the United States. This phrase
is generally traced back to a comment by Thomas Jefferson, referring to the
"despotic behaviour" of Federalist federal judges, in particular, John
Marshall. The question of judicial activism is closely related to
constitutional interpretation, statutory construction, and separation of
powers. Origins of the term. Arthur Schlesinger Jr. introduced the term
"judicial activism" in a January 1947 "Fortune" magazine article titled "The
Supreme Court: 1947". The phrase has been controversial since its beginning. An
article by Craig Green, "An Intellectual History of Judicial Activism," is
highly critical of Schlesinger's use of the term. "Schlesinger's original
introduction of judicial activism was doubly blurred: not only did he fail to
explain what counts as activism, he also declined to say whether activism is
good or bad." Definitions. "Black's Law Dictionary" defines judicial activism
as a "philosophy of judicial decision-making whereby judges allow their
personal views about public policy, among other factors, to guide their
decisions." Political science professor Bradley Canon has posited six
dimensions along which judge courts may be perceived as activist:
majoritarianism, interpretive stability, interpretive fidelity, substance/
democratic process, specificity of policy, and availability of an alternate
policymaker. David Strauss has argued that judicial activism can be narrowly
defined as one or more of three possible actions: overturning laws as
unconstitutional, overturning judicial precedent, and ruling against a
preferred interpretation of the constitution. Others have been less confident
of the term's meaning, finding it instead to be little more than a rhetorical
shorthand. Kermit Roosevelt III has argued that "in practice 'activist' turns
out to be little more than a rhetorically charged shorthand for decisions the
speaker disagrees with"; likewise, the solicitor general under George W. Bush,
Theodore Olson, said in an interview on "Fox News Sunday", in regards to a case
for same-sex marriage he had successfully litigated, that "most people use the
term 'judicial activism' to explain decisions that they don't like." Others
such as current Supreme Court Justice Anthony Kennedy have scolded this
approach as unhelpful because it relies on subjective judgments. Debate.
Detractors of judicial activism charge that it usurps the power of the elected
branches of government or appointed agencies, damaging the rule of law and
democracy. Defenders of judicial activism say that in many cases it is a
legitimate form of judicial review, and that the interpretation of the law must
change with changing times. A third view is that so-called "objective"
interpretation of the law does not exist. According to law professor Brian Z.
Tamanaha, "Throughout the so-called formalist age, it turns out, many prominent
judges and jurists acknowledged that there were gaps and uncertainties in the
law and that judges must sometimes make choices." Some proponents of a stronger
judiciary argue that the judiciary helps provide checks and balances and should
grant itself an expanded role to counterbalance the effects of transient
majoritarianism, i.e., there should be an increase in the powers of a branch of
government which is not directly subject to the electorate, so that the
majority cannot dominate or oppress any particular minority through its
elective powers. Moreover, they argue that the judiciary strikes down both
elected and unelected official action, in some instances acts of legislative
bodies reflecting the view the transient majority may have had at the moment of
passage and not necessarily the view the same legislative body may have at the
time the legislation is struck down. Also, the judges that are appointed are
usually appointed by previously elected executive officials so that their
philosophy should reflect that of those who nominated them, that an independent
judiciary is a great asset to civil society since special interests are unable
to dictate their version of constitutional interpretation with threat of
stopping political donations. Geographical differences. While the term was
first coined and is often used in the United States, it has also been applied
in other countries, particularly common law jurisdictions.
