Junta (Peninsular War) In the Napoleonic era, junta () was the name chosen by
several local administrations formed in Spain during the Peninsular War as a
patriotic alternative to the official administration toppled by the French
invaders. The juntas were usually formed by adding prominent members of
society, such as prelates, to the already-existing "ayuntamientos" (municipal
councils). The juntas of the capitals of the traditional peninsular kingdoms of
Spain styled themselves "Supreme Juntas," to differentiate themselves from, and
claim authority over, provincial juntas. Juntas were also formed in Spanish
America during this period in reaction to the developments in Spain. Junta
Suprema Central, 1808-1810. Realizing that unity was needed to coordinate
efforts against the French and to deal with British aid, several supreme
juntas—Murcia, Valencia, Seville and Castile and León—called for the
formation of a central one. After a series of negotiations between the juntas
and the discredited Council of Castile, which initially had supported Joseph I,
a "Supreme Central and Governmental Junta of Spain and the Indies" met in
Aranjuez on 25 September 1808, with the Conde de Floridablanca as its
president. Serving as surrogate for the absent king and royal government, it
succeeded in calling for representatives from local provinces and the overseas
possessions to meet in an "Extraordinary and General Cortes of the Spanish
Nation," so called because it would be both the single legislative body for the
whole empire and the body which would write a constitution for it. By the
beginning of 1810, the forces under the Supreme Central Junta's command had
suffered serious military reverses—the Battle of Ocaña, the Battle of Alba
de Tormes—in which the French not only inflicted large losses on the Spanish,
but also took control of southern Spain and forced the government to retreat to
Cádiz, the last redoubt available to it on Spanish soil. "(See the Siege of
Cádiz.)" In light of this, the Central Junta dissolved itself on 29 January
1810 and set up a five-person Regency Council of Spain and the Indies, charged
with convening the Cortes. Therefore the system of juntas was replaced by a
regency and the Cádiz Cortes, which established a permanent government under
the Constitution of 1812. Spanish America. The term was also used in Spanish
America to describe the first autonomist governments established in 1809, 1810
and 1811 in reaction to the developments in Spain. By the time the delegates
were to be chosen for the Cádiz Cortes, some of the American provinces had
successfully established their own juntas, which did not recognize the
authority of either the supreme central one or the regency. Therefore, they did
not send representatives to Cádiz, but rather the juntas continued to govern
on their own or called for congresses to set up permanent governments. This
development resulted in the Spanish American wars of independence.
