Jurisdiction Jurisdiction (from the Latin "ius, " meaning "law" and "" meaning
"to speak") is the practical authority granted to a formally constituted legal
body or to a political leader to deal with and make pronouncements on legal
matters and, by implication, to administer justice within a defined area of
responsibility. The term is also used to denote the geographical area or
subject-matter to which such authority applies. Jurisdiction draws its
substance from public international law, conflict of laws, constitutional law
and the powers of the executive and legislative branches of government to
allocate resources to best serve the needs of its native society. International
Dimension. International laws and treaties provide agreements which nations
agree to be bound to. Political issue. Supranational organizations provide
mechanisms whereby disputes between states may be resolved through arbitration
or mediation. When a country is recognized as "de jure", it is an
acknowledgment by the other "de jure" nations that the country has sovereignty
and the right to exist. However, it is often at the discretion of each state
whether to co-operate or participate. If a state does agree to participate in
activities of the supranational bodies and accept decisions, the state is
giving up its sovereign authority and thereby allocating power to these bodies.
Insofar as these bodies or nominated individuals may resolve disputes in a
judicial or quasi-judicial fashion, or promote treaty obligations in the nature
of laws, the power ceded to these bodies cumulatively represents its own
jurisdiction. But no matter how powerful each body may appear to be, the extent
to which any of the judgments may be enforced, or proposed treaties and
conventions may become or remain effective within the territorial boundaries of
each nation is a political matter under the sovereign control of the relevant
representative government(s) which, in a democratic context, will have
electorates to satisfy. International and municipal jurisdiction. The fact that
international organizations, courts and tribunals have been created raises the
difficult question of how to co-ordinate their activities with those of
national courts. If the two sets of bodies do not have "concurrent"
jurisdiction but, as in the case of the International Criminal Court (ICC), the
relationship is expressly based on the principle of "complementarity", i.e. the
international court is subsidiary or complementary to national courts, the
difficulty is avoided. But if the jurisdiction claimed is concurrent, or as in
the case of International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY),
the international tribunal is to prevail over national courts, the problems are
more difficult to resolve politically. The idea of universal jurisdiction is
fundamental to the operation of global organizations such as the United Nations
and the International Court of Justice (ICJ), which jointly assert the benefit
of maintaining legal entities with jurisdiction over a wide range of matters of
significance to states (the ICJ should not be confused with the ICC and this
version of "universal jurisdiction" is not the same as that enacted in the War
Crimes Law (Belgium) which is an assertion of extraterritorial jurisdiction
that will fail to gain implementation in any other state under the standard
provisions of public policy). Under Article 34 Statute of the ICJ only states
may be parties in cases before the Court and, under Article 36, the
jurisdiction comprises all cases which the parties refer to it and all matters
specially provided for in the Charter of the United Nations or in treaties and
conventions in force. But, to invoke the jurisdiction in any given case, all
the parties have to accept the prospective judgment as binding. This reduces
the risk of wasting the Court's time. Despite the safeguards built into the
constitutions of most of these organizations, courts and tribunals, the concept
of universal jurisdiction is controversial among those states which prefer
unilateral to multilateral solutions through the use of executive or military
authority, sometimes described as realpolitik-based diplomacy. Within other
international contexts, there are intergovernmental organizations such as the
World Trade Organization (WTO) that have socially and economically significant
dispute resolution functions but, again, even though their jurisdiction may be
invoked to hear the cases, the power to enforce their decisions is at the will
of the states affected, save that the WTO is permitted to allow retaliatory
action by successful states against those states found to be in breach of
international trade law. At a regional level, groups of states can create
political and legal bodies with sometimes complicated patchworks of overlapping
provisions detailing the jurisdictional relationships between the member states
and providing for some degree of harmonization between their national
legislative and judicial functions, for example, the European Union and African
Union both have the potential to become federated states although the political
barriers to such unification in the face of entrenched nationalism will be very
difficult to overcome. Each such group may form transnational institutions with
declared legislative or judicial powers. For example, in Europe, the European
Court of Justice has been given jurisdiction as the ultimate appellate court to
the member states on issues of European law. This jurisdiction is entrenched
and its authority could only be denied by a member state if that member State
asserts its sovereignty and withdraws from the union. International and
municipal law. In the United States, the Supremacy Clause of the United States
Constitution makes all treaties that have been ratified under the authority of
the United States and customary international law, …the "Supreme Law of the
Land" (U.S. Const.art. VI Cl. 2) and, as such, the law of the land is binding
on the federal government as well as on state and local governments. According
to the Supreme Court of the United States, the treaty power authorizes Congress
to legislate under the Necessary and Proper Clause in areas beyond those
specifically conferred on Congress ("Missouri v. Holland", 252 U.S. 416
(1920)). The jurisdiction between and within states. This concerns the
relationships both between courts in different jurisdictions, and between
courts within the same jurisdiction. The usual legal doctrine under which
questions of jurisdiction are decided is termed "forum non conveniens".
International. To deal with the issue of forum shopping, states are urged to
adopt more positive rules on conflict of laws. The Hague Conference and other
international bodies have made recommendations on jurisdictional matters, but
litigants with the encouragement of lawyers on a contingent fee continue to
shop for forums. Supranational. At a supranational level, countries have
adopted a range of treaty and convention obligations to relate the right of
individual litigants to invoke the jurisdiction of state courts and to enforce
the judgments obtained. For example, the member states of the EEC signed the
Brussels Convention in 1968 and, subject to amendments as new states joined, it
represents the default law for all twenty-seven Member States of what is now
termed the European Union on the relationships between the courts in the
different countries. In addition, the Lugano Convention (1988) binds the
European Union and the European Free Trade Association. In effect from 1 March,
2002, all the member states of the EU except Denmark accepted Council
Regulation (EC) 44/2001, which makes major changes to the Brussels Convention
and is directly effective in the member states. Council Regulation (EC) 44/2001
now also applies as between the rest of the EU Member States and Denmark due to
an agreement reached between the European Community and Denmark. In some legal
areas, at least, the CACA enforcement of foreign judgments is now more
straightforward. At a state level, the traditional rules still determine
jurisdiction over persons who are not domiciled or habitually resident in the
European Union or the Lugano area. National. Many nations are subdivided into
states and provinces (i.e. a subnational "state"). Federation (as can be found
in Australia, States of Brazil, India, Mexico and the United States) and these
subunits will exercise "jurisdiction" through the court systems as defined by
the executives and legislatures. When the jurisdictions of governmental
entities overlap, one another—for example, between a state and the federation
to which it belongs—their jurisdiction is shared or concurrent jurisdiction.
Otherwise, one government entity will have exclusive jurisdiction over the
shared area. When jurisdiction is concurrent, one governmental entity may have
supreme jurisdiction over the other entity if their laws conflict. If the
executive or legislative powers within the jurisdiction are not restricted or
restricted only by a number of limited restrictions, these government branches
have plenary power such as a national policing power. Otherwise, an enabling
act grants only limited or enumerated powers. The problem of forum shopping
also applies as between federal and state courts. United States. The primary
distinctions between areas of jurisdiction are codified at a national level. As
a common law system, jurisdiction is conceptually divided between jurisdiction
over the "subject matter" of a case and jurisdiction over the "person" of the
litigants. (See personal jurisdiction.) Sometimes a court may exercise
jurisdiction over property located within the perimeter of its powers without
regard to personal jurisdiction over the litigants; this is called
"jurisdiction in rem". A court whose subject-matter jurisdiction is limited to
certain types of controversies (for example, suits in admiralty or suits where
the monetary amount sought is less than a specified sum) is sometimes referred
to as a "court of special jurisdiction" or "court of limited jurisdiction". A
court whose subject-matter is not limited to certain types of controversy is
referred to as a "court of general jurisdiction". In the U.S. states, each
state has courts of general jurisdiction; most states also have some courts of
limited jurisdiction. Federal courts (those operated by the federal government)
are courts of limited jurisdiction. Federal jurisdiction is divided into
federal question jurisdiction and diversity jurisdiction. The United States
district courts may hear only cases arising under federal law and treaties,
cases involving ambassadors, admiralty cases, controversies between states or
between a state and citizens of another state, lawsuits involving citizens of
different states, and against foreign states and citizens. Certain courts,
particularly the United States Supreme Court and most state supreme courts,
have discretionary jurisdiction, meaning that they can choose which cases to
hear from among all the cases presented on appeal. Such courts generally only
choose to hear cases that would settle important and controversial points of
law. Though these courts have discretion to deny cases they otherwise could
adjudicate, no court has the discretion to hear a case that falls outside of
its subject-matter jurisdiction. It is also necessary to distinguish between
original jurisdiction and appellate jurisdiction. A court of original
jurisdiction has the power to hear cases as they are first initiated by a
plaintiff, while a court of appellate jurisdiction may only hear an action
after the court of original jurisdiction (or a lower appellate court) has heard
the matter. For example, in United States federal courts, the United States
district courts have original jurisdiction over a number of different matters
(as mentioned above), and the United States court of appeals have appellate
jurisdiction over matters appealed from the district courts. The U.S. Supreme
Court, in turn, has appellate jurisdiction (of a discretionary nature) over the
Courts of Appeals, as well as the state supreme courts, by means of writ of
certiorari. However, in a special class of cases, the U.S. Supreme Court has
the power to exercise original jurisdiction. Under , the Supreme court has
original and exclusive jurisdiction over controversies between two or more
states, and original (but non-exclusive) jurisdiction over cases involving
officials of foreign states, controversies between the federal government and a
state, actions by a state against the citizens of another state or foreign
country. The word "jurisdiction" is also used, especially in informal writing,
to refer to a state or political subdivision generally, or to its government,
rather than to its legal authority. Franchise jurisdiction. In the history of
English common law, a jurisdiction could be held as a form of property (or more
precisely an incorporeal hereditament) called a franchise. Traditional
franchise jurisdictions of various powers were held by municipal corporations,
religious houses, guilds, early universities, Welsh Marches, and Counties
Palatine. Types of franchise courts included Courts Baron, Courts Leet,
merchant courts, and the Stannary Courts which dealt with disputes involving
the tin miners of Cornwall. The original royal charters of the American
colonies included broad grants of franchise jurisdiction along with other
governmental powers to corporations or individuals, as did the charters for
many other colonial companies such as the British East India Company and
British South Africa Company. Analogous jurisdiction existed in medieval times
on the European Continent. Over the course of the 19th and 20th centuries,
franchise jurisdictions were largely eliminated. Several formerly important
franchise courts were not officially abolished until Courts Act of 1971.
