Justice at Stake Campaign The Justice at Stake Campaign (JAS) is a Washington,
D.C.-based non-partisan group whose stated objective is ensuring that courts in
the United States are fair, impartial, and independent, and that judges rely
only on the facts and the law. Founded in 2000, the group is a noted opponent
of judicial elections, and its reports have called attention to rising
expenditures and interest group contributions to candidates for state supreme
courts, in states in which justices are chosen in elections. The group has
commissioned polls showing that many Americans believe these expenditures could
affect the ability of judges to rule neutrally in cases involving campaign
contributors. Justice at Stake has developed a national network of 50 partners
and has received grants from the Carnegie Corporation of New York, the Herbert
Block Foundation, the JEHT Foundation, the Joyce Foundation, the Moriah Fund,
the Open Society Institute, and the Public Welfare Foundation. Justice at Stake
is a 501(c)(3) organization governed by a board of directors. The chair of the
board is Roger Warren, former president of the National Center for State
Courts. JAS does not support or oppose individual judges seeking election or
nomination to the bench. "Educating Americans About Their Courts and Judges":
• Giving informational presentations on judicial independence and discussing
actions groups can take to protect it • Publicizing state voter guides •
Publishing reports on a variety of topics relating to fair and impartial courts
"Reducing Special Interest Pressure and Improving Judicial Campaigns": •
Monitoring special interest pressure on the courts • Encouraging states to
consider public financing of judicial elections and merit-based selection of
judges • Compiling national databases of state disclosures of campaign and
interest group contributions • Rapid response to intimidation and impeachment
threats • Educating political leaders and the public on the unique role of
the courts • Protecting court budgets from political attacks • Calling
attention to attacks on the power of the courts to uphold the Constitution •
Building a network of judges who can speak up on behalf of the courts •
Developing new messages and coalitions to defend the courts Reports and Issue
Briefs. Courting Danger [http://www.justiceatstake.org/files/
JASCourting2ndEd.pdf] How the war on terror has sapped the power of U.S. courts
to protect citizens' constitutional liberties. Brown v. Board of Education and
Attacks on the Courts: Fifty Years Ago, Fifty Years Later [http://
www.justiceatstake.org/files/BrownandthecourtsGuideFINAL.pdf] How the "Brown"
decision triggered a tidal wave of attacks on the Supreme Court, and how the
attacks on the courts continue today. Courts...or Calculators [http://
www.justiceatstake.org/files/SentencingBrief.Final.pdf] How politicians are
grabbing for the gavel from courts of law, and how a new Supreme Court case
could trigger an end run around the Constitution. The New Politics of Judicial
Elections 2004 [http://www.justiceatstake.org/files/NewPoliticsReport2004.pdf]
The most comprehensive collection of data and analysis about the 2004 state
Supreme Court elections. This report summarizes television advertising data in
these campaigns, outlines campaign finance information, and tracks
electioneering efforts by special interest groups. This edition includes a
special focus on Illinois, West Virginia, Alabama and North Carolina. The New
Politics of Judicial Elections 2002 Money and television ads in the 2002 state
Supreme Court elections. The New Politics of Judicial Elections [http://
www.justiceatstake.org/files/JASMoneyReport.pdf] Report on the 2000 races.
Justice at Stake Partners. Alabama Appleseed Center for Law and Justice
American Bar Association American Board of Trial Advocates The American Judges
Association American Judicature Society Appleseed Foundation The Association of
Trial Lawyers of America Brennan Center for Justice at NYU School of Law The
Campaign Legal Center (*campaign reform issues only) Campaigns for People
Chicago Appleseed Fund for Justice Citizen Action/Illinois Citizens for an
Independent Judiciary Committee for Economic Development Common Cause The
Constitution Project Democracy North Carolina Democracy South/Georgia Project
DRI - The Voice of the Defense Bar The Fund for Modern Courts The Greenlining
Institute The Illinois Campaign for Political Reform The National Association
of Women Judges The National Bar Association Institute for the Advancement of
the American Legal System Institute on Money in State Politics Interfaith
Alliance Kansas Appleseed Center for Law and Justice Kansas League of Women
Voters Lawyers' Committee for Civil Rights Under Law League of Women Voters
Safeguarding U.S. Democracy Program (www.lwv.org/fairandimpartialcourts)
Michigan Campaign Finance Network Michigan League of Women Voters Minnesota
League of Women Voters Missourians for Fair and Impartial Courts National Asian
Pacific American Bar Association (NAPABA) National Center for State Courts
National Judicial College National Voting Rights Institute North Carolina
Center for Voter Education Ohio Citizen Action Ohio League of Women Voters
Oklahoma Appleseed Center for Law and Justice Pennsylvanians for Modern Courts
Protestants for the Common Good Public Campaign Tallahassee League of Women
Voters Texans for Public Justice Wisconsin Citizen Action Wisconsin Democracy
Campaign
