Just price The just price is a theory of ethics in economics that attempts to
set standards of fairness in transactions. With intellectual roots in ancient
Greek philosophy, it was advanced by Thomas Aquinas based on an argument
against usury, which in his time referred to the making of any rate of interest
on loans. Unjust price: a kind of fraud. Aquinas would therefore condemn
practices such as raising the price of building supplies in the wake of a
natural disaster. Increased demand caused by the destruction of existing
buildings does not add to a seller's costs, so to take advantage of buyers'
increased willingness to pay constituted a species of fraud in Aquinas's view.
...there is no reason why gain trading may not be directed to some necessary or
even honourable end; and so trading will be rendered lawful; as when a man uses
moderate gains acquired in trade for the support of his household, or even to
help the needy... Later reinterpretations of the doctrine. In Aquinas' time,
most products were sold by the immediate producers (i.e. farmers and
craftspeople), and wage-labor and banking were still in their infancy. The role
of merchants and money-lenders was limited. The later School of Salamanca
argued that the just price is determined by common estimation which can be
identical with the market price -depending on various circumstances such as
relative bargaining power of sellers and buyers- or can be set by public
authorities. With the rise of Capitalism, the use of just price theory faded.
In modern economics, interest is seen as payment for a valuable service, which
is the use of the money, though most banking systems still forbid excessive
interest rates. Likewise, during the rapid expansion of capitalism over the
past several centuries the theory of the just price was used to justify popular
action against merchants who raised their prices in years of dearth. The
Marxist historian E. P. Thompson emphasized the continuing force of this
tradition in his pioneering article on the "Moral Economy of the English Crowd
in the Eighteenth Century." Other historians and sociologists have uncovered
the same phenomenon in variety of other situations including peasants riots in
continental Europe during the nineteenth century and in many developing
countries in the twentieth. The political scientist James C. Scott, for
example, showed how this ideology could be used as a method of resisting
authority in "The Moral Economy of the Peasant: Subsistence and Rebellion in
Southeast Asia" (1976). Brazilian journalist and philosopher Olavo de Carvalho
joined the just price of St. Thomas Aquinas with the economic theories of
Böhm-Bawerk. Explaining that the medieval usurer differed to modern capitalist
by the fact that in medieval society wealth was fixed (land), while in
industrial society the function of money had changed completely: “"At the new
framework, none could accumulate money under the bed for stroke him between
dawn swoon of fetishistic perversion?????, but I had to bet it quickly on
overall growth of the economy before inflation turned it into dust. If he
committed the blunder of investing it in the impoverishment of anyone else,
would be investing in his own bankruptcy.”"
