Kaldor–Hicks efficiency Kaldor–Hicks efficiency, named for Nicholas Kaldor
and John Hicks, also known as Kaldor–Hicks criterion, is a measure of
economic efficiency that captures some of the intuitive appeal of Pareto
efficiency, but has less stringent criteria and is hence applicable to more
circumstances. Under Kaldor–Hicks efficiency, an outcome is considered more
efficient if a Pareto optimal outcome can be reached by arranging sufficient
compensation from those that are made better off to those that are made worse
off so that all would end up no worse off than before. Explanation. Under
Pareto efficiency, an outcome is more efficient if at least one person is made
better off and nobody is made worse off. However, some believe that in
practice, it is almost impossible to take any social action, such as a change
in economic policy, without making at least one person worse off. Even
voluntary exchanges may not be Pareto improving. Under ideal conditions,
voluntary exchanges are Pareto improving since individuals would not enter into
them unless they were mutually beneficial. However, a voluntary exchange would
not be Pareto superior if external costs (such as pollution that hurt a third
party) exist, as they often do. Using Kaldor–Hicks efficiency, an outcome is
more efficient if those that are made better off could "in theory" compensate
those that are made worse off, so that a Pareto improving outcome results. For
example, a voluntary exchange that creates pollution would be a "Kaldor–Hicks
improvement" if the buyers and sellers are still willing to carry out the
transaction even if they have to fully compensate the victims of the pollution.
The key difference is the question of compensation. Kaldor–Hicks does not
require compensation actually be paid, merely that the possibility for
compensation exists, and thus does not necessarily make each party better off
(or neutral). Thus, under Kaldor–Hicks efficiency, a more efficient outcome
can in fact leave some people worse off. Pareto efficiency requires making
every party involved better off (or at least no worse off). While every Pareto
improvement is a Kaldor–Hicks improvement, most Kaldor–Hicks improvements
are not Pareto improvements. This is because, as the graph above illustrates,
the set of Pareto improvements is a proper subset of Kaldor–Hicks
improvement, which also reflects the greater flexibility and applicability of
the Kaldor–Hicks criteria relative to the Pareto criteria. For example, in a
society with two people, suppose initially Person A has 10 sheep and Person B
has 100 sheep. If some policy change or other shock results with Person A
ending up with 20 sheep and Person B with 99 sheep, this change would not be
Pareto improving, since Person B is now worse off. However, it would be a
Kaldor–Hicks improvement, as Person A could theoretically give Person B
anywhere between 1 and 10 sheep to accept this alternative situation. Use in
policy-making. The Kaldor–Hicks methods are typically used as tests of Pareto
efficiency rather than as efficiency goals themselves. They are used to
determine whether an activity moves the economy toward Pareto efficiency. Any
change usually makes some people better off and others worse off, so these
tests consider what would happen if gainers were to compensate losers or vice
versa. The Kaldor criterion is that an activity contributes to Pareto
optimality if the maximum amount the gainers are prepared to pay to the losers
to agree to the change is greater than the minimum amount losers are prepared
to accept; the Hicks criterion is that an activity contributes to Pareto
optimality if the maximum amount the losers would pay the gainers to forgo the
change is less than the minimum amount the gainers would accept to so agree.
Thus, the Kaldor test supposes that losers could prevent the arrangement and
asks whether gainers value their gain so much they would and could pay losers
to accept the arrangement, whereas the Hicks test supposes that gainers are
able to proceed with the change and asks whether losers consider their loss to
be worth less than what it would cost them to pay gainers to agree "not" to
proceed with the change. After several technical problems with each separate
criterion were discovered, they were combined into the Scitovsky criterion,
more commonly known as the "Kaldor–Hicks criterion", which does not share the
same flaws. The Kaldor–Hicks criterion is widely applied in welfare economics
and managerial economics. For example, it forms an underlying rationale for
cost-benefit analysis. In cost-benefit analysis, a project (for example, a new
airport) is evaluated by comparing the total costs, such as building costs and
environmental costs, with the total benefits, such as airline profits and
convenience for travelers. (However, as cost-benefit analysis may also assign
different social welfare weights to different individuals, e.g. more to the
poor, the compensation criterion is not always invoked by cost-benefit
analysis.) The project would typically be given the go-ahead if the benefits
exceed the costs. This is effectively an application of the Kaldor–Hicks
criterion because it is equivalent to requiring that the benefits be enough
that those that benefit could in theory compensate those that have lost out.
The criterion is used because it is argued that it is justifiable for society
as a whole to make some worse off if this means a greater gain for others.
Criticisms. The most common criticism of the Kaldor–Hicks criterion is the
taking into account of only the absolute level of income, not its distribution.
A related problem is that any social welfare functions based on Kaldor–Hicks
criteria are cardinal in nature, and therefore suffer from the aggregation
problems associated with discrepancies between the marginal value of money of
rich and poor people. This has mainly to do with the assumption of diminishing
marginal utility for income: taking one dollar from a poor person causes a
greater loss in utility than taking a dollar from a rich one. By weighting
utility variations by the marginal utilities, the social welfare function
implicit to the Kaldor–Hicks compensation principle is represented by anti-
egalitarian, concave indifference curves. At a more technical level, various
versions of the Kaldor–Hicks criteria lack desirable formal properties. For
instance, Tibor Scitovsky demonstrated that the Kaldor criterion alone is not
antisymmetric: it's possible to have a situation where an outcome A is an
improvement (according to the Kaldor criterion) over outcome B, but B is also
an improvement over A. The combined Kaldor–Hicks criterion does not have this
problem, but it can be non-transitive (A may be an improvement over B, and B
over C, but A may not be an improvement over C).
