Kingdom of Sardinia The Kingdom of Sardinia (, , ; also known as Piedmont-
Sardinia or Sardinia-Piedmont) consisted of the possessions of the House of
Savoy from 1720 or 1723 onwards, following the award of the crown of Sardinia
to King Victor Amadeus II of Savoy under the Treaty of The Hague (1720). This
compensated him for the loss of the crown of Sicily to Austria and allowed him
to retain the title of king, as the title "King of Sardinia" had existed since
the 14th century. Besides Sardinia, the Savoyard state at that time included
Savoy, Piedmont, and Nice; Liguria, including Genoa, was added by the Congress
of Vienna in 1815. During most of the 18th and 19th centuries, the political
and economic capital of the kingdom was Turin in Piedmont on the Italian
mainland. In 1860, Nice and Savoy were ceded to France in return for French
consent and assistance in Italian unification. In 1861, the Kingdom of Sardinia
became the founding state of the new Kingdom of Italy, annexing all other
Italian states. The Kingdom thus continued in legal continuity with the new
Italian state, to which it transferred all its institutions. Early history of
Piedmont. Piedmont was inhabited in early historic times by Celtic-Ligurian
tribes such as the Taurini and the Salassi. They later submitted to the Romans
(c. 220 BC), who founded several colonies there including "Augusta Taurinorum "
(Turin) and "Eporedia" (Ivrea). After the fall of the Western Roman Empire, the
region was repeatedly invaded by the Burgundians, the Goths (5th century),
Byzantines, Lombards (6th century), Franks (773). In the 9th–10th centuries
there were further incursions by the Magyars and Saracens. At the time
Piedmont, as part of the Kingdom of Italy within the Holy Roman Empire, was
subdivided into several marks and counties. In 1046, Oddo of Savoy added
Piedmont to their main segment of Savoy, with a capital at Chambéry (now in
France). Other areas remained independent, such as the powerful communes of
Asti and Alessandria and the marquisates of Saluzzo and Montferrat. The County
of Savoy was elevated to a duke in 1416, and Duke Emanuele Filiberto moved the
seat to Turin in 1563. Early history of Kingdom of Sardinia. In 1297, Pope
Boniface VIII, intervening between the Houses of Anjou and Aragon, established
on paper a "Regnum Sardiniae et Corsicae" that would be a fief of the Papacy.
Then the Pope offered his newly-invented fief to James II of Aragon, promising
him papal support should he wish to conquer Pisan Sardinia in exchange for
Sicily. In 1323 James II formed an alliance with Hugh II of Arborea and,
following a military campaign which lasted a year or so, occupied the Pisan
territories of Cagliari and Gallura along with the city of Sassari, claiming
the territory as the "Kingdom of Sardinia and Corsica". In 1353 Aragon made war
on Arborea, then fought with its leader Marianus IV of Arborea,of the Cappai de
Bas family, but did not reduce the last of the "giudicati" (indigenous kingdoms
of Sardinia) until 1420. The Kingdom of Sardinia and Corsica retained its
separate character as part of the Crown of Aragon and was not merely
incorporated into the Kingdom of Aragon. At the time of his struggles with
Arborea, Peter IV of Aragon granted an autonomous legislature to the Kingdom
and its legal traditions. The Kingdom was governed in the king's name by a
Viceroy. In 1420, Alfonso V of Aragon, king of Sicily and heir to Aragon,
bought the remaining territories for 100,000 gold florins of the Giudicato of
Arborea in the 1420 from the last "giudice" William III of Narbonne and the
"Kingdom of Sardinia" extended throughout the island, excepet for the city of
Castelsardo (at that time called "Casteldoria" or "Castelgenovese") that was
stolen from the Doria in 1448, and renamed "Castillo Aragonés" ("Aragonese
Caste"). Corsica, which had never been conquered, was dropped from the formal
title and Sardinia passed with the Crown of Aragon to a united Spain. The
defeat of the local kingdoms, communes and signorie, the firm Aragonese (later
Spanish) rule, with the introduction of a sterile feudalism, as well as the
discovery of the Americas, provoked an unstoppable decline of Kingdom of
Sardinia. A short period of uprisings occurred under the local noble Leonardo
de Alagon, marquess of Oristano, defended his territories against the "Viceroy"
Nicolò Carroz, and who managed to defeat the viceroy's army in the 1470s but
was later crushed at the Battle of Macomer in 1478, ending any further revolts
in the island. The unceasing attacks from North African pirates and a series of
plagues (from 1582, 1652 and 1655) further worsened the situation. Exchange of
Sardinia for Sicily. The Spanish domination of Sardinia ended at the beginning
of the 18th century, as a result of War of the Spanish succession. By the
Treaty of Utrecht of 1713, Spain's European empire was divided: Savoy received
Sicily and parts of the Duchy of Milan, while Charles VI (the Holy Roman
Emperor and Archduke of Austria), received the Spanish Netherlands, the Kingdom
of Naples, Sardinia, and the bulk of the Duchy of Milan. During the War of the
Quadruple Alliance, Victor Amadeus II, duke of Savoy and sovereign of Piedmont,
had to agree to yield Sicily to the Austrian Habsburgs and receive Sardinia in
exchange. The exchange was formally ratified in the Treaty of The Hague of
February 17, 1720. Because a kingdom of Sardinia had existed since the 14th
century, the exchange allowed Victor Amadeus to retain the title of king in
spite of the loss of Sicily. Victor Amadeus initially resisted the exchange,
and until 1723 continued to style himself King of Sicily rather than King of
Sardinia. The state took the official title of "Kingdom of Sardinia, Cyprus and
Jerusalem", as the house of Savoy still claimed the thrones of Cyprus and
Jerusalem, although both had long been under Ottoman rule. In 1767–1769,
Charles Emmanuel III conquered the Maddalena archipelago in the Strait of
Bonifacio from the Republic of Genoa, who ruled it with the island of Corsica,
and since then the archipelago is still part of the Sardinian region.
Napoleonic Wars and the Congress of Vienna. In 1792, Piedmont-Sardinia joined
the First Coalition against the French First Republic, but was beaten in 1796
by Napoleon and forced to conclude the disadvantageous Treaty of Paris (1796),
giving the French army free passage through Piedmont. On December 6, 1798
Joubert occupied Turin and forced Charles Emmanuel IV to abdicate and leave for
the island of Sardinia. The provisionary government voted to unite Piedmont
with France. In 1799 the Austro-Russians briefly occupied the city, but with
the Battle of Marengo (1800), the French regained control. The island of
Sardinia stayed out of the reach of the French for the rest of the war. In
1814, the kingdom was restored and enlarged with the addition of the former
Republic of Genoa, now a duchy, and it served as a buffer state against France.
This was confirmed by the Congress of Vienna. In the reaction after Napoleon,
the country was ruled by conservative monarchs: Victor Emmanuel I (1802–21),
Charles Felix (1821–31) and Charles Albert (1831–49), who fought at the
head of a contingent of his own troops at the Battle of Trocadero, which set
the reactionary Ferdinand VII on the Spanish throne. Victor Emanuel I disbanded
the entire Code Napoléon and returned the lands and power to the nobility and
the Church. This reactionary policy went as far as discouraging the use of
roads built by the French. These changes typified Piedmont. The Kingdom of
Sardinia industrialized from 1830 onward. A constitution, the "Statuto
Albertino", was enacted in the year of revolutions, 1848, under liberal
pressure, and under the same pressure Charles Albert declared war on Austria.
After initial success the war took a turn for the worse and Charles Albert was
defeated by Marshal Radetzky at Custozza. Italian unification. Like all of
Italy, the Kingdom of Sardinia was troubled with political instability, under
alternating governments. After a very short and disastrous renewal of the war
with Austria in 1849, Charles Albert abdicated on March 23, 1849, in favour of
his son Victor Emmanuel II. In 1852, a liberal ministry under Count Camillo
Benso di Cavour was installed, and the Kingdom of Sardinia became the engine
driving the Italian Unification. The Kingdom of Sardinia (Piedmont) took part
in the Crimean War, allied with the Ottoman Empire, Britain, and France, and
fighting against Russia. In 1859, France sided with the Kingdom of Sardinia in
a war against Austria, the Austro-Sardinian War. Napoleon III didn't keep his
promises to Cavour to fight until all of the Kingdom of Lombardy-Venetia had
been conquered. Following the bloody battles of Magenta and Solferino, both
French victories, Napoleon thought the war too costly to continue and made a
separate peace behind Cavour's back in which only Lombardy would be ceded. Due
to the Austrian government's refusal to cede any lands to the Kingdom of
Sardinia, they agreed to cede Lombardy to Napoleon who in turn then ceded the
territory to the Kingdom of Sardinia to avoid 'embarrassing' the defeated
Austrians. Cavour angrily resigned from office when it became clear that Victor
Emmanuel would accept the deal. Garibaldi and the Thousand. On March 5, 1860,
Parma, Tuscany, Modena, and Romagna voted in referendums to join the Kingdom of
Sardinia. This alarmed Napoleon who feared a strong Savoyard state on his
southeastern border and he insisted that if the Kingdom of Sardinia were to
keep the new acquisitions they would have to cede Savoy and Nice to France.
This was done after dubious referendums showed over 99.5% majorities in both
areas in favour of joining France. In 1860, Giuseppe Garibaldi started his
campaign to conquer southern Italy in the name of the Kingdom of Sardinia. He
quickly toppled the Kingdom of the Two Sicilies and marched to Gaeta. Cavour
was actually the most satisfied with the unification while Garibaldi wanted to
conquer Rome. Garibaldi was too revolutionary for the king and his prime
minister. Towards Kingdom of Italy. On March 17, 1861, the Kingdom of Italy was
proclaimed by the Parliament, so ratifying the annexations of all other Italian
states to Piedmont. The institutions and laws of the Kingdom were quickly
extended to all Italy, brutally abolishing the administrations of the other
regions. Piedmont would become the most dominant and wealthiest region in Italy
and the capital of Piedmont, Turin, would remain the Italian capital until 1865
when the capital was moved to Florence; but in contrast, many revolts exploded
through the peninsula, especially in Southern Italy. The House of Savoy would
rule Italy until 1946 when Italy was declared a republic by referendum. Flags.
When the Duchy of Savoy changed its name into Kingdom of Sicily in 1713 and
Kingdom of Sardinia in 1723, it maintained its traditional flag depicting a
white cross on a red field. But a problem arose: if the Duchy owned the small
harbour of Nice only, the union with Sicily and then Sardinia gave to the
Kingdom a quite big fleet, which had the same flag of Malta. To disambiguate
the ships of the two different States, the House of Savoy added a blue border
to its flag, and then it reduced the cross in a single quarter. The flag had
following minor changes until 1848, when a revolution happened: to follow the
liberal revolutions which were exploding in all Europe, King Charles Albert
adopted the Napoleonic Italian tricolour, surmonted by the Savoyard shield, as
national flag. This flag became the flag of Italy until 1946. File:Savoie
flag.svg|First original flag File:Savoyard flag.svg|Second revised flag File:
Flag of the Kingdom of Sardinia.svg|Third blue flag File:Flag of Italy (1861-
1946).svg|Final tricolour flag  Maps. After the Expedition of the Thousand.
File:Il Regno di Sardegna nel 1860.jpg|maximum expansion of the Kingdom of
Sardinia, in 1860
