Knowledge economy The knowledge economy is a term that refers either to an
economy of knowledge focused on the production and management of knowledge in
the frame of economic constraints, or to a knowledge-based economy. In the
second meaning, more frequently used, it refers to the use of knowledge
technologies (such as knowledge engineering and knowledge management) to
produce economic benefits as well as job creation. The phrase was popularized
by Peter Drucker as the title of Chapter 12 in his book "The Age of
Discontinuity," And, with a footnote in the text, Drucker attributes the phrase
to economist Fritz Machlup and its origins to the idea of "scientific
management" developed by Frederick Winslow Taylor. The essential difference is
that in a "knowledge economy," knowledge is a product, while in a "knowledge-
based economy," knowledge is a tool. This difference is not yet well
distinguished in the subject matter literature. They both are strongly
interdisciplinary, involving economists, computer scientists, engineers,
mathematicians, librarians, geographers, chemists and physicists, as well as
cognitivists, psychologists and sociologists. Various observers describe
today's global economy as one in transition to a "knowledge economy," as an
extension of an "information society." The transition requires that the rules
and practices that determined success in the industrial economy need rewriting
in an interconnected, globalized economy where knowledge resources such as
know-how and expertise are as critical as other economic resources. According
to analysts of the "knowledge economy," these rules need to be rewritten at the
levels of firms and industries in terms of knowledge management and at the
level of public policy as knowledge policy or knowledge-related policy.
Concepts. It can be defined as " The concept that supports creation of
knowledge by organizational employees and helps and encourages them to transfer
and better utilize their knowledge that is in line with company/organization
goals " The initial foundation for the Knowledge Economy was first introduced
in 1966 in the book "The Effective Executive" by Peter Drucker. In this book,
Drucker described the difference between the manual worker (page 2) and the
knowledge worker. The manual worker, according to him, works with his hands and
produces goods or services. In contrast, a knowledge worker (page 3) works with
his or her head not hands, and produces ideas, knowledge, and information. The
key problem in the formalization and modeling of knowledge economy, is a vague
definition of "knowledge", which is a rather relative concept. For example, it
is not proper to consider "information society" as interchangeable with
"knowledge society". "Information" is usually not equivalent to "knowledge".
Their use, as well, depends on individual and group "preferences" (see the
cognitive IPK model) – which are "economy-dependent". Evolution. The
knowledge economy is also seen as the latest stage of development in global
economic restructuring. Thus far, the developed world has transitioned from an
agricultural economy (pre-Industrial Age, largely the agrarian sector) to
industrial economy (with the Industrial Age, largely the manufacturing sector)
to post-industrial/mass production economy (mid-1900s, largely the service
sector) to knowledge economy (late 1900s – 2000s, largely the technology/
human capital sector). This latest stage has been marked by the upheavals in
technological innovations and the globally competitive need for innovation with
new products and processes that develop from the research community (i.e., R&D
factors, universities, labs, educational institutes). In the knowledge economy,
the specialized labor force is characterized as computer literate and well-
trained in handling data, developing algorithms and simulated models, and
innovating on processes and systems. Harvard Business School Professor, Michael
Porter asserts that today’s economy is far more dynamic and that comparative
advantage is less relevant than competitive advantage which rests on “making
more productive use of inputs, which requires continual innovation.”
Consequently, the technical, STEM careers including computer scientists,
engineers, chemists, biologists, mathematicians, and scientific inventors will
see continuous demand in years to come. Additionally, well-situated clusters,
which Michael Porter argues is vital in global economies, connect locally with
linked industries, manufacturers, and other entities that are related by
skills, technologies, and other common inputs. Hence, knowledge is the catalyst
and connective tissue in modern economies. With earth’s depleting natural
resources, the need for green infrastructure, a logistics industry forced into
just-in-time deliveries, growing global demand, regulatory policy governed by
performance results, and a host of other items high priority is put on
knowledge; and research becomes paramount. Knowledge provides the technical
expertise, problem-solving, performance measurement and evaluation, and data
management needed for the transboundary, interdisciplinary global scale of
today’s competition. Worldwide examples of the knowledge economy taking place
among many others include: Silicon Valley in California; aerospace and
automotive engineering in Munich, Germany; biotechnology in Hyderabad, India;
electronics and digital media in Seoul, South Korea; petrochemical and energy
industry in Brazil. It has been suggested that the next evolutionary step after
knowledge economy is the network economy, where the relatively localized
knowledge is now being shared among and across various networks for the benefit
of the network members as a whole, to gain economic of scale in a wider, more
open scale. Driving forces. As a result, goods and services can be developed,
bought, sold, and in many cases even delivered over electronic networks. As
regards the applications of any new technology, this depends on how it meets
economic demand. It can remain dormant or make a commercial breakthrough (see
diffusion of innovation). Characteristics. These characteristics require new
ideas and approaches from policy makers, managers and knowledge workers. The
knowledge economy has manifold forms in which it may appear but there are
predictions that the new economy will extend radically, creating a pattern in
which even ideas will be recognised and identified as a commodity. This
certainly is not the best time to make any hasty judgment on this contention,
but considering the very nature of 'knowledge' itself, added to the fact that
it is the thrust of this new form of economy, there certainly is a clear way
forward for this notion, though the particulars (i.e. the quantum of the
revolutionary approach and its applicability and commercial value),remain in
the speculative realm, as of now. Technology. The technology requirements for
an Innovative System as described by the World Bank Institute must be able to
disseminate a unified process by which a working method may converge scientific
and technology solutions, and organizational solutions. According to the World
Bank Institute‘s definition, such innovation would further enable the World
Bank Institute‘s vision outlined in their Millennium Development Goals.
Challenges for Developing Countries. The United Nations Commission on Science
and Technology for Development report (UNCSTD, 1997) concluded that for
developing countries to successfully integrate ICTs and sustainable development
in order to participate in the knowledge economy they need to intervene
collectively and strategically. Such collective intervention suggested would be
in the development of effective national ICT policies that support the new
regulatory framework, promote the selected knowledge production, and use of
ICTs and harness their organizational changes to be in line with the Millennium
Development Goals. The report further suggests that developing countries to
develop the required ICT strategies and policies for institutions and
regulations taking into account the need to be responsive to the issues of
convergence.
