La Reunion (Dallas) La Réunion was a socialist utopian community formed in
1855 by French, Belgian, and Swiss colonists near the forks of the Trinity
River in Texas, USA. The Reunion Tower in downtown Dallas is about three miles
east of the colony site. The founders of the community were inspired by the
utopian thought of the French philosopher François Marie Charles Fourier.
Followers of Fourier established 29 similar colonies in various parts of the
United States during the 19th century. In 1860 the declining colony was
incorporated into the expanding city of Dallas. Brief history. The founders of
La Réunion intended it to become a socialist utopian colony; they were
inspired by the writings of the French philosopher Charles Fourier, who
advocated communal production and distribution for communal profit. Unlike
other early communist systems, both men and women could vote and individuals
could own private property. Founder of La Réunion. La Réunion was founded in
Texas by Victor Prosper Considerant, a member of the Fourier movement in Lyon,
France. He had been forced into exile after staging protests against Napoléon
III's military expedition to Rome. After personally inspecting an area near the
three forks of the Trinity River in Texas, he returned to Europe where he
formed a group of future settlers. (The site of the community was in the
present-day Reunion District of Dallas, about three miles west of the Reunion
Tower.) Land purchase. Advance agent François Cantegral was sent ahead to sell
at $700 per acre to establish the location of colony. As the land was not good
for farming, the property was a poor choice for the intended colony, although
most of the would-be colonists were not farmers. Approximately 200 colonists
arrived by ship near present-day Houston. They walked overland to the site of
their new colony approximately northward, with their possessions hauled by ox
carts, and arrived on April 22, 1855. Original population. The general area
surrounding the three forks of the Trinity River had about 400 inhabitants at
the time. The addition of the French colonists nearly doubled the population.
The new arrivals spoke a different language from the settlers, believed in a
different system of government and Catholic faith, and brought with them skills
that the existing farmers did not possess. The watchmaking, weaving, brewing
and storekeeping skills of the new colonists were ill-suited to the
establishment of a colony, because they lacked the ability to produce food for
themselves. Texas weather. Although the colonists cultivated wheat and
vegetables, they did not produce enough for their needs or in time; their
biggest handicap was the uncooperative weather of Texas. A blizzard in May 1856
destroyed the colony's crops and turned the Trinity River into a sheet of ice.
That summer the Texas heat created drought conditions, and what was left of the
crops became a feast for an invasion of grasshoppers. Decline of La Réunion.
Although more than 350 European colonists eventually made La Réunion their
home, the experiment was already beginning to fail as the population began to
leave. Some returned to Europe while others moved out of the area. In 1860 the
nearby emerging town of Dallas incorporated La Réunion into its land area; the
remaining skilled colonists were absorbed into its specialized workers. Few
reminders remain. Eventually what had been cultivated as farmland at La
Réunion was discovered to be covering large deposits of limestone; it was
gradually quarried and transported to build the growing state of Texas. The
cemetery on the old colony site still serves as the final resting place for
some of the colonists. It is maintained by the City of Dallas and is located ()
just off Fish Trap Road between Singleton Blvd and the Trinity River in west
Dallas. The Daughters of the American Revolution placed a small memorial to the
colony at a nearby golf course. The last La Réunion house collapsed in the
1930s, and its ruins are now obscured by thick vegetation. Reunion Tower, a
Dallas landmark, was named after the colony and is located a few miles east of
where La Réunion once existed. Legacy. Shortly before the demise of La
Réunion, botanist and pharmacist Jacob Boll arrived and taught Julien
Reverchon. The latter man became celebrated in his own right as a professor of
botany at Baylor University College of Medicine and Pharmacy in Dallas. The
first brewery and butcher shops in Dallas were established by former colonists
from La Réunion; Maxime Guillot opened a carriage factory that operated for 50
years, helping to make Dallas the world center of the carriage and harness-
making industries by 1900.
