Labour economics Labour economics seeks to understand the functioning and
dynamics of the markets for labour. Labour markets function through the
interaction of workers and employers. Labour economics looks at the suppliers
of labour services (workers), the demands of labour services (employers), and
attempts to understand the resulting pattern of wages, employment, and income.
In economics, labour is a measure of the work done by human beings. It is
conventionally contrasted with such other factors of production as land and
capital. There are theories which have developed a concept called human capital
(referring to the skills that workers possess, not necessarily their actual
work), although there are also counter posing macro-economic system theories
that think human capital is a contradiction in terms. Compensation and
measurement. Wage is a basic compensation for paid labour, and the compensation
for labour per period of time is referred to as the wage rate. Economists
measure labour in terms of hours worked, total wages, or efficiency. Demand for
labour and wage determination. Labour demand is a derived demand; that is,
hiring labour is not desired for its own sake but rather because it aids in
producing output, which contributes to an employer's revenue and hence profits.
The demand for an additional amount of labour depends on the Marginal Revenue
Product (MRP) and the marginal cost (MC) of the worker. The MRP is calculated
by multiplying the price of the end product or service by the Marginal Physical
Product of the worker. If the MRP is greater than a firm's Marginal Cost, then
the firm will employ the worker since doing so will increase profit. The firm
only employs however up to the point where MRP=MC, and not beyond, in economic
theory. Wage differences exist, particularly in mixed and fully/partly flexible
labour markets. For example, the wages of a doctor and a port cleaner, both
employed by the NHS, differ greatly. But why? There are many factors concerning
this issue. This includes the MRP (see above) of the worker. A doctor's MRP is
far greater than that of the port cleaner. In addition, the barriers to
becoming a doctor are far greater than that of becoming a port cleaner. For
example to become a doctor takes a lot of education and training which is
costly, and only those who excel in academia can succeed in becoming doctors.
The port cleaner however requires minimal training. The supply of doctors
therefore would be much more inelastic than the supply of port cleaners. The
demand would also be inelastic as there is a high demand for doctors and
medical care is a necessity, so the NHS will pay higher wage rates to attract
the profession. The MRP of the worker is affected by other inputs to production
with which the worker can work (e.g. machinery), often aggregated under the
term "capital". It is typical in economic models for greater availability of
capital for a firm to increase the MRP of the worker, all else equal. The
education and training noted in the last paragraph are counted as "human
capital". Since the amount of physical capital affects MRP, and since financial
capital flows can affect the amount of physical capital available, MRP and thus
wages can be affected by financial capital flows within and between countries,
and the degree of capital mobility within and between countries. Macro and
micro analysis of labour markets. There are two sides to labour economics.
Labour economics can generally be seen as the application of microeconomic or
macroeconomic techniques to the labour market. Microeconomic techniques study
the role of individuals and individual firms in the labour market.
Macroeconomic techniques look at the interrelations between the labour market,
the goods market, the money market, and the foreign trade market. It looks at
how these interactions influence macro variables such as employment levels,
participation rates, aggregate income and Gross Domestic Product. The
macroeconomics of labour markets. The labour force is defined as the number of
individuals age 16 and over, excluding those in the military, who are either
employed or actively looking for work. The participation rate is the number of
people in the labour force divided by the size of the adult civilian
noninstitutional population (or by the population of working age that is not
institutionalised). The nonlabour force includes those who are not looking for
work, those who are institutionalised such as in prisons or psychiatric wards,
stay-at home spouses, children, and those serving in the military. The
unemployment level is defined as the labour force minus the number of people
currently employed. The unemployment rate is defined as the level of
unemployment divided by the labour force. The employment rate is defined as the
number of people currently employed divided by the adult population (or by the
population of working age). In these statistics, self-employed people are
counted as employed. Neoclassical microeconomics of labour markets. Neo-
classical economists view the labour market as similar to other markets in that
the forces of supply and demand jointly determine price (in this case the wage
rate) and quantity (in this case the number of people employed). However, the
labour market differs from other markets (like the markets for goods or the
money market) in several ways. Perhaps the most important of these differences
is the function of supply and demand in setting price and quantity. In markets
for goods, if the price is high there is a tendency in the long run for more
goods to be produced until the demand is satisfied. With labour, overall supply
cannot effectively be manufactured because people have a limited amount of time
in the day, and people are not manufactured. The labour market also acts as a
non-clearing market.Whereas most markets have a point of equilibrium without
excess surplus or demand, the labour market is expected to have a persistent
level of unemployment. Contrasting the labour market to other markets also
reveals persistent compensating differentials among similar workers. The
competitive assumption leads to clear conclusions — workers earn their
marginal product of labour. Neoclassical microeconomic model — Supply.
Households are suppliers of labour. In microeconomics theory, people are
assumed to be rational and seeking to maximise their utility function. In this
labour market model, their utility function is determined by the choice between
income and leisure. However, they are constrained by the working hours
available to them. Let w denote hourly wage. Let k denote total working hours.
Let L denote working hours. Let π denote other incomes or benefits. Let A
denote leisure hours. This can be shown in a graph that illustrates the trade-
off between allocating your time between leisure activities and income
generating activities. The linear constraint line indicates that there are only
24 hours in a day, and individuals must choose how much of this time to
allocate to leisure activities and how much to working. (If multiple days are
being considered the maximum number of hours that could be allocated towards
leisure or work is about 16 due to the necessity of sleep) This allocation
decision is informed by the curved indifference curve labelled IC. The curve
indicates the combinations of leisure and work that will give the individual a
specific level of utility. The point where the highest indifference curve is
just tangent to the constraint line (point A), illustrates the short-run
equilibrium for this supplier of labour services. "The Income/Leisure trade-off
in the short run" "Effects of a wage increase" If wages increase, this
individual's constraint line pivots up from X,Y1 to X,Y2. He/she can now
purchase more goods and services. His/her utility will increase from point A on
IC1 to point B on IC2. To understand what effect this might have on the
decision of how many hours to work, you must look at the income effect and
substitution effect. The wage increase shown in the previous diagram can be
decomposed into two separate effects. The pure income effect is shown as the
movement from point A to point C in the next diagram. Consumption increases
from YA to YC and — assuming leisure is a normal good — leisure time
increases from XA to XC (employment time decreases by the same amount; XA to
XC). "The Income and Substitution effects of a wage increase" But that is only
part of the picture. As the wage rate rises, the worker will substitute work
hours for leisure hours, that is, will work more hours to take advantage of the
higher wage rate, or in other words substitute away from leisure because of its
higher opportunity cost. This substitution effect is represented by the shift
from point C to point B. The net impact of these two effects is shown by the
shift from point A to point B. The relative magnitude of the two effects
depends on the circumstances. In some cases the substitution effect is greater
than the income effect (in which case more time will be allocated to working),
but in other cases the income effect will be greater than the substitution
effect (in which case less time is allocated to working). The intuition behind
this latter case is that the worker has reached the point where his marginal
utility of leisure outweighs his marginal utility of income. To put it in less
formal (and less accurate) terms: there is no point in earning more money if
you don't have the time to spend it. "The Labour Supply curve" If the
substitution effect is greater than the income effect, the labour supply curve
(diagram to the left) will slope upwards to the right, as it does at point E
for example. This individual will continue to increase his supply of labour
services as the wage rate increases up to point F where he is working HF hours
(each period of time). Beyond this point he will start to reduce the amount of
labour hours he supplies (for example at point G he has reduced his work hours
to HG). Where the supply curve is sloping upwards to the right (positive wage
elasticity of labour supply), the substitution effect is greater than the
income effect. Where it slopes upwards to the left (negative elasticity), the
income effect is greater than the substitution effect. The direction of slope
may change more than once for some individuals, and the labour supply curve is
likely to be different for different individuals. Other variables that affect
this decision include taxation, welfare, work environment, and income as a
signal of ability or social contribution. Neoclassical microeconomic model —
Demand. This article has examined the labour supply curve which illustrates at
every wage rate the maximum quantity of hours a worker will be willing to
supply to the economy per period of time. Economists also need to know the
maximum quantity of hours an employer will demand at every wage rate. To
understand the quantity of hours demanded per period of time it is necessary to
look at product production. That is, labour demand is a derived demand: it is
derived from the output levels in the goods market. A firm's labour demand is
based on its marginal physical product of labour (MPPL). This is defined as the
additional output (or physical product) that results from an increase of one
unit of labour (or from an infinitesimally small increase in labour). If you
are not familiar with these concepts, you might want to look at production
theory basics before continuing with this article. "The Marginal Physical
Product of Labour" The value of marginal physical product of labour (formula_3)
is the value of the additional output produced by an additional unit of labour.
This is illustrated in the diagram by the VMPPL curve that is above the MPPL.
In competitive industries, the VMPPL is in identity with the marginal revenue
product of labour (MRPL). This is because in competitive markets price is equal
to marginal revenue, and marginal revenue product is defined as the marginal
physical product times the marginal revenue from the output (MRP = MPP * MR).
"A Firm's Labour Demand in the Short Run" The marginal revenue product of
labour can be used as the demand for labour curve for this firm in the short
run. In competitive markets, a firm faces a perfectly elastic supply of labour
which corresponds with the wage rate and the marginal resource cost of labour
(W = SL = MFCL). In imperfect markets, the diagram would have to be adjusted
because MFCL would then be equal to the wage rate divided by marginal costs.
Because optimum resource allocation requires that marginal factor costs equal
marginal revenue product, this firm would demand L units of labour as shown in
the diagram. Neoclassical microeconomic model — Equilibrium. The demand for
labour of this firm can be summed with the demand for labour of all other firms
in the economy to obtain the aggregate demand for labour. Likewise, the supply
curves of all the individual workers (mentioned above) can be summed to obtain
the aggregate supply of labour. These supply and demand curves can be analysed
in the same way as any other industry demand and supply curves to determine
equilibrium wage and employment levels. Personnel economics: hiring and
incentives. At the micro level, one sub-discipline eliciting increased
attention in recent decades is analysis of internal labour markets, that is,
"within" firms (or other organisations), studied in personnel economics from
the perspective of personnel management. By contrast, external labor markets
"imply that workers move somewhat fluidly between firms and wages are
determined by some aggregate process where firms do not have significant
discretion over wage setting." The focus is on "how firms establish, maintain,
and end employment relationships and on how firms provide incentives to
employees," including models and empirical work on incentive systems and as
constrained by economic efficiency and risk/incentive tradeoffs relating to
personnel compensation. Information approaches. In many real-life situations
this is far from the case. The firm does not necessarily know how hard a worker
is working or how productive they are. This provides an incentive for workers
to shirk from providing their full effort — since it is difficult for the
employer to identify the hard-working and the shirking employees, there is no
incentive to work hard and productivity falls overall, leading to more workers
being hired and a lower unemployment rate. One solution used recently (stock
options) grants employees the chance to benefit directly from the firm's
success. However, this solution has attracted criticism as executives with
large stock option packages have been suspected of acting to over-inflate share
values to the detriment of the long-run welfare of the firm. Another solution,
foreshadowed by the rise of temporary workers in Japan and the firing of many
of these workers in response to the financial crisis of 2008, is more flexible
job contracts and terms that encourage employees to work less than full-time by
partially compensating for the loss of hours, relying on workers to adapt their
working time in response to job requirements and economic conditions instead of
the employer trying to determine how much work is needed to complete a given
task and overestimating. Another aspect of uncertainty results from the firm's
imperfect knowledge about worker ability. If a firm is unsure about a worker's
ability, it pays a wage assuming that the worker's ability is the average of
similar workers. This wage undercompenstates high ability workers and may drive
them away from the labour market. Such phenomenon is called adverse selection
and can sometimes lead to market collapse. There are many ways to overcome
adverse selection in labour market. One important mechanism is called
signalling, pioneered by Michael Spence. In his classical paper on job
signalling, Spence showed that even if education does not increase
productivity, high ability workers may still acquire it just to signal their
abilities. Employers can then use education as a signal to infer worker ability
and pay higher wages to better educated workers. Search models. One of the
major research achievements of the last 20 years has been the development of a
framework with dynamic search, matching, and bargaining. Criticisms. Many
sociologists, political economists, and Austrian School economists claim that
labour economics tends to lose sight of the complexity of individual employment
decisions. These decisions, particularly on the supply side, are often loaded
with considerable emotional baggage and a purely numerical analysis can miss
important dimensions of the process, such as social benefits of a high income
or wage rate regardless of the marginal utility from increased consumption or
specific economic goals. Also missing from most labour market analyses is the
role of unpaid labour. Even though this type of labour is unpaid it can
nevertheless play an important part in society. The most dramatic example is
child raising. However, over the past 25 years an increasing literature,
usually designated as the economics of the family, has sought to study within
household decision making, including joint labour supply, fertility, child
raising, as well as other areas of what is generally referred to as home
production.
