Labour voucher Labour vouchers (also known as "labour cheques", "labour
certificates", and "personal credit") are a device proposed to govern demand
for goods in some models of socialism, much as money does under capitalism.
Outline. Unlike money, vouchers cannot circulate and are not transferable
between people. They are also not exchangeable for any means of production
hence they are not transmutable into Capital. Once a purchase is made the
labour vouchers are either destroyed or must be re-earned through labour.
Therefore, with such a system in place, monetary theft would become impossible.
Such a system is proposed by many as a replacement for traditional money while
retaining a system of remuneration for work done. It is also a way of ensuring
that there is no way to 'make money out of money' as in a capitalist market
economy. Additionally, the only kind of market that could exist in an economy
operating through the use of labour vouchers would be an artificial market
(arket) for mostly non-productive goods and services; as with the dissolution
of money, capital markets could no longer exist and labour markets would also
likely cease to exist with the abolition of wage labor which would by necessity
occur with the adoption of vouchers. Author and activist Michael Albert and
economist Robin Hahnel have proposed a similar system of remuneration in their
economic system of participatory economics (parecon). A difference is that in
parecon "credits" are generally awarded based on both the time spent working
and the amount of effort and sacrifice spent during labour, rather than simple
contribution. Some later advocates of participism and parecon have also
proposed awarding more based on job difficulty or danger. Also, in contrast to
the physical note or cheque format used for labour vouchers in the past,
parecon credits are proposed as being entirely digital in keeping with advances
with technology and are stored in electronic accounts and usable through cards
similar to current day debit cards. History. Labour vouchers were first
proposed in the 1820s by Josiah Warren and Robert Owen. Two early attempts at
implementing labour vouchers (called labour notes at the time by their
proponents) were made by both following their experiences attempting to
establish a utopian community at New Harmony, Indiana, in which currency was
prohibited. In 1827, Josiah Warren established the Cincinnati Time Store where
goods could be purchased with labor vouchers representing an agreement to
perform labor. He folded the store in 1830 in order to devote his effort to
establishing communities that implemented his principles of labor-based prices.
Beginning in 1832, Robert Owen and his followers attempted to implement labor
notes in London and Glasgow by establishing marketplaces and banks that
accepted them. The followers of Robert Owen stood for a society of co-operative
communities. Each community would own its own means of production and each
member of a community would work to produce what had been agreed was needed and
in return would be issued with a labour voucher certifying for how many hours
he or she had worked; a person could then use this labour voucher to obtain
from the community's stock of consumer goods any product or products which had
taken the same number of hours to produce. Owen believed that this co-operative
commonwealth could begin to be introduced under capitalism and in the first
half of the 1830s some of his followers established "labour bazaars" on a
similar principle: workers brought the products of their labour to the bazaar
and received in exchange a labour voucher which entitled them to take from the
bazaar any item or items which had taken the same time to produce, after taking
into account the costs of the raw materials. These bazaars were ultimately
failures but the idea of labour vouchers appeared in substantially similar
forms in France in the writings of Pierre-Joseph Proudhon. Although he
disagreed with the manner in which they were implemented by Owen, they were
later advocated by Karl Marx in 1875 as a way of dealing with any immediate and
temporary shortages upon the establishment of socialism. Marx explained that
this would be necessary since socialism emerges from capitalism and would be
"stamped with its birthmarks". In Marx's proposal, early socialist society
would reward its citizens according to the amount of labour they contribute to
society. " . . . the individual producer receives back from society -- after
the deductions have been made -- exactly what he gives to it. What he has given
to it is his individual quantum of labor. For example, the social working day
consists of the sum of the individual hours of work; the individual labor time
of the individual producer is the part of the social working day contributed by
him, his share in it. He receives a certificate from society that he has
furnished such-and-such an amount of labor (after deducting his labor for the
common funds); and with this certificate, he draws from the social stock of
means of consumption as much as the same amount of labor cost. The same amount
of labor which he has given to society in one form, he receives back in
another." --Critique of the Gotha Programme, 1875 Marx was adamant in saying
that labour vouchers were not a form of money as they cannot circulate - a
problem he pointed out with Owen's system of labour-time notes. During the
Great Depression, European communities implemented local currencies with
varying success. More modern implementations as time-based currencies were
implemented in the United States starting in the 1970s. Systems that advocate
labour vouchers. The following political and economic systems propose the
adoption of labour vouchers (in some form or another) either permanently or as
a temporary means of remuneration during a transitional stage between a
monetary economy and a completely moneyless economy based on free association.
Inclusive Democracy is unique in proposing two kinds of vouchers. Basic
vouchers (BVs) issued to each citizen according to need; are used for essential
goods and services such as health care. And non-basic vouchers (NBVs) awarded
to each worker for labor contributed are used to pay for non-essential
commercial goods and services. Criticisms. Capitalists, whether statist,
minarchist or anarcho-capitalist generally oppose labour vouchers as they are
not money and thus claim an economy using them could not set prices according
to marginal utility and would theoretically have to rely on the labour theory
of value which adherents of the subjective theory of value generally see as
inflexible and restricting economic freedom of choice for the consumer.
Although some proposed systems which advocate labour vouchers (namely
participism) reject the labour theory of value. The system has also been
criticized by many libertarian socialists, particularly anarcho-communists; who
propose abolishing all remuneration and prices and advocate instead a gift
economy with value determined by calculation in kind. Peter Kropotkin, in
criticizing anarcho-collectivism's retaining of labour vouchers/cheques said,
"for after having proclaimed the abolition of private property, and the
possession in common of all means of production, how can they uphold the wages
system in any form? It is, nevertheless, what [anarcho-]collectivists are doing
when they recommend labour-cheques." The World Socialist Movement has argued
against using labour vouchers either as a permanent or a temporary system while
transitioning to their desired libertarian communist economy based on free
access. They claim that seeing as most of the occupations that currently exist
under capitalism will no longer exist, scarcity would no longer be an issue.
They also state that, Labour vouchers would tend to maintain the idea that our
human worth is determined by how much or how many goods we can own (or
produce). Labour vouchers imply that someone must police who takes the goods
produced by society. In other words there must be people who spend their time
ensuring that other people do not take things without paying for them. That is
normal in a profit oriented society, but a waste of human labour in socialism.
