Labor theory of value The labor theories of value (LTV) are heterodox economic
theories of value which argue that the value of a commodity is related to the
labor needed to produce or obtain that commodity. Presently the concept is most
often associated with Marxian economics, although it appears as a foundation to
earlier classical economic theorists such as Adam Smith and David Ricardo.
However, Karl Marx never used the phrase "labor theory of value" to describe
his theory of value, but instead made reference to a law of value, which is not
to be confused with the classical economics concept of "labor theory of price".
Definitions of value and labor. When speaking in terms of a labor theory of
value, value, without any qualifying adjective should theoretically refer to
the amount of labor necessary to the production of a marketable commodity,
including the labor necessary to the development of any real capital employed
in the production. Both David Ricardo and Karl Marx attempted to quantify and
embody all of the labor components in order to set the real price, or natural
price of a commodity. The labor theory of value, as presented by Adam Smith,
however, did not require the quantification of all past labor, nor did it deal
with the labor needed to create the tools (capital) that might be employed in
the production of a commodity. The Smith theory of value was very similar to
the later utility theories in that Smith proclaimed that a commodity was worth
whatever labor it would command in others (value in trade) or whatever labor it
would "save" the self (value in use), or both. But this "value" is subject to
supply and demand at a particular time. The real price of every thing, what
every thing really costs to the man who wants to acquire it, is the toil and
trouble of acquiring it. What every thing is really worth to the man who has
acquired it, and who wants to dispose of it or exchange it for something else,
is the toil and trouble which it can save to himself, and which it can impose
upon other people. ("Wealth of Nations" Book 1, chapter V) Smith's theory of
price (which for many is the same as value) has nothing to do with the past
labor spent in the production of a commodity. It speaks only of the labor that
can be "commanded" or "saved" at present. If there is no use for a buggy whip
then the item is economically worthless in trade or in use, regardless of all
the labor spent in its creation. Distinctions of economically pertinent labor.
A person drinking water from a good stream at his doorstep must "spend" labor
to gain this value, at least if this action is relevant to economics. In terms
of modern orthodox terminology it is important to note that "labor", at least
in Smith's approach, is "defined" as the opposite of utility - "disutility",
pain, toil etc. Labor which is pleasant in itself is only therefore partly
labor, or perhaps not labor at all (however, see opportunity cost). Labor which
is highly skilled on the other hand owes part of its produce to an "investment"
made in training and is almost like capital (hence the modern concept of human
capital). So many types of pleasant labor can be described as a result of an
earlier and more painful investment. In the example of a person going to a
stream at his doorstep, if this is a pleasant activity, it is not labor. If it
is not pleasant it could be relevant to economics because, for example, the
house could be built closer to the stream, plumbing could be installed, a
person could be employed to fetch water, or investment in a better path to the
water might be worth considering. But the above way of defining value is not
the only one. The word VALUE, it is to be observed, has two different meanings,
and sometimes expresses the utility of some particular object, and sometimes
the power of purchasing other goods which the possession of that object
conveys. The one may be called 'value in use ;' the other, 'value in exchange.'
The things which have the greatest value in use have frequently little or no
value in exchange; and on the contrary, those which have the greatest value in
exchange have frequently little or no value in use. Nothing is more useful than
water: but it will purchase scarce any thing; scarce any thing can be had in
exchange for it. A diamond, on the contrary, has scarce any value in use; but a
very great quantity of other goods may frequently be had in exchange for it.
("Wealth of Nations" Book 1, chapter IV) The value of any commodity, ... "to
the person who possesses it, and who means not to use or consume it himself,
but to exchange it for other commodities", is equal to the quantity of labour
which it enables him to purchase or command. Labour, therefore, is the real
measure of the "exchangeable value" of all commodities ("Wealth of Nations"
Book 1, chapter V; emphasis added). Value (without qualification) as an
intrinsic worth which stands without the process of exchange. Marx defined the
value of the commodity by the third definition. In his terms, value is the
'socially necessary abstract labor' embodied in a commodity. In Ricardo and
other classical economists, this definition serves as a measure of "real cost",
"absolute value", or a "measure of value" invariable under changes in
distribution and technology. Ricardo, other classical economists, and Marx
began their expositions with the assumption that value in exchange was equal to
or proportional to this labor value. They thought this was a good assumption
from which to explore the dynamics of development in capitalist societies.
Other supporters of the labor theory of value used the word "value" in the
second sense, to represent "exchange value". Conceptual model. Friedrich Engels
advances such a conceptual model in his Appendix to Marx' Capital v. III LTV
and the labor process. Since the term "value" is understood in the LTV as
denoting something created by labor, and its "magnitude" as something
proportional to the quantity of labor performed, it is important to explain how
the labor process both preserves value and adds new value in the commodities it
creates. The value of a commodity increases in proportion to the duration and
intensity of labor performed on average for its production. Part of what the
LTV means by "socially necessary" is that the value only increases in
proportion to this labor as it is performed with average skill and average
productivity. So though workers may labor with greater skill or more
productivity than others, these more skillful and more productive workers will
thus produce more value through the production of greater quantities of the
finished commodity: each unit still bearing the same value as all the others of
the same class of commodity. By working sloppily, the unskilled workers may
drag down the average skill of labor, thus increasing the average labor time
necessary for the production of each unit commodity. But these unskillful
workers cannot hope to sell the result of their labor process at a higher price
(as opposed to value) simply because they have spent more time than other
workers producing the same kind of commodities. However, production not only
involves labor, but also certain means of labor: tools, materials, power plants
and so on. These means of labor¬ ‚Äî also known as means of production¬ ‚Äî are
often the product of another labor process as well. So the labor process
inevitably involves these means of production that already enter the process
with a certain amount of value. Labor also requires other means of production
that are not produced with labor and therefore bear no value: such as sunlight,
air, uncultivated land, un-extracted minerals, etc. While useful, even crucial
to the production process, these bring no value to that process. In terms of
means of production resulting from another labor process, LTV treats the
magnitude of value of these produced means of production as constant throughout
the labor process. Due to the constancy of their value, these means of
production are referred to, in this light, as constant capital. Consider for
example workers who take coffee beans, use a roaster to roast them, and then
use a brewer to brew and dispense a fresh cup of coffee. In performing this
labor, these workers add value to the coffee beans and water that comprise the
material ingredients of a cup of coffee. The worker also transfers the value of
constant capital¬ ‚Äî the value of the beans; some specific depreciated value
of the roaster and the brewer; and the value of the cup¬ ‚Äî to the value of
the final cup of coffee. Again, on average the worker can transfer no more than
the value of these means of labor previously possessed to the finished cup of
coffee So the value of coffee produced in a day equals the sum of both the
value of the means of labor¬ ‚Äî this constant capital¬ ‚Äî and the value newly
added by the worker in proportion to the duration and intensity of their work.
Note: if the product resulting from the labor process is homogeneous (all
similar in quality and traits, for example, all cups of coffee) then the value
of the period‚Äôs product can be divided by the total number of items (use-
values) produced to derive the unit value of each item. formula_6 where
formula_7 is the total items produced. The first form of the equation expresses
the value resulting from production, focusing on the costs formula_15 and the
surplus value appropriated in the process of production, formula_12. The second
form of the equation focuses on the value of production in terms of the valued
added by the labor performed during the process formula_17. The relation
between values and prices. One issue facing the LTV is the relationship between
value quantities on one hand and prices on the other. If a commodity's value is
not the same as its price, and therefore the magnitudes of each likely differ,
then what is the relation between the two, if any? Various LTV schools of
thought provide different answers to this question. For example, some argue
that value in the sense of the amount of labor embodied in a good acts as a
center of gravity for price. As counter-intuitive as this may seem to those
accustomed to neoclassical price theory, some empirical evidence suggests labor
values are a better predictor of empirically recorded prices than prediction by
any other means. However, most economists would say that cases where pricing is
even approximately equal to the value of the labor embodied are only special
cases, and not the general case. In the standard formulation, prices also
normally include a level of income for "capital" and "land". These incomes are
known as "profit" and "rent" respectively. (It should be kept in mind that like
the terms "labor" and "value", the terms "price, "capital", "land", "profit"
and "rent" here are being used in a theoretical way which will not always
correspond to everyday use, even by accountants.) The real value of all the
different component parts of price, it must be observed, is measured by the
quantity of labour which they can, each of them, purchase or command. Labour
measures the value not only of that part of price which resolves itself into
labour, but of that which resolves itself into rent, and of that which resolves
itself into profit. The final sentence shows us how Smith sees value of a
product as relative to labor of buyer or consumer, as opposite to Marx who sees
the value of a product being proportional to labor of laborer or producer. And
we value things, price them, based on how much labor we can avoid or command,
and we can command labor not only in a simple way but also by trading things
for a profit. The demonstration of the relation between commodities' unit
values and their respective prices is known in Marxian terminology as the
transformation problem or the transformation of values into prices of
production. The transformation problem has probably generated the greatest bulk
of debate about the LTV. The problem with transformation is to find an
algorithm where the magnitude of value added by labor, in proportion to its
duration and intensity, is sufficiently accounted for after this value is
distributed through prices that reflect an equal rate of return on capital
advanced. If there is an additional magnitude of value or a loss of value after
transformation compared with before then the relation between values
(proportional to labor) and prices (proportional to total capital advanced) is
incomplete. Various solutions and impossibility theorems have been offered for
the transformation, but the debate has not reached any clear resolution. It is
the level of this equilibrium which the LTV seeks to explain. This could be
explained by a "cost of production" argument, pointing out that all costs are
ultimately labor costs, but this does not account for profit, and it is
vulnerable to the charge of tautology in that it explains prices by prices.
Marx later called this "Smith's adding up theory of value". Smith argues that
labor values are the natural measure of exchange for direct producers like
hunters and fishermen. Marx, on the other hand, uses a measurement analogy,
arguing that for commodities to be comparable they must have a common element
or substance by which to measure them, and that labor is a common substance of
what Marx eventually calls "commodity-values". Some statistical evidence for
the theory has also been advanced by Anwar Shaikh. The theory's development.
Origins of the LTV. Early insights in the labor theory of value appear in
Aristotle¬¥s "Politics". He developed a "theory of the value of labor", holding
that the value of labor skills is given by the goods they command in the
market. He maintained that value is not created solely by the expenditure of
labor in the production process, but also the utility and labor skills are
pertinent to the determination of exchange values and exchange ratios.
Scholastic philosophers like St. Thomas Aquinas, based on Aristotle's theories,
produced early labor values theories. Some writers (including Bertrand Russell
and Karl Marx) think the labor theory of value can be traced back to him. In
his "Summa Theologiae", he expresses that "... value can, does and should be
increase in relation to the amount of labor which has been expended in the
improvement of commodities". Benjamin Franklin in his 1729 essay entitled "A
Modest Enquiry into the Nature and Necessity of a Paper Currency" is sometimes
credited (including by Karl Marx) with originating the concept in its modern
form. However, the theory has been traced back to "Treatise of Taxes", written
in 1662 by Sir William Petty and to John Locke's notion, set out in the "Second
Treatise on Government" (1689), that property derives from labor through the
act of "mixing" one's labor with items in the common store of goods, though
this has alternatively been seen as a labor theory of property. Other writers
(including Joseph Schumpeter) have traced back the concept even further to Ibn
Khaldun, who in his "Muqaddimah" (1377), described labor as the source of
value, necessary for all earnings and capital accumulation, obvious in the case
of craft. He argued that even if earning ‚Äúresults from something other than a
craft, the value of the resulting profit and acquired (capital) must (also)
include the value of the labor by which it was obtained. Without labor, it
would not have been acquired.‚Äù Scottish economist Adam Smith accepted the LTV
for pre-capitalist societies but saw a flaw in its application to capitalism.
He pointed out that if the "labor embodied" in a product equalled the "labor
commanded" (i.e. the amount of labor that could be purchased by selling it),
then profit was impossible. David Ricardo (seconded by Marx) responded to this
paradox by arguing that Smith had confused labor with wages. "Labor commanded",
he argued, would always be more than the labor needed to sustain itself
(wages). The value of labor, in this view, covered not just the value of wages
(what Marx called the value of labor power), but the value of the entire
product created by labor. Ricardo's theory was a predecessor of the modern
theory that equilibrium prices are determined solely by production costs
associated with "neo-Ricardianism". Based on the discrepancy between the wages
of labor and the value of the product, the "Ricardian socialists"¬ ‚Äî Charles
Hall, Thomas Hodgskin, John Gray, and John Francis Bray¬ ‚Äî applied Ricardo's
theory to develop theories of exploitation. Marx expanded on these ideas,
arguing that workers work for a part of each day adding the value required to
cover their wages, while the remainder of their labor is performed for the
enrichment of the capitalist. The LTV and the accompanying theory of
exploitation became central to his economic thought. 19th century American
individualist anarchists based their economics on the LTV, with their
particular interpretation of it being called "Cost the limit of price". They,
as well as contemporary individualist anarchists in that tradition, hold that
it is unethical to charge a higher price for a commodity than the amount of
labor required to produce it. Hence, they propose that trade should be
facilitated by using notes backed by labor. Adam Smith and David Ricardo. Adam
Smith held that, in a primitive society, the amount of labor put into producing
a good determined its exchange value, with exchange value meaning in this case
the amount of labor a good can purchase. However, according to Smith, in a more
advanced society the market price is no longer proportional to labor cost since
the value of the good now includes compensation for the owner of the means of
production: "The whole produce of labour does not always belong to the
labourer. He must in most cases share it with the owner of the stock which
employs him." "Nevertheless, the 'real value' of such a commodity produced in
advanced society is measured by the labor which that commodity will command in
exchange...But disowns what is naturally thought of as the genuine classical
labor theory of value, that labor-cost regulates market-value. This theory was
Ricardo‚Äôs, and really his alone." Classical economist David Ricardo's labor
theory of value holds that the value of a good (how much of another good or
service it exchanges for in the market) is proportional to how much labor was
required to produce it, including the labor required to produce the raw
materials and machinery used in the process. David Ricardo stated it as, "The
value of a commodity, or the quantity of any other commodity for which it will
exchange, depends on the relative quantity of labour which is necessary for its
production, and not as the greater or less compensation which is paid for that
labour" (Ricardo 1817). In this heading Ricardo seeks to differentiate the
quantity of labor necessary to produce a commodity from the wages paid to the
laborers for its production. However, Ricardo was troubled with some deviations
in prices from proportionality with the labor required to produce them. For
example, he said "I cannot get over the difficulty of the wine which is kept in
the cellar for three or four years while constantly increasing in exchange
value, or that of the oak tree, which perhaps originally had not 2 s. expended
on it in the way of labour, and yet comes to be worth ¬£100."(Quoted in
Whitaker) Of course, a capitalist economy will stabilize this discrepancy until
the value added to aged wine is equal to the cost of storage - if anyone can
hold onto a bottle for four years and become rich, that will be done so much it
is hard to find freshly corked wine. There is also the theory that adding to
the price of a luxury product increases its exchange-value by mere prestige.
The labor theory as an explanation for value contrasts with the subjective
theory of value, which says that value of a good is not determined by how much
labor was put into it but by its usefulness in satisfying a want and its
scarcity. Ricardo's labor theory of value is not a normative theory, as are
some later forms of the labor theory, such as claims that it is "immoral" for
an individual to be paid less for his labor than the total revenue that comes
from the sales of all the goods he produces. It is arguable to what extent
these classical theorists held the labor theory of value as it is commonly
defined. For instance, David Ricardo theorized that prices are determined by
the amount of labor but found exceptions for which the labor theory could not
account. In a letter, he wrote: "I am not satisfied with the explanation I have
given of the principles which regulate value." Adam Smith theorized that the
labor theory of value holds true only in the "early and rude state of society"
but not in a modern economy where owners of capital are compensated by profit.
As a result, "Smith ends up making little use of a labor theory of value."
Marx's contribution. Here Marx is drawing a distinction between exchange value
(which is the subject of the LTV) and use value. Marx uses the concept of
"socially necessary abstract labor-time" to introduce a social perspective
distinct from his predecessors and neoclassical economics. Whereas most
economists start with the individual's perspective, Marx starts with the
perspective of society "as a whole". "Social production" involves a complicated
and interconnected division of labor of a wide variety of people who depend on
each other for their survival and prosperity. "Abstract" labor refers to a
characteristic of commodity-producing labor that is shared by all different
kinds of heterogeneous (concrete) types of labor. That is, the concept
abstracts from the "particular" characteristics of all of the labor and is akin
to average labor. "Socially necessary" labor refers to the quantity required to
produce a commodity "in a given state of society, under certain social average
conditions or production, with a given social average intensity, and average
skill of the labour employed." That is, the value of a product is determined
more by societal standards than by individual conditions. This explains why
technological breakthroughs lower the price of commodities and put less
advanced producers out of business. Finally, it is not labor per se, which
creates value, but labor power sold by free wage workers to capitalists.
Another distinction to be made is that between productive and unproductive
labor. Only wage workers of productive sectors of the economy produce value.
Exploitation. Marx uses his LTV to derive his theory of exploitation under
capitalism. Unlike Ricardo or the Ricardian socialists, Marx distinguishes
between labor power and labor. "Labor-power" is the "potential" or "ability" of
workers to work, given their muscles, brains, skills, and capacities. It is the
"promise" of creating value possessed by human labor that has not yet been
expended. "Labor" is the actual "activity" of producing value. The profit or
surplus-value arises when workers do more labor than is necessary to pay the
cost of hiring their labor-power. To explain the normality of exploitation,
Marx describes capitalism as having an institutional framework in which a small
minority (the capitalists) oligopolize the means of production. The workers
cannot survive except by working for capitalists, and the state preserves this
inequality of power. In normal role of force is structural, part of the usual
workings of the system. The "reserve army of unemployed workers" continually
threatens employed workers, pushing them to work hard to produce for the
capitalists. Criticisms. Many liberal economists believe that the Marxist labor
theory of value has been "discredited". The labor theory of value predicts that
profits will be higher in labor-intensive industries than in capital-intensive
industries, and empirical data contradicts this. This is sometimes referred to
as the "Great Contradiction." Marx responds to this in his third volume of
Capital with his competition of capitals theory, a mathematical transformation
that has been fiercely debated. Most economists today also contest that the
value of capital is limited to the "congealed labor" that it took to build the
capital when that capital can increase the productive capability of labor much
more than that. Nonetheless, many elements of the theory are still believed to
be valid, or the theory is presented in a non-Marxist tradition.
