Labour law Labour law (also called labor law or employment law) is the body of
laws, administrative rulings, and precedents which address the legal rights of,
and restrictions on, working people and their organizations. As such, it
mediates many aspects of the relationship between trade unions, employers and
employees. In Canada, employment laws related to unionized workplaces are
differentiated from those relating to particular individuals. In most countries
however, no such distinction is made. However, there are two broad categories
of labour law. First, collective labour law relates to the tripartite
relationship between employee, employer and union. Second, individual labour
law concerns employees' rights at work and through the contract for work. The
labour movement has been instrumental in the enacting of laws protecting labour
rights in the 19th and 20th centuries. Labour rights have been integral to the
social and economic development since the Industrial Revolution. are social
norms (in some cases also technical standards) for the minimum socially
acceptable conditions under which employees or contractors will work.
Government agencies (such as the former U.S. Employment Standards
Administration) enforce employment standards codified by labour law
(legislative, regulatory, or judicial). Labour law history. Labour law arose
due to the demand for workers to have better conditions, the right to organize,
or, alternatively, the right to work without joining a labour union, and the
simultaneous demands of employers to restrict the powers of workers' many
organizations and to keep labour costs low. Employers' costs can increase due
to workers organizing to achieve higher wages, or by laws imposing costly
requirements, such as health and safety or restrictions on their free choice of
whom to hire. Workers' organizations, such as trade unions, can also transcend
purely industrial disputes, and gain political power. The state of labour law
at any one time is therefore both the product of, and a component of, struggles
between different interests in society. Individual labour law. Contract of
employment. The basic feature of labour law in almost every country is that the
rights and obligations of the worker and the employer between one another are
mediated through the contract of employment between the two. This has been the
case since the collapse of feudalism and is the core reality of modern economic
relations. Many terms and conditions of the contract are however implied by
legislation or common law, in such a way as to restrict the freedom of people
to agree to certain things to protect employees, and facilitate a fluid labour
market. In the U.S. for example, majority of state laws allow for employment to
be "at will", meaning the employer can terminate an employee from a position
for any reason, so long as the reason is not an illegal reason, including a
termination in violation of public policy. One example in many countries is the
duty to provide written particulars of employment with the "essentialia
negotii" (Latin for essential terms) to an employee. This aims to allow the
employee to know concretely what to expect and is expected; in terms of wages,
holiday rights, notice in the event of dismissal, job description and so on. An
employer may not legally offer a contract in which the employer pays the worker
less than a minimum wage. An employee may not for instance agree to a contract
which allows an employer to dismiss them unfairly. There are certain categories
that people may simply not agree to because they are deemed categorically
unfair. However, this depends entirely on the particular legislation of the
country in which the work is. Minimum wage. There may be law stating the
minimum amount that a worker can be paid per hour. Australia, Belgium, Brazil,
Canada, China, France, Greece, Hungary, India, Ireland, Japan, Korea,
Luxembourg, the Netherlands, New Zealand, Paraguay, Portugal, Poland, Romania,
Spain, Taiwan, the United Kingdom, the United States, Vietnam and others have
laws of this kind. The minimum wage is usually different from the lowest wage
determined by the forces of supply and demand in a free market, and therefore
acts as a price floor. Each country sets its own minimum wage laws and
regulations, and while a majority of industrialized countries has a minimum
wage, many developing countries have not. Minimum wage laws were first
introduced nationally in the United States in 1938, Brazil in 1940 India in
1948, France in 1950, and in the United Kingdom in 1998. In the European Union,
18 out of 25 member states currently have national minimum wages. Working time.
Before the Industrial Revolution, the workday varied between 11 and 14 hours.
With the growth of industrialism and the introduction of machinery, longer
hours became far more common, with 14–15 hours being the norm, and 16 not at
all uncommon. Use of child labour was commonplace, often in factories. In
England and Scotland in 1788, about two-thirds of persons working in the new
water-powered textile factories were children. The eight-hour movement's
struggle finally led to the first law on the length of a working day, passed in
1833 in England, limiting miners to 12 hours, and children to 8 hours. The 10-
hour day was established in 1848, and shorter hours with the same pay were
gradually accepted thereafter. The 1802 Factory Act was the first labour law in
the UK. After England, Germany was the first European country to pass labour
laws; Chancellor Bismarck's main goal being to undermine the Social Democratic
Party of Germany (SPD). In 1878, Bismarck instituted a variety of anti-
socialist measures, but despite this, socialists continued gaining seats in the
Reichstag. The Chancellor, then, adopted a different approach to tackling
socialism. To appease the working class, he enacted a variety of paternalistic
social reforms, which became the first type of social security. The year 1883
saw the passage of the Health Insurance Act, which entitled workers to health
insurance; the worker paid two-thirds, and the employer one-third, of the
premiums. Accident insurance was provided in 1884, while old age pensions and
disability insurance were established in 1889. Other laws restricted the
employment of women and children. These efforts, however, were not entirely
successful; the working class largely remained unreconciled with Bismarck's
conservative government. In France, the first labour law was voted in 1841.
However, it limited only under-age miners' hours, and it was not until the
Third Republic that labour law was effectively enforced, in particular after
Waldeck-Rousseau 1884 law legalizing trade unions. With the Matignon Accords,
the Popular Front (1936–38) enacted the laws mandating 12 days (2 weeks) each
year of paid vacations for workers and the law limiting to 40 hours the
workweek (outside of overtime). Health and safety. Other labour laws involve
safety concerning workers. The earliest English factory law was passed in 1802
and dealt with the safety and health of child textile workers. Anti-
discrimination. This clause means that discrimination against employees is
morally unacceptable and illegal, on a variety of grounds, in particular racial
discrimination or sexist discrimination. Unfair dismissal. Convention no. 158
of the International Labour Organization states that an employee "can't be
fired without any legitimate motive" and "before offering him the possibility
to defend himself". Thus, on April 28, 2006, after the unofficial repeal of the
French First Employment Contract (CPE), the Longjumeau (Essonne) "conseil des
prud'hommes" (labour law court) judged the New Employment Contract (CNE)
contrary to international law, and therefore "illegitimate" and "without any
juridical value". The court considered that the two-years period of "fire at
will" (without any legal motive) was "unreasonable", and contrary to convention
no. 158, ratified by France. Child labour. Child labour is the employment of
children under an age determined by law or custom. This practice is considered
exploitative by many countries and international organizations. Child labour
was not seen as a problem throughout most of history, only becoming a disputed
issue with the beginning of universal schooling and the concepts of labourers'
and children's rights. Child labour can be factory work, mining or quarrying,
agriculture, helping in the parents' business, having one's own small business
(for example selling food), or doing odd jobs. Some children work as guides for
tourists, sometimes combined with bringing in business for shops and
restaurants (where they may also work as waiters). Other children are forced to
do tedious and repetitive jobs such as assembling boxes, or polishing shoes.
However, rather than in factories and sweatshops, most child labour occurs in
the informal sector, "selling on the street, at work in agriculture or hidden
away in houses — far from the reach of official inspectors and from media
scrutiny." Collective labour law. Collective labour law concerns the tripartite
relationship between employer, employee and trade unions. Trade unions,
sometimes called "labour unions" Trade unions. Some countries require unions to
follow particular procedures before taking certain actions. For example, some
countries require that unions ballot the membership to approve a strike or to
approve using members' dues for political projects. Laws may guarantee the
right to join a union (banning employer discrimination), or remain silent in
this respect. Some legal codes may allow unions to place a set of obligations
on their members, including the requirement to follow a majority decision in a
strike vote. Some restrict this, such as the 'right to work' legislation in
some of the United States. Strikes. A boycott is a refusal to buy, sell, or
otherwise trade with an individual or business who is generally believed by the
participants in the boycott to be doing something morally wrong. Throughout
history, workers have used tactics such as the go-slow, sabotage, or just not
turning up en-masse to gain more control over the workplace environment, or
simply have to work less [http://www.af-north.org/lordstown.html]. Some labour
law explicitly bans such activity, none explicitly allows it. Pickets.
Picketing is a tactic which is often used by workers during strikes. They may
congregate outside the business they are striking against to make their
presence felt, increase worker participation, and dissuade (or prevent) strike
breakers from entering the workplace. In many countries, this activity is
restricted by labour law, by more general law restricting demonstrations, or
sometimes by injunctions on particular pickets. For example, labour law may
restrict secondary picketing (picketing a business not directly connected with
the dispute, such as a supplier of materials), or flying pickets (mobile
strikers who travel to join a picket). There may be laws against obstructing
others from going about their lawful business (scabbing, for example, is
lawful); making obstructive pickets illegal, and, in some countries, such as
Britain, there may be court orders made from time to time against pickets being
in particular places or behaving in particular ways (shouting abuse, for
example). Workplace involvement. Workplace consolation statutes exist in many
countries, requiring that employers consult their workers on issues that
concern their place in the company. Industrial democracy refers to the same
idea, but taken much further. Not only that workers should have a voice to be
listened to, but that workers have a vote to be counted. Co-determination.
Originating in Germany, some form of co-determination (or "Mitbestimmung")
procedure is practised in countries across continental Europe, such as Holland
and the Czech Republic, as well as Scandinavian countries (e.g. Sweden). This
involves the rights of workers to be represented on the boards of companies for
whom they work. The German model involves half the board of directors being
appointed by the company trade union. However, German company law uses a split
board system, with a 'supervisory board' ("Aufsichtsrat") which appoints an
'executive board' ("Vorstand"). Shareholders and unions elect the supervisory
board in equal number, except that the head of the supervisory board is, under
co-determination law, a shareholder representative. While not gaining complete
parity, there has been solid political consensus since the Helmut Schmidt
social democrat government introduced the measure in 1976. In the United
Kingdom, the similar proposals were drawn up, and a command paper produced
named the Bullock Report (Industrial democracy). This was released in 1977 by
the James Callaghan Labour government. This proposal involved a similar split
on the board, but its effect would have been even more radical. Because British
company law requires no split in the boards of directors, unions would have
directly elected the management of the company. Furthermore, rather than giving
shareholders the slight upper hand as happened in Germany, a debated
'independent' element would be added to the board, reaching the formula 2x + y.
However, no action was ever taken as the UK slid into the winter of discontent.
This tied into the European Commission's proposals for worker participation in
the 'fifth company law directive', which was also never implemented. In Sweden,
this is regulated through the 'Law on board representation' (Lagen om
styrelserepresentation). The law covers all private companies with 25 or more
employees. In these companies, workers (usually through unions) have a right to
appoint two board members and two substitutes. If the company has more than
1,000 employees, three members and three substitutes are appointed by workers/
unions. It is common practice that seats are divided between representatives
from the major union coalitions. International labour law. Since the industrial
revolution the labour movement has been concerned how economic globalisation
would weaken the bargaining power of workers, as their employers could move to
hire workers abroad without the protection of the labour standards at home. The
International Labour Organization and the World Trade Organization have been
the primary focus among international bodies to reform labour markets. Conflict
of laws issues arise, determined by national courts, when people work in more
than one country, and EU law has a growing body of rules regarding labour
rights. International Labour Organization. Following World War One, the Treaty
of Versailles contained the first constitution of a new International Labour
Organisation founded on the principle that "labour is not a commodity", and for
the reason that "peace can be established only if it is based upon social
justice". The primary role of the ILO has been to coordinate principles of
international labour law by issuing Conventions, which codify labour laws on
all matters. Members of the ILO can voluntarily adopt and ratify the
conventions by enacting the rules in their domestic law. For instance, the
first Hours of Work (Industry) Convention, 1919 requires a maximum of a 48 hour
week, and has been ratified by 52 out of 185 member states. The UK ultimately
refused to ratify the Convention, as did many current EU members states,
although the Working Time Directive adopts its principles, subject to the
individual opt-out. The present constitution of the ILO comes from the
Declaration of Philadelphia 1944, and under the Declaration on Fundamental
Principles and Rights at Work 1998 classified eight conventions as core.
Together these require freedom to join a union, bargain collectively and take
action (Conventions Nos 87 and 98) abolition of forced labour (29 and 105)
abolition labour by children before the end of compulsory school (138 and 182)
and no discrimination at work (Nos 100 and 111). Compliance with the core
Conventions is obligatory from the fact of membership, even if the country has
not ratified the Convention in question. To ensure compliance, the ILO is
limited to gathering evidence and reporting on member states' progress, so that
publicity will put public and international pressure to reform the laws. Global
reports on core standards are produced yearly, while individual reports on
countries who have ratified other Conventions are compiled on a bi-annual or
perhaps less frequent basis. World Trade Organization. Because the ILOs
enforcement and sanction mechanisms are weak, there has been significant
discussion about incorporating labour standards in the World Trade
Organisation's operation, since its formation in 1994. The WTO oversees,
primarily, the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade which is a treaty aimed
at reducing customs, tariffs and other barriers to free import and export of
goods, services and capital between its 157 member countries. Unlike for the
ILO, if the WTO rules on trade are contravened, member states who secure a
judgment by the Dispute Settlement procedures (effective a judicial process)
may retaliate through trade sanctions. This could include reimposition of
targeted tariffs against the non-compliant country. Proponents of an integrated
approach have called for a "social clause" to be inserted into the GATT
agreements, for example by amending article XX, which gives an exception to the
general trade barrier reduction rules allowing imposition of sanctions for
breaches of human rights. An explicit reference to core labour standards could
allow action where a WTO member state is found to be in breach of ILO
standards. Opponents argue that such an approach could backfire and undermine
labour rights, as a country's industries, and therefore its workforce, are
necessarily harmed but without any guarantee that labour reform would take
place. Furthermore it was argued in the Singapore Ministerial Declaration 1996
that "the comparative advantage of countries, particularly low-age developing
countries, must in now way be put into question." Accordingly it is argued that
countries ought to be able to take advantage of low wages and poor conditions
at work as a comparative advantage in order to boost their exports. Similarly
it is disputed that business will relocate production to low wage countries
from higher wage countries such as the UK, because that choice depends mostly
on productivity of workers. The view of many labour lawyers and economists
remains that more trade, in the context of weaker bargaining power and mobility
for workers, still allows for business to opportunistically take advantage of
workers by moving production, and that a coordinated multilateral approach with
targeted measures against specific exports is preferable. While the WTO has yet
to incorporate labour rights into its procedures for dispute settlements, many
countries began to make bilateral agreements that protected core labour
standards instead. Moreover, in domestic tariff regulations not yet touched by
the WTO agreements, countries have given preference to other countries who do
respect core labour rights, for example under the EU Tariff Preference
Regulation, articles 7 and 8. Workers in multiple countries. While the debate
over labour standards applied by the ILO and the WTO seeks to balance standards
with free movement of capital globally, conflicts of laws (or private
international law) issues arise where workers move from home to go abroad. If a
worker from America performs part of her job in Brazil, China and Denmark (a
"peripatetic" worker) or if a worker is engaged in Ecuador to work as an
expatriate abroad in France, an employer may seek to characterise the contract
of employment as being governed by the law of the country where labour rights
are least favourable to the worker, or seek to argue that the most favourable
system of labour rights does not apply. For example, in a UK labour law case,
"Ravat v Halliburton Manufacturing and Services Ltd" Mr Ravat was from the UK
but was employed in Libya by a German company that was part of the American
multinational oil conglomerate, Halliburton. He was dismissed by a supervisor
based in Egypt. He was told he would be hired under UK law terms and
conditions, and this was arranged by a staffing department in Aberdeen. Under
the UK Employment Rights Act 1996 he would have a right to unfair dismissal,
but the Act left open what the territorial scope of the statute was. The UK
Supreme Court held that the principle would be that for an expatriate worker,
although the general rule is that they will not have UK labour law rights,
there would be an exception if the worker could show a "close connection" to
the UK, and this was established through the contractual assurances given to Mr
Rabat. This fits within the general framework in the EU. Under the EU Rome I
Regulation article 8, workers will have employment rights of the country where
they habitually work. But exceptionally they may have a claim in another
country if they can establish a close connection to it. The Regulation
emphasises that the rules should be applied with the purpose of protecting the
worker. It is also necessary that a court has jurisdiction to hear a claim.
Under the Brussels I Regulation article 19, this requires the worker habitually
works in the place where the claim is brought, or is engaged there. EU law. The
European Union, unlike most international organisations, has an extensive
system of labour laws, but officially excluding (according to the Treaty on the
Functioning of the European Union) matters around direct wage regulation (eg
setting a minimum wage), fairness of dismissals (e.g., a requirement for
elected workers to approve dismissals) and collective bargaining. A series of
Directives regulate almost all other issues, for instance the Working Time
Directive guarantees 28 days of paid holiday, the Equality Framework Directive
prohibits all forms of discrimination for people performing work, and the
Collective Redundancies Directive requires that proper notice is given and
consultation takes place before any decisions about economic dismissals are
finalised. However, the European Court of Justice has recently expanded upon
the Treaties through its case law. As well as having legal protection for
workers rights, an objective of trade unions has been to organise their members
across borders in the same way that multinational corporations have organised
their production globally. In order to meet the balance of power that comes
from ability of businesses to dismiss workers or relocate, unions have sought
to take collective action and strikes internationally. However, this kind of
coordination was been recently challenged in the European Union in two
controversial decisions. In "Laval Ltd v Swedish Builders Union" a group of
Latvian workers were sent to a construction site in Sweden on low pay. The
local Swedish Union took industrial action to make Laval Ltd sign up to the
local collective agreement. Under the Posted Workers Directive, article 3 lays
down minimum standards for workers being posted away from home so that workers
always receive at least the minimum rights that they would have at home in case
their place of work has lower minimum rights. Article 3(7) goes on to say that
this "shall not prevent application of terms and conditions of employment which
are more favourable to workers". Most people thought this meant that more
favourable conditions could be given than the minimum (e.g., in Latvian law) by
the host state's legislation or a collective agreement. However, in an
interpretation seen as astonishing by many, the ECJ said that only the posting
state could raise standards beyond its minimum for posted workers, and any
attempt by the host state, or a collective agreement (unless the collective
agreement is declared universal under article 3(8)) would be an infringement of
the business' freedom to provide services under TFEU article 56. This decision
was implicitly reversed by the European Union legislature in the Rome I
Regulation, which makes clear in recital 34 that the host state may allow more
favourable standards. However, in "The Rosella", the ECJ also held that a
blockade by the International Transport Workers Federation against a business
that was using an Estonian flag of convenience (i.e., saying it was operating
under Estonian law to avoid labour standards of Finland) infringed the
business' right of free establishment under TFEU article 49. The ECJ said that
it recognised the workers' "right to strike" in accordance with ILO Convention
87, but said that its use must be proportionately to the right of the business'
establishment. The result is that the European Court of Justice's recent
decisions create a significant imbalance between the international freedom of
business, and that of labour, to bargain and take action to defend their
interests. National labour law. British labour law. The Factory Acts (first one
in 1802, then 1833) and the 1832 Master and Servant Act were the first laws
regulating labour relations in the United Kingdom. The vast majority of
employment law before 1960 was based upon the Law of Contract. Since then there
has been a significant expansion primarily due to the "equality movement" and
the European Union. There are three sources of Law: Acts of Parliament called
Statutes, Statutory Regulations (made by a Secretary of State under an Act of
Parliament) and Case Law (developed by various Courts). The first significant
modern day Employment Law Act was the Equal Pay Act of 1970 although as it was
a somewhat radical concept it did not come into effect until 1972. This act was
introduced as part of a concerted effort to bring about equality for women in
the workplace. Since the election of the Labour Government in 1997, there have
been many changes in UK employment law. These include enhanced maternity and
paternity rights, the introduction of a National Minimum Wage and the Working
Time Directive which covers working time, rest breaks and the right to paid
annual leave. Discrimination law has also been tightened, with protection from
discrimination now available on the grounds of age, religion or belief and
sexual orientation as well as gender, race and disability. Canadian labour law.
In Canadian law, 'labour law' refers to matters connected with unionized
workplaces, while 'employment law' deals with non-unionised employees. Chinese
labour law. Labour Law in the People's Republic of China has become a very hot
issue with the soaring numbers of factories and the fast pace of urbanization.
The basic labour laws are the Labour Law of People's Republic of China
(promulgated on 5 July 1994) and the Law of the People's Republic of China on
Employment Contracts (Adopted at the 28th Session of the Standing Committee of
the 10th National People's Congress on June 29, 2007, Effective from January 1,
2008). The administrative regulations enacted by the State Council, the
ministerial rules and the judicial explanations of the Supreme People's Court
stipulate detailed rules concerning the various aspects of the employment
relationship. Labour Union in China is controlled by the government through the
All China Federation of Trade Unions, which is also the sole legal labour union
in Mainland China. Strike is formally legal, but in fact is discouraged. French
labour law. In France, the first labour laws were Waldeck Rousseau's laws
passed in 1884. Between 1936 and 1938 the Popular Front enacted a law mandating
12 days (2 weeks) each year of paid vacation for workers, and a law limiting
the work week to 40 hours, excluding overtime. The Grenelle accords negotiated
on May 25 and 26th in the middle of the May 1968 crisis, reduced the working
week to 44 hours and created trade union sections in each enterprise. The
minimum wage was also increased by 25%. In 2000, Lionel Jospin's government
then enacted the 35-hour workweek, down from 39 hours. Five years later,
conservative prime minister Dominique de Villepin enacted the New Employment
Contract (CNE). Addressing the demands of employers asking for more flexibility
in French labour laws, the CNE sparked criticism from trade unions and
opponents claiming it was lending favour to contingent work. In 2006, he then
attempted to pass the First Employment Contract (CPE) through a vote by
emergency procedure, but that it was met by students and unions' protests.
President Jacques Chirac finally had no choice but to repeal it. Mexican labour
law. Mexican labour law governs the process by which workers in Mexico may
organize labour unions, engage in collective bargaining, and strike. Current
labour law reflects the historic interrelation between the state and the
Confederation of Mexican Workers, the labour confederation officially aligned
with the Institutional Revolutionary Party (the Institutional Revolutionary
Party, or PRI), which ruled Mexico under various names for more than seventy
years. While the law, on its face, promises workers the right to strike and to
organize, in practice it makes it difficult or impossible for independent
unions to organize while condoning the corrupt practices of many existing
unions and the employers with which they deal. Swedish labour law. Swedish
labour law is from an international perspective comparatively 'thin'. This is
because many of the issues and areas that in other countries are regulated
through state or federal law, e.g., working hours, minimum wage and right to
overtime compensation, in Sweden instead are regulated through collective
agreements between trade union and employer organisation representatives.
United States labor law. The Fair Labor Standards Act of 1938 set the maximum
standard work week to 44 hours, and in 1950 this was reduced to 40 hours. A
green card entitles legal immigrants to work just like US citizens, without
requirement of work permits. Despite the 40-hour standard maximum work week,
some lines of work require more than 40 hours to complete the tasks of the job.
For example, if you prepare agricultural products for market you can work over
72 hours a week, if you want to, but you cannot be required to. If you harvest
products you must get a period of 24 hours off after working up to 72 hours in
a seven-day period. There are exceptions to the 24-hour break period for
certain harvesting employees, like those involved in harvesting grapes, tree
fruits and cotton. Professionals, clerical (administrative assistants),
technical, and mechanical employees cannot be terminated for refusing to work
more than 72 hours in a work week. These high-hour ceilings, combined with a
competitive job market, often motivate American workers to work more hours than
required. American workers consistently take fewer vacation days than their
European counterparts, and on average take the fewest days off of any developed
country. The Fifth and Fourteenth Amendments of the United States Constitution
limit the power of the federal and state governments to discriminate. The
private sector is not directly constrained by the Constitution, but several
laws, particularly the Civil Rights Act of 1964, limit the ability of the
private sector to discriminate against certain classes in employment. The Fifth
Amendment has an explicit requirement that the Federal Government not deprive
individuals of "life, liberty, or property", without due process of the law and
an implicit guarantee that each person receive equal protection of the laws.
The Fourteenth Amendment explicitly prohibits states from violating an
individual's rights of due process and equal protection. Equal protection
limits the State and Federal governments' power to discriminate in their
employment practices by treating employees, former employees, or job applicants
unequally because of membership in a group, like a race, religion or sex. Due
process protection requires that employees have a fair procedural process
before they are terminated if the termination is related to a "liberty", like
the right to free speech, or a property interest. The Age Discrimination in
Employment Act of 1967 prohibits employment discrimination based on age with
respect to employees 40 years of age or older. This Act was created to promote
employment of older persons based on their ability rather than age; to prohibit
arbitrary age discrimination in employment; to help employers and workers find
ways of meeting problems arising from the impact of age on employment because
in the face of rising productivity and affluence, older workers find themselves
disadvantaged in their efforts to retain employment, and especially to regain
employment when displaced from jobs; the setting of arbitrary age limits
regardless of potential for job performance has become a common practice, and
certain otherwise desirable practices may work to the disadvantage of older
persons; the incidence of unemployment, especially long-term unemployment with
resultant deterioration of skill, morale, and employer acceptability is,
relative to the younger ages, high among older workers; their numbers are great
and growing; and their employment problems grave; and the existence in
industries affecting commerce, of arbitrary discrimination in employment
because of age, burdens commerce and the free flow of goods in commerce. Title
VII of the Civil Rights Act is the principal federal statute with regard to
employment discrimination prohibiting unlawful employment discrimination by
public and private employers, labour organizations, training programmes and
employment agencies based on race or colour, religion, sex, and national
origin. Retaliation is also prohibited by Title VII against any person for
opposing any practice forbidden by statute, or for making a charge, testifying,
assisting, or participating in a proceeding under the statute. The Civil Rights
Act of 1991 expanded the damages available to Title VII cases and granted Title
VII plaintiffs the right to jury trial. The National Labor Relations Act,
enacted in 1935 as part of the New Deal legislation, guarantees workers the
right to form unions and engage in collective bargaining. This legislation and
its subsequent amendments are also key elements of U.S. labour law.
