Laffer curve In economics, the Laffer curve is a representation of the
relationship between government revenue raised by taxation and possible rates
of taxation. It illustrates the concept of "taxable income elasticity" – that
taxable income will change in response to changes in the rate of taxation. The
Laffer curve usually postulates that no tax revenue will be raised at the
extreme tax rates of 0% and 100%. If both a 0% and 100% rate of taxation
generate no revenue, but some intermediate tax rate generates some tax revenue,
it follows that there must exist at least one rate where tax revenue would be a
non-zero maximum. The Laffer curve is typically represented as a graph which
starts at 0% tax with zero revenue, rises to a maximum rate of revenue at an
intermediate rate of taxation, and then falls again to zero revenue at a 100%
tax rate. The actual existence and shape of the curve is uncertain and
disputed. One potential result of the Laffer curve is that increasing tax rates
beyond a certain point will be counterproductive for raising further tax
revenue. A hypothetical Laffer curve for any given economy can only be
estimated and such estimates are controversial. The New Palgrave Dictionary of
Economics reports that estimates of revenue-maximizing tax rates have varied
widely, with a mid-range of around 70%. Theoretical issues. Justifications.
Laffer explains the model in terms of two interacting effects of taxation: an
"arithmetic effect" and an "economic effect". The "arithmetic effect" assumes
that tax revenue raised is the tax rate multiplied by the revenue available for
taxation (or tax base). At a 0% tax rate, the model assumes that no tax revenue
is raised. The "economic effect" assumes that the tax rate will have an impact
on the tax base itself. At the extreme of a 100% tax rate, the government
theoretically collects zero revenue because taxpayers change their behavior in
response to the tax rate: either they have no incentive to work or they find a
way to avoid paying taxes. Thus, the "economic effect" of a 100% tax rate is to
decrease the tax base to zero. If this is the case, then somewhere between 0%
and 100% lies a tax rate that will maximize revenue. Graphical representations
of the curve sometimes appear to put the rate at around 50%, but the optimal
rate could theoretically be "any" percentage greater than 0% and less than
100%. Similarly, the curve is often presented as a parabolic shape, but there
is no reason that this is necessarily the case. Jude Wanniski noted that all
economic activity would be unlikely to cease at 100% taxation, but would switch
to barter from the exchange of money. He also noted that there can be special
circumstances where economic activity can continue for a period at a near 100%
taxation rate (for example, in war time). Various efforts have been made to
quantify the relationship between tax revenue and tax rates (for example, in
the United States by the Congressional Budget Office). While the interaction
between tax rates and tax revenue is generally accepted, the precise nature of
this interaction is debated. In practice, the shape of a hypothetical Laffer
curve for a given economy can only be estimated. The relationship between tax
rate and tax revenue is likely to vary from one economy to another and depends
on the elasticity of supply for labor and various other factors. Even in the
same economy, the characteristics of the curve could vary over time.
Complexities such as possible differences in the incentive to work for
different income groups and progressive taxation complicate the task of
estimation. The structure of the curve may also be changed by policy decisions.
For example, if tax loopholes and off-shore tax shelters are made more readily
available by legislation, the point at which revenue begins to decrease with
increased taxation is likely to become lower. Laffer presented the curve as a
pedagogical device to show that, in some circumstances, a reduction in tax
rates will actually increase government revenue and not need to be offset by
decreased government spending or increased borrowing. For a reduction in tax
rates to increase revenue, the current tax rate would need to be higher than
the revenue maximizing rate. In 2007, Laffer said that the curve should not be
the sole basis for raising or lowering taxes. Problems. Laffer assumes that the
government would collect no income tax at a 100% tax rate because there would
be no incentive to earn income. Research has shown that it is possible for a
Laffer curve to continuously slope upwards all the way to 100%. Additionally,
the Laffer curve depends on the assumption that tax revenue is used to provide
a public good that is separable in utility and separate from labor supply,
which may not be true in practice. The Laffer curve is also too simplistic in
that it assumes a single tax rate and a single labor supply. Actual systems of
public finance are more complex. There is serious doubt about the relevance of
considering a single marginal tax rate. In addition, revenue may well be a
multivalued function of tax rate - for instance, an increase in tax rate to a
certain percentage may not result in the same revenue as a decrease in tax
rate, even if the final tax rate in both situations is the same (a kind of
hysteresis). Empirical data. Tax rate at which revenue is maximized. The New
Palgrave Dictionary of Economics reports that for academic studies, the mid-
range for the revenue maximizing rate is around 70%. Economist Paul Pecorino
presented a model in 1995 that predicted the peak of the Laffer curve occurred
at tax rates around 65%. A 1996 study by Y. Hsing of the United States economy
between 1959 and 1991 placed the revenue-maximizing federal tax rate between
32.67% and 35.21%. A 1981 paper published in the Journal of Political Economy
presented a model integrating empirical data that indicated that the point of
maximum tax revenue in Sweden in the 1970s would have been 70%. A recent paper
by Trabandt and Uhlig of the NBER presented a model that predicted that the US
and most European economies are on the left of the Laffer curve (in other
words, that raising taxes would raise further revenue). Congressional Budget
Office analysis. In 2005, the Congressional Budget Office (CBO) released a
paper called "Analyzing the Economic and Budgetary Effects of a 10 Percent Cut
in Income Tax Rates". This paper considered the impact of a stylized reduction
of 10% in the then existing marginal rate of federal income tax in the US (for
example, if those facing a 25% marginal federal income tax rate had it lowered
to 22.5%). Unlike earlier research, the CBO paper estimates the budgetary
impact of possible macroeconomic effects of tax policies, that is, it attempts
to account for how reductions in individual income tax rates might affect the
overall future growth of the economy, and therefore influence future government
tax revenues; and ultimately, impact deficits or surpluses. In the paper's most
generous estimated growth scenario, only 28% of the projected lost revenue from
the lower tax rate would be recouped over a 10-year period after a 10% across-
the-board reduction in all individual income tax rates. In other words,
deficits would increase by nearly the same amount as the tax cut in the first
five years, with limited feedback revenue thereafter. Through increased budget
deficits, the tax cuts primarily benefiting the wealthy will be paid for —
plus interest — by taxes borne relatively evenly by all taxpayers. The paper
points out that these projected shortfalls in revenue would have to be made up
by federal borrowing: the paper estimates that the federal government would pay
an extra $200 billion in interest over the decade covered by the paper's
analysis. Other. Laffer has presented the examples of Russia and the Baltic
states, which instituted a flat tax with rates lower than 35% and whose
economies started growing soon after implementation. He has similarly referred
to the economic outcome of the Kemp-Roth tax act, the Kennedy tax cuts, the
1920s tax cuts, and the changes in US capital gains tax structure in 1997. Some
have also cited Hauser's Law, which postulates that US federal revenues, as a
percentage of GDP, have remained stable at approximately 19.5% over the period
1950 to 2007 despite changes in marginal tax rates over the same period. Others
however, have called Hauser's Law "misleading" and contend that tax changes
have had large effects on tax revenues. Optimal taxation. One of the uses of
the Laffer curve is in determining the rate of taxation which will raise the
maximum revenue (in other words, "optimizing" revenue collection). However, the
revenue maximizing rate should not be confused with the optimal tax rate, which
economists use to describe a tax which raises a given amount of revenue with
the least distortions to the economy. Taxation causes deadweight loss to an
economy, and the impact of this needs to be considered in conjunction with the
amount of revenue raised. Relationship with supply-side economics. Supply-side
economics is a school of macroeconomic thought that argues that overall
economic well-being is maximized by lowering the barriers to producing goods
and services (the "Supply Side" of the economy). By lowering such barriers,
consumers are thought to benefit from a greater supply of goods and services at
lower prices. Typical supply-side policy would advocate generally lower income
tax and capital gains tax rates (to increase the supply of labor and capital),
smaller government and a lower regulatory burden on enterprises (to lower
costs). Although tax policy is often mentioned in relation to supply-side
economics, supply-side economists are concerned with all impediments to the
supply of goods and services and not just taxation. Origin and etymology. The
term "Laffer curve" was reportedly coined by Jude Wanniski (a writer for "The
Wall Street Journal") after a 1974 afternoon meeting between Arthur Laffer,
Wanniski, Dick Cheney, Donald Rumsfeld, and his deputy press secretary Grace-
Marie Arnett. In this meeting, Laffer, arguing against President Gerald Ford's
tax increase, reportedly sketched the curve on a napkin to illustrate the
concept. Cheney did not accept the idea immediately, but it caught the
imaginations of those present. Laffer professes no recollection of this napkin,
but writes: "I used the so-called Laffer Curve all the time in my classes and
with anyone else who would listen to me." Laffer himself does not claim to have
invented the concept, attributing it to 14th century Muslim scholar Ibn Khaldun
and, more recently, to John Maynard Keynes. Historical precedents. There are
historical precedents other than those cited directly by Laffer. For example,
in 1924, Secretary of Treasury Andrew Mellon wrote: "It seems difficult for
some to understand that high rates of taxation do not necessarily mean large
revenue to the Government, and that more revenue may often be obtained by lower
rates." Exercising his understanding that "73% of nothing is nothing", he
pushed for the reduction of the top income tax bracket from 73% to an eventual
24% (as well as tax breaks for lower brackets). Personal income-tax receipts
rose from US$719 million in 1921 to over $1 billion in 1929, an average
increase of 4.2% per year over an 8-year period, which supporters attribute to
the rate cut. Amongst others, David Hume expressed similar arguments in his
essay "Of Taxes" in 1756, as did fellow Scottish economist Adam Smith, twenty
years later. The Democratic party made a similar argument in the 1880s when
high revenue from import tariffs raised during the Civil War (1861–1865) led
to federal budget surpluses. The Republican party, which was then based in the
protectionist industrial Northeast, argued that cutting rates would lower
revenues. But the Democratic party, then rooted in the agricultural South,
argued tariff reductions would increase revenues by increasing the number of
taxable imports. A 1997 analysis concluded that the tariff rate used was lower
than the revenue maximizing rate. In political discourse. Reaganomics. The
Laffer curve and supply-side economics inspired Reaganomics and the Kemp-Roth
Tax Cut of 1981. Supply-side advocates of tax cuts claimed that lower tax rates
would generate more tax revenue because the United States government's marginal
income tax rates prior to the legislation were on the "right-hand" side of the
curve. As a successful actor, Reagan himself had been subject to marginal tax
rates as high as 90% during World War II. During the Reagan presidency, the top
marginal rate of tax in the US fell from 70% to 31%, while revenue continued to
increase every year from 1980 ($885B) to 1990 ($1.93T). David Stockman, Ronald
Reagan's budget director during his first administration and one of the early
proponents of supply-side economics, was concerned that the administration did
not pay enough attention to cutting government spending. He maintained that the
Laffer curve was not to be taken literally — at least not in the economic
environment of the 1980s United States. In "The Triumph of Politics", he
writes: "whole California gang had taken [the Laffer curve literally (and
primitively). The way they talked, they seemed to expect that once the supply-
side tax cut was in effect, additional revenue would start to fall, manna-like,
from the heavens. Since January, I had been explaining that there is no literal
Laffer curve." Stockman also said that "Laffer wasn't wrong, he just didn't go
far enough" (in paying attention to government spending). Some have criticized
elements of Reaganomics on the basis of equity. For example, economist John
Kenneth Galbraith believed that the Reagan administration actively used the
Laffer curve "to lower taxes on the affluent." Some critics point out that tax
revenues almost always rise every year and during Reagan's two terms increases
in tax revenue were more shallow than increases during presidencies where top
marginal tax rates were higher. Critics also point out that since the Reagan
tax cuts, income has not significantly increased for the rest of the
population. This assertion is supported by studies that show the income of the
top 1% nearly doubling during the Reagan years, while income for other income
levels increased only marginally; income actually decreased for the bottom
quintile. Bush tax cuts. The Congressional Budget Office (CBO) has estimated
that extending the Bush tax cuts of 2001-2003 beyond their 2010 expiration
would increase deficits by $1.8 trillion dollars over the following decade.
Economist Paul Krugman contended that supply-side adherents did not fully
believe that the United States income tax rate was on the "backwards-sloping"
side of the curve and yet they still advocated lowering taxes to encourage
investment of personal savings. Outside the United States. Between 1979 and
2002, more than 40 other countries, including the United Kingdom, Belgium,
Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Norway, and Sweden cut their top rates of
personal income tax. In an article about this, Alan Reynolds, a senior fellow
with the libertarian think tank Cato Institute, wrote, "Why did so many other
countries so dramatically reduce marginal tax rates? Perhaps they were
influenced by new economic analysis and evidence from... supply-side economics.
But the sheer force of example may well have been more persuasive. Political
authorities saw that other national governments fared better by having tax
collectors claim a medium share of a rapidly growing economy (a low marginal
tax) rather than trying to extract a large share of a stagnant economy (a high
average tax)."
