Survivor Corps Survivor Corps is a global network of survivors helping
survivors to recover from war, rebuild their communities, and break cycles of
violence. The organization currently operates programs in Albania, Armenia,
Azerbaijan, Bosnia-Herzegovina, Burundi, Colombia, Croatia, El Salvador,
Ethiopia, Georgia, Jordan, Kosovo, Macedonia, Montenegro, Serbia, Uganda,
Rwanda, the United States and Vietnam. Survivor Corps is a leading proponent of
the peer support method, in which survivors are linked to one another to share
information as well as emotional and practical support, and work together on
issues affecting their lives. The Survivor Corps peer support program connects
survivors with survivor role models to offer encouragement and motivation. Peer
support is used to help new survivors find hope, get jobs, and get on with
their lives. Survivor Corps also brings conflict survivors together to promote
reconciliation and rebuilding through community service projects and local
activism. By training and organizing survivor advocates to campaign for their
rights, survivor corps has brought the voices of survivors into international
negotiations, to ban weapons that cause unacceptable harm to civilians and to
honor the rights of survivors of war and of persons with disabilities. In May
2008, Survivor Corps emerged out of Landmine Survivors Network. The name change
reflects the expansion of the organization's mission to include all types of
survivors of global conflict and war, including United States service members
and veterans returning from the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan. Nobel Prize and
International Leadership. Survivor Corps has long played a leading role the
International Campaign to Ban Landmines coalition (ICBL), which has over 1100
member organizations and whose goal is to abolish the production and use of
anti-personnel landmines. Survivor Corps co-founders Jerry White and Ken
Rutherford helped lead the coalition's efforts that secured the 1997 Mine Ban
Treaty, which in turn earned the coalition the Nobel Peace Prize. Prominent
Survivor Corps supporters have included Queen Noor of Jordan and Diana,
Princess of Wales. The Mine Ban Treaty bans the use, stockpiling, production
and trade of antipersonnel mines. It was also the first arms control agreement
in history to require governments to provide assistance to victims of the
weapon. This was achieved by an unprecedented level of participation by
survivors in the treaty process. The Convention on the Rights of Persons with
Disabilities entered into force on May 3, 2008, affecting 650 million people
with disabilities around the world, including survivors of violent conflict.
Survivor Corps helped ensure that this progressive human rights treaty
addressed persons with disabilities not as charity cases, but as equal and
autonomous citizens entitled to their human rights and full participation in
society. The Convention on Cluster Munitions was signed in Oslo on December 3,
2008 and entered into force on 1 August 2010. It bans the use, stockpiling,
production and trade of cluster bombs due to the indiscriminate harm they cause
to civilians. As a leader on the steering committee of the Cluster Munitions
Coalition, Survivor Corps used its past experience with the Mine Ban Treaty to
help ensure that the Convention on Cluster Munitions included the strongest
possible requirements to provide assistance to victims of the weapon, their
families and communities. A Sterling Legacy. Over the course of several years,
Survivor Corps established the first database designed to track the
rehabilitation needs of mine victims and the resources available to help
survivors, their families, and the communities affected by anti-personnel
mines. In 1997, Princess Diana visited Bosnia with LSN co-founders Jerry White
and Ken Rutherford to meet landmine survivors. Her high-profile tour of the
war-torn country brought global media attention and public support to the issue
of landmines. After the death of Princess Diana, the organization became the
only American-based charity to receive support from the Diana, Princess of
Wales Memorial Fund. Also in 1997, Queen Noor of Jordan stepped in to take a
prominent role in supporting the organization's work. In 1999, along with Queen
Noor and key members of the United States Congress, including Senator Patrick
Leahy, the organization drew international attention to the refusal of the
United States to sign the Mine Ban Treaty, while appealing to the US to revisit
landmine policy. From 1997 to 2007, LSN provided health support, economic
opportunity and human rights advocacy for survivors of landmines around the
world. Landmine Survivors Network becomes Survivor Corps. In May 2008, Landmine
Survivors Network changed its name to Survivor Corps. The name change reflects
the expansion of their mission to include all types of survivors of global
conflict and war, including United States service members and veterans
returning from the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan. Survivor Corps expanded its
programs into Israel, Rwanda, Burundi, Uganda, and created additional projects
in Colombia. Transition in 2010. In early 2010 Survivor Corps elected to make
its country programs in Vietnam, El Salvador and Bosnia into independent NGOs
and to transfer its peer support resources to the Center for International
Stabilization and Recovery located at James Madison University. On September
30, 2010 Survivor Corps closed its headquarters office in Washington DC.
