Land reform Land reform (also agrarian reform, though that can have a broader
meaning) involves the changing of laws, regulations or customs regarding land
ownership. Such transfers of ownership may be with or without compensation;
compensation may vary from token amounts to the full value of the land. Land
reform may also entail the transfer of land from individual ownership — even
peasant ownership in smallholdings — to government-owned collective farms; it
has also, in other times and places, referred to the exact opposite: division
of government-owned collective farms into smallholdings. The common
characteristic of all land reforms, however, is modification or replacement of
existing institutional arrangements governing possession and use of land. Thus,
while land reform may be radical in nature, such as through large-scale
transfers of land from one group to another, it can also be less dramatic, such
as regulatory reforms aimed at improving land administration. Nonetheless, any
revision or reform of a country's land laws can still be an intensely political
process, as reforming land policies serves to change relationships within and
between communities, as well as between communities and the state. Thus even
small-scale land reforms and legal modifications may be subject to intense
debate or conflict. Land ownership and tenure. Land ownership and tenure can be
perceived as controversial in part because ideas defining what it means to
access or control land, such as through "land ownership" or "land tenure", can
vary considerably across regions and even within countries. Land reforms, which
change what it means to control land, therefore create tensions and conflicts
between those who lose and those who gain from these redefinitions (see next
section). Western conceptions of land have evolved over the past several
centuries to place greater emphasis on individual land ownership, formalized
through documents such as land titles. Control over land, however, may also be
perceived less in terms of individual ownership and more in terms land use, or
through what is known as land tenure. Historically, in many parts of Africa for
example, land was not owned by an individual, but rather used by an extended
family or a village community. Different people in a family or community had
different rights to access this land for different purposes and at different
times. Such rights were often conveyed through oral history and not formally
documented. These different ideas of land ownership and tenure are sometimes
referred to using different terminology. For example, "formal" or "statutory"
land systems refer to ideas of land control more closely affiliated with
individual land ownership. "Informal" or "customary" land systems refer to
ideas of land control more closely affiliated with land tenure. Arguments for
and against land reform. Land reform is a deeply political process and
therefore many arguments for and against it have emerged. These arguments vary
tremendously over time and place. For example, in the twentieth century, many
land reforms emerged from a particular political ideology, such as communism or
socialism. Or, as can be seen in the 19th century in colonized states, a
colonial government may have changed the laws dictating land ownership to
better consolidate political power or to support its colonial economy. In more
recent times, electoral mobilization and the use of land as a patronage
resource have been proposed as possible motivations for land reform efforts,
such as the extensive redistributive land reforms of Robert Mugabe in Zimbabwe.
Arguments for land reform. Land reforms need not be as dramatic in scale as
Zimbabwe. Today many arguments in support of land reform focus on its potential
social and economic benefits, particularly in developing countries, that may
emerge from reforms focused on greater land formalization. Such benefits may
include eradicating food insecurity and alleviating rural poverty. Arguments in
support of such reforms gained particular momentum after the publication of
"The Mystery of Capital" by Peruvian economist Hernando de Soto in 2000. The
poor, he argues, are often unable to secure formal property rights, such as
land titles, to the land on which they live or farm because of poor governance,
corruption and/or overly complex bureaucracies. Without land titles or other
formal documentation of their land assets, they are less able to access formal
credit. Political and legal reforms within countries, according to de Soto,
will help to include the poor in formal legal and economic systems, increase
the poor's ability to access credit and contribute to economic growth and
poverty reduction. Many international development organizations and bilateral
and multilateral donors, such as the World Bank, have embraced de Soto's ideas,
or similar ideas, about the benefits of greater formalized land rights.
Evidence to support the economic and pro-poor benefits of increased formalized
land rights are, however, still inconclusive according to some critics (see
"Arguments against land reform" below). Other arguments in support of land
reform point to the need to alleviate conflicting land laws, particularly in
former colonies, where formal and informal land systems may exist in tension
with each other. For example, in many countries in Africa with conflicting land
laws, AIDS stigmatization has led to an increasing number of AIDS widows being
kicked off marital land by in-laws. While the woman may have both customary and
statutory rights to the land, confusion over which set of laws has primacy, or
even a lack of knowledge of relevant laws, leave many AIDS widows at a
significant disadvantage. Also, conflicting formal and informal land laws can
also clog a country's legal system, making it prone to corruption. Additional
arguments for land reform focus on the potential environmental benefits of
reform. For example, if reform leads to greater security of land ownership,
through either formal or informal means, then those that use the land will be
better stewards of it. Arguments against land reform. Many of the arguments in
support of land reform speak to its potentially positive social and economic
outcomes. Yet, as mentioned previously, land reform is an intensely political
process. Thus, many of those opposed to land reform are nervous as to the
underlying motivations of those initiating the reform. For example, some may
fear that they will disadvantaged or victimized as a result of the reforms.
Others may fear that they will lose out in the economic and political power
struggles that underlie many land reforms. Other groups and individuals express
concerns about land reforms focused on formalization of property rights. While
the economic and social benefits of formalized land rights are often touted,
some research suggests that such reforms are either ineffective or may cause
further hardship or conflict. Additional arguments against land reform focus on
concerns over equity issues and potential elite capture of land, particularly
in regards to reforms focused on greater land formalization. If improperly or
inadequately implemented, critics worry that such reforms may further
disadvantage marginalization groups such as indigenous communities or women.
These concerns also lead to questions about the institutional capacity of
governments to implement land reforms as they are designed. Even if a country
does have this capacity, critics worry that corruption and patrimonalism will
lead to further elite capture. In looking at more radical reforms, such as
large-scale land redistribution, arguments against reform include concerns that
redistributed land will not be used productively and that owners of
expropriated land will not be compensated adequately or compensated at all.
Zimbabwe, again, is a commonly cited example of the perils of such large-scale
reforms, whereby land redistribution contributed to economic decline and
increased food insecurity in the country. Evaluation of land reform. Challenges
for land reform in South Africa Land reform efforts. Agrarian land reform has
been a recurring theme of enormous consequence in world history — see, for
example, the history of the Semproninan Law or "Lex Sempronia agraria" proposed
by Tiberius Sempronius Gracchus and passed by the Roman Senate (133 BC), which
led to the social and political wars that ended the Roman Republic. A
historically important source of pressure for land reform has been the
accumulation of significant properties by tax-exempt individuals or entities.
In ancient Egypt, the tax exemption for temple lands eventually drove almost
all the good land into the hands of the priestly class, making them immensely
rich (and leaving the world a stunning legacy of monumental temple architecture
that still impresses several millennia later), but starving the government of
revenue. In Rome, the land tax exemption for the noble senatorial families had
a similar effect, leading to Pliny's famous observation that the latifundia
(vast landed estates) had ruined Rome, and would likewise ruin the provinces.
In the Christian world, this has frequently been true of churches and
monasteries, a major reason that many of the French revolutionaries saw the
Catholic Church as an accomplice of the landed aristos. In the Moslem world,
land reforms such as that organized in Spain by al-Hurr in 718 have transferred
property from Muslims to Christians, who were taxable by much higher rates. In
the modern world and in the aftermath of colonialism and the Industrial
Revolution, land reform has occurred around the world, from the Mexican
Revolution (1917; the revolution began in 1910) to Communist China to Bolivia
(1952, 2006) to Zimbabwe and Namibia. Land reform has been especially popular
as part of decolonization struggles in Africa and the Arab world, where it was
part of the program for African socialism and Arab nationalism. Cuba has seen
one of the most complete agrarian reforms in Latin America. Land reform was an
important step in achieving economic development in many Third World countries
since the post-World War II period, especially in the East Asian Tigers and
"Tiger Cubs" nations such as Taiwan, South Korea, and Malaysia. Since mainland
China's economic reforms led by Deng Xiaoping land reforms have also played a
key role in the development of the People's Republic of China, with the re-
emergence of rich property developers in urban areas (though as in Hong Kong,
land in China is not privately owned but leased from the state, typically on
very long terms that allow substantial opportunity for private speculative
gain). Africa. Challenges for Land Reform in South Africa
