Land value tax A land value tax (or site valuation tax) is a levy on the
unimproved value of land. It is an "ad valorem" tax on land that disregards the
value of buildings, personal property and other improvements. A land value tax
(LVT) is different from other property taxes, because these are taxes on the
whole value of real estate: the combination of land, buildings, and
improvements to the site. Although the efficiency of a land value tax has been
established knowledge since Adam Smith, it was perhaps most famously promoted
by Henry George. In his best selling work ‘’Progress and Poverty’’
(1879), George argued that the value of land was created by the community, and
therefore its rent belonged to the community. Land value taxes have been
implemented in Taiwan (Republic of China), Hong Kong, Singapore, Russia and
Estonia, as well as in some localities in the American state of Pennsylvania,
the Australian state of New South Wales and Mexicali, in Mexico. The government
of the Republic of Ireland is currently considering the introduction of an LVT,
among other options for taxing property. Economic effects. Efficiency. Most
taxes distort economic decisions. If labor, buildings or machinery and plant
are taxed, people are dissuaded from constructive and beneficial activities,
and enterprise and efficiency are penalized due to the excess burden of
taxation. This does not apply to LVT, which is payable regardless of whether or
how well the land is actually used. Because the supply of land is inelastic,
market land rents depend on what tenants are prepared to pay, rather than on
the expenses of landlords, and so LVT cannot be directly passed on to tenants.
The direct beneficiaries of incremental improvements to the surrounding
neighborhood by others would be the land's occupants, and absentee landlords
would benefit only by virtue of price competition amongst present and
prospective tenants for those incremental benefits; the only direct effect of
LVT on prices in this case is to lower the unearned increment (reduce the
amount of the socially generated benefit that is privately captured as an
increase in the market price of the land). Put another way, LVT is often said
to be justified for economic reasons because if it is implemented properly, it
will not deter production, distort market mechanisms or otherwise create
deadweight losses the way other taxes do. Nobel Prize winner William Vickrey
believed that "removing almost all business taxes, including property taxes on
improvements, excepting only taxes reflecting the marginal social cost of
public services rendered to specific activities, and replacing them with taxes
on site values, would substantially improve the economic efficiency of the
jurisdiction." A correlation between the use of LVT at the expense of
traditional property taxes and greater market efficiency is predicted by
economic theory, and has been observed in practice. Proponents, such as Fred
Foldvary, state that the necessity to pay the tax encourages landowners to
develop vacant and underused land properly or to make way for others who will.
They state that because LVT deters speculative land holding, dilapidated inner
city areas are returned to productive use, reducing the pressure to build on
undeveloped sites and so reducing urban sprawl. For example Harrisburg,
Pennsylvania in the United States has taxed land at a rate six times that on
improvements since 1975, and this policy has been credited by its long-time
mayor, Stephen R. Reed with reducing the number of vacant structures in
downtown Harrisburg from around 4,200 in 1982 to fewer than 500. LVT is an
ecotax because it ostensibly discourages the waste of locations, which are a
finite natural resource. Real estate values. Real estate bubbles direct savings
towards rent seeking activities rather than other investments, and can
contribute to recessions which damage the entire economy. Advocates of the land
tax claim that it reduces the speculative element in land pricing, thereby
leaving more money for productive capital investment and making the economy
more stable. If the value to landowners were reduced to zero or near zero by
recovering effectively all its rent, total privately held asset values could
decline as the land value element was stripped out, representing a shift in
apparent private sector wealth. Since landowners often possess significant
political influence, this has significantly deterred the adoption of land value
taxes. Practical issues. Assessments/Appraisals. In theory, levying a land
value tax is straightforward, requiring only a valuation of the land and a
register of the identities of the landholders. There is no need for the tax
payers to deal with complicated forms or to give up personal information as
with an income tax. Because land cannot be hidden, removed to a tax haven or
concealed in an electronic data system, the tax cannot be evaded. However,
critics point out that determining the value of land can be difficult in
practice. In a 1796 United States Supreme Court opinion, Justice William
Paterson noted that leaving the valuation process up to assessors would cause
numerous bureaucratic complexities, as well as non-uniform assessments due to
imperfect policies and their interpretations. Austrian School economist Murray
Rothbard later raised similar concerns, stating that no government can fairly
assess value, which can only be determined by a free market. However, firstly,
as Steven Spadijer has pointed out, the free market is "already" determining
the taxable value of the land. For example, valuators in the home-and-contents
insurance industry are "already" performing such a function on a daily basis
when, in order to calculate an insurance premium, the valuator must separate
the value of the home from the indestructible value of the land beneath the
home itself. Thus, land value for LVT purposes is assessed using market
evidence. Such evidence may comprise both selling prices and rentals. Where
development already exists on a site, the value of the site can be discovered
by various means, of which the most easily understood is the residual method:
the value of the site is the total value of the property minus the depreciated
value of buildings and other structures. This may explain why the system
involves little fuss and relative ease in the places where it has been
implemented. Secondly, when compared to modern day property tax evaluations,
valuations of land involve fewer variables and have smoother gradients than
valuations that include improvements. This is due to variation of building
style, quality and size between lots. Modern computerization and statistical
techniques have eased the process; in the 1960s and 1970s, multivariate
analysis was introduced as a method of assessing land. Usually, the valuation
process commences with a measurement of the most and least valuable land within
the taxation area. A few sites of intermediate value are then identified and
used as "landmark" values. Other values are filled in between the landmark
values. The data is then collated on a database and linked to a unique property
reference number, "smoothed" and mapped using a geographical information system
(GIS). Thus, even if the initial valuation is difficult, once the system is in
use, successive valuations become easier. Limited revenue. In the context of
land value taxation as a single tax (replacing all other taxes), some have
argued that LVT alone cannot raise large enough revenues. However, this is to
ignore the fact that other taxes have the effect of reducing land values and
hence the amount of revenue that can be raised from them. The Physiocrats
argued that all taxes are ultimately at the expense of land rental values. Most
modern LVT systems are alongside other taxes, and thus only reduce their impact
without removing them completely. In a case or event where a jurisdiction
attempted to levy a land tax that was higher than the entire landowner surplus,
it would result in landowner abandonment and a sharp decline in tax revenue.
Requires clear ownership. In some countries, LVT is nearly impossible to
implement because of lack of certainty regarding land titles and clearly
established land ownership and tenure. For instance a parcel of grazing land
may be communally owned by the inhabitants of a nearby village and administered
by the village elders. In these situations, the land in question would need to
be vested in a trust or similar body for taxation purposes. If the government
can not accurately define ownership boundaries and ascertain the proper owners,
it cannot know from whom to collect the tax. The phenomenon of lack of clear
titles is found worldwide in developing countries and is in part the subject of
the work of the Peruvian economist Hernando de Soto. In African countries with
imperfect land registration, boundaries may be poorly surveyed, the landlord
can be elusive and would have to be identified, or made to identify himself,
otherwise it would be significantly more difficult to tax than occupants. Most
governments require that tax collectors track owners down nonetheless so that
the burden of the tax does not fall on the poor. Land Value Tax Incentives. As
a model of how Land Value Taxation affects incentives, take for example a
vacant lot in the center of a vibrant and growing city. Any landowner that must
pay a tax for such a lot will perceive holding it vacant as a financial
liability instead of an investment that passively rises in value. A Land Value
Tax does not increase the purchasing price of land. Tax incidence rests
completely upon landlords. This is to say that landlords can not collectively
raise the overall market price of land as a result of the tax. One reason is
that buyers will not pay for the anticipated appreciation of land since such
appreciation is taxed away. From the seller's perspective, land costs more to
continuously maintain ownership of. Thus, Land Value Taxation gives buyers
increased leverage over sellers. Similarly, the selling price of anything that
is fixed in supply will not increase if it is taxed. Since there is, for all
intents and purposes, a fixed supply of land, a land value tax is paid by the
land owner. Furthermore, unlike taxing goods that carry higher purchasing
prices as a result of higher production costs, land does not increase in price
when taxed. This is because land simply exists. It is not produced by
individual land owners. For these same reasons, a land value tax is also not
passed on to tenants as higher rent. Landlords are impelled to make land
available to tenants as a means of generating the funds required to pay the
Land Value Tax. Relatively speaking, landlords compete with other landlords for
tenants instead of tenants competing with each other for space. Land Value
Taxation creates an impetus to either use a site for an income generating
purpose, such as apartments, store fronts, office space, etc or to sell part or
all of the site. Of course, anyone who purchases the land will be faced with
the same incentive, which is to use it or lose it. The Land Value Tax paid per
surface area is high in locations with high land values, especially cities. In
vibrant cities, under use of land in the form of buildings which are underused,
short, or even derelict are generally speaking converted to more intensive
uses. Of course vacant or ground-level parking lots are also generally
converted to building space and parking structures. Such incentives result in
an increase in the supply of space for living, working, recreation, etc.
Assuming constant demand, an increase in supply of constructed space, ie
substitutes for land, decrease the rent paid for such space. This is especially
relevant since land value taxes are often used to replace taxes on buildings,
among other taxes. Of course, taxes on buildings restrict the supply of
building space. A revenue neutral shift from buildings to land increases the
supply of building space more than a land value tax alone. In a city, infill of
poorly utilized space effectively combats sprawl,allowing people to live closer
to the city centre for the same cost. Taxing land reduces the incentive for tax
evasion. Multi-national corporations for instance can not take land with them
overseas. Land values are considered public information unlike income, sales,
etc. GIS maps provide a means to easily compare taxes paid on land values. Such
transparency reduces landowners' ability to evade the tax. Ethics. Land
acquires a scarcity value owing to the competing needs of the community for
living, working and leisure space. According to proponents, the unimproved
value of land owes nothing to the individual efforts of the landowner and
everything to the community at large. These supporters suggest that the value
of land belongs justly and uniquely to the community. A land value tax takes
into account the effect on land value of location, or of improvements made to
neighbouring land, such as proximity to roads, public works or a shopping
complex. LVT is said to act as value capture tax. A new public works project
may make adjacent land go up considerably in value, and thus, with a tax on
land values, the tax on adjacent land goes up. Thus, the new public
improvements would be paid for by those most benefited by the new public
improvements — those whose land value went up most. History. Pre-modern. Land
value taxation has ancient roots, tracing back to after the introduction of
agriculture. One of the oldest forms of taxation, it was originally based on
crop yield. This early version of the tax required simply sharing the yield at
the time of the harvest, akin to paying a yearly rent. Ancient China. Mencius
was a Chinese philosopher who advocated for land tax around 300 BCE.
Physiocrats. The physiocrats were a group of economists who believed that the
wealth of nations was derived solely from the value of land agriculture or land
development. Physiocracy is considered one of the "early modern" schools of
economics. Physiocrats called for the abolition of all existing taxes,
completely free trade, and a single tax on land; they did not distinguish,
however, between intrinsic value of land and ground rent. Their theories
originated in France and were most popular during the second half of the 18th
century. The movement was particularly dominated by Anne Robert Jacques Turgot
(1727–1781) and François Quesnay (1694–1774). It immediately preceded the
first modern school, classical economics, which began with the publication of
Adam Smith's "The Wealth of Nations" in 1776. The Physiocrats were also highly
influential in the early history of land value taxation in the United States.
Thomas Paine contended in his "Agrarian Justice" pamphlet that all citizens
should be paid 15 pounds at age 21 "as a compensation in part for the loss of
his or her natural inheritance by the introduction of the system of landed
property." This proposal was the origin of the citizen's dividend advocated by
Geolibertarianism. Classical economists. It was Adam Smith, in his book "The
Wealth of Nations", who first rigorously analyzed the effects of a land value
tax, pointing out how it would not hurt economic activity, and how it would not
raise land rents. Georgism. Henry George (September 2, 1839 – October 29,
1897) was perhaps the most famous advocate of recovering land rents for public
purposes. An American journalist, politician and political economist, he
advocated a "Single Tax" on land that would eliminate the need for all other
taxes. In 1879 he authored "Progress and Poverty", which significantly
influenced land taxation in the United States. Meiji Restoration in Japan.
After the 1868 Meiji Restoration in Japan, Land Tax Reform was undertaken. A
land value tax was implemented beginning in 1873. By 1880 initial problems with
valuation and rural opposition had been overcome and rapid industrialisation
was underway. Liberal and Labour Parties in the United Kingdom. In the United
Kingdom, LVT was an important part of the platform of the Liberal Party during
the early part of the twentieth century: David Lloyd George and H. H. Asquith
proposed "to free the land that from this very hour is shackled with the chains
of feudalism." It was also advocated by Winston Churchill early in his career.
The modern Liberal Party (not to be confused with the Liberal Democrats, which
are the larger heir to the earlier Liberal Party but who also have some support
for the idea) remains committed to a local form of land value taxation, as do
the Green Party of England and Wales and the Scottish Green Party. The 1931
Labour budget included a land value tax, but before it came into force it was
repealed by the Conservative-dominated National Government that followed
shortly after. An attempt at introducing site value taxation in the
administrative County of London was made by the local authority under the
leadership of Herbert Morrison in the 1938–9 Parliament, called the London
Rating (Site Values) Bill. Although it failed, it sets out detailed legislation
for the implementation of a system of land value taxation using annual value
assessment. After 1945, the Labour Party adopted the policy, against the
opposition of a substantial body of MPs, of attempting to collect "development
value": the increase in land price arising from planning consent. This was one
of the provisions of the Town and Country Planning Act 1947 and it was repealed
when the Labour government lost power in 1951. Canada. Land value taxes were
common in Western Canada at the turn of the twentieth century. In Vancouver LVT
became the sole form of municipal taxation in 1910 under the leadership of
mayor, Louis D. Taylor. Gary B. Nixon (2000) states that the rate never
exceeded 2% of land value, too low to prevent the speculation which led
directly to the massive 1913 real estate crash. All Canadian provinces now have
moved back to taxing improvements. Existing tax systems. A comprehensive and
detailed survey of land value taxation around the world was published in 2001.
Australia. The state of New South Wales levies a state land value tax. However
unlike council rates, farmland and a person's principal place of residence are
generally exempt and the state tax is only levied on value over a certain
threshold. In New South Wales determination of land value, for tax purposes at
a state and local level, is the responsibility of the Valuer-General. The
cities of Sydney, Canberra, and others in Australia use LVT. An in-depth study
under the Chairmanship of Sir Gordon Chalk issued a report in 1986 on the
subject of local taxation for the city of Brisbane, Queensland. The report,
which examined many alternative means of local finance, sets out comprehensive
and concise arguments for LVT. By revenue, property taxes represent 4.5% of
total taxation in Australia. United States. Land value taxes are used in
various jurisdictions of the United States, particularly in the state of
Pennsylvania. In the late 19th century followers of Henry George founded a
single tax colony at Fairhope, AL. Although the colony, now a nonprofit
corporation, still holds land in the area and collects a relatively small
ground rent, the land is still subject to all other state and local taxes. Hong
Kong. In Hong Kong, a government rent, formerly the crown rent, is levied in
addition to Rates. For properties which are located in the New Territories
(including New Kowloon), or located in the rest of the territory and of which
the land grant take place after 27 May 1985, the government rent is levied at
3% of the rateable rental value. Other countries. Pure LVT, apart from real
estate or generic property taxation, is used in Taiwan (Republic of China),
Singapore, and Estonia. Several cities around the world also use LVT (e.g. see
Australia, above). It has also been used in Mexicali, Mexico. Countries with
active discussion. Ireland. In 2010 the then government of the Republic of
Ireland announced that it would introduce an LVT, beginning in 2013. However
following a change in government in 2011 this commitment has been weakened. The
current, 2011 Programme for Government states only that the government will
"consider ...various options for a site valuation tax". It continues "Any site
valuation tax must take into account the significant number of households in
mortgage distress and provide local government with a reliable stream of
revenue". Scotland. Since the turn of the new century, with devolution and the
re-establishment of the Scottish Parliament, there has been interest and
political pressure in Scotland to introduce land value taxation. In February
1998 the pre-devolution UK government in Scotland (the Scottish Office)
launched a far-reaching public consultation process on the broad question of
land reform. A survey of the record of the public response found that:
"excluding the responses of the lairds and their agents, reckoned as likely
prejudiced against the measure, 20% of all responses favoured the land tax"
(12% in grand total, without the exclusions). The government responded by
announcing "a comprehensive economic evaluation of the possible impact of
moving to a land value taxation basis". However, in a welter of published Land
Reform Action Plans, concrete, positive public outcomes failed to materialise.
In 2000 the Parliament’s Local Government Committee held an inquiry into
local government finance. Its terms of reference explicitly included land value
taxation but the Committee’s final report did not comment on the system. In
2003 the Scottish Parliament passed a resolution: "That the Parliament notes
recent studies by the Scottish Executive and is interested in building on them
by considering and investigating the contribution that land value taxation
could make to the cultural, economic, environmental and democratic renaissance
of Scotland." In 2004 a letter of support was sent from a group of members of
the Scottish Parliament to the organisers and delegates of the IU’s 24th
international conference being held in Madrid—signed by members of the
Scottish Green, Socialist and Nationalist parties. The policy was considered in
2006 by banker Sir Peter Burt’s government-appointed Scottish Local
Government Finance Review. The Review’s 2007 Report concludes that "although
land value taxation meets a number of our criteria, we question whether the
public would accept the upheaval involved in radical reform of this nature,
unless they could clearly understand the nature of the change and the benefits
involved…. We considered at length the many positive features of a land value
tax which are consistent with our recommended local property tax particularly
its progressive nature." However, "[having considered both rateable value and
land value as the basis for taxation, we concur with Layfield Committee of
Inquiry, 1976) who recommended that any local property tax should be based on
capital values." In 2009, Glasgow City Council resolved that it wished to
introduce a tax based on land values: "the idea could become the blueprint for
Scotland’s future local taxation" The Council has agreed a "long term move to
a local property tax / land value tax hybrid tax": its Local Taxation Working
Group also states that simple [non-hybrid] land value taxation should itself
"not be discounted as an option for local taxation reform: it potentially holds
many benefits and addresses many existing concerns". United Kingdom. The Labour
Land Campaign campaigns within the Labour party and the broader Labour movement
for "a more equitable distribution of the Land Values that are created by the
whole community" through an annual tax on land values. Its membership includes
members of the British Labour Party, Trade Unions and Cooperatives as well as
individuals. The Liberal Democrats' ALTER (Action for Land Taxation and
Economic Reform) aims Courses in "Economics with Justice" with a strong
foundation in LVT are offered at the School of Economic Science, which has
historical links with the Henry George Foundation. Other countries. Land value
taxation is currently at some stage of being introduced in Kenya, Namibia and
other countries. China's Real Rights Law contains fundamental provisions
founded on a land value taxation analysis. Policy interest elsewhere. In
Zimbabwe, government coalition partners the Movement for Democratic Change has
land value taxation as its policy. Since 2000, there have been political
expressions of interest in the policy and analysis in Belgium, Ethiopia,
Republic of South Africa and other countries. The governments of Thailand and
Hungary have shown some sympathy with the policy. There are local campaigns to
introduce it in many other countries, including South Korea and the United
Kingdom (where a broad assembly of independent and politically-aligned groups
advocate and advance the case for land value taxation). The IU works
internationally and at the United Nations in support of the policy. In 1990,
several economists wrote to then President Mikhail Gorbachev suggesting that
Russia use Land Value Taxation in its transition towards a free market economy:
its failure to do so has been argued as causal in the rise of the Oligarchs.
