Land and liberty (slogan) Land and Liberty (, ) is an anarchist political
slogan. It was originally used as a name of the Russian revolutionary
organization Zemlya i Volya in 1878, then by the revolutionary leaders of the
Mexican Revolution; the revolution was fought over land rights, and the leaders
such as Emiliano Zapata and Pancho Villa were fighting to give the land back to
the natives from whom it was expropriated either by force or by some dubious
manner. Without land, the peasants were at the mercy of landowners for
subsistence. Similarly, during the Russian Revolution, the main concern of the
peasants was to free themselves from subservience to landowners, to get a plot
of land if they had none, or to expand on their land holdings. Consequently,
the Russian peasants welcomed the Russian Revolution under the banner "Zemlya i
Volya": "Land and Liberty". The slogan of "Tierra y Libertad" was also used
during the Spanish Revolution (1936–1939). In 1995, a film covering the
Spanish Civil War was released with the title "Land and Freedom". Meaning. In a
narrow sense, the possession of land meant freedom from the landowner. And this
may have been the main concern of both the Mexican and Russian peasants. In a
broader sense, the slogan can be interpreted to mean that the necessary (though
not the sufficient) condition of liberty is something like possession or access
to subsistence land. If possession or access to land is a necessary condition
of liberty, then its deprivation results in some form of slavery: tenancy,
sharecropping, wage-slavery. Access to land is only a necessary condition
because even with access, the government may impose taxes to such an extent
that one is not free. For example, in the Soviet Union in 1932–1933, the
government was removing from the peasants their agricultural products to the
extant that it produced an artificial famine which directly or indirectly
killed roughly 2.582 million people only in Ukraine. (See Soviet famine of
1932–1933.) So, the possession of or access to subsistence land is a
necessary, but not a sufficient, condition for liberty. "In former times the
marauding minority of mankind, by means of physical violence, compelled the
working majority to render feudal services, or reduced them to a state of
slavery or serfdom, or at least made them pay a tribute. Nowadays the
dependence of the working classes is secured in a less direct but equally
efficacious manner, viz. by means of the superior power of capital; the
labourer being forced, in order to get his subsistence, to place his labour
power entirely at the disposal of the capitalist. So there is a semblance of
liberty; but in reality the labourer is exploited and subjected, because, all
the land having been appropriated, he cannot procure his subsistence directly
from nature, and, goods being produced for the market and not for the
producer's own use, he cannot subsist without capital. Wages will rise above
what is wanted for the necessaries of life, where the labourer is able to earn
his subsistence on free land, which has not yet become private property. But
wherever, in an old and totally occupied country, a body of labouring poor is
employed in manufactures, the same law, which we see at work in the struggle
for life throughout the organized world, will keep wages at the absolute
minimum". Appropriation as title. "Land and Liberty" is the title of a
publication produced in Britain by the supporters of the land value taxation
programme described by Henry George in his book "Progress and Poverty". The
journal was first published towards the end of the nineteenth century,
originally under the name "Land Values". It was given its present title just
before World War I. At present, the journal is quarterly. Articles are mostly
about economics and political topics, with special reference to their
relationship to land tenure and taxation. An almost-complete archive of Land
Values and "Land and Liberty" is held at the library of The School of Economic
Science in Mandeville Place, London.
