Lange model The Lange model is an economic model of a hypothetical socialist
economy combining public ownership of the means of production with a trial-and-
error approach to determining output and attaining economic equilibrium. Within
this model, the state owns non-labor factors of production, final goods and
consumer goods are allocated by markets. In economic theory, the Lange model
states that an economy in which all production is performed by the state, but
in which there is a functioning price mechanism, has similar properties to a
hypothetical market economy under perfect competition, in that it achieves
pareto efficiency. The Lange model is based on direct allocation, by directing
enterprise managers to set price equal to marginal cost in order to achieve
pareto efficiency, in contrast to a capitalist economy, where managers are
instructed to maximize profits for private owners and competitive pressures
indirectly lower the price to equal marginal cost. This model was first
proposed by Oskar R. Lange in 1936 and later expanded upon by several other
economists, including H. D. Dickinson and Abba P. Lerner and Fred M. Taylor.
Although the model was called "market socialism" by Lange and Lerner, the Lange
model is actually a form of planned economy where a central planning board
allocates investment and capital goods with markets reserved for labor and
consumer goods. Instead of an actual market for capital goods, the central
planning board simulated a market in capital goods through a trial-and-error
process first elabored by Wilfredo Pareto and Léon Walras. Basic principles.
The Lange model suggests three levels of decision-making. Firms and households
represent the lowest level, with industrial ministries as the intermediate
level, and the highest level of decision-making is made up of the central
planning board. The central planning board sets the initial price of consumer
goods arbitrarily and informs the producing firms of these prices. The state-
owned firms would then produce at the level of output where marginal cost is
equal to price, P = MC, so as to minimize the cost of production. At the
intermediate level, industrial authorities represented by the industrial
ministries are responsible for determining the sectoral expansion of industry.
At the lowest level of decision making, households decide how to allocate
income and how much labor to supply by choosing between work and leisure.
Institutions. The key institutions of the Lange model include the central
planning board (CPB), industrial ministries that are responsible for their
specific economic sector, and state enterprises based on democratic management
by their employees. Trial-and-error price adjustments. Because prices are set
by the central planning board "artificially" in order to achieve planned
objectives, equilibrium between supply and demand is originally unlikely. To
produce the correct amount of goods and services and create a balance, the
Lange model posits a trial-and-error method. If a surplus in the supply of a
particular good arises, the central planning board lowers the price of that
good. Likewise, if there is a shortage of a particular good, the price is
raised by the central planning board. This process of price adjustments takes
place until equilibrium between supply and demand is met. Central planning
board. The central planning board (CPB) has three major functions in the Lange
model: First it instructs firms to set price to equal marginal cost, secondly
it uses the trial-and-error process to attain market-clearing prices for goods
and services, and finally, it reinvests the economic profit derived from state
enterprises into the economy based on a target rate of growth. The central
planning board would also be responsible for distributing social dividends
among the population. Social dividend. The central planning board is
responsible for the allocation of social dividends in addition to its price-
setting role. Because all non-labor factors of production are publicly-owned by
a state entity, the distribution of the rents and profits of these resources
accrues to the public. The profits and rents would be used to finance a social
dividend scheme based on the individuals' share in the income derived from the
socially-owned capital and natural resources, providing a complimentary source
of income for workers alongside their salaries and wages. Advantages. An
advantage is public control over investment. The rate of economic growth would
be largely state-determined due to the investment ratio being one of its major
determinants. In addition, Lange argued that externalities could be better
accounted for as a result of the state's ability to manipulate resource prices.
Because the state controls all firms, they could easily factor the cost of an
externality into the price of a certain resource. Because the decisions are
made by higher rather than lower levels, it is argued that these decisions are
less likely to have undesirable environmental consequences. Furthermore,
because the state uses marginal cost pricing and determines entry, monopolies,
and the accompanying lack of allocative efficiency and x-efficiency can be
avoided under Langean socialism. The model claims to solve another main
criticism of capitalism. Lange believed that his model would reduce cyclical
instability because the state would control savings and investment,
consequently eliminating a major source of inefficiency, inequality and social
instability that arises from violent cyclical shifts under capitalism.
Criticisms. This model was developed in response to Ludwig von Mises and
Friedrich Hayek's criticisms of socialism, stating that the state does not have
the knowledge to calculate general equilibrium prices, and that market prices
were essential for the state to allocate resources. The model contains
underlying principles from the writing of Vilfredo Pareto and Léon Walras.
Lange's theory emphasizes the idea of Pareto efficiency, which states that a
situation is Pareto efficient if there is no way to rearrange things to make at
least one individual better off without making anyone worse off. In order to
achieve this Pareto efficiency, however, a set of conditions must be formulated
through a number of sequential stages. This idea of deriving a set of
conditions which ensures the preferences of consumers are in balance with the
maximum amount of goods and services being produced is emphasized by Walras.
This theorem indicates that a socialist economy could achieve one of the
principal economic benefits of capitalism, a rational price system, and was an
important theoretical force behind the development of the concept of market
socialism. Economist Paul Craig Roberts has criticized Lange's theory of
socialist planning, saying that it is only an effort at market simulation and
is not the socialist alternative it claims to be. Roberts argues that the Lange
model abandons the intentions of socialist planning disregards the hierarchical
prerequisites of socialist organization. He claims that the model includes only
commodity production as an organizational structure and defines socialism only
in terms of property rights. According to Roberts, the commodity production
embodied in the system of exchange of Lange's model is exactly what was
intended to be eliminated by socialist planning. Recently the economist Joseph
Stiglitz has criticized the theorem for replicating many of the alleged errors
of neoclassical economics. He suggests that because of economic problems
resulting from costs of information and missing markets, market economies solve
problems in a manner different from that described by the neoclassical
analysis. Therefore, according to Stiglitz, the Lange model is a poor
description of how the price mechanism will work in a market socialist economy
to the same extent that neoclassical economics is a poor description of market
capitalism. Economists Don Lavoie and Israel Kirzner claim that Lange proposed
an illegitimate simulation of markets. Markets cannot function without genuine
rivalry in real markets, and between actual entrepreneurs. Simulated markets
cannot match real markets. Economist DW MacKenzie claims that the model has
been misunderstood. The trial-and-error model aims at simulating "spot
markets". Mises (1920) suggested that socialist officials could simulate
pricing in spot market. The trial and error proposal is irrelevant to the real
problem of planning investment because inventories of "future" goods never
exist. The primary criticism against socialism is that it could not direct
investment efficiently without speculation in "financial markets". Ludwig von
Mises denied that socialist officials could simulate the pricing of future
capital goods in financial markets. The Lange model focuses on central planning
of investment and social dividend payment. Citizens in Lange's proposed state
are paid a "social dividend" as equal owners of capital. The absence of private
dividends means that there is no stock market to regulate industry. Lange
admitted in several places that socialist officials would direct investment
arbitrarily. Lange also admitted that arbitrary investment would come at the
expense of consumer welfare. Lange compensated for his concessions by arguing
that capitalism also leads to arbitrary investment. According to Lange,
capitalism is arbitrary in the way it concentrates wealth in the hands of a
few. Since investment is directed by the savings of the rich, capitalism
allocates investment according to the arbitrary dictates of a few economic
elites. The model is sometimes referred to as the "Lange–Lerner" model. Abba
Lerner wrote a series of articles that had great influence over Lange's
thinking. For example, Lerner (1938) caused Lange to re-write his 1936 and 1937
articles on market socialism, before they were re-published as chapters in a
1938 book. Lerner (1938) influenced Lange's thinking on social dividend
payment. Lerner (1944) argued that socialist investment would be politicized.
Lavoie and Kirzner both argue that Lange's trial and error proposal is
illegitimate. Mackenzie argues that the trial and error proposal is irrelevant:
the Lange model fails because it aims at simulating the wrong markets.
