Language policy Many countries have a language policy designed to favour or
discourage the use of a particular language or set of languages. Although
nations historically have used language policies most often to promote one
official language at the expense of others, many countries now have policies
designed to protect and promote regional and ethnic languages whose viability
is threatened. Language Policy is what a government does either officially
through legislation, court decisions or policy to determine how languages are
used, cultivate language skills needed to meet national priorities or to
establish the rights of individuals or groups to use and maintain languages.
Overview. The preservation of cultural and linguistic diversity in today's
world is a major concern to many scientists, artists, writers, politicians,
leaders of linguistic communities, and defenders of linguistic human rights.
More than half of the 6000 languages currently spoken in the world are
estimated to be in danger of disappearing during the 21st century. Many factors
affect the existence and usage of any given human language, including the size
of the native speaking population, its use in formal communication, and the
geographical dispersion and the socio-economic weight of its speakers. National
language policies can either mitigate or exacerbate the effects of some of
these factors. For example, according to Ghil'ad Zuckermann, "Native tongue
title and language rights should be promoted. The government ought to define
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander vernaculars as official languages of
Australia. We must change the linguistic landscape of Whyalla and elsewhere.
Signs should be in both English and the local indigenous language. We ought to
acknowledge intellectual property of indigenous knowledge including language,
music and dance." There are many ways in which language policies can be
categorised. It was elaborated by Université Laval sociolinguist Jacques
Leclerc for the French-language Web site "L'aménagement linguistique dans le
monde" put on line by the CIRAL in 1999. The collecting, translating and
classifying of language policies started in 1988 and culminated in the
publishing of "Recueil des législations linguistiques dans le monde" (vol. I
to VI) at Presses de l'Université Laval in 1994. The work, containing some 470
language laws, and the research leading to publication, were subsidised by the
Office québécois de la langue française. In April 2008, the Web site
presented the linguistic portrait and language policies in 354 States or
autonomous territories in 194 recognised countries.
