Law and economics Law and economics or economic analysis of law is the
application of economic methods to analysis of law. Economic concepts are used
to explain the effects of laws, to assess which legal rules are economically
efficient, and to predict which legal rules will be promulgated. Relationship
to other disciplines and approaches. As used by lawyers and legal scholars, the
phrase "law and economics" refers to the application of the methods of
economics to legal problems. Because of the overlap between legal systems and
political systems, some of the issues in law and economics are also raised in
political economy, constitutional economics and political science. Most formal
academic work done in law and economics is broadly within the Neoclassical
tradition. Approaches to the same issues from Marxist and critical theory/
Frankfurt School perspectives usually do not identify themselves as "law and
economics". For example, research by members of the critical legal studies
movement and the sociology of law considers many of the same fundamental issues
as does work labeled "law and economics". The one wing that represents a non-
neoclassical approach to "law and economics" is the Continental (mainly German)
tradition that sees the concept starting out of the governance and public
policy ("Staatswissenschaften") approach and the German Historical school of
economics; this view is represented in the "Elgar Companion to Law and
Economics" (2nd ed. 2005) and—though not exclusively—in the "European
Journal of Law and Economics". Here, consciously non-neoclassical approaches to
economics are used for the analysis of legal (and administrative/governance)
problems. Origin and history. As early as in the 18th century, Adam Smith
discussed the economic effect of mercantilist legislation. However, to apply
economics to analyze the law regulating nonmarket activities is relatively new.
In 1961, Ronald Coase and Guido Calabresi independently from each other
published two groundbreaking articles: "The Problem of Social Cost" and "Some
Thoughts on Risk Distribution and the Law of Torts". This can be seen as the
starting point for the modern school of law and economics. In the early 1970s,
Henry Manne (a former student of Coase) set out to build a Center for Law and
Economics at a major law school. He began at Rochester, worked at Miami, but
was soon made unwelcome, moved to Emory, and ended at George Mason. The latter
soon became a center for the education of judges—many long out of law school
and never exposed to numbers and economics. Manne also attracted the support of
the John M. Olin Foundation, whose support accelerated the movement. Today,
Olin centers (or programs) for Law and Economics exist at many universities.
Positive and normative law and economics. Economic analysis of law is usually
divided into two subfields, positive and normative. Positive law and economics.
"Positive law and economics" uses economic analysis to predict the effects of
various legal rules. So, for example, a positive economic analysis of tort law
would predict the effects of a strict liability rule as opposed to the effects
of a negligence rule. Positive law and economics has also at times purported to
explain the development of legal rules, for example the common law of torts, in
terms of their economic efficiency. Normative law and economics. "Normative law
and economics" goes one step further and makes policy recommendations based on
the economic consequences of various policies. The key concept for normative
economic analysis is efficiency, in particular, allocative efficiency. A common
concept of efficiency used by law and economics scholars is Pareto efficiency.
A legal rule is Pareto efficient if it could not be changed so as to make one
person better off without making another person worse off. A weaker conception
of efficiency is Kaldor-Hicks efficiency. A legal rule is Kaldor-Hicks
efficient if it could be made Pareto efficient by some parties compensating
others as to offset their loss. Important scholars. Important figures include
the Nobel Prize winning economists Ronald Coase and Gary Becker, U.S. Court of
Appeals for the Seventh Circuit judges Frank Easterbrook and Richard Posner,
Andrei Shleifer and other distinguished scholars such as Robert Cooter, Henry
Manne, William Landes, and A. Mitchell Polinsky. Guido Calabresi, judge for the
U.S. Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit, author of the 1970 book, "",
wrote in depth on this subject, with "Costs of Accidents" being cited as
influential in its extensive treatment of the proper incentives and
compensation required in accident situations. Calabresi took a different
approach in his 1985 book, "Ideals, Beliefs, Attitudes, and the Law", where he
argued, "who is the cheapest avoider of a cost, depends on the valuations put
on acts, activities and beliefs by the whole of our law and not on some
objective or scientific notion (69)." Influence. In the United States, economic
analysis of law has been extremely influential. Judicial opinions utilize
economic analysis and the theories of law and economics with some regularity.
The influence of law and economics has also been felt in legal education. Many
law schools in North America, Europe, and Asia have faculty members with a
graduate degree in economics. In addition, many professional economists now
study and write on the relationship between economics and legal doctrines.
Anthony Kronman, former dean of Yale Law School, has written that "the
intellectual movement that has had the greatest influence on American academic
law in the past quarter-century the 20th Century" is law and economics.
Criticisms. Despite its influence, the law and economics movement has been
criticized from a number of directions. This is especially true of normative
law and economics. Because most law and economics scholarship operates within a
neoclassical framework, fundamental criticisms of neoclassical economics have
been drawn from other, competing frameworks and applied to the work of law and
economics. Rational choice theory. Critics of the law and economics movements
have argued that normative economic analysis does not capture the importance of
human rights and concerns for distributive justice. Some of the heaviest
criticisms of the "classical" law and economics come from the critical legal
studies movement, in particular Duncan Kennedy[http://www.duncankennedy.net/
topics/law_economics.html] and Mark Kelman. Pareto efficiency. Relatedly,
additional critique has been directed toward the assumed benefits of law and
policy designed to increase allocative efficiency when such assumptions are
modeled on "first-best" (Pareto optimal) general-equilibrium conditions. Under
the theory of the second best, for example, if the fulfillment of a subset of
optimal conditions cannot be met under any circumstances, it is incorrect to
conclude that the fulfillment of "any" subset of optimal conditions will
necessarily result in an increase in allocative efficiency. Consequently, any
expression of public policy whose purported purpose is an unambiguous increase
in allocative efficiency (for example, consolidation of research and
development costs through increased mergers and acquisitions resulting from a
systematic relaxation of anti-trust laws) is, according to critics,
fundamentally incorrect, as there is no general reason to conclude that an
increase in allocative efficiency is more likely than a decrease. Essentially,
the "first-best" neoclassical analysis fails to properly account for various
kinds of general-equilibrium feedback relationships that result from intrinsic
Pareto imperfections. Another critique comes from the fact that there is no
unique optimal result. Warren Samuels in his 2007 book, "The Legal-Economic
Nexus", argues, "efficiency in the Pareto sense cannot dispositively be applied
to the definition and assignment of rights themselves, because efficiency
requires an antecedent determination of the rights (23-4)." Responses. Law and
economics has adapted to some of these criticisms (see "contemporary
developments," below). One critic, Jon D. Hanson of Harvard Law School, argues
that our legal, economic, political, and social systems are unduly influenced
by an individualistic model that assumes "dispositionism"—the idea that
outcomes are the result of our "dispositions" (economists would say
"preferences"). Instead, Hanson argues, we should look to the "situation", both
inside of us (including cognitive biases) and outside of us (family, community,
social norms, and other environmental factors) that have a much larger impact
on our actions than mere "choice." Hanson has written many law review articles
on the subject and has books forthcoming. Contemporary developments. Law and
economics has developed in a variety of directions. One important trend has
been the application of game theory to legal problems. Other developments have
been the incorporation of behavioral economics into economic analysis of law,
and the increasing use of statistical and econometrics techniques. Within the
legal academy, the term socio-economics has been applied to economic approaches
that are self-consciously broader than the neoclassical tradition. Universities
with law and economics programs. Almost every major American law school, and
most leading economics departments, offer courses in law and economics and has
faculty working in the field. Two of the leading law schools focusing on Law
and Economics are the University of Chicago Law School, whose faculty includes
Judge Richard A. Posner, Ronald Coase and Gary Becker, and the George Mason
University School of Law, whose faculty used to include Nobel laureate Vernon
Smith (though Smith and his team have since moved to Chapman University), and
perennial Nobel finalist Gordon Tullock. In the spring of 2006, Vanderbilt
University Law School announced the creation of a new program to award a Ph.D.
in Law & Economics. A ranking of law and economics Ph.D. programs was published
in the "Southern Economics Journal" in 2008, and also includes among the top 10
programs (based on publications in the field) the economics departments at UC
Berkeley, Harvard University, University of Connecticut, UC San Diego,
Princeton University, MIT, University of Wisconsin - Madison, Florida State
University, Central Michigan University, and the University of Michigan. In
Europe, a consortium of universities from ten different countries is running
the European Master Program in Law and Economics, also known as EMLE, which is
a European program in the field since 1990. This programme offers the unique
opportunity for interdisciplinary studies of law and economics at two or even
three European and Non-European universities. Each partner university awards a
Master degree (LL.M. / M.A. / M.Sc.). The programme also provides students with
an advanced understanding of the economic effects of divergent laws and
prepares students for a professional career, for example, in public
organisations, in multinational law firms or consultancy firms. Graduates are
also well prepared for doctorate research in a PhD programme such as the
European Doctorate in Law and Economics (EDLE), which is operated by three
European centers in Law and Economics. http://www.edle-phd.eu] The University
of Toronto's Faculty of Law offers a combined J.D./M.A. Economics, as well as a
J.D./Ph.D. Economics. In 2009 the University of Copenhagen and the Copenhagen
Business School established an interdisciplinary elite master program in
International Law, Economics and Management that is jointly offered by both
institutions. The program is not only a Copenhagen Master of Excellence, but
also one of only twelve elite programs in Denmark and attracting students from
all over Europe. Since 2009 there has been created a new PhD program in Law and
Economics of Finance and Money from Goethe University in Frankfurt am Main/
Germany. The program is entirely created for the purpose of research in fields
such as regulation of Financial Institutions and Market Regulation. The program
is thought to be finished within four years and is entirely taught in English.
The Collegio Carlo Alberto in Turin, Italy hosts an International Ph.D. Program
in Institutions, Economics and Law within the Centre for the Comparative
Analysis of Law and Economics, Economics of Law, Economics of Institutions.
Members of the teaching staff come from various academic institutes in Europe
and the United States. A separate Doctoral Program in Law and Economics is
currently run by the School of Economics at the University of Siena. Also in
Italy, the International University College of Turin, with students and faculty
from worldwide, runs a biennial Master of Sciences in Comparative Law,
Economics and Finance, which challenges mainstream views on the subject.
Central European University in Budapest, Hungary offers both an MA and LLM in
Law and Economics. The program is offered in both the university's Economics
Department, as well as in its Legal Studies Department. This program is
registered in the United States by the Commission on Higher Education of the
Middle States Association of Colleges and Schools. Switzerland's University of
St. Gallen has a Law and Economics Program on both the undergraduate (Bachelor
of Arts in Law and Economics) and graduate levels (Master of Arts in Law and
Economics). The graduate program was initiated in October 2005 at the first
international scientific conference on Law and Economics by the President of
the University, Ernst Mohr and the St. Gallen Professor and leading business
lawyer Peter Nobel. The Law and Economics Program is supported by an
International Academic Council lead by leading experts in the field of law and
economics, such as Richard A. Posner, Ronald J. Gilson, Victor Goldberg or
Geoffrey P. Miller. Operating outside this particular framework, Utrecht
University offers students the possibility to major in law and economics as
part of their undergraduate studies, or to specialize in law and economics in a
one-year post-graduate programme. University of Economics, Prague, specifically
the Department of Institutional Economics at the Faculty of Economics and
Public Administration, offers Law and Economics as a possible specialization
for graduate students, while a complete graduate program is being prepared. The
University of Leicester runs a degree program called "Economics and Law", with
various modules taught in the specific area.The University of Cambridge offers
the option of a 'Law and Economics' paper within the Land Economy Tripos.[http:
//www.landecon.cam.ac.uk/] The University of Manchester Law School, Nottingham
University Business School and City University Law School, London have
undergraduate courses in Law and Economics. University College London offers
undergraduate courses in Law and Economics in its Economics Faculty and post-
graduate courses in its Law Faculty. The Centre for Economic Studies and
Planning, Jawaharlal Nehru University, was the first to introduce a Post-
graduate Optional course in Law and Economics in India. In the past few years
Law and economics has also become one of the major research areas at the
centre. The Delhi School of Economics also offers law and economics courses at
the post graduate level. The National University of Juridical Sciences (NUJS)
offers two courses in Law and Economics to its undergraduate students, as does
NALSAR University of Law. A Post-graduate Optional Course is now offered in
University of Hyderabad by the Department of Economics, School of Social
Sciences. Bilkent University Faculty of Law in Turkey has also launched a
graduate degree program on September 2010, titled "Law and Economics". The
program runs for one year, containing courses and seminars on conventional
economic analyses of law, along with the application of these analyses on the
energy and telecommunication sectors of Turkey. Seminars and courses are taught
in both Turkish and English. In the National University of Singapore, a Double
Honours Programme in Law and Economics was launched in 2005, whereby students
complete two Bachelors' degrees in five years. Similarly, the Singapore
Management University offers a Double Degree Programme in Law and Economics
whereby students graduate with Bachelor's degrees in both subjects. The
University of Bonn has recently founded a Center for the Advanced Studies of
Law and Economics (CASTLE). The International Max Planck Research School for
Competition and Innovation is a PhD program offered jointly by the Max Planck
Institute for Intellectual Property and Competition Law and the Ludwig
Maximilians University in Munich (Germany). The program selects outstanding
candidates from the fields of law and economics to produce doctoral research in
the area of the law and economics of intellectual property and competition law.
China University of Political Science and Law provides a Master/PhD program of
Law and Economics. Its Center for Law and Economics, which was established in
2005, hold lectures and exchange activities regularly. The University of
Reading has launched a new LLM/MSc in Law and Economics providing a critical
approach to the interrelation between the two disciplines. The programme shall
enable law students to understand the economic effects of legal rules and
economics students to understand the institutional legal framework of market
economies.
