Left-wing politics In politics, left-wing describes an outlook or specific
position that accepts or supports social equality, often in opposition to
social hierarchy and social inequality. They usually involve a concern for
those in society who are disadvantaged relative to others and an assumption
that there are unjustified inequalities (which right-wing politics views as
natural or traditional) that need to be reduced or abolished. The political
terms "Left" and "Right" were coined during the French Revolution
(1789–1799), referring to the seating arrangement in the Estates General:
those who sat on the left generally opposed the monarchy and supported the
revolution, including the creation of a republic and secularization, while
those on the right were supportive of the traditional institutions of the Old
Regime. Use of the term "Left" became more prominent after the restoration of
the French monarchy in 1815 when it was applied to the "Independents". The term
was later applied to a number of revolutionary movements, especially
republicanism during the French Revolution, socialism in both its revolutionary
and modern forms, and communism, and reform movements from the civil rights
movement to the Occupy movement, which includes anti-war movements and
environmental movements. It also applies to reformist ideologies like
progressivism, anarchism, democratic socialism, social liberalism, and
environmentalism. In two party systems, the terms "left" and "right" are often
used in a different sense: one party is usually designated as the "left" and
the other "right", even when neither party is "left wing" in the original sense
of being opposed to the ruling class. The two senses often contradict each
other. The term "centrist" sometimes applies to a person or a publishing
company that supports or criticises each party equally, whereas people who
strongly oppose both parties and the two party system could be called "left-
wing" using the original sense, even when they are neither left-wing or right-
wing in the partisan sense. History. In politics, the term "left wing" derives
from the French Revolution, as radical Montagnard and Jacobin deputies from the
Third Estate generally sat to the left of the president's chair in parliament,
a habit which began in the Estates General of 1789. Throughout the 19th century
in France, the main line dividing left and right was between supporters of the
French Republic and those of the Monarchy. The June Days Uprising during the
Second Republic was an attempt by the left to assert itself after the 1848
Revolution, but only a small portion of the population supported this. In the
mid-19th century, nationalism, socialism, democracy, and anti-clericalism
became features of the French Left. After Napoleon III's 1851 coup and the
subsequent establishment of the Second Empire, Marxism began to rival radical
republicanism and utopian socialism as a force within left-wing politics. The
influential "Communist Manifesto" by Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels, published
in 1848, asserted that all human history is the history of class struggle. They
predicted that a proletarian revolution would eventually overthrow bourgeois
capitalism and create a classless, stateless, post-monetary society. In the
United States, many leftists, social liberals, progressives and trade unionists
were influenced by the works of Thomas Paine, who introduced the concept of
asset-based egalitarianism, which theorises that social equality is possible by
a redistribution of resources. The International Workingmen's Association
(1864–76), sometimes called the First International, brought together
delegates from many different countries, with many different views about how to
reach a classless and stateless society. Following a split between supporters
of Marx and Mikhail Bakunin, anarchists formed the International Workers'
Association. The Second International (1888–1916) became divided over the
issue of World War I. Those who opposed the war, such as Vladimir Lenin and
Rosa Luxemburg, saw themselves as further to the left. In the United States
after Reconstruction, the phrase "the Left" was used to describe those who
supported trade unions, the civil rights movement and the anti-war movement.
More recently in the United States, "left-wing" and "right-wing" have often
been used as synonyms for Democratic and Republican, or as synonyms for
"liberalism" and "conservatism" respectively. Positions. Anti-globalization and
third-worldism. The Global Justice Movement, also known as the anti-
globalisation or alter-globalization movement, protests against global trade
agreements and the negative consequences they perceive them to have for the
poor and the environment. This movement is generally characterised as left-
wing, although some on the right, Pat Buchanan for example, oppose
globalization on nationalistic grounds. The Global Justice Movement does not
oppose globalisation per se, on the contrary, it supports some forms of
internationalism. Its main themes are the reforms (or abolition) of
international institutions such as the World Bank and the International
Monetary Fund, and the creation of an international social and environmental
justice movement. It rejects the leadership of any political party, defining
itself as a "movement of movements." Third-worldism regards the inequality
between developed, or First World countries, and the developing, or Third World
countries as of key political importance. It supports national liberation
movements against what it takes to be imperialism by capitalist nations. Key
figures associated with Third-worldism include Frantz Fanon, Ahmed Ben Bella,
Andre Gunder Frank, Samir Amin, and Simon Malley. Among the New Left groups
associated with Third Worldism were Monthly Review and the New Communist
Movement. "Maoism-Third Worldism" is espoused by the Revolutionary Anti-
Imperialist Movement and Anti-Imperialism.com. Third worldism is closely
connected with Pan-Africanism, Pan-Arabism, Maoism, African socialism, and
Latin American socialist trends. The Palestine Liberation Organization and the
Sandinistas are or have been particular "causes célèbres". Some left-wing
groups in the developing world, such as the Zapatista Army of National
Liberation in Mexico, the Abahlali baseMjondolo in South Africa, and the
Naxalites in India, argue that the First-World left takes a racist and
paternalistic attitude towards liberation movements in the Third-World. There
is particular criticism of the role played by NGOs and the assumption by the
Western Anti-globalization movement that they should seek to influence the
politics of the Third World. Economics. Leftist economic beliefs range from
Keynesian economics and the welfare state through industrial democracy and the
social market to nationalization of the economy and central planning. During
the industrial revolution, left-wingers supported trade unions. In the early
twentieth century, the Left were associated with policies advocating extensive
government intervention in the economy. Leftists continue to criticize what
they perceive as the exploitative nature of globalization, the "race to the
bottom" and unjust lay-offs. In the last quarter of the Twentieth Century the
belief that government (ruling in accordance with the interests of the people)
ought to directly involve itself in the day to day workings of an economy
declined in popularity amongst the center left, especially social-democrats who
became influenced by 'third way' ideology. Other leftists believe in Marxian
economics, which are based on the economic theories of Karl Marx. Some
distinguish Marx's economic theories from his political philosophy, arguing
that Marx's approach to understanding the economy is independent of his
advocacy of revolutionary socialism or his belief in the inevitability of
proletarian revolution. Marxian economics does not exclusively rely upon Marx,
it draws from a range of Marxist and non-Marxist sources. The dictatorship of
the proletariat or workers' state are terms used by Marxists to describe what
they see as a temporary state between the capitalist and communist society.
Marx defined the proletariat as salaried workers, in contrast to the lumpen
proletariat, who he defined as outcasts of society, such as beggars,
tricksters, entertainers, buskers, criminals and prostitutes. The political
relevance of farmers has divided the left. In "Das Kapital", Marx scarcely
mentioned the subject. Mao Zedong believed that it would be rural peasants not
urban workers who would bring about proletariat revolution. Left-libertarians,
Libertarian socialists and left-wing anarchists believe in a decentralized
economy run by trade unions, workers' councils, cooperatives, municipalities
and communes, and oppose both government and private control of the economy,
preferring "local control", in which a nation of decentralized regions are
united in a confederation. According to Barry Clark: The environment. Both Karl
Marx and the early socialist William Morris arguably had a deep concern for
environmental matters. According to Marx, “Even an entire society, a nation,
or all simultaneously existing societies taken together . . . are not owners of
the earth. They are simply its possessors, its beneficiaries, and have to
bequeath it in an improved state to succeeding generations.” Following the
Russian Revolution, environmental scientists such as revolutionary Aleksandr
Bogdanov and the Proletkul't organisation made efforts to incorporate
environmentalism into Bolshevism, and "integrate production with natural laws
and limits" in the first decade of Soviet rule, before Joseph Stalin attacked
ecologists and the science of ecology, purged environmentalists and promoted
the pseudo-science of Trofim Lysenko. Likewise, Mao Zedong rejected
environmentalism and believed that, based on the laws of historical
materialism, all of nature must be put into the service of revolution. From the
1970s onwards, environmentalism became an increasing concern of the left, with
social movements and some unions campaigning over environmental issues. For
example, the left-wing Builders Labourers Federation in Australia, led by the
communist Jack Mundy, united with environmentalists to place Green Bans on
environmentally destructive development projects. Some segments of the
socialist and Marxist left consciously merged environmentalism and anti-
capitalism into an eco-socialist ideology. Barry Commoner articulated a left-
wing response to The Limits to Growth model that predicted catastrophic
resource depletion and spurred environmentalism, postulating that capitalist
technologies were chiefly responsible for environmental degradation, as opposed
to population pressures. Environmental degradation can be seen as a class or
equity issue, as environmental destruction disproportionately affects poorer
communities and countries. Several left-wing or socialist groupings have an
overt environmental concern, whereas several green parties contain a strong
socialist presence. For example, the Green Party of England and Wales features
an eco-socialist group, Green Left, that was founded in June 2005 and whose
members hold a number of influential positions within the party, including both
the former Principal Speakers Siân Berry and Dr. Derek Wall, himself an eco-
socialist and marxist academic. In Europe, some 'Green-Left' political parties
combine traditional social-democratic values such as a desire for greater
economic equality and workers rights with demands for environmental protection,
such as the Nordic Green Left. Well-known socialist Bolivian President Evo
Morales has traced environmental degradation to consumerism. He has said "The
Earth does not have enough for the North to live better and better, but it does
have enough for all of us to live well." James Hansen, Noam Chomsky, Raj Patel,
Naomi Klein, The Yes Men, and Dennis Kucinich have had similar views. In the
21st Century, questions about the environment have become increasingly
politicized, with the Left generally accepting the findings of environmental
scientists about global warming, and many on the Right disputing or rejecting
those findings. The left is however divided over how to effectively and
equitably reduce carbon emissions- the center-left often advocates a reliance
on market measures such as emissions trading or a carbon tax, whilst those
further to the left tend to support direct government regulation and
intervention either alongside or instead of market mechanisms. Nationalism and
anti-nationalism. The question of nationality and nationalism has been a
central feature of political debates on the Left. During the French Revolution,
nationalism was a policy of the Republican Left. The Republican Left advocated
civic nationalism, and argued that the nation is a "daily plebiscite" formed by
the subjective "will to live together." Related to "revanchism", the
belligerent will to take revenge against Germany and retake control of Alsace-
Lorraine, nationalism was sometimes opposed to imperialism. In the 1880s, there
was a debate between those, such as Georges Clemenceau (Radical), Jean Jaurès
(Socialist) and Maurice Barrès (nationalist), who argued that colonialism
diverted France from the "blue line of the Vosges" (referring to Alsace-
Lorraine), and the "colonial lobby", such as Jules Ferry (moderate republican),
Léon Gambetta (republican) and Eugène Etienne, the president of the
parliamentary colonial group. After the Dreyfus Affair however nationalism
became increasingly associated with the far right. The Marxist social class
theory of proletarian internationalism asserts that members of the working
class should act in solidarity with working people in other countries in
pursuit of a common class interest, rather than focusing on their own
countries. Proletarian internationalism is summed up in the slogan, "Workers of
all countries, unite!", the last line of "The Communist Manifesto". Union
members had learned that more members meant more bargaining power. Taken to an
international level, leftists argued that workers ought to act in solidarity to
further increase the power of the working class. Proletarian internationalism
saw itself as a deterrent against war, because people with a common interest
are less likely to take up arms against one another, instead focusing on
fighting the ruling class. According to Marxist theory, the antonym of
proletarian internationalism is bourgeois nationalism. Some Marxists, together
with others on the left, view nationalism, racism (including anti-Semitism),
and religion, as divide and conquer strategies used by the ruling classes to
prevent the working class from uniting against them. Left-wing movements
therefore have often taken up anti-imperialist positions. Anarchism has
developed a critique of nationalism that focuses on nationalism's role in
justifying and consolidating state power and domination. Through its unifying
goal, nationalism strives for centralization, both in specific territories and
in a ruling elite of individuals, while it prepares a population for capitalist
exploitation. Within anarchism, this subject has been treated extensively by
Rudolf Rocker in "Nationalism and Culture" and by the works of Fredy Perlman,
such as "Against His-Story, Against Leviathan" and "The Continuing Appeal of
Nationalism". The failure of revolutions in Germany and Hungary ended Bolshevik
hopes for an imminent world revolution and led to promotion of "Socialism in
One Country" by Joseph Stalin. In the first edition of the book "Osnovy
Leninizma" ("Foundations of Leninism", 1924), Stalin argued that revolution in
one country is insufficient. But by the end of that year, in the second edition
of the book, he argued that the "proletariat can and must build the socialist
society in one country". In April 1925 Nikolai Bukharin elaborated the issue in
his brochure "Can We Build Socialism in One Country in the Absence of the
Victory of the West-European Proletariat?" The position was adopted as State
policy after Stalin's January 1926 article "On the Issues of Leninism" (К
вопросам ленинизма). This idea was opposed by Leon Trotsky and
his followers who declared the need for an international "permanent
revolution". Various Fourth Internationalist groups around the world who
describe themselves as Trotskyist see themselves as standing in this tradition,
while Maoist China supported Socialism in One Country. Some link left-wing
nationalism to the pressure generated by economic integration with other
countries encouraged by free-trade agreements. This view is sometimes used to
justify hostility towards supranational organizations such as the European
Union. Left-wing nationalism can also refer to any nationalism which emphasises
a working-class populist agenda which seeks to overcome perceived exploitation
or oppression by other nations. Many Third World anti-colonial movements
adopted left-wing and socialist ideas. Religion. The original French left-wing
was anti-clerical, opposing the influence of the Roman Catholic Church and
supporting the separation of church and state. Karl Marx asserted that
"Religion is the sigh of the oppressed creature, the heart of a heartless
world, and the soul of soulless conditions. It is the opium of the people." In
Soviet Russia the Bolsheviks originally embraced "an ideological creed which
professed that all religion would atrophy" and "resolved to eradicate
Christianity as such." In 1918 "ten Orthodox hierarchs were summarily shot" and
"children were deprived of any religious education outside the home." Today in
the Western world, those on the Left usually support secularization and the
separation of church and state. Religious beliefs, however, have also been
associated with some left-wing movements, such as the American abolitionist
movement and the anti-capital punishment movement. Early socialist thinkers
such as Robert Owen, Charles Fourier, and the Duc de Saint-Simon based their
theories of socialism upon Christian principles. From St. Augustine of Hippo's
"City of God" through St. Thomas More's "Utopia" major Christian writers
defended ideas that socialists found agreeable. There is a strong thread of
egalitarianism in the New Testament. Other common leftist concerns such as
pacifism, social justice, racial equality, human rights, and the rejection of
excessive wealth can be found in the Bible. In the late 19th century, the
Social Gospel movement arose (particularly among some Anglicans, Lutherans,
Methodists and Baptists in North America and Britain) which attempted to
integrate progressive and socialist thought with Christianity in faith-based
social activism, promoted by movements such as Christian Socialism. In the 20th
century, the theology of liberation and Creation Spirituality was championed by
such writers as Gustavo Gutierrez and Matthew Fox. There are also left-wing
movements such as Islamic socialism and Buddhist socialism. There have been
alliances between the Left and anti-war Muslims, such as the Respect Party and
the Stop the War Coalition in Britain. In France, the Left has been divided
over moves to ban the hijab from schools, with some supporting a ban based on
separation of church and state, and others opposing the ban based on personal
freedom. Social progressivism and counterculture. Social progressivism is
another common feature of the modern Left, particularly in the United States,
where social progressives played an important role in the abolition of slavery,
women's suffrage, civil rights, and multiculturalism. Progressives have both
advocated prohibition legislation and worked towards its repeal. Current
positions associated with social progressivism in the West include opposition
to the death penalty, and support for legal recognition of same-sex marriage,
distribution of contraceptives, public funding of embryonic stem-cell research,
and the right of women to choose abortion. Public education was a subject of
great interest to groundbreaking social progressives such as Lester Frank Ward
and John Dewey who believed that a democratic system of government was
impossible without a universal and comprehensive system of education. Various
counterculture movements in the 1960s and 1970s were associated with the "New
Left". Unlike the earlier leftist focus on union activism, the "New Left"
instead adopted a broader definition of political activism commonly called
social activism. U.S. "New Left" is associated with the Hippie movement,
college campus mass protest movements and a broadening of focus from protesting
class-based oppression to include issues such as gender, race, and sexual
orientation. The British "New Left" was an intellectually driven movement which
attempted to correct the perceived errors of "Old Left". The New Left opposed
prevailing authority structures in society, which it termed "The
Establishment", and became known as "anti-Establishment." The New Left did not
seek to recruit industrial workers, but rather concentrated on a social
activist approach to organization, convinced that they could be the source for
a better kind of social revolution. This view has been criticised by some
Marxists (especially Trotskyists) who characterized this approach as
'substitutionism'- or what they saw as the misguided and apparently non-Marxist
belief that other groups in society could 'substitute' for the revolutionary
agency of the working class. Many early feminists and advocates of women's
rights were considered left-wing by their contemporaries. Feminist pioneer Mary
Wollstonecraft was influenced by the radical thinker Thomas Paine. Many notable
leftists have been strong supporters of gender equality, such as: the Marxists
Rosa Luxemburg, Clara Zetkin and Alexandra Kollontai, the anarchist Emma
Goldman, and the socialists Helen Keller and Annie Besant. Marxists such as
Clara Zetkin and Alexandra Kollontai however, though supporters of radical
social equality for women, opposed feminism on the grounds that it was a
bourgeois ideology. Marxists were responsible for organizing the first
International Women's Day events. In more recent times the women's liberation
movement is closely connected to the New Left and other new social movements
that challenged the orthodoxies of the Old Left. Socialist feminism
(e.g.Freedom Socialist Party, Radical Women) and Marxist feminism (e.g. Selma
James) saw themselves as a part of the left that challenged what they perceive
to be male-dominated and sexist structures within the left. Liberal feminism is
closely connected with left-liberalism, and the left-wing of mainstream
American politics. (e.g. the National Organization for Women). Varieties. The
spectrum of left-wing politics ranges from centre-left to far left (or ultra-
left). The term "centre left" describes a position within the political
mainstream. The terms "far left" and "ultra-left" refer to positions that are
more radical. The centre-left includes social democrats, social liberals,
progressives and also some democratic socialists and greens (in particular the
eco-socialists). Centre-left supporters accept market allocation of resources
in a mixed economy with a significant public sector and a thriving private
sector. Centre-left policies tend to favour limited state intervention in
matters pertaining to the public interest. In several countries, the terms "far
left" and "radical left" have been associated with communism, Maoism,
Autonomism and many forms of anarchism. They have been used to describe groups
that advocate anti-capitalist, identity politics or eco-terrorism. In France, a
distinction is made between the "left" (Socialist Party and Communist Party)
and the "far left" (Trotskyists, Maoists and Anarchists). The US Department of
Homeland Security defines left-wing extremism as groups who want "to bring
about change through violent revolution rather than through established
political processes." In China, the term "Chinese New Left" denotes those who
oppose the current economic reforms and favour the restoration of more
socialist policies. In the Western world, the term "New Left" refers to
cultural politics. In the United Kingdom in the 1980s, the term "hard left" was
applied to supporters of Tony Benn, such as the Campaign Group and Labour
Briefing, as well as Trotskyist groups such as the Militant Tendency and
Socialist Organiser. In the same period, the term "soft left" was applied to
supporters of the British Labour Party who were perceived to be more moderate.
Under the leadership of Tony Blair and Gordon Brown the British Labour Party
re-branded itself as New Labour in order to promote the notion that it was less
left-wing than it had been in the past. One of the first actions however of the
Labour Party leader who succeeded them, Ed Miliband, was the rejection of the
"New Labour" label. Left-wing post-modernism opposes attempts to supply
universal explanatory theories, including Marxism, deriding them as grand
narratives. It views culture as a contested space, and via deconstruction seeks
to undermine all pretensions to absolute truth. Left-wing critics of post-
modernism assert that cultural studies inflates the importance of culture by
denying the existence of an independent reality. In 1996, physicist Alan Sokal
wrote a nonsensical article entitled "Transgressing the Boundaries: Toward a
Transformative Hermeneutics of Quantum Gravity". The journal "Social Text"
published the paper in its Spring/Summer 1996 issue, whereupon Sokal publicly
revealed his hoax. While this action was interpreted as an attack upon leftism,
Sokal, who was a committed supporter of the Sandinista movement in Nicaragua
during the 1980s, intended it as a critique from within the Left. He said he
was concerned about what he saw as the increasing prevalence on the left of "a
particular kind of nonsense and sloppy thinking... that denies the existence of
objective realities". He called into question the usefulness of such theories
to the wider left movement saying he "never understood how deconstruction was
meant to help the working class."
