Legal origins theory In economics, the legal origins theory states that many
aspects of a country's economic state of development are the result of their
legal system, most of all where a particular country received its law from. The
first papers on the theory were published from 1997 onwards by a group of
researchers around Andrei Shleifer. Theory. Since, historically, most countries
received their law through colonial transplantation, law is considered to be
exogenous to the analysis. Some economists have thus classified countries on
whether they adhere to common law or whether their legal system is based on
French civil law, German civil law or Scandinavian civil law. These economists
have done empirical research finding correlations between economic indicators
and that classification. The basic thrust of the theory is that common law, as
opposed to French civil law and (to a lesser extent) German and Scandinavian
civil law, is associated with more orientation towards institutions of the
market (instead of state intervention), which is why, according to proponents
of the legal origins theory, common law countries tend to be economically more
developed. While the theory originally started out in corporate law, where
common law was found to be correlated with better shareholder protection and
more developed financial markets, the theory has in the meantime been extended
to many other fields, such as whether or not a country is likely to have
military service (common law countries are least likely to). Criticism. Early
papers developing the theory in particular faced a good deal of criticism. Most
of all, the research underlying the indexes on specific legal rules used in the
earlier papers on corporate law did not meet the basic minimum standards of
comparative law and thus crudely mischaracterized continental European
corporate governance systems. Because of this, the papers' authors were met
with hostility from European corporate law scholars. However, indexes made in
later papers somewhat improved on this point. The question of whether the Legal
Origins Theory adequately describes reality is still hotly debated, most of all
among financial economists and scholars of corporate law.
