Rational-legal authority Rational-legal authority (also known as rational
authority, legal authority, rational domination, legal domination, or
bureaucratic authority) is a form of leadership in which the authority of an
organization or a ruling regime is largely tied to legal rationality, legal
legitimacy and bureaucracy. The majority of the modern states of the twentieth
century are rational-legal authorities, according to those who use this form of
classification. Rational-legal authority. In sociology, the concept of
rational-legal domination comes from Max Weber's tripartite classification of
authority (one of several classifications of government used by sociologists);
the other two forms being traditional authority and charismatic authority. All
of those three domination types represent an example of his ideal type concept.
Weber noted that in history those ideal types of domination are always found in
combinations. In traditional authority, the legitimacy of the authority comes
from tradition. Charismatic authority is legitimized by the personality and
leadership qualities of the ruling individual. Finally, rational-legal
authority derives its powers from the system of bureaucracy and legality. Legal
rationality and legitimacy. Under rational-legal authority, legitimacy is seen
as coming from a legal order and the laws that have been enacted in it (see
also natural law and legal positivism). Weber defined legal order as a system
where the rules are enacted and obeyed as legitimate because they are in line
with other laws on how they can be enacted and how they should be obeyed.
Further, they are enforced by a government that monopolizes their enactment and
the legitimate use of physical force. Emergence of the modern state. Weber
argued that some of those attributes have existed in various time or places,
but together they existed only in Occidental civilization. The conditions that
favoured this were Weber's belief that rational-legal authority did not exist
in Imperial China has been heavily criticized, and does not have many
supporters in the early 21st century. Modern state. An important attribute of
Weber's definition of a modern state was that it is a bureaucracy. The vast
majority of the modern states from the 20th century onward fall under the
rational-legal authority category. Rational-legal leaders. The majority of
modern bureaucratic officials and political leaders represent this type of
authority. See also. External links http://www.sociologyencyclopedia.com/
public/tocnode?id=g9781405124331_yr2011_chunk_g978140512433124_ss1-26 http://
oyc.yale.edu/sociology/socy-151/lecture-20
