List of country legal systems The legal systems of the world today are
generally based on one of three basic systems: civil law, common law, and
religious law – or combinations of these. However, the legal system of each
country is shaped by its unique history and so incorporates individual
variations. Civil law. Civil law is the most widespread system of law around
the world. It is also sometimes known as "Continental European law". The
central source of law that is recognized as authoritative are codifications in
a constitution or statute passed by legislature, to amend a code. While the
concept of codification dates back to the Code of Hammurabi in Babylon ca. 1790
BC, civil law systems mainly derive from the Roman Empire and, more
particularly, the "Corpus Juris Civilis" issued by the Emperor Justinian ca. AD
529. This was an extensive reform of the law in the Byzantine Empire, bringing
it together into codified documents. Civil law was also partly influenced by
religious laws such as Canon law and Islamic law. Civil law today, in theory,
is interpreted rather than developed or made by judges. Only legislative
enactments (rather than legal precedents, as in common law) are considered
legally binding. Common law. Common law and equity are systems of law whose
sources are the decisions in cases by judges. Alongside, every system will have
a legislature that passes new laws and statutes. The relationships between
statutes and judicial decisions can be complex. In some jurisdictions, such
statutes may overrule judicial decisions or codify the topic covered by several
contradictory or ambiguous decisions. In some jurisdictions, judicial decisions
may decide whether the jurisdiction's constitution allowed a particular statute
or statutory provision to be made or what meaning is contained within the
statutory provisions. Statutes were allowed to be made by the government.
Common law developed in England, influenced by Anglo-Saxon law and to a much
lesser extent by the Norman conquest of England which introduced legal concepts
from Norman law, which had its origins in Salic law. Common law was later
inherited by the Commonwealth of Nations, and almost every former colony of the
British Empire has adopted it (Malta being an exception). The doctrine of
"stare decisis" or "precedent by courts" is the major difference to codified
civil law systems. Common law is currently in practice in Ireland, most of the
United Kingdom (England and Wales and Northern Ireland), Australia, New
Zealand, Bangladesh, India (excluding Goa), Pakistan, South Africa, Canada
(excluding Quebec), Hong Kong, the United States (excluding Louisiana) and many
other places. In addition to these countries, several others have adapted the
common law system into a mixed system. For example, Nigeria operates largely on
a common law system but incorporates religious law. In the European Union, the
Court of Justice takes an approach mixing civil law (based on the treaties)
with an attachment to the importance of case law. One of the most fundamental
documents to shape common law is Magna Carta which placed limits on the power
of the English Kings. It served as a kind of medieval bill of rights for the
aristocracy and the judiciary who developed the law. Religious law. Religious
law refers to the notion of a religious system or document being used as a
legal source, though the methodology used varies. For example, the use of
Jewish Halakha for public law has a static and unalterable quality, precluding
amendment through legislative acts of government or development through
judicial precedent; Christian Canon law is more similar to civil law in its use
of civil codes; and Islamic Sharia law (and Fiqh jurisprudence) is based on
legal precedent and reasoning by analogy ("Qiyas"), and is thus considered
similar to common law. The main kinds of religious law are Sharia in Islam,
Halakha in Judaism, and canon law in some Christian groups. In some cases these
are intended purely as individual moral guidance, whereas in other cases they
are intended and may be used as the basis for a country's legal system. The
latter was particularly common during the Middle Ages. The Islamic legal system
of Sharia (Islamic law) and Fiqh (Islamic jurisprudence) is the most widely
used religious law, and one of the three most common legal systems in the world
alongside common law and civil law. It is the most protected divine law,
because, the majority of the rulings of Sharia law are based on the Qur'an and
Sunnah, while a small fraction of its rulings are based on the Ulema (jurists)
who used the methods of "Ijma" (consensus), "Qiyas" (analogical deduction),
"Ijtihad" (research) and "Urf" (common practice) to derive "Fatwā" (legal
opinions). An Ulema was required to qualify for an "Ijazah" (legal doctorate)
at a "Madrasah" (school) before they could issue "Fatwā". During the Islamic
Golden Age, classical Islamic law may have had an influence on the development
of common law and several civil law institutions. Sharia law governs a number
of Islamic countries, including Saudi Arabia and Iran, though most countries
use Sharia law only as a supplement to national law. It can relate to all
aspects of civil law, including property rights, contracts or public law. The
Halakha is followed by orthodox and conservative Jews in both ecclesiastical
and civil relations. No country is fully governed by Halakha, but two Jewish
people may decide, because of personal belief, to have a dispute heard by a
Jewish court, and be bound by its rulings. Canon law is not a divine law,
properly speaking, because it is not found in revelation. Instead, it is seen
as human law inspired by the word of God and applying the demands of that
revelation to the actual situation of the church. Canon law regulates the
internal ordering of the Roman Catholic Church, the Eastern Orthodox Church and
the Anglican Communion. Canon law is amended and adapted by the legislative
authority of the church, such as councils of bishops, single bishops for their
respective sees, the Pope for the entire Catholic Church, and the British
Parliament for the Church of England. Systems by geography. Despite the
usefulness of different classifications, every legal system has its own
individual identity. Below are groups of legal systems, categorised by their
geography. Click the "show" buttons on the right for the lists of countries.
References. Moustaira Elina N., "Milestones in the Course of Comparative Law:
Thesis and Antithesis (in Greek)", Ant. N. Sakkoulas Publishers, Athens, 2003,
ISBN 960-15-1097-4

