Legislature A legislature is a kind of deliberative assembly with the power to
pass, amend, and repeal laws. The law created by a legislature is called
legislation or statutory law. In addition to enacting laws, legislatures
usually have exclusive authority to raise or lower taxes and adopt the budget
and other money bills. Legislatures are known by many names, the most common
being parliament and congress, although these terms also have more specific
meanings. In parliamentary systems of government, the legislature is formally
supreme and appoints a member from its house as the prime minister which acts
as the executive. In a presidential system, according to the separation of
powers doctrine, the legislature is considered an independent and coequal
branch of government along with both the judiciary and the executive. The
primary components of a legislature are one or more "chambers" or "houses":
assemblies that can debate and vote upon bills. A legislature with only one
house is called unicameral. A bicameral legislature possesses two separate
chambers, usually described as an upper house and a lower house, which often
differ in duties, powers, and the methods used for the selection of members.
Much rarer have been tricameral legislatures; the Massachusetts Governor's
Council still exists, but the most recent national example existed in the
waning years of caucasian-minority rule in South Africa. In most parliamentary
systems, the lower house is the more powerful house while the upper house is
merely a chamber of advice or review. However, in presidential systems, the
powers of the two houses are often similar or equal. In federations, it is
typical for the upper house to represent the component states; the same applies
to the supranational legislature of the European Union. For this purpose, the
upper house may either contain the delegates of state governments, as is the
case in the European Union and in Germany and was the case in the United States
before 1913, or be elected according to a formula that grants equal
representation to states with smaller populations, as is the case in Australia
and the modern United States. Because members of legislatures usually sit
together in a specific room to deliberate, seats in that room may be assigned
exclusively to members of the legislature. In parliamentary language, the term
"seat" is sometimes used to mean that someone is a member of a legislature. For
example, saying that a legislature has 100 "seats" means that there are 100
members of the legislature, and saying that someone is "contesting a seat"
means they are trying to get elected as a member of the legislature. By
extension, the term "seat" is often used in less formal contexts to refer to an
electoral district itself, as for example in the phrases "safe seat" and
"marginal seat".
