Parliamentary procedure Parliamentary procedure is the body of rules, ethics,
and customs governing meetings and other operations of clubs, organizations,
legislative bodies, and other deliberative assemblies. It is part of the common
law originating primarily in the practices of the House of Commons of the
Parliament of the United Kingdom, from which it derives its name. In the United
States, parliamentary procedure is also referred to as parliamentary law,
parliamentary practice, legislative procedure, or rules of order. In the United
Kingdom, Australia, New Zealand, South Africa, and other English-speaking
countries it is often called chairmanship, chairing, the law of meetings,
procedure at meetings, or the conduct of meetings. At its heart is the rule of
the majority with respect for the minority. Its object is to allow deliberation
upon questions of interest to the organization and to arrive at the sense or
the will of the assembly upon these questions. Self-governing organizations
follow parliamentary procedure to debate and reach group decisions—usually by
vote—with the least possible friction. Rules of order consist of rules
written by the body itself (often referred to as bylaws), but also usually
supplemented by a published parliamentary authority adopted by the body.
Typically, national, state, and other full-scale legislative assemblies have
extensive internally written rules of order, whereas non-legislative bodies
write and adopt a limited set of specific rules as the need arises. Overview.
In the English-speaking world, the British House of Commons is the originating
source for most rules of order. These rules have evolved into two separate
sets: American parliamentary procedure as generally followed in the United
States; and Westminster parliamentary procedure, followed in several
Commonwealth countries, including the United Kingdom, Canada, Australia, New
Zealand, India, and South Africa. Various attempts have been made to codify
American procedure. The most common procedural authority in use in the United
States is "Robert's Rules of Order Newly Revised". In Canada, Parliament uses
of Commons Procedure and Practice" as its primary procedural authority. Others
include Arthur Beauchesne’s "Parliamentary Rules and Forms of the House of
Commons of Canada", Sir John George Bourinot’s "Parliamentary Procedure and
Practice in the Dominion of Canada", and Erskine May’s "The Law, Privileges,
Proceedings and Usage of Parliament from Britain". Parliamentary procedure is
based on the principles of allowing the majority to make decisions effectively
and efficiently (majority rule), while ensuring fairness towards the minority
and giving each member or delegate the right to voice an opinion. Voting
determines the will of the assembly. While each assembly may create their own
set of rules, these sets tend to be more alike than different. A common
practice is to adopt a standard reference book on parliamentary procedure and
modify it through special rules of order that supersede the adopted authority.
A parliamentary structure conducts business through motions, which cause
actions. Members bring business before the assembly by introducing main
motions, or dispose of this business through subsidiary motions and incidental
motions. Parliamentary procedure also allows for rules in regards to
nomination, voting, disciplinary action, appeals, dues, and the drafting of
organization charters, constitutions, and bylaws. Parliamentary authority usage
patterns. Organizations and civic groups. In American civic groups and other
organizations, "Robert's Rules of Order Newly Revised" is the most used
parliamentary authority. Other authorities are "The Standard Code of
Parliamentary Procedure" (widely used in medical and educational organizations
and by libraries), and "Demeter's Manual of Parliamentary Law and Procedure".
In Canada, English Speaking, popular authorities include Kerr & King's
"Procedures for Meeting and Organizations" . In Canada, French Speaking,
commonly used rules of order for ordinary societies include Victor Morin's
"Procédures des assemblées délibérantes" (commonly known as the "Code
Morin") and the "Code CSN". Legislatures. Legislative assemblies in all
countries, because of their nature, tend to have a specialized set of rules
that differ from parliamentary procedure used by clubs and organizations. In
the United Kingdom, Thomas Erskine May's "" (often referred to simply as
"Erskine May") is the accepted authority on the powers and procedures of the
Westminster parliament. Of the 99 state legislative chambers in the United
States (two for each state except Nebraska, which has a unicameral
legislature), "Mason's Manual of Legislative Procedure" governs parliamentary
procedures in 70; "Jefferson's Manual" governs 13, and "Robert's Rules of
Order" governs five. The United States Senate follows the Standing Rules of the
United States Senate, while the United States House of Representatives follows
"Jefferson's Manual". "Mason's Manual", originally written by constitutional
scholar and former California Senate staff member Paul Mason in 1935, and since
his death revised and published by the National Conference of State
Legislatures (NCSL), governs legislative procedures in instances where the
state constitution, state statutes, and the chamber's rules are silent.
According to the NCSL, one of the many reasons that most state legislatures use
"Mason's Manual" instead of "Robert's Rules of Order" is because "Robert's
Rules" applies best to private organizations and civic groups that do not meet
in daily public sessions. "Mason's Manual", however, is geared specifically
toward state legislative bodies. Parliamentarians. In the United States,
individuals who are proficient in parliamentary procedure are called
parliamentarians. (In other English-speaking countries with parliamentary forms
of government, "parliamentarian" refers to a member of Parliament.) Several
organizations offer certification programs for parliamentarians, including the
National Association of Parliamentarians and American Institute of
Parliamentarians. Agriculture teachers who coach teams in the National FFA
Organization (formerly Future Farmers of America) parliamentary procedure
contest can earn the title Associate Parliamentarian (AP). Parliamentarians
perform an important role in many meetings, including counseling organizations
on parliamentary law, holding elections, or writing amendments to the
constitution and bylaws of an organization.
