Legislative Assembly (France) The Legislative Assembly was the legislature of
France from 1 October 1791 to September 1792 during the years of the French
Revolution. It provided the focus of political debate and revolutionary law-
making between the periods of the National Constituent Assembly and of the
National Convention. The Legislative Assembly was driven by two opposing
groups. The members of the first group were primarily moderate members of the
bourgeoisie that favored a constitutional monarchy, represented by the
Feuillants, who felt that the revolution had already achieved its goal. The
second group was the democratic faction, for whom the king could no longer be
trusted, represented by the new members of the Jacobin club. This group claimed
that more revolutionary measures were necessary. Background. The National
Constituent Assembly dissolved itself on 30 September 1791. Upon Robespierre's
motion it had decreed that none of its members should be capable of sitting in
the next legislature. Its successor body, the Legislative Assembly, operating
under the liberal French Constitution of 1791, did not last a year and was
generally deemed a failure. It left behind an empty treasury, an undisciplined
army and navy, and enormous domestic turmoil. The Legislative Assembly
entrenched the perceived left-right political spectrum that is still commonly
used today. Election of the Legislative Assembly. Despite a limited franchise,
the elections of 1791 brought in a legislature which – perhaps even
disproportionately to the will of the country – desired to carry the
Revolution further. Prominent among this legislature were the Jacobin Club and
its affiliated societies throughout France. The Legislative Assembly first met
on 1 October 1791. It consisted of 745 members, and some historians have
attempted to argue that they were mostly from the middle class, though this is
not universally accepted. The members were generally young, and, since none had
sat in the previous Assembly, they largely lacked national political
experience. They tended to be people who had made their name through successful
political careers in local politics. The Right within the assembly (in the
wider picture of national politics they are better seen as moderates, since the
'real' right wing of monarchists were outside the assembly and in some cases
outside the country as émigrés at this time) consisted of about 165
"Feuillants", guided chiefly by persons outside the House, because those had
been made incapable of re-election. The Left, generally dominant during this
period, consisted of about 330 "Jacobins", a term which still included the
party afterwards known as the Girondins or Girondists. The Left as a whole was
openly anti-"émigré" and anticlerical. They also generally, although often
not openly, favored a republic. In these views, they were reinforced by the
less privileged classes in Paris and throughout France. The remainder of the
House, about 250 deputies, generally belonged to no definite party. The king's
ministers, named by him and excluded from the Assembly, are described by the
1911 "Encyclopædia Britannica" as "mostly persons of little mark." History.
"For a detailed description of the proceedings of the Legislative Assembly and
related events, see The Legislative Assembly and the fall of the French
monarchy." The 27 August 1791 Declaration of Pillnitz already threatened France
with attack by its neighbors. With both King Louis XVI and the majority of the
legislature favoring war, albeit for different reasons, this led in April 1792
to the first of the French Revolutionary Wars. In the early days of the
Legislative Assembly, the king vetoed many of their radical measures: A
sparsely populated session of the Legislative Assembly, almost all of them
Jacobins, suspended Louis from office and voted that a convention should be
summoned to give France a new constitution. At this point, the government of
France descended into chaos. The new, anti-monarchical government had no root
in law and little hold on public opinion. It could not lean on the Assembly, a
mere shrunken remnant, whose days were numbered. It remained dependent on the
power which had set it up, the revolutionary Commune of Paris. The Commune
could therefore extort what concessions it pleased. It got the custody of the
king and his family, who were imprisoned in the Temple. Having obtained an
indefinite power of arrest, it soon filled the prisons of Paris. With the
invasion of France on 19 August 1792 under the leadership of the Duke of
Brunswick, a prison bloodbath ensued, a prelude to the Reign of Terror. The
ensuing elections to the Convention were by almost universal suffrage, but
indifference or intimidation reduced the voters to a small number. Many who had
sat in the National Constituent Assembly and many more who had sat in the
Legislative Assembly were returned. The Convention met on 20 September 1792 and
became the new "de facto" government of France. Marriage Reform. On 15 February
1792 Honoré Muraire, reporting for the Legislative Committee, presented a
series of recommendations on marriage reform, including the implementation of
registers of civil status (replacing registers maintained by the clergy), and
allowing young people the age of twenty-one years old to marry without the
consent of their parents. A law on divorce was passed 20 June 1792.
