Legislative violence Legislative violence broadly refers to any violent clashes
between members of a legislature, often physically inside the legislature and
triggered by divisive issues and tight votes. Such clashes have occurred in
many countries across time, and notable incidents still regularly occur.
Although the sight of brawling politicians is incongruous with a legislature's
stately image, its occupants, like in any other workplace, are still prone to
stress and anger. The confrontational nature of politics and the high stakes
often add to the simmering tensions. Ancient Rome. Roman general and dictator
Julius Caesar was famously assassinated by a group of senators on the Ides of
March, 44 BC during a meeting of the Roman Senate. The senators, led by Cassius
and Brutus and calling themselves Liberatores, had conspired in secret to kill
Caesar and considered various ways to do so. Ultimately, they decided to kill
him during a meeting of the senate, since only senators would be allowed in the
meeting and Caesar would be alone. The senators drafted a fake petition
requesting that Caesar hand over power to senate; Caesar called a meeting of
the senate to read it. When Caesar met the senators at the Theatre of Pompey,
they stabbed him repeatedly with daggers concealed under their togas, killing
him. Caesar's assassination lead to a civil war for control of the republic,
ending ultimately with the rise of Caesar Augustus and the founding of the
Roman Empire. Bolivia. In 2007 a fight broke out in the lower chamber of the
national legislature of Bolivia, the Chamber of Deputies. The fight erupted
during a debate over whether or not to try four judges on corruption charges.
India. Tamil Nadu. Riots broke out in the state legislative assembly in Tamil
Nadu over a vote. Uttar Pradesh. Riots broke out in the state legislative
assembly in Uttar Pradesh with MLAs using microphones, chairs as weapons.
Maharashtra. A member of the legislative assembly has been assaulted on 10
November 2009 in the state assembly. One of the members 'who can't speak
Marathi' took oath in Hindi the national language of India. This was objected
to by a right wing party Maharashtra Navanirmana Samithi, that wants Marathi to
be the official language in the state. Four members of the Maharashtra
Navaniramana Samithi were immediately suspended for 4years. Violence is
extremely unusual in the legislatures of India. Mexico. Hours before the
scheduled Oath of Office ceremony for Felipe Calderón in the Legislative
Palace, the legislature erupted in a brawl. It was the latest installment of
the string of fistfights that rattled the Mexican legislature. The incident was
broadcast on live television. In spite of such events the ceremony took place.
Calderón entered the Congress chamber through a back door directly onto the
podium, and in a quick ceremony took the Oath of Office amid jeers. Then, after
singing the national anthem which silenced the opposition for a while, he took
a quick exit rather than deliver his inaugural address to Congress (the
traditional follow-up to the oath taking). Nigeria. A fight broke out in the
National Assembly of Nigeria after a group of members were suspended for
accusing the speaker of corruption. South Korea. There have been several events
of legislative violence in South Korea. However the politicians who were
involved in the violence often don't receive criminal penalties under the civil
laws. During a vote to approve Kim Jong-pil as Prime Minister, Grand National
Party legislators submitted blank ballots to demonstrate their disapproval. A
fight broke out after supporters of the ruling coalition of Kim Dae-jung
demanded that the vote be declared void. During a National Assembly vote on the
motion to impeach President Roh Moo-hyun, supporters of the President openly
clashed with opposition MPs for 20 minutes in an effort to stop the vote (which
was in favor of impeachment) from being finalized. A brawl broke out as The
National Assembly passed three bills that is set to reform the media industry.
Opposition MPs blocked the Speaker from entering the room to pass the bills
while both sides clashed. The bills were eventually passed by the Deputy
Speaker. A brawl broke out as the Grand National Party forcefully passed the
year 2011 budget bill in advance without the presence of the opposition
parties. Taiwan. The Legislative Yuan of the Republic of China (Taiwan) is
probably the most notable example of legislative violence today. In the history
of the Legislative Yuan, numerous violent acts have occurred during
parliamentary sessions. It is popularly referred locally as "Legislative
Brawling" (). In 1995, the Legislative Yuan was presented with the Ig Nobel
Prize Peace Award, for "demonstrating that politicians gain more by punching,
kicking and gouging each other than by waging war against other nations."
Listed below are the most current brawlings in the Legislative Yuan of Taiwan.
A serious scuffle broke out between the ruling and opposition party members
after an argument over vote recounts from the presidential election. Lawmakers
Chu Hsing-yu and Lai Ching-teh got into a brawl over legislative procedures. TV
stations showed Chu grabbing Lai and trying to wrestle him onto a desk. He then
tried to headbutt his colleague before jabbing him in the stomach. The brawl
resulted in having a traffic policeman called into the chamber to test Chu's
alcohol level, after he was accused of being drunk. The tests showed no sign of
alcohol influence. During a debate on a military hardware purchase ordinance,
the opposition and ruling party engaged in a food fight after a disagreement
broke out. Amid a proposal about creating direct transport links with Mainland
China, DPP deputy Wang Shu-hui snatched the written proposal and shoved it into
her mouth. Opposition members failed to get her to cough it up by pulling her
hair. She later spat the proposal out and tore it up. This is the third time
that the DPP’s actions have stopped a vote over this issue. During the
incident another DPP member, Chuang Ho-tzu, spat at an opposition member. Two
dozen members overwhelmed the Speaker's podium, which became a free-for-all
between the ruling (DPP) and opposition (KMT) parties with punches and sprayed
water, requiring at least one hospitalization. The fight was over an alleged
delay of the annual budget. Ukraine. A debate on extending Russia's lease of
the naval base in the Black Sea in exchange for cheaper oil descended into a
mass brawl, involving smoke bombs, eggs and general fighting among members. The
Speaker had to be escorted from the chamber, covered by umbrellas. Violent
scuffles broke out in the Ukrainian parliament on 24 May 2012 during a debate
over a bill which would allow the official use of Russian language in certain
parts of the country. United Kingdom. In the House of Commons of the United
Kingdom, the government and the opposition are separated by red lines drawn on
the carpet. The red lines in front of the two sets of benches are two sword-
lengths apart (or a little more than two sword-lengths apart); a Member is
traditionally not allowed to cross the line during debates, supposedly because
the Member might then be able to attack an individual on the opposite side.
These procedures were made because the Members were allowed to carry weapons
into the House in its founding days. During a dispute over the conduct of
British soldiers on Bloody Sunday, Independent Socialist MP Bernadette Devlin
punched the Conservative Party Home Secretary Reginald Maudling. Her aggression
was in response to the comments made by Maudling, who was maintaining that the
British Army had fired at Bloody Sunday protesters in self-defence, contrary to
the testimonies of civilian eye-witnesses (including Devlin herself). She
argued that she was being denied the right to speak. Her actions resulted in
her being banned from the House of Commons for six months. In the aftermath of
a rancorous debate with Labour MPs over the Aircraft and Shipbuilding
Industries Bill, Conservative Michael Heseltine was enraged by a group who
began singing "The Red Flag". He seized the chamber's ceremonial mace and
brandished it over his head, but was restrained by Jim Prior, and after his
departure legislative action was suspended for the day. United States.
Federalist Congressman Roger Griswold of Connecticut attacked Vermont
Representative Matthew Lyon with a hickory walking stick in the chambers of the
United States House of Representatives. Griswold struck Lyon repeatedly about
the head, shoulders and arms, while Lyon attempted to shield himself from the
blows. Lyon then turned and ran to the fireplace, took up a pair of metal
tongs, and having armed himself thus returned to the engagement. Griswold then
tripped Lyon and struck him in the face while he lay on the ground, at which
point the two were separated. After a break of several minutes, however, Lyon
unexpectedly pursued Griswold again with the tongs, and the brawl was re-
ignited. The two men had a prior history of conflict. On January 30 of that
year, Griswold had publicly insulted Lyon by calling him a coward, and Lyon had
retaliated by spitting in Griswold's face. As a result of Lyon's actions in
that case, he became the first Congressman to have charges filed against him
with that body's ethics committee, although he escaped censure through a vote
in the House. Congressman Preston Brooks of South Carolina famously assaulted
Charles Sumner of Massachusetts for a previous speech of his, saying his uncle
Andrew Butler took "a mistress who, though ugly to others, is always lovely to
him; though polluted in the sight of the world, is chaste in his sight—I
mean, the harlot, Slavery." After having consulted with fellow South Carolina
Congressman Laurence Keitt on the situation, Brooks and Keitt decided that
Sumner had the social status of a "drunkard" and was thus unworthy of the
traditional challenge to a duel. Brooks (accompanied by Keitt), approached and
confronted Sumner as he sat writing at his desk in the almost empty Senate
chamber. As Sumner began to stand up, Brooks began beating Sumner severely on
the head with a thick gutta-percha cane with a gold head before he could reach
his feet. Sumner was knocked down and trapped under the heavy desk (which was
bolted to the floor), but Brooks continued to bash Sumner until he ripped the
desk from the floor. By this time, Sumner was blinded by his own blood, and he
staggered up the aisle and collapsed, lapsing into unconsciousness. Brooks
continued to beat the motionless Sumner until he broke his cane, then quietly
left the chamber. Several other senators attempted to help Sumner, but were
blocked by Keitt, who had jumped into the aisle, brandishing a pistol and
shouting, "Let them be!" Keitt was censured for his actions and resigned in
protest, but was overwhelmingly re-elected to his seat by his South Carolina
constituency within a month. For several decades following, Senators often
carried walking canes and even revolvers in the Senate Chamber, fearing a
similar assault. Congressman Laurence Keitt of South Carolina was involved in
another incident of legislative violence less than two years later, starting a
massive brawl on the House floor during a tense late-night debate. Keitt became
offended when Pennsylvania Congressman (and later Speaker of the House) Galusha
A. Grow stepped over to the Democrat side of the House chamber while delivering
an anti-slavery speech. Keitt dismissively interrupted Grow's speech to demand
he sit down, calling him a "black Republican puppy". Grow indignantly responded
by telling Keitt that “No negro-driver shall crack his whip over me.” Keitt
became enraged and went for Grow's throat, shouting that he would "choke him
for that". A large brawl involving approximately 50 representatives erupted on
the House floor, ending only when a missed punch from Rep. Cadwallader Washburn
of Wisconsin upended the hairpiece of Rep. William Barksdale of Mississippi.
The embarrassed Barksdale accidentally replaced the wig backwards, causing both
sides to erupt in spontaneous laughter. Keitt would later die of wounds
following the Battle of Cold Harbor while fighting for the Confederacy. The
Indiana General Assembly experienced a massive brawl between Democrats and
Republicans in the Indiana Senate and Indiana House of Representatives. The
event began as an attempt by Democratic Governor Isaac P. Gray to be elected to
the United States Senate and his own party’s attempt to thwart him. Gray was
a former Republican who had been elected Governor by popular vote but was
scorned as a turncoat by his new party, who maneuvered desperately (and
unsuccessfully) to try to prevent his eligibility for the Senate seat. When
Gray went over the head of the Democrats in arranging a midterm election for a
new Lieutenant Governor, Republican Robert S. Robertson was elected with a
majority of the popular vote, a situation the Democrats refused to accept
despite a ruling from the Indiana Supreme Court. The matter came to a head when
Robertson attempted to enter the Senate chamber to be sworn in and take his
seat presiding over the session; he was attacked, beaten, and thrown bodily
from the chamber by the Democrats, who then locked the chamber door, beginning
four hours of intermittent mass brawling that spread throughout the Indiana
Statehouse. The fight ended only after Republicans and Democrats began
brandishing pistols and threatening to kill each other and the Governor was
forced to deploy the Indianapolis Police Department to restore order.
Subsequently, the Republican controlled House of Representatives refused to
communicate with the Democratic Senate, ending the legislative session and
leading to calls for United States Senators to be elected by popular vote.
During a debate on a bill dealing with the Philippine Islands, Senator Benjamin
Tillman of South Carolina accused Senator John L. McLaurin of South Carolina of
"treachery" for siding with the Republicans in support of Philippine
Annexation, and alleged that McLaurin had been granted control of government
patronage in South Carolina. Upon receiving word of this statement, McLaurin
entered the Senate Chamber and denounced Tillman, upon which Tillman attacked
him. During the fight, other senators were hit by the punches. As a result, the
Senate went into closed session to debate the matter. Both senators apologized
to the Senate, but almost came to blows immediately thereafter. On February 28,
the Senate voted 54 to 12, with 22 abstentions, to Censure both Tillman and
McLaurin. McLaurin did not seek reelection, while Tillman served in the Senate
until 1918. During the final day of the 2007 regular session of the Alabama
State Senate Republican Sen. Charles Bishop of Jasper punched Democratic Sen.
Lowell Barron of Fyffe in the head before the two were pulled apart. During a
vote of California budget state Assemblymen Warren Furutani and Don Wagner
broke out in a fight over a comment Wagner made that Furutani deemed offensive.
European Parliament. In 1988 when Pope John Paul II addressed the European
Parliament, Ian Paisley, then an MEP, denounced him as the Antichrist and was
subjected to booing by fellow MEPs who also threw objects at him; Otto von
Habsburg was among those who helped physically eject him from the room.
