Vladimir Lenin Vladimir Ilyich Lenin (; born Vladimir Ilyich Ulyanov, ; ¬ ‚Äì
21 January 1924) was a Russian communist revolutionary, politician and
political theorist who served as the leader of the Russian SFSR from 1917, and
then concurrently as Premier of the Soviet Union from 1922, until 1924. Born
into a wealthy middle-class family in Simbirsk, Lenin gained an interest in
revolutionary leftist politics following the execution of his brother in 1887.
Briefly attending the University of Kazan, where he was ejected for his
involvement in anti-Tsarist protests, he devoted the next few years to gaining
a degree in law and to radical politics, becoming a Marxist. In 1893 he moved
to Russia's capital at St. Petersburg, where he continued with his political
agitation, becoming a senior figure within the League of Struggle for the
Emancipation of the Working Class. Arrested and exiled to Siberia for three
years, he subsequently fled to Western Europe, living in Germany, England and
then Switzerland. Following the February Revolution of 1917, in which the Tsar
was overthrown and a provisional government took power, he decided to return
home. As the leader of the Bolshevik faction of the Russian Social Democratic
Labour Party, he took a senior role in orchestrating the October Revolution in
1917, which led to the overthrow of the Russian Provisional Government and the
establishment of the Russian Socialist Federative Soviet Republic, the world's
first constitutionally socialist state. Immediately afterwards, Lenin proceeded
to implement socialist reforms, including the transfer of estates and crown
lands to workers' soviets. Faced with the threat of German invasion, he argued
that Russia should immediately sign a peace treaty‚Äîwhich led to Russia's exit
from the First World War. In 1921 Lenin proposed the New Economic Policy, a
system of state capitalism which started the process of industrialisation and
recovery from the Russian Civil War. In 1922, the Russian SFSR joined former
territories of the Russian Empire in becoming the Soviet Union. The Bolshevik
faction later became the Communist Party of the Soviet Union, which acted as a
vanguard party presiding over a single-party dictatorship of the proletariat.
As a politician, Lenin was a persuasive and charismatic orator. As an
intellectual his extensive theoretic and philosophical developments of Marxism
produced Marxism‚ÄìLeninism, a pragmatic Russian application of Marxism that
emphasized the critical role played by a committed and disciplined political
vanguard in the revolutionary process, while defending the possibility of a
socialist revolution in less advanced capitalist countries through an alliance
of the proletarians with the rural peasantry. Lenin remains a controversial and
highly divisive world figure. Critics labeled him a dictator whose
administration oversaw multiple human rights abuses, but supporters countered
this criticism citing the limitations on his power and promoted him heroically
as a champion of the working class. He has had a significant influence on the
Marxist‚ÄìLeninist movement, which since his death had developed into a variety
of schools of thought, namely Stalinism, Trotskyism and Maoism. Early life.
Childhood: 1870‚Äì1887. Lenin's father, Ilya Nikolayevich Ulyanov
(1831‚Äì1886), had been born the fourth and final child of a couple living in
Astrakhan. Ilya's father, a poor tailor named Nikolai Vassilievich Ulyanov, had
been born a serf of either Kalmyk or Tatar descent, before marrying a far
younger illiterate Kalmyk girl named Anna Alexeevna Smirnova when in his
fifties. Ilya had escaped the poverty of his family by gaining admittance to
the University of Kazan, where he studied mathematics and physics, before
gaining employment teaching those subjects at the Penza Institute for the
Nobility in 1854. Introduced through a mutual friend to a woman named Maria
Alexandrovna Blank (1835‚Äì1916), they fell in love, and were married in the
summer of 1863. Having been born into a relatively prosperous background,
Mariya was the daughter of a Russian Jewish physician named Alexander
Dmitrievich Blank, and his German-Swedish wife, Anna Ivanovna Grosschopf. An
eccentric, Dr Blank had insisted on providing his children with a good
education, ensuring that Mariya learned English and French alongside Russian
and German and that she was well versed in Russian literature. Soon after their
wedding, Ilya obtained a job teaching in Nizhni Novgorod, before being
appointed to the position of director of primary schools in the Simbirsk
district six years later. Five years after that, he was promoted to Director of
Public Schools for the province, overseeing the foundation of over 450 schools
as a part of the government's plans for modernisation. As a result, he was
awarded the Order of St. Vladimir and given the position of an hereditary
nobleman. The middle-class couple had two children, Anna (born 1864) and
Alexander (born 1868) before the birth of their third child, Vladimir "Volodya"
Ilyich (), on 10 April 1870, who would be baptised in the nearby St Nicholas
Cathedral several days later. They would be followed by three more children,
Olga (born 1871), Dmitry (born 1874) and Mariya (born 1878). Another brother,
Nikolai, had been born in 1873, but had died several days after birth. Ilya was
a devout member of the Russian Orthodox Church and had his children baptised
into it, although Mariya, who had been raised a Lutheran, was largely
indifferent to Christianity, a view that influenced the beliefs of her
children. Politically, both parents were monarchists and liberal conservatives,
being committed to the Emancipation reform of 1861 introduced by the reformist
Tsar Alexander II and hoping that Russia would progress in much the same way as
Western Europe had; they avoided associating with political radicals and there
is no evidence that the Tsarist police ever put them under surveillance for
subversive thought. Every summer they would leave their home in Moscow Street,
Simbirsk and spend a holiday at a rural manor house in Kokushkino that was
shared with the family's Veretennikov cousins, relatives of Mariya. Among his
siblings, the young Vladimir was closest to his sister Olya, whom he often
bossed around, having an extremely competitive nature; he could be destructive,
but would usually admit to his misbehaviour. A keen sportsman, he spent much of
his free time outdoors or playing chess, but his father insisted that he devote
his life to study, leading him to excel at school, the Simbirsk Classical
Gimnazia, a strictly disciplinarian and conservative institution. By his
teenage years, Vladimir was coaching his elder sister in his favourite subject,
Latin, and gave private tuition to a student from the ethnic Chuvash minority.
Ilya Ulyanov died of a brain haemorrhage on 12 January 1886, when Vladimir was
16 years old. His behaviour becoming increasingly erratic and confrontational,
shortly thereafter Vladimir renounced his belief in God, becoming an atheist.
At the time, Vladimir's elder brother Aleksandr Ulyanov, whom he affectionately
knew as Sacha, was studying biology at St. Petersburg University, in 1885
having been awarded a gold medal for his dissertation, after which he was
elected onto the university's Scientific-Literary Society. He had become
involved in political agitation against the absolute monarchy of reactionary
Tsar Alexander III which governed the Russian Empire, reading the writings of a
number of banned leftist authors, including Dmitry Pisarev, Nikolay
Dobrolyubov, Nikolay Chernyshevsky and Karl Marx. Helping to organise protests
against the Tsarist government, he joined a small cell of socialist
revolutionaries who were bent on assassinating the Tsar and with his scientific
background was selected to construct a bomb for use in the plot. Before they
had the chance to carry out the attack, the conspirators were arrested by
police and put on trial. On 25 April 1887, Sacha was sentenced to death by
hanging, and executed on 8 May. Despite the emotional trauma brought on by the
recent deaths of his father and brother, Vladimir continued with his studies,
leaving school with a gold medal for his exceptional performance, and decided
that he wanted to study law at Kazan University. University and political
radicalism: 1887‚Äì1893. Entering the Judicial Faculty of Kazan University in
August 1887, Vladimir moved into a flat in the city, being joined in November
by his mother, who began renting out their Simbirsk family home. He had begun
to take an interest in his late brother's radical ideas, having been
particularly interested by Nikolai Chernyshevsky's novel "What is to be Done?"
(1863). He began meeting with a secretive revolutionary cell run by the
militant agrarian socialist Lazar Bogoraz. Joining the now-illegal Samara-
Simbirsk "zemlyachestvo" at the university, he was elected to be its
representative in the university's secret "zemlyachestvo" council, and began to
associate with leftists intent on reviving the People's Freedom Party
("Narodnaya Volya"), a leftist militant group responsible for assassinating
Tsar Alexander II. On 4 December he took part in a demonstration demanding the
abolition of the 1884 statute and the re-legalisation of student societies, but
along with 100 other protesters was arrested by police. Accused of being a
ringleader in the protests, the university expelled him and the Ministry of
Internal Affairs ordered him to be put under police surveillance and exiled to
his family's Kokushkino estate. From here, he set about voraciously reading
radical texts, becoming particularly enamoured with the work of Chernyshevsky.
His mother disliked his radicalism, in September 1888 persuading him to write
to the Ministry of the Interior asking them to allow him to study at a foreign
university, and although they refused his request, they did allow him to move
back to Kazan, where he settled on the Pervaya Gora with his mother and brother
Dmitry. In Kazan, he made contact with the revolutionary M.P. Chetvergova,
joining her secret political circle, who spent much of their time discussing
political strategies. Here he was introduced to Marxist theory through Karl
Marx's study of capitalist economy, "Capital" (1867), a book which exerted a
strong influence on him. His mother was increasing wary of his political views,
and purchased an estate in the village of Alakaevka, Samara Oblast ‚Äì made
famous in the work of poet Gleb Uspensky, of whom Lenin was a great fan ‚Äì in
the hope that Vladimir would turn his attention to agriculture rather than
politics. Here, he began studying the life of the peasants and the poverty that
many of them faced, something that would later exert a strong influence over
his views. Nevertheless, he remained locally unpopular, with peasants stealing
his farm equipment and livestock, and so his mother subsequently decided to
sell the farm. In September 1889, the Ulyanovs moved to Samara for the winter,
where Vladimir made contact with a number of dissidents who had been exiled
there for their political views, joining a discussion circle run by Alexei P.
Sklyarenko. At the time both Vladimir and Sklyarenko adopted Marxism, with
Vladimir translating Marx and Friedrich Engels' political pamphlet, "The
Communist Manifesto" (1848), into Russian for the benefit of his circle. He
began to read the works of the Russian Marxist Georgi Plekhanov (1856‚Äì1918),
a founder of the Black Repartition movement, concurring with Plekhanov's
argument that Russia was undoubtedly moving from feudalism to capitalism, and
that a Marxist analysis of Russian society was therefore apt. Becoming
increasingly sceptical of the usefulness of militant attacks and
assassinations, he argued against such tactics in a December 1889 debate with
M.V. Sabunaev, who was in the area trying to recruit members for the People's
Freedom Party. Nevertheless, despite disagreeing on tactics, he made friends
among the People's Freedom Party, in particular an older man named Apollon
Shukht, who would later ask Vladimir to be the godfather of his daughter in
1893. In May 1890, Mariya managed to convince the authorities to allow Vladimir
to undertake his exams externally at a university of choice. He picked the
University of Saint Petersburg, where he obtained the equivalent of a first-
class degree with honours. However, celebrations were marred when his sister
Olga was struck down with typhoid and died. Vladimir remained in Samara for
several years, in January 1892 being employed as a legal assistant for a
regional court, and soon after gaining a job working for local lawyer Andrei N.
Khardin. Embroiled primarily in disputes between peasants and artisans, he
continued to devote much of his time to radical politics, remaining active in
Skylarenko's group and formulating his own ideas about Marxism's applicability
to Russia. Inspired by Plekhanov's work, Vladimir began collecting data on
Russian society and its various social classes, using it to support a Marxist
interpretation of societal development. Hoping to be taken seriously as an
intellectual, in 1893 he submitted a paper, "New Economic Developments in
Peasant Life", to the liberal journal "Russian Thought", but it was rejected;
it would eventually see publication in 1927. Revolutionary activities. St.
Petersburg and foreign visits: 1893‚Äì1895. In the autumn of 1893, Vladimir
moved to St. Petersburg, capital city of the Russian Empire, which was then
undergoing a process of massive industrialisation. He first took up residence
in an apartment block on Sergievsky Street in the Liteiny district, before
moving to 7 Kazachy Alley, near the Haymarket. Taking up a job as assistant to
the lawyer M.F. Volkenstein, he joined a clandestine revolutionary cell run by
S.I. Radchenko, whose members were primarily students from the city's
Technological Institute. Like Vladimir, they were Marxists, and called
themselves the "Social Democrats" after the Social Democratic Party of Germany,
which at the time was also Marxist. Impressed by his extensive knowledge, they
welcomed him in and he soon became a senior member of the group. Championing
Marxist thought among the revolutionary socialist movement, in January 1894 he
openly debated with the well known theorist V.P. Vorontsov, author of "The Fate
of Capitalism in Russia" (1882) at a clandestine meeting, where his outspoken
behaviour was noted by a police spy who was present. Intent on building the
Marxist movement in Russia, Vladimir contacted Petr Bernardovich Struve, a
wealthy sympathizer whom he hoped could aid in the publication of further
Marxist literature, and encouraged the foundation of further revolutionary
cells in Russia's major industrial centres. He also became friends with a young
Russian Jewish Marxist named Julius Martov (1873‚Äì1923), who encouraged his
comrades in the group to spend less time intellectually theorising and more
time engaged in revolutionary activity. Vladimir entered into a relationship
with a fellow Marxist, the schoolteacher Nadezhda "Nadya" Krupskaya
(1869‚Äì1939), who introduced him to a number of socialist workers. By autumn
1894, Vladimir was the leader of a workers' circle who met for two hours on a
Sunday to discuss revolutionary socialist ideas; to them he was known by a
pseudonym, Nikolai Petrovich, although they affectionately referred to him as
"starik" (old man) because of his appearance. He was meticulous in covering his
tracks, knowing that the police had many spies trying to infiltrate the
revolutionary movement. He also wrote his first political tract, "What the
"Friends of the People" Are and How They Fight the Social-Democrats"; based
largely on his experiences in Samara, around 200 copies were printed illegally
and then distributed. Although they borrowed ideas from one another, Lenin and
the Social-Democrats clashed with the ideas of the Socialist‚ÄìRevolutionary
Party (SR), who were inspired by the example of the now-defunct People's
Freedom Party. Advocating an agrarian-socialist platform, the SR emphasised the
role of the peasant as revolutionary, highlighting the fact that in 1881, the
Russian peasantry numbered 75 million, while the urban proletariat numbered
only 1 million. In contrast, the Marxists believed that the peasant class'
primary motivation was to own their own land, and that they were therefore
capitalists, not socialists; instead, they saw the proletariat as the
revolutionary force who would bring about socialism. Lenin nevertheless
retained an influence from the thought of militant agrarian-socialist P√´tr
Tkach√´vi (1844‚Äì1886). He hoped that connections could be cemented between
his Social-Democratic movement and the Emancipation of Labour group; an
organisation founded in Geneva, Switzerland by Pleckhanov and other Russian
Marxist emigres in 1883. Vladimir and E.I. Sponti were selected to travel to
Switzerland to meet with Pleckhanov, who was generally supportive but
criticised the Social-Democrats for ignoring the role that the bourgeoisie
could play in the anti-Tsarist revolution. Traveling on to Zurich, Vladimir met
and befriended Pavel Axelrod, another member of Emancipation of Labour.
Proceeding to Paris, France, Vladimir met with Paul Lafargue and undertook
research into the Paris Commune of 1871, which he saw as an early prototype for
a proletarian government. Financed by his mother, he returned to Switzerland to
stay in a health spa before traveling to Berlin, Germany, where he studied for
six weeks at the Staatsbibliothek and met with Wilhelm Liebknecht. Returning to
Russia with a stash of illegal revolutionary literature, he traveled to various
cities, becoming aware that he was being monitored by the police. Coinciding
with a series of strikes in St. Petersburg, centered on the Thornton textile
mill in 1895, he distributed Marxist literature to the workers, and was also
involved in the production of a news sheet, "The Workers' Cause". However, both
he and 40 other activists were arrested on the night before the first issue's
publication and charged with committing seditious activities. Siberian exile:
1895‚Äì1900. Imprisoned at the House of Preliminary Detention in Shpalernaya
Street, during initial interrogation Vladimir was refused legal representation,
and so denied all of the charges that the police brought against him. His
family rallied round to help him, but he was refused bail, meaning that he had
to remain imprisoned for a year before sentencing. His fellow revolutionaries
were able to smuggle messages into him, while he devised a code for playing
chess with the inmate in his neighbouring cell. He spent much of his time
writing, focusing on the role of the working class in what he thought was the
coming revolution; believing that the rise of industrial capitalism had led
large numbers of peasants to move to the cities, where they became proletariat,
he argued that class consciousness would eventually develop, leading the
proletariat to rise up in violent revolution against the aristocracy and
bourgeoisie who oppressed them. By July 1896 he had finished "Draft and
Explanation of A Programme for the Social Democratic Party" and had commenced
work on his book "The Development of Capitalism in Russia". Along with most of
his comrades, Vladimir Ulyanov was sentenced without trial to 3 years exile in
eastern Siberia. Given a few days in St. Petersburg in February 1897 to put his
affairs in order before being sent east, he used this as an opportunity to meet
up with fellow revolutionaries. While imprisoned, the Social-Democratic
movement had been renamed the League of Struggle for the Emancipation of the
Working Class, and with many of its leading intelligentsia imprisoned, workers
had taken over a number of senior positions, a move that caused rifts in the
organisation but which gained Vladimir's cautious support. In 1896‚Äì97,
strikes had hit St. Petersburg in an attempt to decrease the working day from
12 or 13 hours to 10 and a half, but while the Marxists were not responsible
for its organisation, they had proved influential in helping to organise the
strikers themselves. Believing his predictions regarding class consciousness to
be coming true, Vladimir was unhappy at having to abandon the movement at this
crucial period. The Tsarist government made use of a large network of prison
camps and areas of exile on the verges of its empire to deal with dissidents
and criminals; by 1897 there were 300,000 Russian citizens in this system, and
Vladimir was now one of them. Permitted to make his own way there without
escort, the journey to eastern Siberia took him 11 weeks, for much of which he
was accompanied by his mother and sisters. Considered a minor threat, Vladimir
was exiled to the village of Shushenskoye in the Minusinsky District, a
settlement that Vladimir would describe as "not a bad place". Renting a room in
a peasant's hut, he was kept under constant police surveillance, but maintained
a large number of correspondences with other subversives, many of whom actually
came to visit him, and also went on trips to hunt duck and snipe and to swim in
the Yenisei River. In May 1898, Vladimir's partner Nadya joined him in exile,
having been arrested in August 1896 for organizing a strike. Although she was
initially posted to Ufa, she successfully convinced the authorities to allow
her to move to Shushenskoye, claiming that she and Vladimir were engaged; they
subsequently married in a church service on 10 July 1898. Settling into a
family life with Nadya's widowed mother Elizaveta Vasilyevna, the couple began
translating Sidney and Beatrice Webb's "The History of Trade Unionism" (1894)
into Russian, a job obtained for them by Struve. The couple were keen to keep
abreast of the developments within the German Marxist movement, which had
received significant electoral support through the Social Democratic Party
(SDP). However, in Germany there had been an ideological split, with
revisionists like Eduard Bernstein advocating a peaceful and electoral path to
socialism, something that conflicted with the orthodox Marxist idea advocating
violent proletariat revolution; he remained devoted to the latter, composing "A
Protest by Russian Social-Democrats" attacking revisionist arguments. Vladimir,
by this time using various pseudonyms, also finished writing "The Development
of Capitalism in Russia" (1899), then his longest book to date, which offered a
well-researched and polemical attack on the Social-Revolutionaries and their
beliefs, arguing that capitalism was already establishing itself in the Russian
countryside, thereby supporting a Marxist analysis of Russian economic
development. Published under the pseudonym of "Vladimir Ilin", it would later
be described by Lenin biographer Robert Service as "a "tour de force"", but
received predominantly poor reviews upon publication. Munich, London and
Geneva: 1900‚Äì1905. His three year exile over, Vladimir was banned from
returning to St. Petersburg, instead settling in Pskov, a small town two hours'
train ride from the capital, in February 1900. However, his wife, who had not
served the entirety of her sentence, remained in exile in Ufa, where she fell
ill. Intent on founding a newspaper through which he could advocate his
positions against the Marxist revisionists, the Social-Revolutionary Party and
the government, Vladimir and Struve began raising money for the publication of
"Iskra" ("The Spark"), a new organ of the Russian Marxist movement, by now
calling itself the Russian Social Democratic Labour Party (RSDLP). After
visiting his wife in Ufa, on 29 July 1900, he then left Russia for Western
Europe. In Switzerland and Germany, he held talks with senior Marxists such as
Axelrod, Plekhanov and Potresov and gave lectures on the situation in Russia.
On 24 August 1900, a conference of Russian Marxists was held in the Swiss town
of Corsier to discuss the development of "Iskra", but both Vladimir and
Potresov were shocked at the controlling nature of Plekhanov, particularly when
he gave an anti-semitic outburst; both of them lost a lot of respect for "the
father of Russian Marxism", a man whom they had always looked up to.
Ultimately, it was agreed that the paper would be produced in Munich, where it
would be harder for the Swiss-based Plekhanov to control it, and Vladimir moved
to the city in September 1900. The first issue was printed on Christmas Eve,
and contained an article written by Vladimir decrying European intervention in
the Boxer Rebellion. A second RSDLP publication, entitled "Zarya", appeared in
March 1901, and would run for four issues, but "Iskra" was far more successful,
being smuggled into Russia illegally, where it was then distributed, becoming
the most successful Russian underground publication for 50 years. It contained
contributions from such figures as the Polish Rosa Luxemburg, the Czech-German
Karl Kautsky, and a young Ukrainian Marxist, Leon Trotsky, who became a regular
contributor from the autumn of 1902. Vladimir Ulyanov adopted the "nom de
guerre" of "Lenin" in December 1901, possibly taking the River Lena as a basis,
thereby imitating the manner in which Plekhanov had adopted the pseudonym on
"Volgin" after the River Volga. In 1902, he published a political pamphlet
entitled "What Is to Be Done?" ‚Äì named after the influential Chernychevsky
novel ‚Äì under this new pseudonym. His most influential publication to date,
it dealt with Lenin's thoughts on the need to form a vanguard party who would
lead the working classes to revolution. When his wife finished her sentence in
exile, she too left Russia for Munich, where the couple were reunited; she
became his personal secretary, aiding him in the production of "Iskra".
Together, they continued their political agitation, with Lenin writing further
articles for "Iskra" and drafting the program for the RSDLP, attacking both
ideological dissenters and external critics. Despite remaining an orthodox
Marxist, he had begun to accept the Social Revolutionary Party's views on the
revolutionary power of the Russian peasantry, penning a pamphlet while in
Geneva in 1903 entitled "To the Village Poor", in which he tried to convert
them to the Marxist cause. In 1903, Lenin attended the 2nd Congress of the
Russian Social Democratic Labour Party which initially convened at Brussels
before moving to London. Here a longstanding ideological split developed within
the party between the Bolshevik faction, led by Lenin, and the Menshevik
faction, led by Martov. These terms "Bolshevik" (from the Russian
"bol'shinstvo" meaning "majority") and "Menshevik" (from the Russian
"menshinstvo" meaning "minority") derive from the narrow Bolshevik electoral
defeat of the Mensheviks to the party's newspaper editorial board, and to
central committee leadership. The break partly originated from Lenin's book
"What Is to Be Done?" (1902), which proposed a smaller party organisation of
"professional" revolutionaries, with "Iskra" in a primary ideologic role.
Another issue which divided the two factions was Lenin's support of a worker-
peasant alliance to overthrow the Tsarist regime as opposed to the Menshevik's
support of an alliance between the working classes and the liberal bourgeoisie
to achieve the same aim (whilst a small third faction led by Trotsky espoused
the view that the working class alone was the instrument of revolutionary
change‚Äîneeding no help from either the peasants or the middle classes). The
1905 Revolution: 1905‚Äì1907. In November 1905, Lenin returned to Russia to
support the 1905 Russian Revolution. In 1906, he was elected to the Presidium
of the RSDLP; and shuttled between Finland and Russia, but resumed his exile in
December 1907, after the Tsarist defeat of the revolution and after the scandal
of the 1907 Tiflis bank robbery. Until the February and October revolutions of
1917, he lived in Western Europe, where, despite relative poverty, he developed
Leninism‚Äîurban Marxism adapted to agrarian Russia reversing Karl Marx's
economics‚Äìpolitics prescription to allow for a dynamic revolution led by a
vanguard party of professional revolutionaries. Return to exile: 1907‚Äì1917.
In 1909, to disambiguate philosophic doubts about the proper practical course
of a socialist revolution, Lenin published "Materialism and Empirio-criticism"
(1909), which became a philosophic foundation of Marxism-Leninism. Throughout
exile, Lenin travelled Europe, participated in socialist activities, (the 1912
Prague Party Conference). When Inessa Armand left Russia for Paris, she met
Lenin and other exiled Bolsheviks. Rumour has it she was Lenin's lover; yet
historian Neil Harding notes that there is a "slender stock of evidence . . .
we still have no evidence that they were sexually intimate". In 1914, when the
First World War (1914‚Äì18) began, most of the mass Social Democratic parties
of Europe supported their homelands' war effort. At first, Lenin disbelieved
such political fickleness, especially that the Germans had voted for war
credits; the Social Democrats' war-authorising votes broke Lenin's mainstream
connection with the Second International (1889‚Äì1916). He opposed the Great
War, because the peasants and workers would be fighting the bourgeoisie's
"imperialist war"‚Äîone that ought be transformed to an international civil
war, between the classes. Lenin's view of the war can be summed up in a letter
he wrote to the Romanian poet Valeriu Marcu in 1917: "One slaveowner, Germany
is fighting another slaveowner, England, for a fairer distribution of the
slaves". At the beginning of the war, the Austrians briefly detained him in
Poronin, his town of residence; on 5 September 1914 Lenin moved to neutral
Switzerland, residing first at Bern, then at Z√ºrich. In 1915, in Switzerland,
at the anti-war Zimmerwald Conference, he led the Zimmerwald Left minority, who
failed, against the majority pacifists, to achieve the conference's adopting
Lenin's proposition of transforming the imperialist war into a class war. In
the next conference (24‚Äì30 April 1916), at Kienthal, Lenin and the Zimmerwald
Left presented a like resolution; but the conference concorded only a
compromise manifesto. In the spring of 1916, in Z√ºrich, Lenin wrote
"Imperialism, the Highest Stage of Capitalism" (1916). In this work Lenin
synthesised previous works on the subject by Karl Kautsky, John A. Hobson
("Imperialism: A Study", 1902), and Rudolf Hilferding ("Das Finanzkapital",
1910), and applied them to the new circumstances of the First World War
(1914‚Äì18) fought between the German and the British empires‚Äîwhich
exemplified the imperial capitalist competition, which was the thesis of his
book. This thesis posited that the merging of banks and industrial cartels gave
rise to finance capital‚Äîthe basis of imperialism, the zenith of capitalism.
To wit, in pursuing greater profits than the home market can offer, business
exports capital, which, in turn, leads to the division of the world, among
international, monopolist firms, and to European states colonising large parts
of the world, in support of their businesses. Imperialism, thus, is an advanced
stage of capitalism based upon the establishment of monopolies, and upon the
exportation of capital (rather than goods), managed with a global financial
system, of which colonialism is one feature. In accordance with this thesis,
Lenin believed that Russia was being used as a tool of French and British
capitalist imperialism in World War I and that its participation in the
conflict was at the behest of those interests. The February Revolution. In
February 1917 popular demonstrations in Russia provoked by the hardship of war
forced Tsar Nicholas II to abdicate. The monarchy was replaced by an uneasy
political relationship between, on the one hand, a Provisional Government of
parliamentary figures and, on the other, an array of "Soviets" (most
prominently the Petrograd Soviet): revolutionary councils directly elected by
workers, soldiers and peasants. Lenin was still in exile in Zurich. Lenin was
preparing to go to the Altstadt library after lunch on 15 March when a fellow
exile, the Pole Mieczyslav Bronski, burst in to exclaim: "Haven't you heard the
news? There's a revolution in Russia!" The next day Lenin wrote to Alexandra
Kollontai in Stockholm, insisting on "revolutionary propaganda, agitation and
struggle with the aim of an "international" proletarian revolution and for the
conquest of power by the Soviets of Workers' Deputies". The next day: "Spread
out! Rouse new sections! Awaken fresh initiative, form new organisations in
every stratum and prove to them that peace can come only with the armed Soviet
of Workers' Deputies in power." Lenin was determined to return to Russia at
once. But that was not an easy task in the middle of the First World War.
Switzerland was surrounded by the warring countries of France, Germany,
Austria-Hungary and Italy, and the seas were dominated by Russia's ally
Britain. Lenin considered crossing Germany with a Swedish passport, but
Krupskaya joked that he would give himself away by swearing at Mensheviks in
Russian in his sleep. Negotiations with the Provisional Government to obtain
passage through Germany for the Russian exiles in return for German and Austro-
Hungarian prisoners of war dragged on. Eventually, bypassing the Provisional
Government, on 31 March the Swiss Communist Fritz Platten obtained permission
from the German Foreign Minister through his ambassador in Switzerland, Baron
Gisbert von Romberg, for Lenin and other Russian exiles to travel through
Germany to Russia in a sealed one-carriage train. At Lenin's request the
carriage would be protected from interference by a special grant of
extraterritorial status. There are many evidences for German financial
commitment to the mission of Lenin. The aim was to disintegrate Russian
resistance in the First World War by spreading the revolutionary unrest.
Financial support was continued until July of 1917, when the Provisional
Government, after revealing German funding for the Bolsheviks, outlawed the
party and issued an arrest warrant for Lenin. On 9 April Lenin and Krupskaya
met their fellow exiles in Bern, a group eventually numbering thirty boarded a
train which took them to Zurich. From there they travelled to the specially
arranged train which was waiting at Gottmadingen, just short of the official
German crossing station at Singen. Accompanied by two German Army officers, who
sat at the rear of the single carriage behind a chalked line, the exiles
travelled through Frankfurt and Berlin to Sassnitz (arriving 12 April), where a
ferry took them to Trelleborg. Krupskaya noted how, looking out of the carriage
window as they passed through wartime Germany, the exiles were "struck by the
total absence of grown-up men. Only women, teenagers and children could be seen
at the wayside stations, on the fields, and in the streets of the towns." Once
in Sweden the group travelled by train to Stockholm and thence back to Russia.
Ronald W. Clark, "Lenin: The Man Behind the Mask", London: Faber and Faber
(1989), pp. 210‚Äì1. The April Theses. Lenin argued that this socialist
revolution would be achieved by the Soviets taking power from the parliamentary
Provisional Government: "No support for the Provisional Government ... Not a
parliamentary republic ‚Äì to return to a parliamentary republic from the
Soviets of Workers' Deputies would be a retrograde step ‚Äì but a republic of
Soviets of Workers', Agricultural Labourers' and Peasants' Deputies throughout
the country, from top to bottom." The April Theses were more radical than
virtually anything Lenin's fellow revolutionaries had heard. Previous Bolshevik
policy had been like that of the Mensheviks in this respect: that Russia was
ready only for bourgeois, not socialist, revolution. Joseph Stalin and Lev
Kamenev, who had returned from exile in Siberia in mid-March and taken control
of the Bolshevik newspaper "Pravda", had been campaigning for support for the
Provisional Government. When Lenin presented his Theses to a joint Russian
Social Democratic Labour Party (RSDLP) meeting, he was booed by the Mensheviks.
Boris Bogdanov called them "the ravings of a madman". Of the Bolsheviks, only
Kollontai at first supported the Theses. Lenin arrived at the revolutionary
April Theses thanks to his work in exile on the theory of imperialism. Through
his study of worldwide politics and economics, Lenin came to view Russian
politics in international perspective. In the conditions of the First World
War, Lenin believed that, although Russian capitalism was underdeveloped, a
socialist revolution in Russia could spark revolution in the more advanced
nations of Europe, which could then help Russia achieve economic and social
development. A. J. P. Taylor argued: "Lenin made his revolution for the sake of
Europe, not for the sake of Russia, and he expected Russia's preliminary
revolution to be eclipsed when the international revolution took place. Lenin
did not invent the iron curtain. On the contrary it was invented against him by
the anti-revolutionary Powers of Europe. Then it was called the "cordon
sanitaire."" In this way, Lenin moved away from the previous Bolshevik policy
of pursuing only bourgeois revolution in Russia, and towards the position of
his fellow Russian revolutionary Leon Trotsky and his theory of permanent
revolution, which may have influenced Lenin at this time. Controversial as it
was in April 1917, the programme of the April Theses made the Bolshevik party a
political refuge for Russians disillusioned with the Provisional Government and
the war. The October Revolution. In the event, the Provisional Government
arrested the Bolsheviks and outlawed their Party, prompting Lenin to go into
hiding and flee to Finland. In exile again, reflecting on the July Days and its
aftermath, Lenin determined that, to prevent the triumph of counter-
revolutionary forces, the Provisional Government must be overthrown by an armed
uprising. Meanwhile, he published "State and Revolution" (1917) proposing
government by the soviets (worker-, soldier- and peasant-elected councils)
rather than by a parliamentary body. In late August 1917, while Lenin was in
hiding in Finland, the Commander-in-Chief of the Russian Army General Lavr
Kornilov sent troops from the front to Petrograd in what appeared to be a
military coup attempt against the Provisional Government. Kerensky panicked and
turned to the Petrograd Soviet for help, allowing the revolutionaries to
organise workers as Red Guards to defend Petrograd. The coup petered out before
it reached Petrograd thanks to the industrial action of the Petrograd workers
and the soldiers' increasing unwillingness to obey their officers. However,
faith in the Provisional Government had been severely shaken. Lenin's slogan
since the April Theses¬ ‚Äì "All power to the soviets!"¬ ‚Äì became more
plausible the more the Provisional Government was discredited in public eyes.
The Bolsheviks won a majority in the Petrograd Soviet on 31 August and in the
Moscow Soviet on 5 September. In October Lenin returned from Finland. From the
Smolny Institute for girls, Lenin directed the Provisional Government's
deposition (6‚Äì8 November 1917), and the storming (7‚Äì8 November) of the
Winter Palace to realise the Kerensky capitulation that established Bolshevik
government in Russia. Forming a government. Lenin had argued in a newspaper
article in September 1917:V. I. Lenin, 'The Russian Revolution And Civil War:
They Are Trying To Frighten Us With Civil War', "Rabochy Put" ('The Workers'
Path') No. 12 (29 September 1917), Lenin Internet Archive.The October
Revolution had been relatively peaceful. The revolutionary forces already had
"de facto" control of the capital thanks to the defection of the city garrison.
Few troops had stayed to defend the Provisional Government in the Winter
Palace. Most citizens had simply continued about their daily business while the
Provisional Government was actually overthrown. It thus appeared that all power
had been transferred to the Soviets relatively peacefully. On the evening of
the October Revolution, the Second All-Russian Congress of Soviets met, with a
Bolshevik-Left SR majority, in the Smolny Institute in Petrograd. When the
left-wing Menshevik Martov proposed an all-party Soviet government, the
Bolshevik Lunacharsky stated that his party did not oppose the idea. The
Bolshevik delegates voted unanimously in favour of the proposal. However, not
all Russian socialists supported transferring all power to the Soviets. The
Right SRs and Mensheviks walked out of this very first session of the Congress
of Soviets in protest at the overthrow of the Provisional Government, of which
their parties had been members. John Reed, "Ten Days That Shook the World",
London: Penguin (1977), p. 128. (Available online, courtesy of the Marxists
Internet Archive.) According to Reed, Lenin waited for the applause to subside
before declaring simply: "We shall now proceed to construct the Socialist
order!" Lenin proceeded to propose to the Congress a Decree on Peace, calling
on "all the belligerent peoples and to their Governments to begin immediately
negotiations for a just and democratic peace", and a Decree on Land,
transferring ownership of all "land-owners' estates, and all lands belonging to
the Crown, to monasteries" to the Peasants' Soviets. The Congress passed the
Decree on Peace unanimously, and the Decree on Land faced only one vote in
opposition. Having approved these key Bolshevik policies, the Congress of
Soviets proceeded to elect the Bolsheviks into power as the Council of People's
Commissars by "an enormous majority". The Bolsheviks offered posts in the
Council to the Left SRs: an offer which the Left SRs at first refused, but
later accepted, joining the Bolsheviks in coalition on 12 December O.S. Lenin
had suggested that Trotsky take the position of Chairman of the Council‚Äîthe
head of the Soviet government‚Äîbut Trotsky refused on the grounds that his
Jewishness would be controversial, and he took the post of Commissar for
Foreign Affairs instead. Thus Lenin became the head of government in Russia.
Trotsky announced the composition of the new Soviet Central Executive
Committee: with a Bolshevik majority, but with places reserved for the
representatives of the other parties, including the seceded Right SRs and
Mensheviks. Trotsky concluded the Congress: "We welcome into the Government all
parties and groups which will adopt our programme." Yet the Bolshevik
Government had to first withdraw Russia from the First World War (1914‚Äì18).
Facing continuing Imperial German eastward advance, Lenin proposed immediate
Russian withdrawal from the West European war; yet, other, doctrinaire
Bolshevik leaders (e.g. Nikolai Bukharin) advocated continuing in the war to
foment revolution in Germany. Lead peace treaty negotiator Leon Trotsky
proposed "No War, No Peace", an intermediate-stance Russo‚ÄìGerman treaty
conditional upon neither belligerent annexing conquered lands; the negotiations
collapsed, and the Germans renewed their attack, conquering much of the
(agricultural) territory of west Russia. Resultantly, Lenin's withdrawal
proposal then gained majority support, and, on 3 March 1918, Russia withdrew
from the First World War via the Treaty of Brest-Litovsk, losing much of its
European territory. Because of the German threat Lenin moved the Soviet
Government from Petrograd to Moscow on 10‚Äì11 March 1918. On 19 January 1918,
relying upon the soviets, the Bolsheviks, allied with anarchists and the
Socialist Revolutionaries, dissolved the Russian Constituent Assembly thereby
consolidating the Bolshevik Government's political power. Yet, that left-wing
coalition collapsed consequent to the Social Revolutionaries opposing the
territorially expensive Brest-Litovsk treaty the Bolsheviks had concorded with
Imperial Germany. The anarchists and the Socialist Revolutionaries then joined
other political parties in attempting to depose the Bolshevik Government, who
defended themselves with persecution and jail for the anti-Bolsheviks. To
initiate the Russian economic recovery, on 21 February 1920, he launched the
GOELRO plan, the "State Commission for Electrification of Russia"
(–ì–æ—Å—É–¥–∞—Ä—Å—Ç–≤–µ–Ω–Ω–∞—è –∫–æ–º–∏—Å—Å–∏—è –ø–æ
—ç–ª–µ–∫—Ç—Ä–∏—Ñ–∏–∫–∞—Ü–∏–∏ – –æ—Å—Å–∏–∏), and also established free universal
health care and free education systems, and promulgated the politico-civil
rights of women. Moreover, since 1918, in re-establishing the economy, for the
productive business administration of each industrial enterprise in Russia,
Lenin proposed a government-accountable leader for each enterprise. Workers
could request measures resolving problems, but had to abide the leader's
ultimate decision. Although contrary to workers' self-management, such
pragmatic industrial administration was essential for efficient production and
employment of worker expertise. Yet Lenin's doctrinaire Bolshevik opponents
argued that such industrial business management was meant to strengthen State
control of labour, and that worker self-management failures were owed to lack
of resources, not incompetence. Lenin resolved that problem by licencing (for a
month) all workers of most factories; thus historian S. A. Smith's observation:
"By the end of the civil war, not much was left of the democratic forms of
industrial administration promoted by the factory committees in 1917, but the
government argued that this did not matter since industry had passed into the
ownership of a workers' state." Internationally, Lenin's admiration of the
Irish socialist revolutionary James Connolly, led to the USSR's being the first
country to grant diplomatic recognition to the Irish Republic that fought the
Irish War of Independence from Britain. In the event, Lenin developed a
friendship with Connolly's revolutionary son, Roddy Connolly. Establishing the
Cheka. On 20 December 1917, "The Whole-Russian Extraordinary Commission for
Combating Counter-Revolution and Sabotage", the Cheka ("Chrezvychaynaya
Komissiya"¬ ‚Äì Extraordinary Commission) was created by a decree issued by
Lenin to defend the Russian Revolution. The establishment of the Cheka, secret
service, headed by Felix Dzerzhinsky, formally consolidated the censorship
established earlier, when on "17 November, the Central Executive Committee
passed a decree giving the Bolsheviks control over all newsprint and wide
powers of closing down newspapers critical of the r√©gime. . . ."; non-
Bolshevik soviets were disbanded; anti-soviet newspapers were closed until
"Pravda" ("Truth") and "Izvestia" ("The News") established their communications
monopoly. According to Leonard Schapiro the Bolshevik "refusal to come to terms
with the socialists, and the dispersal of the Constituent assembly, led to the
logical result that revolutionary terror would now be directed, not only
against traditional enemies, such as the bourgeoisie or right-wing opponents,
but against anyone, be he socialist, worker, or peasant, who opposed Bolshevik
rule". On 19 December 1918, a year after its creation, a resolution was adopted
at Lenin's behest that forbade the Bolshevik's own press from publishing
"defamatory articles" about the Cheka. As Lenin put it: "A Good Communist is
also a good Chekist." Lenin on anti-Semitism. V. I. Lenin, 'Anti-Jewish
Pogroms' (1919), Lenin Internet Archive. Failed assassinations. Lenin survived
two serious assassination attempts. The first occasion was on 14 January 1918
in Petrograd, when assassins ambushed Lenin in his automobile after a speech.
He and Fritz Platten were in the back seat when assassins began shooting, and
"Platten grabbed Lenin by the head and pushed him down... Platten's hand was
covered in blood, having been grazed by a bullet as he was shielding Lenin".
The second event was on 30 August 1918, when the Socialist Revolutionary Fanya
Kaplan approached Lenin at his automobile after a speech; he was resting a foot
on the running board as he spoke with a woman. Kaplan called to Lenin, and when
he turned to face her she shot at him three times. The first bullet struck his
arm, the second bullet his jaw and neck, and the third missed him, wounding the
woman with whom he was speaking; the wounds felled him and he became
unconscious. Fearing in-hospital assassins, Lenin was brought to his Kremlin
apartment; physicians decided against removing the bullets lest the surgery
endanger his recovery, which proved to be slow. "Pravda" publicly ridiculed
Fanya Kaplan as a failed assassin, a latter-day Charlotte Corday (the murderess
of Jean-Paul Marat) who could not derail the Russian Revolution, reassuring
readers that, immediately after surviving the assassination: "Lenin, shot
through twice, with pierced lungs spilling blood, refuses help and goes on his
own. The next morning, still threatened with death, he reads papers, listens,
learns, and observes to see that the engine of the locomotive that carries us
towards global revolution has not stopped working..."; despite unharmed lungs,
the neck wound did spill blood into a lung. Red Terror. Indirect evidence shows
that the order to execute the royal family was given verbally by Lenin and
Sverdlov. The object of 'exterminating the entire Romanov kin' is confirmed by
the almost simultaneous murders of Grand Duchess Yelizaveta Feodorovna, Grand
Duke Sergei Mikhailovich, Prince Ivan Konstantinovich, Prince Konstantin
Konstantinovich, Prince Igor Konstantinovich and Count Vladimir Paley (son of
Grand Duke Paul Alexandrovich), all of them in Alapaevsk, a hundred miles from
Yekaterinburg. Earlier, in October, Lev Kamenev and cohort, had warned the
Party that terrorist rule was inevitable, given Lenin's assumption of sole
command. In late 1918, when he and Nikolai Bukharin tried curbing Chekist
excesses, Lenin overruled them; in 1921, via the Politburo, he expanded the
Cheka's discretionary death-penalty powers. The foreign-aided White Russian
counter-revolution failed for want of popular Russian support, because the
Bolshevik proletarian state, protected with "mass terror against enemies of the
revolution", was socially organised against the previous capitalist
establishment, thus class warfare terrorism in post‚ÄìTsarist Russia originated
in working class (peasant and worker) anger against the privileged aristocrat
classes of the deposed absolute monarchy. During the Russian Civil War, anti-
Bolsheviks faced torture and summary execution, and by May 1919, there were
some 16,000 enemies of the people imprisoned in the Tsarist katorga labour
camps; by September 1921 the prisoner populace exceeded 70,000. Nicolas Werth,
Karel Bartosek, Jean-Louis Panne, Jean-Louis Margolin, Andrzej Paczkowski,
Stephane Courtois, "Black Book of Communism: Crimes, Terror, Repression",
Harvard University Press, 1999, hardcover, page 106, ISBN 0-674-07608-7.
Chapter 4: "The Red Terror" "Black Book" Professor Christopher Read states that
though terror was employed at the height of the Civil War fighting, "from 1920
onwards the resort to terror was much reduced and disappeared from Lenin's
mainstream discourses and practices". However, after a clerical insurrection in
the town of Shuia, in a 19 March 1922 letter to Vyacheslav Molotov and the
Politburo, Lenin delineated action against defiers of the decreed Bolshevik
removal of Orthodox Church valuables: "We must... put down all resistance with
such brutality that they will not forget it for several decades... The greater
the number of representatives of the reactionary clergy and reactionary
bourgeoisie we succeed in executing... the better." As a result of this letter,
historian Orlando Figes estimates that perhaps 8,000 priests and laymen were
executed. And the crushing of the revolts in Kronstadt and Tambov in 1921
resulted in tens of thousands of executions. Estimates for the total number of
people killed in the Red Terror ranger from 50,000 to over a million Civil War.
In 1917, as an anti-imperialist, Lenin said that oppressed peoples had the
unconditional right to secede from the Russian Empire; however, at end of the
Civil War, the USSR annexed Armenia, Georgia, and Azerbaijan, because the White
Movement used them as attack bases. Lenin defended the annexations as
geopolitical protection against capitalist imperial depredations. To maintain
the war-isolated cities, keep the armies fed, and to avoid economic collapse,
the Bolshevik government established war communism, via "prodrazvyorstka", food
requisitioning from the peasantry, for little payment, which peasants resisted
with reduced harvests. The Bolsheviks blamed the "kulak"s' withholding grain to
increase profits; but statistics indicate most such business occurred in the
black market economy. Nonetheless, the "prodrazvyorstka" resulted in armed
confrontations which the Cheka and Red Army suppressed with shooting hostages,
poison gas, and labour-camp deportation; yet Lenin increased the
requisitioning. The six-year long White‚ÄìRed civil war, the war communism, the
famine of 1921, which killed an estimated five million, and foreign military
intervention reduced much of Russia to ruin, and provoked rebellion against the
Bolsheviks, the greatest being the Tambov rebellion (1919‚Äì21). After the
March 1921 left-wing Kronstadt Rebellion mutiny, Lenin replaced war communism
with the New Economic Policy (NEP), and successfully rebuilt industry and
agriculture. The NEP was his pragmatic recognition of the political and
economic realities, despite being a tactical, ideological retreat from the
socialist ideal; later, the doctrinaire Joseph Stalin reversed the NEP in
consolidating his control of the Communist Party and the USSR. Retirement and
death. Persistant stories mark syphilis as the cause of Lenin's death. A
"retrospective diagnosis" published in The European Journal of Neurology in
2004 stengthens these suspicions. When already sick, Lenin remembered that,
since 1917, he had only rested twice: once, whilst hiding from the Kerensky
Provisional Government (when he wrote "The State and Revolution"), and whilst
recovering from Fanya Kaplan's failed assassination. In March 1922, when
physicians examined him, they found evidence of neither nervous nor organic
pathology, but, given his fatigue and the headaches he suffered, they
prescribed rest. Upon returning to St. Petersburg in May 1922, Lenin suffered
the first of three strokes, which left him unable to speak for weeks, and
severely hampered motion in his right side; by June, he had substantially
recovered. By August he resumed limited duties, delivering three long speeches
in November. In December 1922, he suffered the second stroke that partly
paralyzed his right side, he then withdrew from active politics. In March 1923,
he suffered the third stroke that rendered him mute and bed-ridden until his
death. After the first stroke, Lenin dictated government papers to Nadezhda;
among them was "Lenin's Testament" (changing the structure of the soviets), a
document partly inspired by the 1922 Georgian Affair, which was a conflict
about the way in which social and political transformation within a constituent
republic was to be achieved. It criticized high-rank Communists, including
Joseph Stalin, Grigory Zinoviev, Lev Kamenev, Nikolai Bukharin, and Leon
Trotsky. About the Communist Party's General Secretary (since 1922), Joseph
Stalin, Lenin reported that the "unlimited authority" concentrated in him was
unacceptable, and suggested that "comrades think about a way of removing Stalin
from that post." His phrasing, ""–°—Ç–∞–ª–∏–Ω —Å–ª–∏—à–∫–æ–º –≥—Ä—É–±"",
implies "personal rudeness, unnecessary roughness, lack of finesse", flaws
"intolerable in a Secretary-General". At Lenin's death, Nadezhda mailed his
testament to the central committee, to be read aloud to the 13th Party Congress
in May 1924. However, to remain in power, the ruling "troika"‚ÄîStalin,
Kamenev, Zinoviev‚Äîsuppressed "Lenin's Testament"; it was not published until
1925, in the United States, by the American intellectual Max Eastman. In that
year, Trotsky published an article minimising the importance of "Lenin's
Testament", saying that Lenin's notes should not be perceived as a will, that
it had been neither concealed, nor violated; yet he did invoke it in later
anti-Stalin polemics. Funeral. The Soviet government publicly announced Lenin's
death the following day, with head of State Mikhail Kalinin tearfully reading
an official statement to delegates of the All-Russian Congress of Soviets at
11am, the same time that a team of physicians began a postmortem of the body.
On 23 January, mourners from the Communist Party Central Committee, the Moscow
party organisation, the trade unions and the soviets began to assemble at his
house, with the body being removed from his home at about 10am the following
day, being carried aloft in a red coffin by Kamenev, Zinoviev, Stalin,
Bukharin, Bubhov and Krasin. Transported by train to Moscow, mourners gathered
at every station along the way, and upon arriving in the city, a funerary
procession carried the coffin for five miles to the House of Trade Unions,
where the body lay in state. Over the next three days, around a million
mourners from across the Soviet Union came to see the body, many queuing for
hours in the freezing conditions, with the events being filmed by the
government. On Saturday 26 January, the eleventh All-Union Congress of Soviets
met to pay respects to the deceased leader, with speeches being made by
Kalinin, Zinoviev and Stalin, but notably not Trotsky, who had been
convalescing in the Caucasus. Lenin's funeral took place the following day,
when his body was carried to Red Square, accompanied by martial music, where
assembled crowds listened to a series of speeches before the corpse was carried
into a vault, followed by the singing of the revolutionary hymn, "You fell in
sacrifice." Three days after his death, Petrograd was renamed Leningrad in his
honour, so remaining until 1991, when the USSR dissolved, yet the
administrative area remains "Leningrad Oblast". In the early 1920s, the Russian
cosmism movement proved so popular that Leonid Krasin and Alexander Bogdanov
proposed to cryonically preserve Lenin for future resurrection, yet, despite
buying the requisite equipment, that was not done. Instead, the body of V. I.
Lenin was embalmed and permanently exhibited in Lenin's Mausoleum, in Moscow,
on 27 January 1924. Despite the official diagnosis of death from stroke
consequences, the Russian scientist Ivan Pavlov reported that Lenin died of
neurosyphilis, according to a publication by V. Lerner and colleagues in the
"European Journal of Neurology" in 2004. The authors also note that "It is
possible that future DNA technology applied to Lenin's preserved brain material
could ultimately establish or disprove neurosyphilis as the primary cause of
Lenin's death." In a poll conducted by a Russian website, 48 per cent of the
people that responded voted that the body of the former leader should be
buried. Politics and world revolution. Lenin was a Marxist and principally a
revolutionary. His revolutionary theory‚Äîthe belief in the necessity of a
violent overthrow of capitalism through communist revolution, to be followed by
a dictatorship of the proletariat as the first stage of moving towards
communism, and the need for a vanguard party to lead the proletariat in this
effort‚Äîdeveloped into Marxism‚ÄìLeninism, a highly influential ideology.
Lenin biographer Robert Service noted that Lenin considered "moral questions"
to be "an irrelevance", rejecting the concept of moral absolutism; instead he
judged whether an action was justifiable based upon its chances of success for
the revolutionary cause. Lenin praised Chinese socialist revolutionary leader
Sun Yatsen and his Kuomintang party for their ideology and principles. Lenin
praised Sun, his attempts on social reformation and congratulated him for
fighting foreign Imperialism. Sun also returned the praise, calling him a
"great man", and sent his congratulations on the revolution in Russia.
Organised on Leninism, the Kuomintang was a nationalist revolutionary party,
which had been supported by the Soviet Union. Writings. After Lenin's death,
the USSR selectively censored his writings, to establish the dogma of the
infallibility of Lenin, Stalin (his successor), and the Central Committee;
thus, the Soviet fifth edition (55 vols., 1958‚Äì65) of Lenin's "≈ìuvre"
deleted the Lenin‚ÄìStalin contradictions, and all that was unfavourable to the
founder of the USSR. The historian Richard Pipes published a documentary
collection of letters and telegrams excluded from the Soviet fifth edition,
proposing that edition as incomplete. Personal life and characteristics. One of
Lenin's biographers, the historian Robert Service, asserted that the Russian
had been "a young man of intense emotions", who also exhibited a "visceral
hatred" of the "slightest sign of illegality or corruption" which he saw
exhibited throughout Tsarist Russia. He furthermore argued that Lenin was a man
who could be "moody and volatile". Service noted that Lenin developed an
"emotional attachment" to his ideological heroes, such as Marx, Engels and
Chernyshevsky, owning portraits of them. Lenin despised untidiness, always
keeping his work desk tidy and his pencils sharpened. According to most
reports, in his personal life Lenin was a modest and unassuming man. He liked
children and cats and his enthusiasms included bicycling, amateur photography,
chess, skating, swimming, hunting, music and hiking. When in exile in
Switzerland, Lenin, accompanied by his wife Krupskaya, developed a considerable
passion for mountain walking in the Swiss peaks. Lenin's personal life is
documented in detail in his wife's book "Memories of Lenin". Legacy. When Lenin
died on 21 January 1924, near Moscow, he was acclaimed as "the greatest genius
of mankind" and "the leader and teacher of the peoples of the whole world".
Historian J. Arch Getty has remarked that "Lenin deserves a lot of credit for
the notion that the meek can inherit the earth, that there can be a political
movement based on social justice and equality". "Time Magazine" also named
Lenin one of the , and one of their top 25 political icons of all time;
remarking that "for decades, Marxist‚ÄìLeninist rebellions shook the world
while Lenin's embalmed corpse lay in repose in the Red Square". Following the
dissolution of the USSR in 1991, reverence for Lenin declined among the post-
Soviet generations, yet he remains an important historical figure for the
Soviet-era generations. Statues and city names. During the Soviet period, many
statues of Lenin were erected across Eastern Europe. Although many of the
statues have subsequently been removed, some remain standing, and a few new
ones have been erected. Many places and entities were named in honor of Lenin.
The city of Saint Petersburg, the site where both February and October
revolutions started, was renamed "Leningrad" in 1924, four days after Lenin's
death. In 1991, after a contested vote between Communists and liberals, the
Leningrad government reverted the city's name to Saint Petersburg whilst the
surrounding Leningrad Oblast remained so named; like-wise the city of Ulyanovsk
(so-named after Lenin's birth name) and the Ulyanovsk Oblast remain so named.
Gyumri in Armenia was named "Leninakan" from 1924 to 1990, Khujand in
Tajikistan "Leninabad" from 1936 to 1991. In space, the 852 Wladilena asteroid
was named in his honor.
