Leviathan (book) Leviathan or The Matter, Forme and Power of a Common Wealth
Ecclesiasticall and Civil — commonly referred to as Leviathan — is a book
written by Thomas Hobbes (1588–1679) and published in 1651. Its name derives
from the biblical Leviathan. The work concerns the structure of society and
legitimate government, and is regarded as one of the earliest and most
influential examples of social contract theory. "Leviathan" ranks as a classic
western work on statecraft comparable to Machiavelli's "The Prince". Written
during the English Civil War (1642–1651), "Leviathan" argues for a social
contract and rule by an absolute sovereign. Hobbes wrote that civil war and
situations identified with a state of nature and the famous motto "Bellum
omnium contra omnes" ("the war of all against all") could only be averted by
strong central government. Content. Frontispiece. After lengthy discussion with
Hobbes, the Parisian Abraham Bosse created the etching for the book's famous
frontispiece in the "geometrico" style which Bosse himself had refined. It is
similar in organization to the frontispiece of Hobbes' "De Cive" (1642),
created by Jean Matheus. The frontispiece has two main elements, of which the
upper part is by far the most striking. In it, a giant crowned figure is seen
emerging from the landscape, clutching a sword and a crosier, beneath a quote
from the Book of Job—""Non est potestas Super Terram quae Comparetur ei. Iob.
41 . 24"" ("There is no power on earth to be compared to him. Job 41 .
24")—linking the figure to the monster of that book. (Because of disagreement
over where chapters begin, the verse Hobbes quotes is usually given as in
modern Christian translations into English, Job 41:25 in the Masoretic text,
Septuagint, and the Luther Bible; it is 41:24 in the Vulgate.) The torso and
arms of the figure are composed of over three hundred persons, in the style of
Giuseppe Arcimboldo; all are facing inwards with just the giant's head having
visible features. (A manuscript of "Leviathan" created for Charles II in 1651
has notable differences – a different main head but significantly the body is
also composed of many faces, all looking outwards from the body and with a
range of expressions.) The lower portion is a triptych, framed in a wooden
border. The centre form contains the title on an ornate curtain. The two sides
reflect the sword and crosier of the main figure – earthly power on the left
and the powers of the church on the right. Each side element reflects the
equivalent power – castle to church, crown to mitre, cannon to
excommunication, weapons to logic, and the battlefield to the religious courts.
The giant holds the symbols of both sides, reflecting the union of secular and
spiritual in the sovereign, but the construction of the torso also makes the
figure the state. Part I: Of Man. Hobbes begins his treatise on politics with
an account of human nature. He presents an image of man as matter in motion,
attempting to show through example how everything about humanity can be
explained materialistically, that is, without recourse to an incorporeal,
immaterial soul or a faculty for understanding ideas that are external to the
human mind. Hobbes proceeds by defining terms clearly, and in an unsentimental
way. Good and evil are nothing more than terms used to denote an individual's
appetites and desires, while these appetites and desires are nothing more than
the tendency to move toward or away from an object. Hope is nothing more than
an appetite for a thing combined with opinion that it can be had. He suggests
the dominant political theology of the time, Scholasticism, thrives on confused
definitions of everyday words, such as "incorporeal substance", which for
Hobbes is a contradiction in terms. Hobbes describes human psychology without
any reference to the "summum bonum", or greatest good, as previous thought had
done. Not only is the concept of a "summum bonum" superfluous, but given the
variability of human desires, there could be no such thing. Consequently, any
political community that sought to provide the greatest good to its members
would find itself riven by competing conceptions of that good with no way to
decide among them. The result would be civil war. There is, however, Hobbes
states, a "summum malum", or greatest evil. This is the fear of violent death.
A political community can be oriented around this fear. Since there is no
"summum bonum", the natural state of man is not to be found in a political
community that pursues the greatest good. But to be outside of a political
community is to be in an anarchic condition. Given human nature, the
variability of human desires, and need for scarce resources to fulfill those
desires, the state of nature, as Hobbes calls this anarchic condition, must be
a war of all against all. Even when two men are not fighting, there is no
guarantee that the other will not try to kill him for his property or just out
of an aggrieved sense of honour, and so they must constantly be on guard
against one another. It is even reasonable to preemptively attack one's
neighbour. The desire to avoid the state of nature, as the place where the
"summum malum" of violent death is most likely to occur, forms the polestar of
political reasoning. It suggests a number of laws of nature, although Hobbes is
quick to point out that they cannot properly speaking be called "laws," since
there is no one to enforce them. The first thing that reason suggests is to
seek peace, but that where peace cannot be had, to use all of the advantages of
war. Hobbes is explicit that in the state of nature nothing can be considered
just or unjust, and every man must be considered to have a right to all things.
The second law of nature is that one ought to be willing to renounce one's
right to all things where others are willing to do the same, to quit the state
of nature, and to erect a commonwealth with the authority to command them in
all things. Hobbes concludes Part One by articulating an additional seventeen
laws of nature that make the performance of the first two possible and by
explaining what it would mean for a sovereign to represent the people even when
they disagree with the sovereign. Part II: Of Common-wealth. The purpose of a
commonwealth is given at the start of Part II: "THE final cause, end, or design
of men (who naturally love liberty, and dominion over others) in the
introduction of that restraint upon themselves, in which we see them live in
Commonwealths, is the foresight of their own preservation, and of a more
contented life thereby; that is to say, of getting themselves out from that
miserable condition of war which is necessarily consequent, as hath been shown,
to the natural passions of men when there is no visible power to keep them in
awe, and tie them by fear of punishment to the performance of their
covenants...". The commonwealth is instituted when all agree in the following
manner: "I authorise and give up my right of governing myself to this man, or
to this assembly of men, on this condition; that thou give up, thy right to
him, and authorise all his actions in like manner." Hobbes explicitly rejects
the idea of "Separation of Powers", in particular the form that would later
become the separation of powers under the United States Constitution. Part 6 is
perhaps an under-emphasised feature of Hobbes's argument: his is explicitly in
favour of censorship of the press and restrictions on the rights of free speech
should they be considered desirable by the sovereign in order to promote order.
Succession. So we end up back at the first-born son, in practice. Religion. In
"Leviathan", Hobbes explicitly states that the sovereign has authority to
assert power over matters of faith and doctrine, and that if he does not do so,
he invites discord. Hobbes presents his own religious theory, but states that
he would defer to the will of the sovereign (when that was re-established:
again, "Leviathan" was written during the Civil War) as to whether his theory
was acceptable. Tuck argues that it further marks Hobbes as a supporter of the
religious policy of the post-Civil War English republic, Independency.
Taxation. Thomas Hobbes also touched upon the sovereign's ability to tax in
"Leviathan", although he is not as widely cited for his economic theories as he
is for his political theories. Hobbes believed that equal justice includes the
equal imposition of taxes. The equality of taxes doesn’t depend on equality
of wealth, but on the equality of the debt that every man owes to the
commonwealth for his defence and the maintenance of the rule of law. Hobbes
also supported public support for those unable to maintain themselves by
labour, which would presumably be funded by taxation. He advocated public
encouragement of works of Navigation etc. to usefully employ the poor who could
work. Part III: Of a Christian Common-wealth. And "Seeing therefore miracles
now cease" this means that only the books of the Bible can be trusted. Hobbes
then discusses the various books which are accepted by various sects, and the
"question much disputed between the diverse sects of Christian religion, from
whence the Scriptures derive their authority". To Hobbes, "it is manifest that
none can know they are God's word (though all true Christians believe it) but
those to whom God Himself hath revealed it supernaturally". And therefore "The
question truly stated is: by what authority they are made law"? He discusses
the Ten Commandments, and asks "who it was that gave to these written tables
the obligatory force of laws. There is no doubt but they were made laws by God
Himself: but because a law obliges not, nor is law to any but to them that
acknowledge it to be the act of the sovereign, how could the people of Israel,
that were forbidden to approach the mountain to hear what God said to Moses, be
obliged to obedience to all those laws which Moses propounded to them?" and
concludes, as before, that "making of the Scripture law, belonged to the civil
sovereign." Finally: "We are to consider now what office in the Church those
persons have who, being civil sovereigns, have embraced also the Christian
faith"? to which the answer is: "Christian kings are still the supreme pastors
of their people, and have power to ordain what pastors they please, to teach
the Church, that is, to teach the people committed to their charge." There is
an enormous amount of biblical scholarship in this third part. However, once
Hobbes's initial argument is accepted (that no-one can know for sure anyone
else's divine revelation) his conclusion (the religious power is subordinate to
the civil) follows from his logic. The very extensive discussions of the
chapter were probably necessary for its time. The need (as Hobbes saw it) for
the civil sovereign to be supreme arose partly from the many sects that arose
around the civil war, and to quash the "Pope of Rome's challenge", to which
Hobbes devotes an extensive section. Part IV: Of the Kingdom of Darkness.
Hobbes named Part IV of his book Kingdom of Darkness. By this, Hobbes does not
mean Hell (he did not believe in Hell or Purgatory) but the darkness of
ignorance as opposed to the light of true knowledge. Hobbes' interpretation is
largely unorthodox and so sees much darkness in what he sees as the
misinterpretation of Scripture. Hobbes enumerates four causes of this darkness.
The first is by extinguishing the light of scripture through misinterpretation.
Hobbes sees the main abuse as teaching that the kingdom of God can be found in
the church, thus undermining the authority of the civil sovereign. Another
general abuse of scripture, in his view, is the turning of consecration into
conjuration, or silly ritual. The second cause is the demonology of the heathen
poets concerning demons, which in Hobbes opinion are nothing more than
constructs of the brain. Hobbes then goes on to criticise what he sees as many
of the practices of Catholicism: "Now for the worship of saints, and images,
and relics, and other things at this day practised in the Church of Rome, I say
they are not allowed by the word of God". The third is by mixing with the
Scripture diverse relics of the religion, and much of the vain and erroneous
philosophy of the Greeks, especially of Aristotle. Hobbes has little time for
the various disputing sects of philosophers and objects to what people have
taken "From Aristotle's civil philosophy, they have learned to call all manner
of Commonwealths but the popular (such as was at that time the state of
Athens), tyranny". At the end of this comes an interesting section (darkness is
suppressing true knowledge as well as introducing falsehoods), which would
appear to bear on the discoveries of Galileo Galilei. "Our own navigations make
manifest, and all men learned in human sciences now acknowledge, there are
antipodes" (i.e., the Earth is round) "...Nevertheless, men... have been
punished for it by authority ecclesiastical. But what reason is there for it?
Is it because such opinions are contrary to true religion? That cannot be, if
they be true." However, Hobbes is quite happy for the truth to be suppressed if
necessary: if "they tend to disorder in government, as countenancing rebellion
or sedition? Then let them be silenced, and the teachers punished" – but only
by the civil authority. The fourth is by mingling with both these, false or
uncertain traditions, and feigned or uncertain history. Hobbes concludes that
the beneficiaries are the churches and churchmen.
