Libertarianism and Objectivism Ayn Rand's philosophy of Objectivism has been
and continues to be a major influence on the libertarian movement. Many
libertarians justify their political views using aspects of Objectivism.
However, the views of Rand and her philosophy among prominent libertarians are
mixed and many Objectivists are hostile to non-Objectivist libertarians in
general. Philosophical disagreements. Aggression. Some libertarians, including
Murray Rothbard and Walter Block, hold the view that the non-aggression
principle is an irreducible concept: it is not the logical result of any given
ethical philosophy but, rather, is self-evident as any other axiom is. Rand,
too, argued that liberty was a precondition of virtuous conduct, but argued
that her non-aggression principle itself derived from a complex set of previous
knowledge and values. For this reason, Objectivists refer to the non-aggression
principle as such, while libertarians who agree with Rothbard's argument call
it "the non-aggression axiom." Rothbard and other anarcho-capitalists hold that
government requires non-voluntary taxation to function and that in all known
historical cases, the state was established by force rather than social
contract. They thus consider the establishment and maintenance of the night-
watchman state supported by Objectivists to be in violation of the non-
aggression principle. Objectivism's rejection of the primitive. Jennifer Burns
in her biography "", notes how Rand's position that "Native Americans were
savages", and that as a result "European colonists had a right to seize their
land because native tribes did not recognize individual rights", was one of the
views that "particularly outraged libertarians." Burns also notes how Rand's
position that "Palestinians had no rights and that it was moral to support
Israel, the sole outpost of civilization in a region ruled by barbarism", was
also a controversial position amongst libertarians, who at the time were a
large portion of Rand's fan base. Foreign Policy. Libertarians and Objectivists
often disagree about matters of foreign policy. Rand's rejection of what she
deemed to be "primitivism" extended to the Middle East peace process in the
1970s. Following the Arab-Israeli War of 1973, Rand denounced Arabs as
"primitive" and "one of the least developed cultures" who "are typically
nomads." Consequently, Rand contended Arab resentment for Israel was a result
of the Jewish state being "the sole beachhead of modern science and
civilization on their (Arabs) continent", while decreeing that "when you have
civilized men fighting savages, you support the civilized men, no matter who
they are." Many libertarians were highly critical of Israeli government at the
time. Most scholars of the libertarian Cato Institute have opposed military
intervention against Iran, while the Objectivist Ayn Rand Institute has
supported forceful intervention in Iran. Rand's influence on libertarianism.
movement to libertarians is that It Can Happen Here, that libertarians, despite
explicit devotion to reason and individuality, are not exempt from the mystical
and totalitarian cultism that pervades other ideological as well as religious
movements. Hopefully, libertarians, once bitten by the virus, may now prove
immune. Some Objectivists have argued that Objectivism is not limited to Rand's
own positions on philosophical issues and are willing to work with and identify
with the libertarian movement. This stance is most clearly identified with
David Kelley (who separated from the Ayn Rand Institute because of
disagreements over the relationship between Objectivists and libertarians),
Chris Sciabarra, Barbara Branden (Nathaniel's former wife), and others.
Kelley's Atlas Society has focused on building a closer relationship between
"open Objectivists" and the libertarian movement. Rand's view of libertarians.
Ayn Rand condemned libertarianism as being a greater threat to freedom and
capitalism than both modern liberalism and conservativism. Ayn Rand regarded
Objectivism as an integrated philosophical system. Libertarianism, in contrast,
is a political philosophy which confines its attention to matters of public
policy. For example, Objectivism argues positions in metaphysics, epistemology,
and ethics, whereas libertarianism does not address such questions. Rand
believed that political advocacy could not succeed without addressing what she
saw as its methodological prerequisites. Rand rejected any affiliation with the
libertarian movement and many other Objectivists have done so as well. "They
are not defenders of capitalism. They're a group of publicity seekers... most
of them are my enemies... I've read nothing by a Libertarian (when I read them,
in the early years) that wasn't my ideas badly mishandled—i.e., had the teeth
pulled out of them—with no credit given." In an 1981 interview, Rand
described Libertarians as "a monstrous, disgusting bunch of people" who
"plagiarize my ideas when that fits their purpose."  Rapprochement. In 2011,
Yaron Brook, President of the Ayn Rand Institute, spoke at the Foundation for
Economic Education. He was a keynote speaker at FreedomFest 2012. He appeared
on ReasonTV on July 26, 2012. Ayn Rand Institute board member John Allison
spoke at the Cato Club 200 Retreat in September 2012, contributed "The Real
Causes of the Financial Crisis" to "Cato's Letter", and spoke at Cato's
Monetary Conference in November, 2011. On June 25, 2012, the Cato Institute
announced that John Allison would become its next president. In Cato's public
announcement, Allison was described as a "revered libertarian." In
communication to Cato employees, he wrote, "I believe almost all the name
calling between libertarians and objectivists is irrational. I have come to
appreciate that all objectivists are libertarians, but not all libertarians are
objectivists."
