Libertarian Marxism Libertarian Marxism refers to a broad scope of economic and
political philosophies that emphasize the anti-authoritarian aspects of
Marxism. Early currents of libertarian Marxism, known as left communism,
emerged in opposition to Marxism–Leninism and its derivatives, such as
Stalinism, Maoism, and Trotskyism. Libertarian Marxism is also critical of
reformist positions, such as those held by social democrats. Libertarian
Marxist currents often draw from Marx and Engels' later works, specifically the
"Grundrisse" and "The Civil War in France"; emphasizing the Marxist belief in
the ability of the working class to forge its own destiny without the need for
a revolutionary party or state to mediate or aid its liberation. Along with
anarchism, Libertarian Marxism is one of the main currents of libertarian
socialism. Libertarian Marxism includes such currents as council communism,
left communism, "Socialisme ou Barbarie" Lettrism/Situationism and operaismo/
autonomism, and New Left. Libertarian Marxism has often had a strong influence
on both post-left and social anarchists. Notable theorists of libertarian
Marxism have included Anton Pannekoek, Raya Dunayevskaya, CLR James, Antonio
Negri, Cornelius Castoriadis, Maurice Brinton, Guy Debord, Daniel Guérin,
Ernesto Screpanti, and Raoul Vaneigem. Overview. Marxism started to develop a
libertarian strand of thought after specific circumstances. "One does find
early expressions of such perspectives in (William) Morris and the Socialist
Party of Great Britain (the SPGB), then again around the events of 1905, with
the growing concern at the bureaucratisation and de-radicalisation of
international socialism". Morris established the Socialist League in December
1884, which was encouraged by Friedrich Engels and Eleanor Marx. As the leading
figure in the organization Morris embarked on a relentless series of speeches
and talks on street corners, in working men's clubs and lecture theatres across
England and Scotland. From 1887, anarchists began to outnumber socialists in
the Socialist League. The 3rd Annual Conference of the League, held in London
on 29 May 1887 marked the change, with a majority of the 24 branch delegates
voting in favor of an anarchist-sponsored resolution declaring that "This
conference endorses the policy of abstention from parliamentary action,
hitherto pursued by the League, and sees no sufficient reason for altering it."
Morris played peacemaker but sided with the anti-Parliamentarians, who won
control of the League, which consequently lost the support of Engels and saw
the departure of Eleanor Marx and her partner Edward Aveling to form the
separate Bloomsbury Socialist Society. However, "the most important ruptures
are to be traced to the insurgency during and after the First World War.
Disillusioned with the capitulation of the social democrats, excited by the
emergence of workers’ councils, and slowly distanced from Leninism, many
communists came to reject the claims of socialist parties and to put their
faith instead in the masses." For these socialists, “The intuition of the
masses in action can have more genius in it than the work of the greatest
individual genius”. Luxemburg’s workerism and spontaneism are exemplary of
positions later taken up by the far-left of the period – Pannekoek, Roland
Holst, and Gorter in Holland, Sylvia Pankhurst in Britain, Gramsci in Italy,
Lukacs in Hungary. In these formulations, the dictatorship of the proletariat
was to be the dictatorship of a class, “not of a party or of a clique”."
However within this line of thought "The tension between anti-vanguardism and
vanguardism has frequently resolved itself in two diametrically opposed ways:
the first involved a drift towards the party; the second saw a move towards the
idea of complete proletarian spontaneity...The first course is exemplified most
clearly in Gramsci and Lukacs...The second course is illustrated in the
tendency, developing from the Dutch and German far-lefts, which inclined
towards the complete eradication of the party form." For "many Marxian
libertarian socialists, the political bankruptcy of socialist orthodoxy
necessitated a theoretical break. This break took a number of forms. The
Bordigists and the SPGB championed a super-Marxian intransigence in theoretical
matters. Other socialists made a return “behind Marx” to the anti-
positivist programme of German idealism. Libertarian socialism has frequently
linked its anti-authoritarian political aspirations with this theoretical
differentiation from orthodoxy...Karl Korsch...remained a libertarian socialist
for a large part of his life and because of the persistent urge towards
theoretical openness in his work. Korsch rejected the eternal and static, and
he was obsessed by the essential role of practice in a theory’s truth. For
Korsch, no theory could escape history, not even Marxism. In this vein, Korsch
even credited the stimulus for Marx’s Capital to the movement of the
oppressed classes. " In rejecting both capitalism and the state, some
libertarian socialists align themselves with anarchists in opposition to both
capitalist representative democracy and to authoritarian forms of Marxism.
Although anarchists and Marxists share an ultimate goal of a stateless society,
anarchists criticise most Marxists for advocating a transitional phase under
which the state is used to achieve this aim. Nonetheless, libertarian Marxist
tendencies such as autonomist Marxism and council communism have historically
been intertwined with the anarchist movement. Anarchist movements have come
into conflict with both capitalist and Marxist forces, sometimes at the same
time, as in the Spanish Civil War, though as in that war Marxists themselves
are often divided in support or opposition to anarchism. Other political
persecutions under bureaucratic parties have resulted in a strong historical
antagonism between anarchists and libertarian Marxists on the one hand and
Leninist Marxists and their derivatives such as Maoists on the other. In recent
history, however, libertarian socialists have repeatedly formed temporary
alliances with Marxist-Leninist groups for the purposes of protest against
institutions they both reject. Part of this antagonism can be traced to the
International Workingmen's Association, the "First International", a congress
of radical workers, where Mikhail Bakunin, who was fairly representative of
anarchist views, and Karl Marx, whom anarchists accused of being an
"authoritarian", came into conflict on various issues. Bakunin's viewpoint on
the illegitimacy of the state as an institution and the role of electoral
politics was starkly counterposed to Marx's views in the First International.
Marx and Bakunin's disputes eventually led to Marx taking control of the First
International and expelling Bakunin and his followers from the organization.
This was the beginning of a long-running feud and schism between libertarian
socialists and what they call "authoritarian communists", or alternatively just
"authoritarians". Some Marxists have formulated views that closely resemble
syndicalism, and thus express more affinity with anarchist ideas. Several
libertarian socialists, notably Noam Chomsky, believe that anarchism shares
much in common with certain variants of Marxism such as the council communism
of Marxist Anton Pannekoek. In Chomsky's "Notes on Anarchism", he suggests the
possibility "that some form of council communism is the natural form of
revolutionary socialism in an industrial society. It reflects the belief that
democracy is severely limited when the industrial system is controlled by any
form of autocratic elite, whether of owners, managers, and technocrats, a
'vanguard' party, or a State bureaucracy." In 1969 French platformist anarcho-
communist Daniel Guerin published an essay called "Libertarian Marxism?" in
which he dealt with the debate between Karl Marx and Mikhail Bakunin at the
First International and afterwards he suggested that "Libertarian marxism
rejects determinism and fatalism, giving the greator place to individual will,
intuition, imagination, reflex speeds, and to the deep instincts of the masses,
which are more far-seeing in hours of crisis than the reasonings of the
‘elites’; libertarian marxism thinks of the effects of surprise,
provocation and boldness, refuses to be cluttered and paralysed by a heavy
‘scientific’ apparatus, doesn’t equivocate or bluff, and guards itself
from adventurism as much as from fear of the unknown." Autonomist Marxism, Neo-
Marxism, and Situationist theory are also regarded as being anti-authoritarian
variants of Marxism that are firmly within the libertarian socialist tradition.
Notable libertarian marxist tendencies. Council communism. Council communism
was a radical Left movement originating in Germany and the Netherlands in the
1920s. Its primary organization was the Communist Workers Party of Germany
(KAPD). Council communism continues today as a theoretical and activist
position within Marxism, and also within libertarian socialism. The central
argument of council communism, in contrast to those of Social democracy and
Leninist communism, is that workers' councils arising in the factories and
municipalities are the natural and legitimate form of working class
organisation and government power. This view is opposed to the reformist and
Bolshevik stress on vanguard parties, parliaments, or the state. The core
principle of council communism is that the state and the economy should be
managed by workers' councils, composed of delegates elected at workplaces and
recallable at any moment. As such, council communists oppose state-run
"bureaucratic socialism". They also oppose the idea of a "revolutionary party",
since council communists believe that a revolution led by a party will
necessarily produce a party dictatorship. Council communists support a workers'
democracy, which they want to produce through a federation of workers'
councils. The Russian word for council is "soviet", and during the early years
of the revolution worker's councils were politically significant in Russia. It
was to take advantage of the aura of workplace power that the word became used
by Lenin for various political organs. Indeed, the name "Supreme Soviet", by
which the parliament was called; and that of the Soviet Union itself make use
of this terminology, but they do not imply any decentralization. Furthermore,
council communists held a critique of the Soviet Union as a capitalist state,
believing that the Bolshevik revolution in Russia became a "bourgeois
revolution" when a party bureaucracy replaced the old feudal aristocracy.
Although most felt the Russian Revolution was working class in character, they
believed that, since capitalist relations still existed (because the workers
had no say in running the economy), the Soviet Union ended up as a state
capitalist country, with the state replacing the individual capitalist. Thus,
council communists support workers' revolutions, but oppose one-party
dictatorships. Council communists also believed in diminishing the role of the
party to one of agitation and propaganda, rejected all participation in
elections or parliament, and argued that workers should leave the reactionary
trade unions and form one big revolutionary union. Left communism. Left
communism' is the range of communist viewpoints held by the communist left,
which criticizes the political ideas of the Bolsheviks at certain periods, from
a position that is asserted to be more authentically Marxist and proletarian
than the views of Leninism held by the Communist International after its first
and during its second congress. Left Communists see themselves to the left of
Leninists (whom they tend to see as 'left of capital', not socialists),
Anarchists (some of whom they consider internationalist socialists) as well as
some other revolutionary socialist tendencies (for example De Leonists, who
they tend to see as being internationalist socialists only in limited
instances). Although she lived before left communism became a distinct
tendency, Rosa Luxemburg has heavily influenced most left communists, both
politically and theoretically. Proponents of left communism have included
Amadeo Bordiga, Herman Gorter, Anton Pannekoek, Otto Rühle, Karl Korsch,
Sylvia Pankhurst, and Paul Mattick. Prominent left communist groups existing
today include the International Communist Current and the International Bureau
for the Revolutionary Party. Also, different factions from the old Bordigist
International Communist Party are considered left communist organizations.
"Socialisme ou Barbarie". "Socialisme ou Barbarie" (Socialism or Barbarism) was
a French-based radical libertarian socialist group of the post-World War II
period (the name comes from a phrase Rosa Luxemburg used in a 1916 essay, 'The
Junius Pamphlet'). It existed from 1948 until 1965. The animating personality
was Cornelius Castoriadis, also known as Pierre Chaulieu or Paul Cardan.
Situationist International. The Situationist International was a restricted
group of international revolutionaries founded in 1957, and which had its peak
in its influence on the unprecedented general wildcat strikes of May 1968 in
France. With their ideas rooted in Marxism and the 20th century European
artistic avant-gardes, they advocated experiences of life being alternative to
those admitted by the capitalist order, for the fulfillment of human primitive
desires and the pursuing of a superior passional quality. For this purpose they
suggested and experimented with the "construction of situations", namely the
setting up of environments favorable for the fulfillment of such desires. Using
methods drawn from the arts, they developed a series of experimental fields of
study for the construction of such situations, like unitary urbanism and
psychogeography. They fought against the main obstacle on the fulfillment of
such superior passional living, identified by them in advanced capitalism.
Their theoretical work peaked on the highly influential book "The Society of
the Spectacle" by Guy Debord. Debord argued in 1967 that spectacular features
like mass media and advertising have a central role in an advanced capitalist
society, which is to show a fake reality in order to mask the real capitalist
degradation of human life. To overthrow such a system, the Situationist
International supported the May '68 revolts, and asked the workers to occupy
the factories and to run them with direct democracy, through workers' councils
composed by instantly revocable delegates. After publishing in the last issue
of the magazine an analysis of the May 1968 revolts, and the strategies that
will need to be adopted in future revolutions, the SI was dissolved in 1972.
"Solidarity". "Solidarity" was a small libertarian socialist organisation from
1960 to 1992 in the United Kingdom. It published a magazine of the same name.
Solidarity was close to council communism in its prescriptions and was known
for its emphasis on workers' self-organisation and for its radical anti-
Leninism. Solidarity was founded in 1960 by a small group of expelled members
of the Trotskyist Socialist Labour League. It was initially known as "Socialism
Reaffirmed". The group published a journal, "Agitator", which after six issues
was renamed "Solidarity", from which the organisation took its new name. Almost
from the start it was strongly influenced by the French Socialisme ou Barbarie
group, in particular by its intellectual leader Cornelius Castoriadis, whose
essays were among the many pamphlets Solidarity produced. Solidarity existed as
a nationwide organisation with groups in London and many other cities until
1981, when it imploded after a series of political disputes. "Solidarity" the
magazine continued to be published by the London group until 1992; other former
Solidarity members were behind "Wildcat" in Manchester and "Here and Now"
magazine in Glasgow. The intellectual leader of the group was Chris Pallis,
whose pamphlets (written under the name Maurice Brinton) included "Paris May
1968", The Bolsheviks and Workers' Control 1917-21 and 'The Irrational in
Politics'. Other key Solidarity writers were Andy Anderson (author of Hungary
1956), Ken Weller (who wrote several pamphlets on industrial struggles and
oversaw the group's Motor Bulletins on the car industry), Joe Jacobs ("Out of
the Ghetto"), John Quail ("The Slow-Burning Fuse"), Phil Mailer ("Portugal:The
Impossible Revolution") John King ("The Political Economy of Marx", "A History
of Marxian Economics"), George Williamson (writing as James Finlayson, "Urban
Devastation - The Planning of Incarceration"), Lamb ("Mutinies") and Liz Willis
("Women in the Spanish Revolution"). De Leonism. De Leonism, occasionally known
as Marxism-Deleonism, is a form of syndicalist Marxism developed by Daniel De
Leon. De Leon was an early leader of the first United States socialist
political party, the Socialist Labor Party of America. De Leon combined the
rising theories of syndicalism in his time with orthodox Marxism. According to
De Leonist theory, militant industrial unions (specialized trade unions) are
the vehicle of class struggle. Industrial Unions serving the interests of the
proletariat will bring about the change needed to establish a socialist system.
The only way this differs from some currents in anarcho-syndicalism is that,
according to De Leonist thinking, a revolutionary political party is also
necessary to fight for the proletariat on the political field. De Leonism lies
outside the Leninist tradition of communism. It predates Leninism as De
Leonism's principles developed in the early 1890s with De Leon's assuming
leadership of the Socialist Labor Party; Leninism and its vanguard party idea
took shape after the 1902 publication of Lenin's What Is to Be Done?. The
highly decentralized and democratic nature of the proposed De Leonist
government is in contrast to the democratic centralism of Marxism–Leninism
and what they see as the dictatorial nature of the Soviet Union and the
People's Republic of China and other "communist" states. The success of the De
Leonist plan depends on achieving majority support among the people both in the
workplaces and at the polls, in contrast to the Leninist notion that a small
vanguard party should lead the working class to carry out the revolution.
Autonomism. Autonomism refers to a set of left-wing political and social
movements and theories close to the socialist movement. As an identifiable
theoretical system it first emerged in Italy in the 1960s from workerist
("operaismo") communism. Later, post-Marxist and anarchist tendencies became
significant after influence from the Situationists, the failure of Italian far-
left movements in the 1970s, and the emergence of a number of important
theorists including Antonio Negri, who had contributed to the 1969 founding of
"Potere Operaio", Mario Tronti, Paolo Virno, etc. Through translations made
available by Danilo Montaldi and others, the Italian autonomists drew upon
previous activist research in the United States by the Johnson–Forest
Tendency and in France by the group Socialisme ou Barbarie. It influenced the
German and Dutch Autonomen, the worldwide Social Centre movement, and today is
influential in Italy, France, and to a lesser extent the English-speaking
countries. Those who describe themselves as autonomists now vary from Marxists
to post-structuralists and anarchists. The Autonomist Marxist and "Autonomen"
movements provided inspiration to some on the revolutionary left in English
speaking countries, particularly among anarchists, many of whom have adopted
autonomist tactics. Some English-speaking anarchists even describe themselves
as "Autonomists". The Italian "operaismo" movement also influenced Marxist
academics such as Harry Cleaver, John Holloway, Steve Wright, and Nick Dyer-
Witheford. Communization. Communization mainly refers to a contemporary
communist theory in which we find is a "mixing-up of insurrectionist anarchism,
the communist ultra-left, postautonomists, anti-political currents, groups like
the Invisible Committee, as well as more explicitly ‘communizing’ currents,
such as "Théorie Communiste" and "Endnotes". Obviously at the heart of the
word is communism and, as the shift to communization suggests, communism as a
particular activity and process..." The association of the term communization
with a self-identified "ultra-left" was cemented in France in the 1970s, where
it came to describe not a transition to a higher phase of communism but a
vision of communist revolution itself. Thus the 1975 Pamphlet "A World Without
Money" states: “insurrection and communisation are intimately linked. There
would not be first a period of insurrection and then later, thanks to this
insurrection, the transformation of social reality. The insurrectional process
derives its force from communisation itself.” The term is still used in this
sense in France today and has spread into English usage as a result of the
translation of texts by Gilles Dauvé and "Théorie Comuniste", two key figures
in this tendency. But in the late 1990s a close but not identical sense of
"communization" was developed by the French post-situationist group Tiqqun. In
keeping with their ultra-left predecessors, Tiqqun's predilection for the term
seems to be its emphasis on communism as an immediate process rather than a
far-off goal, but for Tiqqun it is no longer synonymous with "the revolution"
considered as an historical event, but rather becomes identifiable with all
sorts of activities – from squatting and setting up communes to simply
"sharing" – that would typically be understood as "pre-revolutionary". From
an ultra-left perspective such a politics of "dropping-out" or, as Tiqqun put
it, "desertion" — setting up spaces and practices that are held to partially
autonomous from capitalism — is typically dismissed as either naive or
reactionary. Due to the popularity of the Tiqqun-related works "Call" and "The
Coming Insurrection" in US anarchist circles it tended to be this latter sense
of "communization" that was employed in US anarchist and "insurrectionist"
communiques, notably within the Californian student movement of 2009–2010.
