Liberalism in the United States Liberalism in the United States is a broad
political philosophy centered on the unalienable rights of the individual. The
fundamental liberal ideals of freedom of speech, freedom of the press, freedom
of religion for all belief systems, and the separation of church and state,
right to due process and equality under the law are widely accepted as a common
foundation across the spectrum of liberal thought. The main focus of modern
liberalism in the United States includes issues such as voting rights for all
adult citizens, equal rights, protection of the environment, and the provision
by the government of social services, such as: equal education opportunities,
access to health care, transportation infrastructure, basic food for the hungry
and basic shelter for the homeless. Some American liberals, who call themselves
classical liberals, neoliberals, or libertarians, support fundamental liberal
ideals but disagree with modern liberal thought, holding that economic freedom
is more important than equality of opportunity, and that promoting the general
welfare of society exceeds the legitimate role of government. Without a
qualifier, the term "liberalism" since the 1930s in the United States usually
refers to "modern liberalism", a political philosophy exemplified by Franklin
Delano Roosevelt's New Deal and, later, Lyndon Johnson's Great Society. It is a
form of social liberalism, whose accomplishments include the Works Progress
Administration and the Social Security Act in 1935, the Civil Rights Act of
1964, the Community Reinvestment Act and the Voting Rights Act of 1965.
According to Louis Hartz, liberalism in the United States differs from
liberalism elsewhere in the world because America never had a resident
hereditary aristocracy, and so avoided the worst of the class warfare that
swept Europe. History. The origins of American liberalism lie in the political
ideals of The Enlightenment. The Constitution of the United States of 1787 set
up the first modern republic, with sovereignty in the people (not in a monarch)
and no hereditary ruling aristocracy. However, the Constitution limited liberty
by accepting slavery. The Founding Fathers recognized the contradiction, and
most expected slavery to wither away. Indeed it was abolished in all the
Northern states by 1804, but due to the demand for raw cotton by the Industrial
Revolution, plantation slavery continued to flourish in the Deep South. From
the time of the Revolution to the present day, America has extended liberty to
ever broader classes of people. The states abolished restrictions on voting in
the early 19th century. The Constitution was amended in 1865 to abolish
slavery, in 1870 to extend the vote to Black men, in 1920 to extend the vote to
women, and in 1971 to lower the voting age to 18. The Jim Crow system of the
South between the 1890s and 1960s relegated blacks to second class citizenship,
until it was overthrown by the Civil Rights Movement and new federal laws in
1964 and 1965. Thomas Jefferson believed that America should remain a nation of
small farmers. As America became more and more a nation of businessmen,
liberals began to fear threats to liberty from corruption and monopolies
(called "trusts" at the time). Wealth was concentrated in the hands of a
few—especially in the new fast-growing cities—raised questions whether
political democracy could survive the power of the rich. The dominance of the
Republican Party for most of the era 1860-1932, the Third Party System, and the
Fourth Party System, prevented any major reversal of the concentration of
wealth. During the Progressive Era of the early 20th century, laws were passed
restricting monopolies (the antitrust movement) and regulating railroad rates.
After 1933, modern liberals used the New Deal to provide jobs during the Great
Depression. The Social Security act of 1935 provided retirement and disability
income for Americans unable to work or unable to find jobs. In the Social
Security Act of 1965, this was extended to provide benefits for Americans
unable to work due to illness. In the 1960s, liberals fought for the rights of
blacks and women, and for protection of the environment. They split on the
issue of the Vietnam War. A reaction against modern American liberalism began
with Barry Goldwater, which led to the eventual election of Ronald Reagan in
1980. The intellectual foundations of this conservative resurgence included the
works of free-market economists Milton Friedman and the Chicago School of
Economics, who argued against central economic planning (with the notable
exception of the Federal Reserve), regulation of business, and Keynesian
economics. Deregulation began in the mid-1970s and had broad support from both
liberals and conservatives. Reagan successfully lowered marginal tax rates,
most notably for those at the top of the income distribution, while his Social
Security reforms raised taxes on the middle and bottom of the income
distribution, leaving their total tax burden unchanged. Democratic president
Bill Clinton (1993–2001) worked with conservatives, against strong liberal
opposition, to end some of the main welfare programs and to implement NAFTA,
linking the economies of the U.S., Canada, and Mexico. Clinton pushed to extend
modern liberal ideals especially in the areas of health care (where he failed)
and environmental protection (where he had more success). According to Louis
Hartz, liberalism was the only significant political tradition in the United
States. However in the 1970s, Bernard Bailyn, Gordon Wood and J. G. A. Pocock
saw republicanism as the main political tradition. In the 1980s, J. David Green
returned to Hartz's thesis, but saw two different types of liberalism in the
tradition, which he called "humanist" and "reform". More recently, writers have
seen a multitude of traditions, including liberalism, republicanism and
Protestantism. Varieties of liberalism. Early Liberalism. The United States of
America was the first country to be founded on the liberal ideas of John Locke
and other philosophers of the Enlightenment, with no monarchy, no hereditary
aristocracy, and no established religion. The American Bill of Rights
guarantees every citizen the freedoms advocated by the liberal philosophers:
freedom of religion, freedom of speech, freedom of the press, the right to
gather in peaceful assembly, the right to petition the government for redress
of grievances, and the right to bear arms, among other freedoms and rights. In
this sense, virtually all Americans are liberals. However, questions arose,
both before and after the country was founded. In the Dred Scott decision of
1856-57, the Supreme Court ruled that these rights only applied to White men,
and that Blacks had no rights whatsoever that any White man was obliged to
respect. Therefore the constitution was amended several times to extend these
rights to ever larger classes of citizens, to all citizens in 1868, then
specifically to Blacks in 1870, to women in 1919, and to people unable to
afford a poll tax in 1964. Classical liberalism. Classical liberalism in the
United States (also called "laissez-faire liberalism") is the belief that a
free market economy is the most productive. It may be represented by Henry
David Thoreau's statement "that government is best which governs least."
Classical liberalism is a philosophy of individualism and self-responsibility.
Classical liberals in the United States believe that if the economy is left to
the natural forces of supply and demand, free of government intervention, the
result is the most abundant satisfaction of human wants. Modern classical
liberals oppose the concepts of social democracy and the welfare state. Modern
liberalism. In 1883 Lester Frank Ward (1841–1913) published "Dynamic
Sociology: Or Applied social science as based upon statical sociology and the
less complex sciences" and laid out the basic tenets of modern American
liberalism while at the same time attacking the laissez-faire policies
advocated by Herbert Spencer and William Graham Sumner. Ward was a passionate
advocate for a sociology which would intelligently and scientifically direct
the development of society. Another influential thinker in the Progressive Era
was Herbert Croly (1869 – 1930). He effectively combined classical liberal
theory with progressive philosophy and founded the periodical "The New
Republic" to present his ideas. Croly presented the case for a mixed economy,
increased spending on education, and the creation of a society based on the
"brotherhood of mankind." In 1909, Croly published "The Promise of American
Life", in which he proposed raising the general standard of living by means of
economic planning, though he opposed aggressive unionization. In "The
Techniques of Democracy" (1915) he argued against both dogmatic individualism
and dogmatic socialism. As editor of the "New Republic", Croly had the forum to
reach the intellectual community. Changes in liberalism in the United States.
The New Deal. President Franklin D. Roosevelt (1882 – 1945), came to office
in 1933 amid the economic calamity of the Great Depression, offering the nation
a New Deal intended to alleviate economic want and joblessness, provide greater
opportunities, and restore prosperity. His presidency from 1933 to 1945, the
longest in U.S. history, was marked by an increased role for the Federal
government in addressing the nation's economic and other problems. Work relief
programs provided jobs, ambitious projects such as the Tennessee Valley
Authority were created to promote economic development, and a Social security
system was established. The Great Depression dragged on through the 1930s,
however, despite the New Deal programs, which met with mixed success in solving
the nation's economic problems. Economic progress for minorities was hindered
by discrimination, about which the Roosevelt administration did less than
subsequent administrations, but more than had been done before. The New Deal
provided direct relief for minorities in the 1930s (through the Works Progress
Administration, Civilian Conservation Corps and other agencies); and, during
World War II, executive orders and the FEPC opened millions of new jobs to
minorities and forbade discrimination in companies with government contracts.
The 1.5 million black veterans in 1945 were fully entitled to generous veteran
benefits from the GI Bill on the same basis as everyone else. Relief was the
immediate effort to help the one-third of the population that was hardest hit
by the depression. Roosevelt expanded Hoover's FERA work relief program, and
added the Civilian Conservation Corps (CCC), Public Works Administration (PWA),
and starting in 1935 the Works Progress Administration (WPA). In 1935 the
Social Security Act (SSA) and unemployment insurance programs were added.
Separate programs were set up for relief in rural areas, such as the
Resettlement Administration and Farm Security Administration. Recovery was the
goal of restoring the economy to pre-depression levels. It involved "pump
priming" (deficit spending), dropping the gold standard, efforts to re-inflate
farm prices that were too low, and efforts to increase foreign trade. New Deal
efforts to help corporate America were chiefly channeled through a Hoover
program, the Reconstruction Finance Corporation (RFC). Reform was based on the
assumption that the depression was caused by the inherent instability of the
market and that government intervention was necessary to rationalize and
stabilize the economy, and to balance the interests of farmers, business and
labor. Reform measures included the National Industrial Recovery Act (NIRA),
regulation of Wall Street by the Securities Exchange Act (SEA), the
Agricultural Adjustment Act (AAA) for farm programs, Federal Deposit Insurance
Corporation (FDIC) insurance for bank deposits enacted through the
Glass–Steagall Act of 1933, and the National Labor Relations Act (NLRA) (also
known as the Wagner Act) dealing with labor-management relations. Despite
urgings by some New Dealers, there was no major anti-trust program. Roosevelt
opposed socialism (in the sense of state ownership of the means of production),
and only one major program, the Tennessee Valley Authority (TVA), involved
government ownership of the means of production. In international affairs,
Roosevelt's presidency was dominated by isolationism until 1938, followed by an
increasingly central role in World War II, especially after America's formal
entry into the war in 1941. Anticipating the post-war period, Roosevelt
strongly supported proposals to create a United Nations organization as a means
of encouraging mutual cooperation to solve problems on the international stage.
His commitment to internationalist ideals was in the tradition of Woodrow
Wilson, architect of the failed League of Nations, and led to his support for
the establishment of the United Nations, with the proviso that the U.S. would
have a veto power. Liberalism during the Cold War. U.S. liberalism of the Cold
War era was the immediate heir to Franklin Delano Roosevelt's New Deal and the
slightly more distant heir to the Progressives of the early 20th century. Sol
Stern wrote, "Cold War liberalism deserves credit for the greatest American
achievement since World War II — winning the Cold War." The essential tenets
of Cold War liberalism can be found in Roosevelt's Four Freedoms (1941): of
these, freedom of speech and of religion were classic liberal freedoms, as was
"freedom from fear" (freedom from tyrannical government), but "freedom from
want" was another matter. Roosevelt proposed a notion of freedom that went
beyond government non-interference in private lives. "Freedom from want" could
justify positive government action to meet economic needs, a concept more
associated with the concepts of Lincoln's Republican party, Clay's Whig Party,
and Hamilton's economic principles of government intervention and subsidy than
the more radical socialism and social democracy of European thinkers or with
prior versions of classical liberalism as represented by Jefferson's
Democratic-Republican and Jackson's Democratic party. In the 1950s and 1960s,
both major U.S. political parties included liberal and conservative factions.
The Democratic Party had two wings: on the one hand, Northern and Western
liberals, on the other generally conservative Southern whites. Difficult to
classify were the northern urban Democratic "political machines". The urban
machines had supported New Deal economic policies, but would slowly come apart
over racial issues. Some historians have divided the Republican Party into
liberal Wall Street and conservative Main Street factions; others have noted
that the GOP's conservatives came from landlocked states (Robert Taft of Ohio
and Barry Goldwater of Arizona) and the liberals tended to come from California
(Earl Warren and Paul N. "Pete" McCloskey), New York (Nelson Rockefeller), and
other coastal states. Opposing both communism and conservatism, Cold War
liberalism resembled earlier "liberalisms" in its views on many social issues
and personal liberty, but its economic views were not those of free-market
Jeffersonian liberalism nor those of European social democrats. They never
endorsed state socialism, but did call for spending on education, science, and
infrastructure, notably the expansion of NASA and the construction of the
Interstate Highway System. Their progressive ideas continued the legacy of
Lincoln, Woodrow Wilson, Theodore Roosevelt, and Franklin Delano Roosevelt. At
first liberals generally did not see FDR's successor Harry S. Truman as one of
their own, viewing him as a Democratic Party hack. However, liberal politicians
and liberal organizations such as the Americans for Democratic Action (ADA)
sided with Truman in opposing communism both at home and abroad, sometimes at
the sacrifice of civil liberties. Hubert Humphrey, for example, in 1950 put
before the Senate a bill to establish detention centers where those declared
subversive by the President could be held without trial. It did not pass.
Liberals were united in their opposition to McCarthyism. The liberal consensus.
By 1950, the liberal ideology was so intellectually dominant that the literary
critic Lionel Trilling could write that "liberalism is not only the dominant
but even the sole intellectual tradition... there are no conservative or
reactionary ideas in circulation." For almost two decades, Cold War liberalism
remained the dominant paradigm in U.S. politics, peaking with the landslide
victory of Lyndon B. Johnson over Barry Goldwater in the 1964 presidential
election. Lyndon Johnson had been a New Deal Democrat in the 1930s and by the
1950s had decided that the Democratic Party had to break from its
segregationist past and endorse racial liberalism as well as economic
liberalism. In the face of the disastrous defeat of Goldwater, the Republicans
accepted more than a few of Johnson's ideas as their own, so to a very real
extent, the policies of President Johnson became the policies of the Republican
administrations of Richard M. Nixon and Gerald R. Ford. Liberals and civil
rights. Cold War liberalism emerged at a time when most African Americans were
politically and economically disenfranchised. Beginning with "To Secure These
Rights", an official report issued by the Truman White House in 1947, self-
proclaimed liberals increasingly embraced the civil rights movement. In 1948,
President Truman desegregated the armed forces and the Democrats inserted a
strong civil rights plank in the party platform, even though delegates from the
Deep South walked out, and nominated a third party ticket, called Dixiecrat,
headed by Strom Thurmond. Truman abolished discrimination in the Armed Forces,
which led to the integration of military units in the early 1950s. However, no
civil rights legislation was passed until a weak bill was passed in 1957.
During the 1960s, relations between white liberals and the civil rights
movement became increasingly strained; civil rights leaders accused liberal
politicians of temporizing and procrastinating, although they realize they
needed the support of Northern lights to pass any legislation over Southern
obstructionism. The white liberals believed the grassroots movement for civil
rights would only anger many Southern whites and make it even more difficult to
pass civil rights laws through Congress. Thereafter, in response to that
concern, civil rights leader Martin Luther King, Jr. agreed to tone down the
March on Washington in 1963. Kennedy finally endorsed the March on Washington,
and proposed what would become the Civil Rights Act of 1964, but he could not
get it passed during his lifetime. Lyndon Johnson, who took office in November
1963, used the image of Kennedy's martyrdom to mobilize northern support, along
with the black leadership community, to pass major civil rights legislation,
the Civil Rights Act of 1964 and the Voting Rights Act of 1965. The result was
an end to segregation, and an end to restrictions on black voting, but also a
wave of black riots in the inner cities, but made for "long hot summers" in
every major city from 1964 through 1970. The riots alienated much of the white
working class, that had been the base of the labor union element in the civil
rights coalition. The civil rights movement itself was becoming fractured. On 8
March 1964, Malcolm X stated he was going to organize a black nationalist
organization that would try to "heighten the political consciousness" of
African Americans. By 1966, a Black Power movement had emerged; Black Power
advocates accused white liberals of trying to control the civil rights agenda.
Proponents of Black Power wanted African-Americans to follow an "ethnic model"
for obtaining power, not unlike that of Democratic political machines in large
cities. This put them on a collision course with urban machine politicians.
And, on its edges, the Black Power movement contained racial separatists who
wanted to give up on integration altogether — a program that could not be
endorsed by American liberals of any race. The mere existence of such
individuals (who always got more media attention than their actual numbers
might have warranted) contributed to "white backlash" against liberals and
civil rights activists. Paleoliberalism. As the civil rights and anti-war
protesters of the late 1960s and early 1970s began to organize into a
recognizable school of thought known as the New Left, many "anti-Soviet
liberals and social democrats in the tradition of Roosevelt, Truman, Kennedy,
Johnson, Humphrey and Henry ("Scoop") Jackson… preferred to call themselves
'paleoliberals'", according to historian Michael Lind. Lind also notes that
some of these people became "neoconservatives". , although paleoliberals such
as Peter Beinart exist to this day. Liberals and Vietnam. While the civil
rights movement isolated liberals from the working class and southern
Democrats, the Vietnam War threw another wedge into the liberal ranks, dividing
pro-war "hawks" such as Senator Henry M. Jackson from "doves" such as Senator
(and 1972 presidential candidate) George McGovern. As the war became the
leading political issue of the day, agreement on domestic matters was not
enough to hold the liberal consensus together. Vietnam was part of the strategy
of containment of Soviet Communism which began in ernest after WWII with the
decesent of the so-called Iron Curtain. In the 1960 presidential campaign, the
Kennedy was more hawkish on Southeast Asia than the Richard Nixon. Although it
can be argued that the war expanded only under Johnson, there was much
continuity of their cabinets. As opposition to the war grew, a large portion of
that opposition came from within liberal ranks. After Johnson refused to run
again, assassination removed Robert Kennedy from contention and noted liberal
Vice President Hubert Humphrey emerged from the disastrous 1968 Democratic
National Convention with the presidential nomination of a deeply divided party.
Much of the party's right wing had seceded to run Alabama governor George
Wallace. The result was a narrow victory for Republican Richard Nixon, a man
who, although a California native, was largely regarded as from the old
Northeast Republican Establishment. Nixon enacted many liberal policies,
including the establishment of the Environmental Protection Agency, normalizing
relations with Communist China, and starting the Strategic Arms Limitation
Talks to reduce the availability of ballistic missiles. Nixon and the liberal
consensus. While the differences between Nixon and the liberals are obvious –
the liberal wing of his own party favored politicians like Nelson Rockefeller
and William Scranton, and Nixon overtly placed an emphasis on "law and order"
over civil liberties, and Nixon's Enemies List was composed largely of liberals
– in some ways the continuity of many of Nixon's policies with those of the
Kennedy-Johnson years is more remarkable than the differences. Pointing at this
continuity, Noam Chomsky has called Nixon, "in many respects the last liberal
president." Although liberals turned increasingly against the Vietnam War, to
the point of running the very dovish George McGovern for President in 1972, the
war had, as noted above, been of largely liberal origin. Similarly, while many
liberals condemned actions such as the Nixon administrations support for the
1973 Chilean coup, it was not entirely dissimilar to the Bay of Pigs Invasion
in 1961 or the marine landing in the Dominican Republic in 1965. The political
dominance of the liberal consensus, even into the Nixon years, can best be seen
in policies such as the establishment of the Environmental Protection Agency or
in Nixon's (failed) proposal to replace the welfare system with a guaranteed
annual income by way of a negative income tax. Affirmative action in its most
quota-oriented form was a Nixon administration policy. Even the Nixon "War on
Drugs" allocated two-thirds of its funds for treatment, a far higher ratio than
was to be the case under any subsequent President, Republican or Democrat.
Additionally, Nixon's normalization of diplomatic relations with the People's
Republic of China and his policy of "détente" with the Soviet Union were
probably more popular with liberals than with his conservative base. An
opposing view, offered by Cass R. Sunstein, in "The Second Bill of Rights"
(Basic Books, 2004, ISBN 0-465-08332-3) argues that Nixon, through his Supreme
Court appointments, effectively ended a decades-long expansion under U.S. law
of economic rights along the lines of those put forward in the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights, adopted in 1948 by the United Nations General
Assembly. American Liberalism, 1970 to the present day. During the Nixon years
(and through the 1970s), the liberal consensus began to come apart. The
alliance with white Southern Democrats had been lost in the Civil Rights era.
While the steady enfranchisement of African Americans expanded the electorate
to include many new voters sympathetic to liberal views, it was not quite
enough to make up for the loss of some Southern Democrats. Organized labor,
long a bulwark of the liberal consensus, was past the peak of its power in the
U.S. and many unions had remained in favor of the Vietnam War even as liberal
politicians increasingly turned against it. Within the Democratic party
leadership, there was a turn toward moderation after the defeat of liberal
George McGovern in 1972. Meanwhile, in the Republican ranks, a new wing of the
party emerged. The libertarian Goldwater Republicans laid the groundwork for,
and partially fed in to the Reagan Republicans. In 1980, Ronald Reagan was the
Republican party's Presidential nominee. More centrist groups such as the
Democratic Leadership Council (DLC) were on equal footing with liberals for
control of the Democratic Party in this time. The centrist-liberal alliance of
the federal level Democrats lasted through the 1980s, declined in the 1990s
when more conservative political figures sided with the Republican party, and
returned in the 2010s, when congress split almost totally along party lines. It
has been hypothesized that the election of the first African-American President
Barack Obama in 2008 could bring liberalism to the mainstream of American
political thought once again. Republicans have worked to prevent that. In an
interview in the National Journal, October 23, 2010, Senate Minority Learder
Mitch McConnell stated: "The single most important thing we want to achieve is
for President Obama to be a one-term president." Demographics of American
liberals. While it is difficult to gather demographic information on
ideological groups, recent surveys by the New York Times and CBS News, between
18% and 27% of American adults identify as liberal, versus moderate or
conservative. In the 2008 presidential election, exit polls showed that 22% of
the electorate self-identified as "liberal." According to a 2004 study by the
Pew Research Center, liberals were tied with the conservative sub-group, the
"Enterprisers", for the most affluent group, and were the ideological
demographic with the highest rate of college education. Of those who identified
as liberal, 49% were college graduates and 41% had household incomes exceeding
$75,000, compared to 27% and 28% as the national average, respectively.
Liberalism also remains the dominant political ideology in academia, with 72%
of full-time faculty identifying as liberal in a 2004 study. The social
sciences and humanities were most liberal, whereas business and engineering
departments were the least liberal, though even in the business departments,
liberals outnumbered conservatives 49% to 39%. Generally, the more educated a
person is the more likely he or she is to hold liberal beliefs. In the 2000,
2004 and 2006 elections, the vast majority of liberals voted in favor of the
Democrats, though liberals may also show support for the Greens.
