Liberty Tree Foundation for the Democratic Revolution Liberty Tree Foundation
for the Democratic Revolution is an American non-governmental organization
""rooted in the belief that the American Revolution is a living tradition whose
greatest promise is democracy."" Their purpose is to foster a broad-based
democracy movement in the United States. Their programs include Democratizing
Elections, Democratizing Education, and Local Democracy. They formerly
published a quarterly magazine, Liberty Tree: Journal of the Democratic
Revolution. Early history. "Cities for People!" was a national coalition of
twenty seven community, youth, labor, religious, political, and other civic
organizations dedicated to offering an alternative, democratic agenda for the
nation's largest cities. Cities for People! organized mass demonstrations
protesting corporate involvement in setting the priorities of the June, 2002,
annual national meeting of the U.S. Conference of Mayors. Cities for People!
also organized a conference on progressive municipal policy as an alternative
to the official mayors' meeting. "Community Power 2002: First International
Conference on Local Democracy". Held over three days in October 2002, this
conference drew participants from 25 U.S. states and six countries. Panelists
described the lessons of experiments in local democracy conducted in
Montevideo, Uruguay, Porto Alegre, Brazil, Manchester, England, San Francisco,
California, Arcata, California, rural Pennsylvania, Hartford, Connecticut, and
Madison, Wisconsin. In the Summer of 2004, Liberty Tree initiated the "No
Stolen Elections!" campaign and the Nov3.US website (no longer active), a
broad-based mobilization to defend voting rights and protest attempts to
manipulate the outcome of the 2004 presidential elections. After election day,
the No Stolen Elections! campaign coordinated protests in scores of cities
across the United States, and lent support to the Cobb/Badnarik recount in
Ohio. The campaign succeeded, among other things, in seeding local voting
rights groups across the United States. The Liberty Tree Fellows formally
incorporated the Liberty Tree Foundation for the Democratic Revolution as a
non-stock corporation in the state of Wisconsin in October 2004.
