Liberation theology Liberation theology is a political movement in Christian
theology which interprets the teachings of Jesus Christ in terms of a
liberation from unjust economic, political, or social conditions. It has been
described by proponents as "an interpretation of Christian faith through the
poor's suffering, their struggle and hope, and a critique of society and the
Catholic faith and Christianity through the eyes of the poor", and by
detractors as Christianized Marxism. Although liberation theology has grown
into an international and inter-denominational movement, it began as a movement
within the Catholic Church in Latin America in the 1950s–1960s. Liberation
theology arose principally as a moral reaction to the poverty caused by social
injustice in that region. The term was coined in 1971 by the Peruvian priest
Gustavo Gutiérrez, who wrote one of the movement's most famous books, "A
Theology of Liberation". Other noted exponents are Leonardo Boff of Brazil, Jon
Sobrino of El Salvador, Óscar Romero of El Salvador, and Juan Luis Segundo of
Uruguay. The influence of liberation theology diminished after proponents were
accused of using "Marxist concepts" leading to admonishment by the Vatican's
Congregation for the Doctrine of the Faith (CDF) in 1984 and 1986. The Vatican
criticized certain strains of liberation theology for focusing on
institutionalized or systemic sin, apparently to the exclusion of individual
offenders/offences; and for allegedly misidentifying Catholic Church hierarchy
in South America as members of the same privileged class that would had long
been oppressing indigenous populations since the arrival of Pizarro onward.
Theology. Liberation theology could be interpreted as a western attempt to
return to the gospel of the early church where Christianity is politically and
culturally decentralized. Liberation theology proposes to fight poverty by
addressing its supposed source: sin. In so doing, it explores the relationship
between Christian theology — especially Roman Catholic theology — and
political activism, especially in terms of social justice, poverty, and human
rights. The principal methodological innovation is seeing theology from the
perspective of the poor and the oppressed. For example Jon Sobrino, S.J.,
argues that the poor are a privileged channel of God's grace. Some liberation
theologians base their social action upon the Bible scriptures describing the
mission of Jesus Christ, as bringing a sword (social unrest), e.g. , , — and
"not" as bringing peace (social order). This Biblical interpretation is a call
to "action" against poverty, and the sin engendering it, to effect Jesus
Christ's mission of justice in this world. Gustavo Gutierrez gave the movement
its paradigmatic expression with his book "A Theology of Liberation" (1971). In
this book, Gutierrez combined populist ideas with the social teachings of the
Catholic Church. He was influenced by an existing socialist current in the
Church which included organizations such as the Catholic Worker Movement and
the French Christian youth worker organization, ""Jeunesse Ouvrière
Chrétienne"." He was also influenced by Paul Gauthier's ""The Poor, Jesus and
the Church"" (1965). Gutierrez's book is based on an understanding of history
in which the human being is seen as assuming conscious responsibility for human
destiny, and yet Christ the Savior liberates the human race from sin, which is
the root of all disruption of friendship and of all injustice and oppression.
Gutierrez also popularized the phrase "preferential option for the poor", which
became a slogan of liberation theology and later appeared in addresses of the
Pope. Drawing from the biblical motif on the poor, Gutierrez asserts that God
is revealed as having a preference for those people who are
“insignificant,” “marginalized,” “unimportant,” “needy,”
despised” and “defenseless." Moreover, he makes clear that terminology of
"the poor" in scripture has social and economic connotations that
etymologically go back to the Greek word, "ptōchos". To be sure, as to not
misinterpret Gutierrez’s definition of the term "preferential option," he
stresses, “Preference implies the universality of God’s love, which
excludes no one. It is only within the framework of this universality that we
can understand the preference, that is, 'what comes first.'" McBrien, R.P.
‘’Catholicism’’ (Harper Collins, 1995), pp. 249–250. Gutierrez, G.
"Faith as Freedom", ‘’Horizons’’ 2/1, Spring 1975, p.32 Gutierrez also
considered the Church to be the "sacrament of history", an outward and visible
sign of an inward and spiritual grace, thus pointing to the doctrine of
universal salvation as the true means to eternal life, and assigning the Church
itself to a somewhat temporal role, namely, liberation. The struggle of women
for social justice has given rise to its own liberation theology, frequently
known as feminist theology in Europe and North America. Black and other women
of colour in the United States speak of womanist theology, while Mujerista
theology denotes the liberation theology of Hispanic women. History. A major
player in the formation of liberation theology was CELAM, the Latin American
Episcopal Conference. Created in 1955 in Rio de Janeiro (Brazil), CELAM pushed
the Second Vatican Council (1962–65) toward a more socially oriented stance.
However, CELAM never supported liberation theology as such, since liberation
theology was frowned upon by the Vatican, with Pope Paul VI trying to slow the
movement after the Second Vatican Council. After the Second Vatican Council,
CELAM held two conferences which were important in determining the future of
liberation theology: the first was held in Medellín, Colombia, in 1968, and
the second in Puebla, Mexico, in January 1979. The Medellín conference debated
how to apply the teachings of Vatican II to Latin America, and its conclusions
were strongly influenced by liberation theology. Cardinal Alfonso López
Trujillo was a central figure at the Medellín Conference, and was elected in
1972 as general secretary of CELAM. He represented a more orthodox position,
becoming a favorite of pope John Paul II and the "principal scourge of
liberation theology." Trujillo's faction became predominant in CELAM after the
1972 Sucre conference, and in the Roman Curia after the CELAM conference in
Puebla, Mexico, in January 1979. Despite the orthodox bishops' predominance in
CELAM, a more radical form of liberation theology remained much supported in
South America. Thus, the 1979 Puebla Conference was an opportunity for orthodox
bishops to reassert control of the radical elements; but they failed. At the
Puebla Conference, the orthodox reorientation was met by strong opposition from
the liberal part of the clergy, which supported the concept of a "preferential
option for the poor". This concept had been approved at the Medellín
conference by Bishop Ricard Durand, president of the Commission about Poverty.
Pope John Paul II gave the opening speech at the Puebla Conference. The general
tone of his remarks was conciliatory. He criticized radical liberation
theology, saying, "this conception of Christ, as a political figure, a
revolutionary, as the subversive of Nazareth, does not tally with the Church's
catechisms"; however, he did speak of "the ever increasing wealth of the rich
at the expense of the ever increasing poverty of the poor", and affirmed that
the "principle" of private property "must lead to a more just and equitable
distribution of goods...and, if the common good demands it, there is no need to
hesitate at expropriation, itself, done in the right way"; on balance, the Pope
offered neither praise nor condemnation. Some liberation theologians, however,
including Gutierrez, had been barred from attending the Puebla Conference.
Working from a seminary and with aid from sympathetic, liberal bishops, they
partially obstructed other clergy's efforts to ensure that the Puebla
Conference documents satisfied conservative concerns. Within four hours of the
Pope's speech, Gutiérrez and the other priests wrote a twenty-page refutation,
which was circulated at the conference, and has been claimed to have influenced
the final outcome of the conference. According to a socio-political study of
liberation theology in Latin America, twenty-five per cent of the final Puebla
documents were written by theologians who were "not invited" to the conference.
Cardinal Trujillo said that this affirmation is "an incredible exaggeration"
(Ben Zabel 2002:139). Practice. One of the most radical aspects of liberation
theology was the social organization, or re-organization, of church practice
through the model of Christian base communities (CBCs). Liberation theology
strove to be a bottom-up movement in practice, with Biblical interpretation and
liturgical practice designed by lay practitioners themselves, rather than by
the orthodox Church hierarchy. In this context, sacred text interpretation is
understood as "praxis". Journalist and writer Penny Lernoux described this
aspect of liberation theology in her numerous and committed writings intended
to explain the movement's ideas in North America. Base communities were small
gatherings, usually outside of churches, in which the Bible could be discussed,
and Mass could be said. They were especially active in rural parts of Latin
America where parish priests were not always available, as they placed a high
value on lay participation. As of May 2007, it was estimated that 80,000 base
communities were operating in Brazil alone. Contemporaneously Fanmi Lavalas in
Haiti, the Landless Workers' Movement in Brazil, and Abahlali baseMjondolo in
South Africa are three organizations that make use of liberation theology.
Reaction within the Catholic Church. In March 1983, Cardinal Ratzinger (now
Pope Benedict XVI) head of the Vatican's Congregation for the Doctrine of the
Faith (CDF), made ten observations of Gutiérrez's theology, accusing
Gutiérrez of politically interpreting the Bible in supporting temporal
messianism, and stating that the predominance of orthopraxis over orthodoxy in
his thought proved a Marxist influence. Ratzinger objected that the spiritual
concept of the Church as "People of God" is transformed into a "Marxist myth."
In liberation theology he declared, the "people is the antithesis of the
hierarchy, the antithesis of all institutions, which are seen as oppressive
powers. Ultimately anyone who participates in the class struggle is a member of
the "people"; the "Church of the people" becomes the antagonist of the
hierarchical Church." Cardinal Ratzinger did praise liberation theology in some
respects, including its ideal of justice, its rejection of violence, and its
stress on "the responsibility which Christians necessarily bear for the poor
and oppressed." He subsequently stated that no one could be neutral in the face
of injustice, and referred to the "crimes" of colonialism and the "scandal" of
the arms race. Nonetheless, media reports tended to assume that the
condemnation of "liberation theology" meant a rejection of such attitudes and
an endorsement of conservative politics. In 1984, it was reported that a
meeting occurred between the CDF and the CELAM bishops, during which a rift
developed between Ratzinger and some of the bishops with Ratzinger issuing
official condemnations of certain elements of liberation theology. These
"Instructions" refuted the Marxist-based idea that class struggle is
fundamental to history, and rejected the interpretation of religious phenomena
such as the Exodus and the Eucharist in exclusively political terms. Ratzinger
further stated that liberation theology had a major flaw in that it attempted
to apply Christ's sermon on the mount teachings about the poor to present
social situations. He asserted that Christ's teaching on the poor meant that we
will be judged when we die, with particular attention to how we personally have
treated the poor. Ratzinger also argued that liberation theology is not
originally a "grass-roots" movement among the poor, but rather, a creation of
Western intellectuals: "an attempt to test, in a concrete scenario, ideologies
that have been invented in the laboratory by European theologians" and in a
certain sense itself a form of "cultural imperialism". Ratzinger saw this as a
reaction to the demise or near-demise of the "Marxist myth" in the West.
Throughout the 1990s, Ratzinger, as prefect of the CDF, continued to condemn
these elements in liberation theology, and prohibited dissident priests from
teaching such doctrines in the Catholic Church's name. Leonardo Boff was
suspended and others were censured. Tissa Balasuriya, in Sri Lanka, was
excommunicated. Sebastian Kappen, an Indian theologian, was also censured for
his book "Jesus and Freedom". Under Cardinal Ratzinger's influence, theological
formation schools were forbidden from using the Catholic Church's organization
and grounds to teach liberation theology in the sense of theology using
unacceptable Marxist ideas, not in the broader sense. Roman Catholic priest and
author Andrew Greeley also criticized liberation theology in his 2009 fictional
book "Irish Tweed". In Greeley's book, a Chicago Catholic school is taken over
by a principal and priest practicing liberation theology, and its ideas, as
Greeley saw them, are applied in the school environment. For instance,
basketball team members are chosen based on their family's economic status
rather than on their ability. Counter criticism. Such criticisms have provoked
counter-criticisms that orthodox Catholics are in effect casting the Catholic
Church as a friend of authoritarian regimes; and that the Vatican is not so
much trying to defend pure doctrine as to maintain an established
ecclesiastical and political order. This conflict could be compared to some
aspects of the Protestant Reformation. Outside Latin America, some of
liberation theology's most ardent advocates are Protestant thinkers (e.g.,
Jürgen Moltmann and Frederick Herzog.) There is also a Christian humanist
response that calls for a complete breakaway from clerical hierarchies and the
formulation of an entirely new Christian theology, one based on recent
historical analysis by biblical scholars like JD Crossan highlighting the
social revolutionary dimension of Jesus. Further reading. Introductory works
(all by Penny Lernoux) Principal texts Rubem Alves, a Brazilian theologian
working at Princeton, wrote "Towards a Theology of Liberation" (1968). Peruvian
Catholic priest, Fr. Gustavo Gutiérrez, O.P. wrote "A Theology of Liberation"
(1972). External links. =*Liberation Theology Video from the Dean Peter Krogh
Foreign Affairs Digital Archives.
