Linguistics Linguistics is the scientific study of human language. Linguistics
can be broadly broken into three categories or subfields of study: language
form, language meaning, and language in context. The earliest known activities
in descriptive linguistics have been attributed to Panini around 500 BCE, with
his analysis of Sanskrit in "Ashtadhyayi". The first subfield of linguistics is
the study of language structure, or grammar. This focuses on the system of
rules followed by the users of a language. It includes the study of morphology
(the formation and composition of words), syntax (the formation and composition
of phrases and sentences from these words), and phonology (sound systems).
Phonetics is a related branch of linguistics concerned with the actual
properties of speech sounds and nonspeech sounds, and how they are produced and
perceived. The study of language meaning is concerned with how languages employ
logical structures and real-world references to convey, process, and assign
meaning, as well as to manage and resolve ambiguity. This category includes the
study of semantics (how meaning is inferred from words and concepts) and
pragmatics (how meaning is inferred from context). Linguistics also looks at
the broader context in which language is influenced by social, cultural,
historical and political factors. This includes the study of evolutionary
linguistics, which investigates into questions related to the origins and
growth of languages; historical linguistics, which explores language change;
sociolinguistics, which looks at the relation between linguistic variation and
social structures; psycholinguistics, which explores the representation and
function of language in the mind; neurolinguistics, which looks at language
processing in the brain; language acquisition, on how children or adults
acquire language; and discourse analysis, which involves the structure of texts
and conversations. Although linguistics is the scientific study of language, a
number of other intellectual disciplines are relevant to language and intersect
with it. Semiotics, for example, is the general study of signs and symbols both
within language and without. Literary theorists study the use of language in
literature. Linguistics additionally draws on and informs work from such
diverse fields as acoustics, anthropology, biology, computer science, human
anatomy, informatics, neuroscience, philosophy, psychology, sociology, and
speech-language pathology. Nomenclature. Before the 20th century, the term
"philology", first attested in 1716, was commonly used to refer to the science
of language, which was then predominantly historical in focus. Since Ferdinand
de Saussure's insistence on the importance of synchronic analysis, however,
this focus has shifted and the term "philology" is now generally used for the
"study of a language's grammar, history, and literary tradition", especially in
the United States, where it was never as popular as it was elsewhere (in the
sense of the "science of language"). Although the term "linguist" in the sense
of "a student of language" dates from 1641, the term "linguistics" is first
attested in 1847. It is now the usual academic term in English for the
scientific study of language. The term "linguist" applies within the field to
someone who studies language, or specific languages. Outside the field, this
term is commonly used to refer to people who speak many languages fluently.
Fundamental questions. Linguistics concerns itself with describing and
explaining the nature of human language. Fundamental questions include what is
universal to language, how language can vary, and how human beings come to know
languages. Linguistic research can broadly be divided into the descriptive
analysis of structure and grammar on the one hand and the study of non-
linguistic influences on language on the other. Formal and functional
approaches. One major debate in linguistics concerns how language should be
defined and understood. One prominent group of linguists use the term
"language" primarily to refer to a hypothesised, innate module in the human
brain that allows people to undertake linguistic behaviour. This "Universal
grammar" is considered to guide children when they learn languages and to
constrain what sentences are considered grammatical in any language. Proponents
of this view, which is predominant in those schools of linguistics that are
based on the generative theory of Noam Chomsky, do not necessarily consider
that language evolved for communication in particular. They consider instead
that it has more to do with the process of structuring human thought (see also
formal grammar). Another group of linguists, by contrast, use the term
"language" to refer to a communication system that developed to support
cooperative activity and extend cooperative networks. Such functional theories
of grammar view language as a tool that is adapted to the communicative needs
of its users, and the role of cultural evolutionary processes are often
emphasised over that of biological evolution. Variation and universality. While
some theories on linguistics focus on the different varieties that language
produces, among different sections of society, others focus on the universal
properties that are common to all given languages at one given time on the
planet. The theory of variation therefore would elaborate on the different
usages of popular languages like French and English across the globe, as well
as its smaller dialects and regional permutations within their national
boundaries. The theory of variation looks at the cultural stages that a
particular language undergoes, and these include the following. The first stage
is pidgin, or that phase in the creation of a language's variation when new,
non-native speakers undertake a mainstream language and use its phrases and
words in a broken manner that often attempts to be overly literal in meaning.
At this junction, many of the linguistic characteristics of the native
speakers' own language or mother tongue influence their use of the mainstream
language, and that is when it arrives at the stage of being called a creole.
Hence, this process in the creation of dialects and varieties of languages as
globally popular as English and French, as well as others like Spanish, for
instance, is one that is rooted in the changing evolution and growth of each
language. These variating factors are studied in order to understand the
different usages and dialects that a language develops over time. Universality,
on the other hand, looks at formal structures and features that are common to
all languages, and the template of which pre-exists in the mind of an infant
child. This idea is based on the theory of generative grammar and the formal
school of linguistics, whose proponents include Noam Chomsky and those who
follow his theory and work. Schools of thought. Early grammarians. The formal
study of language began in India with Pāṇini, the 5th century BC grammarian
who formulated 3,959 rules of Sanskrit morphology. Pāṇini’s systematic
classification of the sounds of Sanskrit into consonants and vowels, and word
classes, such as nouns and verbs, was the first known instance of its kind. In
the Middle East Sibawayh (سیبویه) made a detailed description of Arabic
in 760 AD in his monumental work, "Al-kitab fi al-nahw" (الكتاب في
النحو, "The Book on Grammar"), the first known author to distinguish
between sounds and phonemes (sounds as units of a linguistic system). Western
interest in the study of languages began as early as in the East, but the
grammarians of the classical languages did not use the same methods or reach
the same conclusions as their contemporaries in the Indic world. Early interest
in language in the West was a part of philosophy, not of grammatical
description. The first insights into semantic theory were made by Plato in his
"Cratylus" dialogue, where he argues that words denote concepts that are
eternal and exist in the world of ideas. This work is the first to use the word
etymology to describe the history of a word's meaning. Around 280 BC one of
Alexander the Great’s successors founded a university (see Musaeum) in
Alexandria, where a school of philologists studied the ancient texts in and
taught Greek to speakers of other languages. This school was the first to use
the word "grammar" in its modern sense, Plato had used the word in its original
meaning as "téchnē grammatikḗ" (Τέχνη Γραμματική), the "art
of writing," which is also the title of one of the most important works of the
Alexandrine school by Dionysius Thrax. Throughout the Middle Ages the study of
language was subsumed under the topic of philology, the study of ancient
languages and texts, practiced by such educators as Roger Ascham, Wolfgang
Ratke and John Amos Comenius. Historicism. In the 18th century, the first use
of the comparative method by William Jones sparked the rise of comparative
linguistics. Bloomfield attributes "the first great scientific linguistic work
of the world" to Jacob Grimm, who wrote "Deutsche Grammatik". It was soon
followed by other authors writing similar comparative studies on other language
groups of Europe. The scientific study of language was broadened from Indo-
European to language in general by Wilhelm von Humboldt, of whom Bloomfield
asserts:"This study received its foundation at the hands of the Prussian
statesman and scholar Wilhelm von Humboldt (1767—1835), especially in the
first volume of his work on Kavi, the literary language of Java, entitled
"Über die Verschiedenheit des menschlichen Sprachbaues und ihren Einfluß auf
die geistige Entwickelung des Menschengeschlechts" (‘On the Variety of the
Structure of Human Language and its Influence upon the Mental Development of
the Human Race’)." Structuralism. Early in the 20th century, Saussure
introduced the idea of language as a static system of interconnected units,
defined through the oppositions between them. By introducing a distinction
between diachronic to synchronic analyses of language, he laid the foundation
of the modern discipline of linguistics. Saussure also introduced several basic
dimensions of linguistic analysis that are still foundational in many
contemporary linguistic theories, such as the distinctions between syntagm and
paradigm, and the langue- parole distinction, distinguishing language as an
abstract system ("langue") from language as a concrete manifestation of this
system ("parole"). Substantial additional contributions following Saussure's
definition of a structural approach to language came from The Prague school,
Leonard Bloomfield, Charles F. Hockett, Louis Hjelmslev, Émile Benveniste and
Roman Jakobson. Generativism. During the last half of the 20th century,
following the work of Noam Chomsky, linguistics was dominated by the
generativist school. While formulated by Chomsky in part as a way to explain
how human beings acquire language and the biological constraints on this
acquisition, in practice it has largely been concerned with giving formal
accounts of specific phenomena in natural languages. Generative theory is
modularist and formalist in character. Chomsky built on earlier work of Zellig
Harris to formulate the generative theory of language. According to this theory
the most basic form of language is a set of syntactic rules universal for all
humans and underlying the grammars of all human languages. This set of rules is
called Universal Grammar, and for Chomsky describing it is the primary
objective of the discipline of linguistics. For this reason the grammars of
individual languages are of importance to linguistics only in so far as they
allow us to discern the universal underlying rules from which the observable
linguistic variability is generated. A formal description of language attempts
to replicate a speaker's knowledge of the rules of their language, and the aim
is to produce a set of rules that is minimally sufficient to successfully model
valid linguistic forms. Functionalism. Functional theories of language propose
that since language is fundamentally a tool, it is reasonable to assume that
its structures are best analyzed and understood with reference to the functions
they carry out. Functional theories of grammar differs from formal theories of
grammar, in that the latter seeks to define the different elements of language
and describe the way they relate to each other as systems of formal rules or
operations, whereas the former defines the functions performed by language and
then relates these functions to the linguistic elements that carry them out.
This means that functional theories of grammar tend to pay attention to the way
language is actually used, and not just to the formal relations between
linguistic elements. Functional theories then describe language in term of
functions existing on all levels of language. Cognitive linguistics. In the
1970s and 1980s, a new school of thought known as cognitive linguistics emerged
as a reaction to generativist theory. Led by theorists such as Ronald Langacker
and George Lakoff, linguists working within the realm of cognitive linguistics
propose that language is an emergent property of basic, general-purpose
cognitive processes. In contrast to the generativist school of linguistics,
cognitive linguistics is non-modularist and functionalist in character.
Important developments in cognitive linguistics include cognitive grammar,
frame semantics, and conceptual metaphor, all of which are based on the idea
that form-function correspondences based on representations derived from
embodied experience constitute the basic units of language. Cognitive
linguistics interprets language in terms of the concepts, sometimes universal,
sometimes specific to a particular tongue, which underlie its forms. It is thus
closely associated with semantics but is distinct from psycholinguistics, which
draws upon empirical findings from cognitive psychology in order to explain the
mental processes that underlie the acquisition, storage, production and
understanding of speech and writing. Cognitive linguistics denies that there is
an "autonomous linguistic faculty" in the mind; it understands grammar in terms
of "conceptualization"; and it claims that knowledge of language arises out of
"language use". Because of its conviction that knowledge of language is learned
through use, cognitive linguistics is sometimes considered to be a functional
approach, but it differs from other functional approaches in that it is
primarily concerned with how the mind creates meaning through language, and not
with the use of language as a tool of communication. Sub-disciplines.
Linguistic structures. Linguistic structures are pairings of meaning and form.
Any particular pairing of meaning and form is a Saussurean sign. For instance,
the meaning "cat" is represented worldwide with a wide variety of different
sound patterns (in oral languages), movements of the hands and face (in sign
languages), and written symbols (in written languages). Linguists focusing on
structure attempt to understand the rules regarding language use that native
speakers know (not always consciously). All linguistic structures can be broken
down into component parts that are combined according to (sub)conscious rules,
over multiple levels of analysis. For instance, consider the structure of the
word "tenth" on two different levels of analysis. On the level of internal word
structure (known as morphology), the word "tenth" is made up of one linguistic
form indicating a number and another form indicating ordinality. The rule
governing the combination of these forms ensures that the ordinality marker
"th" follows the number "ten." On the level of sound structure (known as
phonology), structural analysis shows that the "n" sound in "tenth" is made
differently from the "n" sound in "ten" spoken alone. Although most speakers of
English are consciously aware of the rules governing internal structure of the
word pieces of "tenth", they are less often aware of the rule governing its
sound structure. Linguists focused on structure find and analyze rules such as
these, which govern how native speakers use language. Linguistics has many sub-
fields concerned with particular aspects of linguistic structure. These sub-
fields range from those focused primarily on form to those focused primarily on
meaning. They also run the gamut of level of analysis of language, from
individual sounds, to words, to phrases, up to discourse. Many linguists would
agree that these divisions overlap considerably, and the independent
significance of each of these areas is not universally acknowledged. Regardless
of any particular linguist's position, each area has core concepts that foster
significant scholarly inquiry and research. Inter-disciplinary factors.
Alongside the structurally motivated domains of study, are other fields within
the domain of linguistics. These fields are often distinguished by external
factors that influence the study of language. Semiotics is a larger discipline
that investigates the relationship between signs and what they signify more
broadly. From the perspective of semiotics, language can be seen as a sign or
symbol, with the world as its representation. Sub-fields. Historical
linguistics. Historical linguists study the history of specific languages as
well as general characteristics of language change. One aim of historical
linguistics is to classify languages in language families descending from a
common ancestor, an enterprise that relies primarily on the comparative method.
This involves comparison of elements in different languages to detect possible
cognates in order to be able to reconstruct how different languages have
changed over time. Some historical linguists, along with non-linguists
interested in language change, have also employed such tools as computational
phylogenetics. The study of language change is also referred to as "diachronic
linguistics", which can be distinguished from "synchronic linguistics", the
study of a given language at a given moment in time without regard to its
previous stages. Historical linguistics was among the first linguistic
disciplines to emerge and was the most widely practised form of linguistics in
the late 19th century. However, a shift in focus to the synchronic perspective
began in the early twentieth century with Saussure and became predominant in
western linguistics through the work of Noam Chomsky. Semiotics. Semiotics is
the study of sign processes (semiosis), or signification and communication,
signs, and symbols, both individually and grouped into sign systems, including
the study of how meaning is constructed and understood. Semioticians often do
not restrict themselves to linguistic communication when studying the use of
signs but extend the meaning of "sign" to cover all kinds of cultural symbols.
Nonetheless, semiotic disciplines closely related to linguistics are literary
studies, discourse analysis, text linguistics, and philosophy of language.
Semiotics, within the linguistics paradigm, is the study of the relationship
between language and culture. Historically, Edward Sapir and Ferdinand De
Saussure's structuralist theories influenced the study of signs extensively
until the late part of the 20th century, but later, post-modern and post-
structural thought, through language philosophers including Jacques Derrida,
Mikhail Bakhtin, Michel Foucault, and others, have also been a considerable
influence on the discipline in the late part of the 20th century and early 21st
century . These theories emphasise the role of language variation, and the idea
of subjective usage, depending on external elements like social and cultural
factors, rather than merely on the interplay of formal elements. Language
documentation. Since the inception of the discipline of linguistics, linguists
have been concerned with describing and analysing previously undocumented
languages. Starting with Franz Boas in the early 1900s, this became the main
focus of American linguistics until the rise of formal structural linguistics
in the mid-20th century. This focus on language documentation was partly
motivated by a concern to document the rapidly disappearing languages of
indigenous peoples. The ethnographic dimension of the Boasian approach to
language description played a role in the development of disciplines such as
sociolinguistics, anthropological linguistics, and linguistic anthropology,
which investigate the relations between language, culture, and society. The
emphasis on linguistic description and documentation has also gained prominence
outside North America, with the documentation of rapidly dying indigenous
languages becoming a primary focus in many university programs in linguistics.
Language description is a work-intensive endeavour, usually requiring years of
field work in the language concerned, so as to equip the linguist to write a
sufficiently accurate reference grammar. Further, the task of documentation
requires the linguist to collect a substantial corpus in the language in
question, consisting of texts and recordings, both sound and video, which can
be stored in an accessible format within open repositories, and used for
further research. Applied linguistics. Linguists are largely concerned with
finding and describing the generalities and varieties both within particular
languages and among all languages. Applied linguistics takes the results of
those findings and "applies" them to other areas. Linguistic research is
commonly applied to areas such as language education, lexicography, and
translation. "Applied linguistics" has been argued to be something of a
misnomer, since applied linguists focus on making sense of and engineering
solutions for real-world linguistic problems, not simply "applying" existing
technical knowledge from linguistics; moreover, they commonly apply technical
knowledge from multiple sources, such as sociology (e.g., conversation
analysis) and anthropology. Today, computers are widely used in many areas of
applied linguistics. Speech synthesis and speech recognition use phonetic and
phonemic knowledge to provide voice interfaces to computers. Applications of
computational linguistics in machine translation, computer-assisted
translation, and natural language processing are areas of applied linguistics
that have come to the forefront. Their influence has had an effect on theories
of syntax and semantics, as modeling syntactic and semantic theories on
computers constraints. Linguistic analysis is a sub-discipline of applied
linguistics used by many governments to verify the claimed nationality of
people seeking asylum who do not hold the necessary documentation to prove
their claim. This often takes the form of an interview by personnel in an
immigration department. Depending on the country, this interview is conducted
either in the asylum seeker's native language through an interpreter or in an
international lingua franca like English. Australia uses the former method,
while Germany employs the latter; the Netherlands uses either method depending
on the languages involved. Tape recordings of the interview then undergo
language analysis, which can be done either by private contractors or within a
department of the government. In this analysis, linguistic features of the
asylum seeker are used by analysts to make a determination about the speaker's
nationality. The reported findings of the linguistic analysis can play a
critical role in the government's decision on the refugee status of the asylum
seeker. Translation. The sub-field of translation includes the translation of
written and spoken texts across mediums, from digital to print and spoken. To
translate literally means to transmute the meaning from one language into
another. Translators are often employed by organisations, such as travel
agencies as well as governmental embassies to facilitate communication between
two speakers who do not know each other's language. Translators are also
employed to work within computational linguistics setups like Google Translate
for example, which is an automated, programmed facility to translate words and
phrases between any two or more given languages. Translation is also conducted
by publishing houses, who convert works of writing from one language to another
in order to reach varied audiences. Description and prescription. Linguistics
is descriptive; linguists describe and explain features of language without
making subjective judgments on whether a particular feature is "right" or
"wrong". This is analogous to practice in other sciences: A zoologist studies
the animal kingdom without making subjective judgments on whether a particular
animal is better or worse than another. Prescription, on the other hand, is an
attempt to promote particular linguistic usages over others, often favouring a
particular dialect or "acrolect". This may have the aim of establishing a
linguistic standard, which can aid communication over large geographical areas.
It may also, however, be an attempt by speakers of one language or dialect to
exert influence over speakers of other languages or dialects (see Linguistic
imperialism). An extreme version of prescriptivism can be found among censors,
who attempt to eradicate words and structures that they consider to be
destructive to society. Speech and writing. Nonetheless, linguists agree that
the study of written language can be worthwhile and valuable. For research that
relies on corpus linguistics and computational linguistics, written language is
often much more convenient for processing large amounts of linguistic data.
Large corpora of spoken language are difficult to create and hard to find, and
are typically transcribed and written. In addition, linguists have turned to
text-based discourse occurring in various formats of computer-mediated
communication as a viable site for linguistic inquiry. The study of writing
systems themselves is, in any case, considered a branch of linguistics. See
also. Branches and fields. Anthropological linguistics, Articulatory phonology,
Asemic writing, Axiom of categoricity, Biolinguistics, Biosemiotics,
Articulatory synthesis, Cognitive linguistics, Cognitive science, Comparative
linguistics, Computational linguistics, Concept Mining, Corpus linguistics,
Critical discourse analysis, Cryptanalysis, Decipherment, Descriptive
linguistics, Developmental linguistics, Discourse Analysis, Discourse,
Ecolinguistics, Embodied cognition, Endangered languages, Evolutionary
linguistics, Forensic linguistics, Global language system, Glottometrics,
Grammar Writing, Historical linguistics, History of linguistics, Integrational
linguistics, Intercultural competence, International Linguistic Olympiad,
Language acquisition, Language attrition, Language engineering, Language
geography, Lexicography/Lexicology, Linguistic typology, Machine translation,
Metacommunicative competence, Microlinguistics, Natural language processing,
Neurolinguistics, Orthography, Philology, Post-structuralism, Reading, Second
language acquisition, Semiotics, Sociocultural linguistics, Sociolinguistics,
Speaker recognition (authentication), Speech processing, Speech recognition,
Speech synthesis, Stratificational linguistics, Structuralism, Text
linguistics, Varieties, Writing systems.
