Delegative democracy Delegate Democracy, also known as liquid democracy, is a
form of democratic control whereby voting power is vested in delegates, rather
than representatives. This term is a generic description of either already
existing or proposed popular control apparatuses. The delegative form.
Variations on this general model most certainly exist, and this outline is only
mentioned here for orientation within a general model. For example, in the "Joy
of Revolution" delegates are left open to being specialized "at the time of
each individual's delegation of authority". Additionally, general principles of
fluidity can often be applied to the concept such that individuals can revise
their "vote" at any time by modifying their registered delegation (sometimes
called "proxy") with the governing organization. (see also Single Transferable
Vote.) Contrasted with representative democracy. Crucial to the understanding
of delegate democracy is the theory's view of the meaning of "representative
democracy." Representative democracy is seen as a form of governance whereby a
single winner is determined for a predefined jurisdiction, with a change of
delegation only occurring after the preset term length (or in some instances by
a forced recall election if popular support warrants it). The possibility
usually exists within representation that the "recalled" candidate can win the
subsequent electoral challenge. This is contrasted with most forms of
governance referred to as "delegative." Delegates may not, but usually do, have
specific limits on their "term" as delegates, nor do they represent specific
jurisdictions. Some key differences include: Contrasted with direct democracy.
Outside of these two main differences, delegative models are seen as
essentially a form of direct democracy. So much so that some have taken to
calling the system a "direct democracy with delegable proxies" (though that
name is less common.) Notable examples of delegative democracy. The internal
policies of the Paris Commune are seen as the real-world precursor to the more
formalized notions of modern delegative democracy. Early Soviets, before a
Bolshevik majority was reached. Delegative democracy was gradually eroded in
favor of more representational forms of governance. Industrial Workers of the
World trade federation. Its general assembly consists of delegates elected to
carry out deliberations and construct referendums. All members can proxy their
votes and have full access to meetings. The assembly currently has no power to
make and enforce decisions on its own. These changes are accomplished by way of
referendum, though policy changes have been proposed. Mondragon Corporation
General assembly is supreme authority in the corporation and it consists of all
the workers. Pirate Party in Germany, Italy, and Austria uses delegacy
democracy with the open source software LiquidFeedback.
