Local Works Local Works is a UK coalition of over 120 national organisations
campaigning to promote the use of the Sustainable Communities Act. Originally
set up by the new economics foundation, the Local Works coalition was formed in
2002 with the sole aim of campaigning to see the Sustainable Communities Bill
made law. Local Works ran an effective operation in support of the Bill,
including a parliamentary Early Day Motion signed by 363 MPs, showing cross-
party support. It was taken up as a Private Members Bill by Nick Hurd,
Conservative MP for Ruislip-Northwood, when he won the Private Members Bill
ballot in 2006. During its parliamentary passage, the Bill (in an amended form)
gained support of the government, and Phil Woolas as the then Local Government
Minister. It was successful in this campaign when the Sustainable Communities
Act was passed by the UK Parliament in October 2007 with the support of all
political parties in Parliament at that time. Since then Local Works, as a part
of Unlock Democracy, has been promoting the Act and urging people to get
involved and government to implement it properly. Purpose and Aims of the
Sustainable Communities Act. The Sustainable Communities Act 2007 gives an
opportunity for councils and communities to put forward new thinking on how to
meet the challenges of sustainability and local wellbeing. It starts from the
principle that local people know best what needs to be done to promote the
sustainability of their area, but that sometimes they need central government
to act to enable them to do so. It provides a channel for local people and the
councils which represent them to ask central government to take such action.
The Sustainable Communities Act is a piece of legislation that aims to reverse
the trend called 'Ghost Town Britain'. Ghost Town Britain refers to the ongoing
community decline through loss of local facilities and services including
amongst others: shops, markets, post offices, pubs, banks and health centres.
The term 'Ghost Town Britain' was initially coined by the British think-tank
New Economics Foundation in two reports: Ghost Town Britain (2002) and Clone
Town Britain (2004). The Amendment Campaign. In November 2009 Local Works
successfully saw the Sustainable Communities Act Amendment Bill introduced into
the UK Parliament as a Private Members' Bill. The Sustainable Communities Act
2007 was amended in 2010 when the Sustainable Communities Act 2007 (Amendment)
Act passed through Parliament and became law on 6th April 2010. The Amendment
was necessary to ensure:
