Local currency A Community Currency is often used as synonym for complementary
currency, local currency, regional currency, alternative currency, auxiliary
currencies, and private currencies. The debate is not easy to solve, since the
words have different meanings to different people. All are currencies that have
different designs and serve different purposes than conventional money. They
depart from the notion that money is essentially a human invention and
instrument to influence the relations between citizens and organizations. A
solid theoretical framework legitimizes this idea and in the past hundred years
a lot of experimentation and experience was picked up with realizing social
goals by the implementation of community currencies. In economics, a local
currency, in its common usage, is a currency not backed by a national
government (and not necessarily legal tender), and intended to trade only in a
small area. As a tool of fiscal localism, local moneys can raise awareness of
the state of the local economy, especially among those who may be unfamiliar or
uncomfortable with traditional bartering. These currencies are also referred to
as community currency, and are a form of alternative currency or complementary
currency. They encompass a wide range of forms, both physically and
financially, and often are associated with a particular economic discourse.
History. In the modern era, the most recognizable local currencies were company
scrip issued in certain industries to pay workers, and token coins issued by
some businesses to encourage consumer loyalty. In the 19th and early 20th
centuries, the failures of national banks during crises often created acute
demands for cash, which were met by businesses creating emergency currency.
These scrips were usually issued with the intention of redemption in national
currency at some later date. A few such currencies, however, developed into
monetary systems in their own right. The idea of using free banking to produce
an alternative, community-level currency dates back at least as far as the
German Credit Unions in the 1800s. The oldest local currencies known to be in
continuous use are the WIR in Switzerland, and the Labor Banks in Japan.
Complementary currency is a hypernym to local currency, but the terms are often
used as synonyms. The term "local currency" does not refer to national currency
that happens to be used only in a local area. Advocates of local currency, such
as Jane Jacobs, argue that this enables an economically cool, yet depressed
region to pull itself up by giving the people living there a medium of exchange
they can use to exchange services and locally-produced goods. In a broader
sense, this is the original purpose of all money. Local currencies also tend to
operate in relatively small geographic regions and encourage recycling and
reducing the amount of carbon emissions from the transportation and manufacture
of goods. As a result, they are part of the economic strategy of many green and
sustainable-living groups such as the Green Party of England and Wales. Local
currencies can come into being also when there is economic turmoil involving
the national currency. For example, during the Argentine economic crisis of
2002, small denomination, interest-free provincial bond IOUs issued by local
governments quickly took on some of the characteristics of local currencies
successfully. Opponents of this concept argue that local currency creates a
barrier which can interfere with economies of scale and comparative advantage,
and that in some cases they can serve, like traditional national currencies, as
a means of tax evasion. Use of local currencies to boost local economies is
strongly advocated by Social Trade Organisation STRO in the Netherlands,
Instrodi in Latin America, and Qoin in the Netherlands. Historical local
currencies. The Wörgl experiment that was conducted from July 1932 to November
1933 is a classic example of the potential efficacy of local currencies.
Wörgl, a small town in Austria with 4000 inhabitants, introduced a local scrip
during the Great Depression. By 1932, unemployment in Wörgl had risen to 30%.
The local government had amassed debts of 1.3 million Austrian schillings (AS)
against cash reserves of 40,000 AS. Local construction and civic maintenance
had come to a standstill. On the initiative of the town's mayor, Michael
Unterguggenberger, the local government printed 32,000 in labor certificates
which carried a negative 1% monthly interest rate and could be converted into
schillings at 98% of face value. An equivalent amount in schillings, deposited
in the local bank as cover for the certificates in case of mass redemption,
earned interest for the government. The certificates circulated so rapidly that
only 12,000 were ever actually put into circulation. According to reports by
the mayor and economists of the day who studied the experiment, the scrip was
readily accepted by local merchants and the local population. It used the scrip
to carry out 100,000 AS in public works projects involving construction and
repair of roads, bridges, tanks, drainage systems, factories, and buildings.
The scrip was also accepted as legal tender for payment of local taxes. In the
one year the currency was in circulation, it circulated 13 times faster than
the official shilling and served as a catalyst to the local economy. The heavy
arrears in local tax collection declined dramatically. Local government revenue
rose from 2,400 AS in 1931 to 20,400 in 1932. Unemployment was eliminated,
while it remained very high throughout the rest of the country. No increase in
prices was observed. Based on the dramatic success of the Wörgl experiment,
several other communities introduced similar scrips. In spite of the tangible
benefits of the program, it met with stiff opposition from the regional
socialist party and from the Austrian central bank, which opposed the local
currency as an infringement on its powers over the currency. As a result, the
program was suspended, unemployment rose, and the local economy soon
degenerated to the level of other communities in the country. Characteristics.
Theory. it establishes an internal trade barrier, as the local currency cannot
be used externally, and allows the area to have a different (presumably lower)
interest rate than the national currency's — in the Wörgl experiment, a
negative interest rate, known as demurrage. Advocacy and criticism of local
currencies is based partly on general attitudes towards monetarism and
mercantilism, and partly on opinions of the desirability of having internal
variations in currency and trade. Advocates of local currency in effect argue
that, in certain circumstances, an entire country is not an optimum currency
area, and that various regions should have different currencies. Compare with
the Eurozone in Europe. Benefits. The Wörgl experiment dramatically
illustrates some of the common characteristics and major benefits of local
currencies. Society utilizes only a small portion of its resources and
opportunities. Almost everyone has underutilized knowledge, skills and time
that can be engaged productively. Most manufacturers and services have
underutilized machinery or capacity. Complementary currencies are a creative
means to enhance this untapped social potential. Difficulties and criticisms.
Local currencies and the Transition Towns movement in the UK have received
criticism for a failure to address the needs of the wider population,
especially lower socio-economic groups. Such local currency initiatives have
been more widely criticized in light of limited success stimulating new
spending in local economies and as an unrealistic strategy to reduce carbon
emissions. Successful Local Currencies such as the Wörgl experiment attract
hostility from the Central Governments, as they reduce the bureaucracy's
control over an important power centre. Modern local currencies. has been a
tremendous surge in the use of local currencies over the past two decades.
Today there are over 2,500 different local currency systems operating in
countries throughout the world. Since 2002 there has been an upsurge in local
currency experiments particularly payment voucher-based systems that are
exchangeable with the national currency. Such currencies aim to raise the
resilience of local economies by encouraging re-localisation of buying and food
production. The drive for this change has arisen from a range of community-
based initiatives and social movements. The Transition Towns movement
originating in the UK has utilised local currencies for re-localisation in the
face of energy descent from peak oil and climate change. Other drives include
movements against Clone town and Big-box trends. Previously, one of the most
prominent systems was LETS, local exchange trading system, a trading network
supported by its own internal currency. Originally started in Vancouver,
Canada, there are presently more than 30 LETS systems operating in Canada and
over 400 in the United Kingdom. Australia, France, New Zealand, and Switzerland
have similar systems. Time Dollars, Ithaca Hours, and PEN exchange are among
the most successful systems in the USA.
