Localism (politics) Localism describes a range of political philosophies which
prioritize the local. Generally, localism supports local production and
consumption of goods, local control of government, and promotion of local
history, local culture and local identity. Localism can be contrasted with
regionalism and centralized government, with its opposite being found in the
unitary state. History. Localists assert that throughout the world's history,
most social and economic institutions have been scaled at the local level, as
opposed to regional, inter-regional, or global (basically until the late 19th-
early 20th centuries). Only with imperialism and the industrial revolution did
local scales become denigrated. Most proponents of localism position themselves
as defending aspects of this earlier way of life; the phrase "relocalization"
is often used in this sense. In the 20th century, localism drew heavily on the
writings of Leopold Kohr, E.F. Schumacher, Wendell Berry, and Kirkpatrick Sale,
among others. More generally, localism draws on a wide range of movements and
concerns and it proposes that by re-localizing democratic and economic
relationships to the local level, social, economic and environmental problems
will be more definable and solutions more easily created. These include
anarchism, bioregionalism, environmentalism, the Greens, and more specific
concerns about food, monetary policy and education. Political parties of all
persuasions have also occasionally favored the devolution of power to local
authorities. In this vein Alan Milburn, a Labour Party MP, has spoken of
"making services more locally accountable, devolving more power to local
communities and, in the process, forging a modern relationship between the
state, citizens and services" Beginning in the 1980s, a particularly visible
strain of localism in the United States was a movement to buy locally produced
products. This movement originated with organic farming and likely gained
impetus because of growing dissatisfaction with organic certification and the
failing economic model of industrial agriculture for small farmers. While the
advocates of local consumption draw on protectionist arguments, they also
appealed primarily to an environmental argument: that pollution caused by
transporting goods was a major externality in a global economy, and one that
"localvores" could greatly diminish. Also, environmental issues can be
addressed when decision making power is held by those affected by the issues
instead of power sources that do not understand the needs of local communities.
Localism as a Political Philosophy. In the early 21st century, localists have
frequently found themselves aligned with critics of globalisation. Variants of
localism are prevalent within the Green movement. According to an article in
the International Socialism Journal, localism of this sort seeks to "answer to
the problems created by globalisation" with "calls to minimise international
trade and to seek to establish economies based on ‘local’ self-sufficiency
only." Some Localists believe that society should be organised politically
along community lines, with each community being free to conduct its own
business in whatever fashion its people see fit. The size of these communities
is defined such that their members are both familiar and dependent on each
other — a size something along the lines of a small town or village. In
reference to Localism Edward Goldsmith, former editor of The Ecologist
magazine, claims that "The problems facing the world today can only be solved
by restoring the functioning of those natural systems which once satisfied our
needs, i.e. by fully exploiting those incomparable resources which are
individual people, families, communities and ecosystems, which together make up
the biosphere or real world" Thomas "Tip" O'Neill, a longtime Speaker of the
House in the U.S. Congress, once famously declared that "All politics is local"
He eventually wrote a book by that name: "All Politics Is Local: And Other
Rules of the Game". Localism and concern for the third world. Many localists
are concerned with the problems of the development of the third world. Many
advocate that third world countries should aim to rely on their own goods and
services in order to escape from what they see are the unfair trade relations
with the developed world. George Monbiot claims this idea does not recognise
the fact that, though Third world countries often get a raw deal in trade
relations, not trading at all would be a significant blow because the countries
need the revenue generated by trade. Some localists are also against
immigration from poor countries to rich ones. One of the problems they claim
results from such immigration is the drain on the intellectual resources of
poor countries, so called brain drain. For example, in the past decade Bulgaria
is estimated to have lost more than 50,000 qualified scientists and skilled
workers through emigration every year. About one fifth of them were highly
educated specialists in chemistry, biology, medicine and physics. International
relations. Some Localists are against political intervention and peace keeping
measures. They believe that Communities should find solutions to their own
problems and in their own time, in what ever fashion they decide. They believe
that all societies are capable of achieving long term peace once given the
opportunity to do so. Localist activism. Localism usually describes social
measures or trends which emphasise or value local and small-scale phenomena.
This is in contrast to large, all-encompassing frameworks for action or belief.
Localism can therefore be contrasted with globalisation, and in some cases
localist activism has parallels with opposition to corporate-led globalization.
Localism can be geographical, but there are also transnational linkages.
Localist movements are often organized in support of locally owned, independent
businesses and nonprofit organizations. Although the focus of this aspect of
localist activism is on "buy local," "support local food," and "bank local"
campaigns, some organizations and businesses also combine the goal of increased
local ownership with environmental sustainability and social fairness goals.
McKibben, Bill. Eaarth. New York: Time /Henry Holt, 2010. Print. Business & the
Environment; Sep2011, Vol. 22 Issue 9, p1-4, 4p Curtis, Fred. "Eco-localism and
Sustainability." Science Direct. N.p., Aug. 2003. Web. Oct. 6.
www.sciencedirect.com.ezproxy.ithaca.edu:2048/science/article/pii/
S0921800903001022>.
