Local purchasing Local purchasing is a preference to buy locally produced goods
and services over those produced more distantly. It is very often abbreviated
as a positive goal 'buy local' to parallel the phrase think globally, act
locally common in green politics. On the national level, the equivalent of
local purchasing is import substitution, the deliberate industrial policy or
agricultural policy of replacing goods or services produced on the far side of
a national border with those produced on the near side, i.e. in the same
country or trade bloc. Historically, there have been so many incentives to buy
locally that no one had to make any kind of point to do so, but with current
market conditions, it is often cheaper to buy distantly-produced goods, despite
the added costs in terms of packaging, transport, inspection, retail
facilities, etc.. As such, one must now often take explicit action if one wants
to purchase locally produced goods. These market conditions are based on
externalized costs, argues local economy advocates. Examples of externalized
costs include the price of war, asthma, or climate change, which are not
typically included in the cost of a gallon of fuel, for instance. Most
advocates for local economics address contracting and investment, as well as
purchasing. Agricultural alternatives are being sought, and have manifested
themselves in the form of farmers’ markets, farmed goods sold through the
community cooperatives, urban gardens, and even school programs that endorse
community agriculture. Rationale for local purchasing. Advocates often suggest
local purchasing as a form of moral purchasing. Local purchasing is often
claimed to be better for the environment and better for working conditions.
Others contend (with empirical evidence) that local purchasing and contracting
enhances local job creation and wealth while strengthening community
cohesiveness. The first potential moral benefit is environmental: Bringing
goods from afar generally requires using more energy than transporting goods
locally, and some environmental advocates (for instance, Amory Lovins) see this
as a serious environmental threat. Transportation contributes to environmental
contamination in addition to the pollution caused by chemical inputs in the
growing phase. Of course, locally produced goods are not "always" more energy-
efficient; local agriculture or manufacturing may rely on heavy inputs (e.g.
industrial agriculture) or energy-inefficient machinery and/or transportation
systems. However, small-scale growers tend to be more environmentally friendly
because industrial-sized agriculture uses genetically modified crops,
monoculture production, and chemical fertilizer intensive processes to grow
crops—practices that local farmers typically avoid. The second potential
benefit is creating better working conditions. Nonetheless, while diverting
purchasing from developing countries to local farmers helps build the local
economy, it can lead to worse conditions for poor farmers in developing
countries because it removes potential buyers from the market. The goal of
localization is not necessarily to eradicate globalization; rather, it is to
reduce unnecessary transport and to strengthen and diversify community
economies. This calls for condensation of agriculture and supports the idea
that local farmers are capable of sustaining a community. The term “Buy
Local” has become subject to varying interpretations. While leading advocates
of local independent business such as the American Independent Business
Alliance say the term should apply only to locally-owned independent
businesses, some campaigns run by governments and Chambers of Commerce consider
local to be merely a geographic consideration. Additionally, many corporations
have manipulated the term in ways critics call "local-washing." Alternative
Viewpoints. The argument that 'buying local' is good for the economy is
questioned by many economic theorists. They argue that transportation costs
actually account for a tiny fraction of overall production prices, and that
choosing less efficient local products over more efficient nonlocal products is
an economic deadweight loss. Moreover, the community as a whole does not
actually save money because consumers have to spend so much more on the more
expensive local products. Karen Selick argues that the buying local trend is
just a watered down version of protectionism, and would not benefit communities
as proponents envisage. Additionally, organic local food tends to be more
costly so this is not an appealing option to consumers who are shopping on a
budget. Small-scale farmers do not receive government subsidies and are not
able to support their business on prices comparable to those of industrial-
scale food production, so they must sell at higher prices to make a living.
Therefore, in order for the appeal of the local agriculture movement to
overcome the economic cost, people must be willing to invest in it, which is
unlikely when apparently similar products are available in grocery stores for a
lower cost. Despite this, distribution costs of expansive food trade must also
be factored in; with increasing gas prices, it becomes more expensive to ship
food from outside sources. Besides these arguments against purchasing locally,
society has now reached a point where globalization is so deeply embedded, it
is difficult to turn back, and impossible to remove completely. Globalization
has fostered a higher level of dependency, requiring international trade for
products that may not be otherwise available, particularly produce that is
grown out-of-season. Limited local accessibility is indicative that trade on a
global scale is a necessity in the modern economy. This transcontinental
sharing of food results in an exchange that continues to be both profitable and
sustainable, provided that the government support and consumer demand for these
products persists.
