Lorenz curve In economics, the Lorenz curve is a graphical representation of
the cumulative distribution function of the empirical probability distribution
of wealth; it is a graph showing the proportion of the distribution assumed by
the bottom "y"% of the values. It is often used to represent income
distribution, where it shows for the bottom "x"% of households, what percentage
"y"% of the total income they have. The percentage of households is plotted on
the "x"-axis, the percentage of income on the "y"-axis. It can also be used to
show distribution of assets. In such use, many economists consider it to be a
measure of social inequality. It was developed by Max O. Lorenz in 1905 for
representing inequality of the wealth distribution. The concept is useful in
describing inequality among the size of individuals in ecology, and in studies
of biodiversity, where cumulative proportion of species is plotted against
cumulative proportion of individuals. It is also useful in business modeling:
e.g., in consumer finance, to measure the actual delinquency Y% of the X% of
people with worst predicted risk scores. Explanation. Every point on the Lorenz
curve represents a statement like "the bottom 20% of all households have 10% of
the total income." (see Pareto principle). A perfectly equal income
distribution would be one in which every person has the same income. In this
case, the bottom "N"% of society would always have "N"% of the income. This can
be depicted by the straight line "y" = "x"; called the "line of perfect
equality." By contrast, a perfectly unequal distribution would be one in which
one person has all the income and everyone else has none. In that case, the
curve would be at "y" = 0 for all "x" < 100%, and "y" = 100% when "x" = 100%.
This curve is called the "line of perfect inequality." The Gini coefficient is
the area between the line of perfect equality and the observed Lorenz curve, as
a percentage of the area between the line of perfect equality and the line of
perfect inequality. The higher the coefficient, the more unequal the
distribution is. In the diagram on the right, this is given by the ratio A/
(A+B), where A and B are the indicated areas. Calculation. The Lorenz curve can
often be represented by a function "L"("F"), where "F" is represented by the
horizontal axis, and "L" is represented by the vertical axis. For an example of
a Lorenz curve, see Pareto distribution. Properties. A Lorenz curve always
starts at (0,0) and ends at (1,1). The Lorenz curve is not defined if the mean
of the probability distribution is zero or infinite. The Lorenz curve for a
probability distribution is a continuous function. However, Lorenz curves
representing discontinuous functions can be constructed as the limit of Lorenz
curves of probability distributions, the line of perfect inequality being an
example. The information in a Lorenz curve may be summarized by the Gini
coefficient and the Lorenz asymmetry coefficient. Note however that a Lorenz
curve for net worth would start out by going negative due to the fact that some
people have a negative net worth because of debt. The Lorenz curve is invariant
under positive scaling. If X is a random variable, for any positive number "c"
the random variable "c" X has the same Lorenz curve as X.
