Low-carbon economy A Low-Carbon Economy (LCE), Low-Fossil-Fuel Economy (LFFE)
or Decarbonised Economy is an economy that has a minimal output of greenhouse
gas (GHG) emissions into the environment biosphere, but specifically refers to
the greenhouse gas carbon dioxide. GHG emissions due to anthropogenic (human)
activity are increasingly either causing climate change (global warming) or
making climate change worse. Scientists are concerned about the negative
impacts of climate change on humanity in the foreseeable future. Globally
implemented LCEs, therefore, are proposed, by those having drawn this
conclusion, as a means to avoid catastrophic climate change, and as a precursor
to the more advanced, zero-carbon society and renewable energy economy.
Rationale and aims. Nations may seek to become low-carbon or decarbonised
economies as a part of a national climate change mitigation strategy. A
comprehensive strategy to mitigate, if that is possible, climate change is
carbon neutrality and geoengineering. The aim of a LCE is to integrate all
aspects of itself from its manufacturing, agriculture, transportation, and
power-generation, etc. around technologies that produce energy and materials
with little GHG emission, and, thus, around populations, buildings, machines,
and devices that use those energies and materials efficiently, and, dispose of
or recycle its wastes so as to have a minimal output of GHGs. Furthermore, it
has been proposed that to make the transition to an LCE economically viable we
would have to attribute a cost(per unit output) to GHGs through means such as
emissions trading and/or a carbon tax. Some nations are presently low carbon:
societies that are not heavily industrialised or populated. In order to avoid
climate change on a global level, all nations considered carbon intensive
societies, and societies that are heavily populated might have to become zero-
carbon societies and economies. Several of these countries have pledged to cut
their emissions by 100% via offsetting emissions rather than ceasing all
emissions (carbon neutrality); in other words, emitting will not cease but will
continue and will be "offset" to a different geographical area. Energy policy.
Renewable energy and energy efficiency. Recent advances in technology and
policy will allow renewable energy and energy efficiency to play major roles in
displacing fossil fuels, meeting global energy demand while reducing carbon
dioxide emissions. Renewable energy technologies are being rapidly
commercialized and, in conjunction with efficiency gains, can achieve far
greater emissions reductions than either could independently. Renewable energy
is energy that comes from natural resources such as sunlight, wind, rain,
tides, and geothermal heat, which are renewable (naturally replenished). In
2008, about 19% of global final energy consumption came from renewables. During
the five years from the end of 2004 through 2009, worldwide renewable energy
capacity grew at rates of 10–60 percent annually for many technologies. For
wind power and many other renewable technologies, growth accelerated in 2009
relative to the previous four years. More wind power capacity was added during
2009 than any other renewable technology. However, grid-connected photovoltaics
increased the fastest of all renewables technologies, with a 60 percent annual
average growth rate for the five-year period. Energy efficiency gains in recent
decades have been significant, but there is still much more that can be
achieved. With a concerted effort and strong policies in place, future energy
efficiency improvements are likely to be very large. Heat is one of many forms
of "energy wastage" that could be captured to significantly increase useful
energy without burning more fossil fuels. Energy storage. A criticsm of
renewable energy is the difficulty in balancing an electrical energy grid using
intermittant and variable energy sources. Storage of energy using for example
chemical, mechanical, etc. can help, but at a cost of lowering overall system
efficiencies. Smart grid. One proposal from Karlsruhe University developed as a
virtual power station is the use of solar and wind energy for base load with
hydro and biogas for make up or peak load. Hydro and biogas are used as energy
storage. This requires the development of a smart intelligent grid hopefully
including local power networks than use energy near the site of production,
thereby minimising electrical grid losses. Methane cycle. A further development
of this at kassel University, Fraunhofer Institute, Negawatt Institute, etc. is
the use of the carbon capture, hydrogen and its conversion into methane (SNG
synthetic natural gas) to act as a storage for intermittant renewables. CO2 +
4H2 → CH4 + 2H2O Sabatier reaction This involves the use of the existing
natural gas (methane) grid as the store. In this case, the carbon dioxide is
given economic value as a component of energy carrier. This "solar fuel" cycle
uses the excess electrical renewable energy that cannot be used instantanously
in the grid, which otherwise would be wasted to create hydrogen via
electrolysis of water. The hydrogen is then combined with CO2 to create
synthetic or substitute natural gas SNG and stored in the natural gas network.
The natural gas is used to create electrical energy (and the heat used as well
in CHP) on demand when there is not enough sun (photovoltaic, CSP...) or wind
(turbines) or water (hydro, ocean current, waves...). The German natural gas
grid, for example, has 2 months of storage, more than enough to see out
renewable energy low production points. Nuclear power and CCS. Nuclear power
and/or the proposed strategies of carbon capture and storage (CCS) have been
offered as the primary means to achieve a LCE while continuing to exploit non-
renewable resources; there is concern, however, with the matter of spent-
nuclear-fuel storage, security, and the uncertainty of costs and time needed to
successfully implement CCS worldwide and with guarantees that the stored
emissions will not leak into the biosphere. The liquid fluoride thorium reactor
(LFTR) has been suggested as a solution to the concerns posed by conventional
nuclear. Combined Heat and Power. Combined Heat and Power (CHP) is a technology
which by allowing the more efficient use of fuel will at least reduce carbon
emissions; should the fuel be biomass or biogas or hydrogen used as an energy
store then in principle it can be a zero carbon option. CHP can also be used
with a nuclear reactor as the energy source, there are examples of such
installations in the far North of the Russian Federation. Primary sector.
Agriculture. Most of the agricultural facilities in the developed world are
mechanized due to rural electrification. Rural electrification has produced
significant productivity gains, but it also uses a lot of energy. For this and
other reasons (such as transport costs) in a low-carbon society, rural areas
would need available supplies of renewably produced electricity. Irrigation can
be one of the main components of an agricultural facility's energy consumption.
In parts of California, it can be up to 90%. In the low carbon economy,
irrigation equipment will be maintained and continuously updated and farms will
use less irrigation water. Crops. Glasshouse crops Irrigated arable crops
Livestock. Livestock operations can also use a lot of energy depending on how
they are run. Feed lots use animal feed made from corn, soybeans, and other
crops. Energy must be expended to produce these crops, process, and transport
them. Free-range animals find their own vegetation to feed on. The farmer may
expend energy to take care of that vegetation, but not nearly as much as the
farmer growing cereal and oil-seed crops. Many livestock operations currently
use a lot of energy to water their livestock. In the low-carbon economy, such
operations will use more water conservation methods such as rainwater
collection, water cisterns, etc., and they will also pump/distribute that water
with on-site renewable energy sources (most likely wind and solar). Irrigated
Dairy Hunting and fishing. Fishing is quite energy intensive. Improvements such
as heat recovery on refrigeration and trawl net technology will be common in
the low-carbon economy. Forestry. In the low-carbon economy, forestry
operations will be focused on low-impact practices and regrowth. Forest
managers will make sure that they do not disturb soil-based carbon reserves too
much. Specialized tree farms will be the main source of material for many
products. Quick maturing tree varieties will be grown on short rotations in
order to maximize output. Mining. Flaring and venting of natural gas in oil
wells is a significant source of greenhouse gas emissions. Its contribution to
greenhouse gases has declined by three-quarters in absolute terms since a peak
in the 1970s of approximately 110 million metric tons/year, and in 2004
accounted for about 1/2 of one percent of all anthropogenic carbon dioxide
emissions. The World Bank estimates that 134 billion cubic meters of natural
gas are flared or vented annually (2010 datum), an amount equivalent to the
combined annual gas consumption of Germany and France or enough to supply the
entire world with gas for 16 days. This flaring is highly concentrated: 10
countries account for 70% of emissions, and twenty for 85%. The top-ten leading
contributors to world gas flaring in 2010, were (in declining order): Russia
(26%), Nigeria (11%), Iran (8%), Iraq (7%), Algeria (4%), Angola (3%),
Kazakhstan (3%), Libya (3%), Saudi Arabia (3%), and Venezuela (2%). Tertiary
sector. Retail. Retail operations in the low-carbon economy will have several
new features. One will be high-efficiency lighting such as compact fluorescent,
halogen, and eventually LED light sources. Many retail stores will also feature
roof-top solar panel arrays. These make sense because solar panels produce the
most energy during the daytime and during the summer. These are the same times
that electricity is the most expensive and also the same times that stores use
the most electricity. Transportation services. See Health services. There have
been some moves to investigate the ways and extent to which health systems
contribute to greenhouse gas emissions and how they may need to change to
become part of a low-carbon world. The Sustainable Development Unit of the NHS
in the UK is one of the first official bodies to have been set up in this area,
whilst organisations such as the Campaign for Greener Healthcare are also
producing influential changes at a clinical level. This work includes Initial
steps. A good overview of the history of international efforts towards a low-
carbon economy, from its initial seed at the inaugural UN Conference on the
Human Environment in Stockholm in 1972, has been given by David Runnals. On the
international scene, the most prominent early step in the direction of a low-
carbon economy was the signing of the Kyoto Protocol, which came into force on
February 16, 2005, under which most industrialized countries committed to
reduce their carbon emissions. Importantly, all member nations of the
Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development except the United States
have ratified the protocol. Europe is the leading geopolitical continent in
defining and mobilising decarbonisation policies. For instance, the UITP - an
organisation advocating sustainable mobility and public transport - has an EU
office, but less well developed contacts with, for example, the US. The
European Union Committee of the UITP wants to promote decarbonisation of urban
mobility in Europe. Although Europe is nowadays the leading geopolitical
continent with regard to lowering emissions, Europe is quickly losing ground to
Asia, with countries such as China and South Korea. Countries. Costa Rica.
Costa Rica sources much of its energy needs from renewables and is undertaking
reforestation projects. In 2007, the Costa Rican government announced the
commitment for Costa Rica to become the first carbon neutral country by 2021.
Iceland. Iceland began utilising renewable energy early in the 20th century and
so since has been a low-carbon economy. However, since dramatic economic
growth, Iceland's emissions have increased significantly per capita. As of
2009, Iceland energy is sourced from mostly geothermal energy and hydropower,
renewable energy in Iceland and, since 1999, has provided over 70% of the
nation's primary energy and 99.9% of Iceland's electricity. As a result of
this, Iceland's carbon emissions per capita are 62% lower than those of the
United States despite using more primary energy per capita, due to the fact
that it is renewable and thus limitless and costs Icelanders almost nothing.
Iceland seeks carbon neutrality and expects to use 100% renewable energy by
2050 by generating hydrogen fuel from renewable energy sources. Australia.
Australia has implemented schemes to start the transition to a low-carbon
economy but carbon neutrality has not been mentioned and since the introduction
of such scheme emissions have increased. The current government has mentioned
the concept but has done little and has pledged to lower emissions by 5-15%. In
2001, The Howard Government introduced a Mandatory Renewable Energy Target
(MRET) scheme. In 2007, the Government revised the MRET - 20 percent of
Australia's electricity supply to come from renewable energy sources by 2020.
In 2009, the Rudd Government will legislate a short-term emissions reduction
target, another revision to the Mandatory Renewable Energy Target as well as an
emissions trading scheme. Renewable energy sources provide 8-10% of the
nation's energy, and this figure will increase significantly in the coming
years. However coal dependence and exporting conflicts with the concept of
Australia as a low-carbon economy. Carbon-neutral businesses have received no
incentive; they have voluntarily done so. Carbon-offset companies offer
assessments based on lifecycle impacts to businesses that seek carbon
neutrality. The Carbon Reduction Institute is one such offset provider, that
has produced a certification procedure to promote a low-carbon economy in
Australia. In 2011 the Gillard Government introduced a tax on carbon dioxide
emissions for businesses. China. In China, the city of Dongtan is to be built
to produce zero net greenhouse gas emissions. Chinese State Council has
announced its aim to cut China's carbon dioxide emission per unit of GDP by
40%-45% in 2020 from 2005 levels. United Kingdom. In the United Kingdom, the
Climate Change Act 2008 outlining a framework for the transition to a low-
carbon economy became law on November 26, 2008. This legislation requires a 80%
cut in the UK's carbon emissions by 2050 (compared to 1990 levels), with an
intermediate target of between 26% and 32% by 2020. Thus, the UK became the
first country to set such a long-range and significant carbon reduction target
into law. A meeting at the Royal Society on 17–18 November 2008 concluded
that an integrated approach, making best use of all available technologies, is
required to move toward a low-carbon future. It was suggested by participants
that it would be possible to move to a low-carbon economy within a few decades,
but that 'urgent and sustained action is needed on several fronts'. In June
2012, the UK coalition government announced the introduction of mandatory
carbon reporting, requiring around 1,100 of the UK’s largest listed companies
to report their greenhouse gas emissions every year. Deputy Prime Minister Nick
Clegg confirmed that emission reporting rules would come into effect from April
2013 in his piece for The Guardian. India. Low carbon strategies for inclusive
growth - An interim report (India), May 2011 Cities. Companies are planning
large scale developments without using fossil fuels. Development plans such as
those by World Wide Assets LLC for entire cities using only geothermal energy
for electricity, geothermal desalination, and employing full recycling systems
for water and waste are under development (2006) in Mexico and Australia.
Education. The University of Edinburgh has a Carbon Management MSc. As well as
a Carbon Finance MSc. The University of East Anglia has a Strategic Carbon
Management MBA. The myclimate climate education offers capacity building tools
like exhibitions, games, schoolbooks and courses for young people, adults and
businesses.
