Luxemburgism Luxemburgism (also written Luxembourgism) is a specific
revolutionary theory within Marxism, based on the writings of Rosa Luxemburg.
According to M. K. Dziewanowski, the term was originally coined by Bolshevik
leaders denouncing the deviations of Luxemburg's followers from traditional
Leninism, but it has since been adopted by her followers themselves.
Luxemburgism is a Marxist tendency which, while supporting the Russian
Revolution, as Rosa Luxemburg did, agrees with her criticisms of the politics
of the Bolsheviks. Luxemburgism as democratic revolutionary socialism. The
chief tenets of Luxemburgism are a commitment to democracy and the necessity of
the revolution taking place as soon as possible. In this regard, it is similar
to Council Communism, but differs in that, for example, Luxemburgists do not
reject elections by principle. It resembles anarchism in its insistence that
only relying on the people themselves as opposed to their leaders can avoid an
authoritarian society, but differs in that it sees the importance of a
revolutionary party, and mainly the centrality of the working class in the
revolutionary struggle. It resembles Trotskyism in its opposition to the
totalitarianism of Stalinist government while simultaneously avoiding the
reformist politics of Social Democracy, but differs from Trotskyism in arguing
that Lenin and Trotsky also made undemocratic errors. In "The Russian
Revolution", written in a German jail during WWI, Luxemburg critiqued
Bolsheviks' absolutist political practice and opportunist policies—i.e.,
their suppression of the Constituent Assembly in January 1918, their support
for the partition of the old feudal estates to the peasant communes. She
derived this critique from Marx's original concept of the "revolution in
permanence." Marx outlines this strategy in his March 1850 "Address of the
Central Committee to the Communist League." As opposed to the Bolsheviks' neo-
Blanquist interpretation of permanent revolution, Marx argued that the role of
the working class revolutionary party was not to create a one-party state, nor
to give away land—even in semi-feudal countries like Germany in 1850, or
Russia in 1917, where the working class was in the minority. Rather, Marx
argued that the role of the working class was, within structures of radical
democracy, to organize, arm and defend themselves in workers' councils and
militias, to campaign for their own socialist political program, to expand
workers' rights, and to seize and farm collectively the feudal estates. Because
the Bolsheviks failed to fulfil this Marxian program, Luxemburg argued, the
Revolution bureaucratized, the cities starved, and the peasant soldiers in the
Army were demoralized and deserted in order to get back home for the land grab.
Thus the Germans easily invaded and took Ukraine. They justified this, during
the Brest-Litovsk treaty negotiations, in the very same terms of "national
self-determination" (for the Ukrainian bourgeoisie) that the Bolsheviks had
promoted as an aid to socialist revolution, and that Luxemburg critiqued, years
earlier, in her "The National Question," and in this document. Luxemburg
criticized Lenin's ideas on how to organize a revolutionary party as likely to
lead to a loss of internal democracy and the domination of the party by a few
leaders. Ironically, in her most famous attack on Lenin's views, the 1904
"Organizational Questions of the Russian Social Democracy, or, Leninism or
Marxism?", a response to Lenin's 1903 "What Is To Be Done?," Luxemburg was more
worried that the authoritarianism she saw in Leninism would lead to
sectarianism and irrelevancy than that it would lead to a dictatorship after a
successful revolution - although she also warned of the latter danger.
Luxemburg died before Stalin's assumption of power, and never had a chance to
come up with a complete theory of Stalinism, but her criticisms of the
Bolsheviks have been taken up by many writers in their arguments about the
origins of Stalinism, including many who are otherwise far from Luxemburgism.
"The Russian Revolution", http://www.marxists.org/archive/luxemburg/1918/
russian-revolution/ch06.htm "The Russian Revolution", http://www.marxists.org/
archive/luxemburg/1918/russian-revolution/ch06.htm Dialectic of Spontaneity and
Organisation. "In a Revolutionary Hour: What Next?", "Collected Works" 1.2,
p.554 "The Political Leader of the German Working Classes", "Collected Works"
2, p.280 and "The Politics of Mass Strikes and Unions", "Collected Works" 2,
p.465 Other Luxemburg criticism of Lenin and Trotsky. Rosa Luxemburg also
criticized Lenin's views on the right of the oppressed nations of the former
Czarist Empire to self-determination. She saw this as a ready-made formula for
imperialist intervention in those countries on behalf of bourgeois forces
hostile to socialism. Proponents of Lenin's position on the nationalities argue
that it was in fact what brought many members of the different nationalities of
the former Czarist Empire together in supporting the Bolshevik-led revolution.
Luxemburgism as opposition to imperialist war and capitalism. While being
critical of the politics of the Bolsheviks, Rosa Luxemburg saw the behaviour of
the Social Democratic Second International as a complete betrayal of socialism.
As she saw it, at the outset of the First World War the Social Democratic
Parties around the world betrayed the world's working class by supporting their
own individual bourgeoisies in the war. This included her own Social Democratic
Party of Germany (SPD), the majority of whose delegates in the Reichstag voted
for war credits. Rosa Luxemburg opposed the sending of the working class youth
of each country to what she viewed as slaughter in a war over which of the
national bourgeoisies would control world resources and markets. She broke from
the Second International, viewing it as nothing more than an opportunist party
that was doing administrative work for the capitalists. Rosa Luxemburg, with
Karl Liebknecht, organized a strong movement in Germany with these views, but
was imprisoned and, after her release, killed for her work during the failed
German Revolution of 1919 - a revolution which the German Social Democratic
Party violently opposed. Present-day Luxemburgism. There are presently very few
active Luxemburgist revolutionary movements. There are two small international
networks that claim to be Luxemburgists : Communist Democracy (Luxemburgist),
founded in 2005, and the International Luxemburgist Network, founded in 2008.
There is also widespread interest in her ideas particularly among feminists and
Trotskyists as well as among leftists in Germany. It has been seen as a
corrective to revolutionary theory by distinguished modern Marxist thinkers
such as Ernest Mandel, who has even been characterised as "Luxemburgist". In
2002 ten thousand people marched in Berlin for Rosa Luxemburg and Karl
Liebknecht and another 90,000 people laid carnations on their graves. To many
socialists, whether they see themselves as Luxemburgist or not, Rosa Luxemburg
was a martyr for revolutionary socialism. For Luxemburgists, her stalwart
dedication to democracy and vigorous repudiation of capitalism exemplifies the
socialist concept of democracy that is viewed as the essential element of
socialism rather than a contradiction of it. Many socialist currents today,
particularly Trotskyists and left communists, consider Rosa Luxemburg to have
been an important influence on their theory and politics. However, while
respecting Luxemburg, these organizations do not consider themselves
"Luxemburgist."
