Machiavellianism Machiavellianism (or machiavellian mask) is, according to the
"Oxford English Dictionary", "the employment of cunning and in statecraft or in
general conduct", deriving from the Italian Renaissance diplomat and writer
Niccolò Machiavelli, who wrote "Il Principe" ("The Prince") and other works.
The word has a similar use in modern psychology where it describes one of the
dark triad personalities, characterised by a duplicitous interpersonal style
associated with cynical beliefs and pragmatic morality. "Machiavellian" (and
variants) as a word became very popular in the late 16th century in English,
though "Machiavellianism" itself is first cited by the Oxford English
Dictionary from 1626. Political thought. In the 16th century, immediately
following the publication of the Prince, Machiavellianism was seen as a foreign
plague infecting northern European politics, originating in Italy, and having
first infected France. It was in this context that the St. Bartholomew's Day
massacre of 1572 in Paris came to be seen as a product of Machiavellianism, a
view greatly influenced by the Huguenot Innocent Gentillet, who published his
"Discours contre Machievel" in 1576, which was printed in ten editions in three
languages over the next four years. Gentillet held, quite wrongly according to
Sydney Anglo, that Machiavelli's "books held most dear and precious by our
Italian and Italionized [sic courtiers" in France (in the words of his first
English translation), and so (in Anglo's paraphrase) "at the root of France's
present degradation, which has culminated not only in the St Bartholemew
massacre but the glee of its perverted admirers". In fact there is little trace
of Machiavelli in French writings before the massacre, not that politicians
telegraph their intentions in writing, until Gentillet's own book, but this
concept was seized upon by many contemporaries, and played a crucial part in
setting the long-lasting popular concept of Machiavellianism. The English
playwright Christopher Marlowe was an enthusiastic proponent of this view. In
"The Jew of Malta" (1589–90) "Machievel" in person speaks the Prologue,
claiming not to be dead, but to have possessed the soul of (the Duke of) Guise,
"And, now the Guise is dead, is come from France/ To view this land, and frolic
with his friends" (Prologue, lines 3–4) His last play, "The Massacre at
Paris" (1593) takes the massacre, and the following years, as its subject, with
the Duke of Guise and Catherine de' Medici both depicted as Machiavellian
plotters, bent on evil from the start. The "Anti-Machiavel" is an 18th century
essay by Frederick the Great, King of Prussia and patron of Voltaire, rebutting
"The Prince", and Machiavellianism. It was first published in September 1740, a
few months after Frederick became king, and is one of many such works.
Psychology. Machiavellianism is also a term that some social and personality
psychologists use to describe a person's tendency to be emotionally cool and
detached, and thus more able to detach from conventional morality and to
deceive and manipulate others. In the 1960s, Richard Christie and Florence L.
Geis developed a test for measuring a person's level of Machiavellianism. Their
MACH-IV test, a twenty-statement personality survey, became the standard self-
assessment tool of Machiavellianism. People scoring high on the scale ("high
Machs") tend to endorse statements such as, "Never tell anyone the real reason
you did something unless it is useful to do so," (No. 1) but not ones like,
"Most people are basically good and kind" (No. 4), "There is no excuse for
lying to someone else," (No. 7) or "Most people who get ahead in the world lead
clean, moral lives" (No. 11). Using their scale, Christie and Geis conducted
multiple experimental tests that showed that the interpersonal strategies and
behavior of "High Machs" and "Low Machs" differ. Their basic results have been
widely replicated. Measured on the Mach-IV scale, males are on average slightly
more Machiavellian than females. Motivation. A 1992 review described
Machiavellian motivation as related to cold selfishness and pure
instrumentality, and those high on the trait were assumed to pursue their
motives (e.g. sex, achievement, sociality) in duplicitous ways. More recent
research on the motivations of high Machs compared to low Machs found that they
gave high priority to money, power, and competition and relatively low priority
to community building, self-love, and family concerns. High Machs admitted to
focusing on unmitigated achievement and winning at any cost. Abilities. Due to
their skill at interpersonal manipulation, there has often been an assumption
that high Machs possess superior intelligence, or ability to understand other
people in social situations. However, research has firmly established that
Machiavellianism is unrelated to IQ. Furthermore, studies on emotional
intelligence have found that high Machiavellianism actually tends to be
associated with low emotional intelligence as assessed by both performance and
questionnaire measures. Both empathy and emotion recognition have been shown to
have negative correlations with Machiavellianism. Additionally, research has
shown that Machiavellianism is unrelated to a more advanced theory of mind,
that is, the ability to anticipate what others are thinking in social
situations. If high Machs actually are skilled at manipulating others this
appears to be unrelated to any special cognitive abilities as such. Relations
with other personality traits. Machiavellianism is one of the three personality
traits referred to as the dark triad, along with narcissism and psychopathy.
Some psychologists consider Machiavellianism to be essentially a subclinical
form of psychopathy, although recent research suggests that while
Machiavellianism and psychopathy overlap, they are distinct personality
constructs. Machiavellianism has been found to be negatively correlated with
the Agreeableness (r = -.47) and Conscientiousness (r = -.34) dimensions of the
Big Five personality model (NEO-PI-R). However, machiavellianism correlates
more highly with the Honesty-humility dimension of the six-factor HEXACO model
than with any of the Big Five dimensions. Machiavellianism has also been
located within the interpersonal circumplex, which consists of the two
independent dimensions of agency and communion. Agency refers to motivation to
succeed and to individuate the self, whereas communion refers to motivation to
merge with others and to support group interests. Machiavellianism lies in the
quadrant of the circumplex defined by high agency and low communion.
Machiavellianism has been found to lie diagonally opposite from a circumplex
construct called "self-construal", a tendency to prefer communion over agency.
This suggests that people high in machiavellianism do not simply wish to
achieve, they wish to do so at the expense of (or at least without regard to)
others. Game theory. In 2002, the Machiavellianism scale of Christie and Geis
was applied by behavioral game theorists Anna Gunnthorsdottir, Kevin McCabe and
Vernon L. Smith in their search for explanations for the spread of observed
behavior in experimental games, in particular individual choices which do not
correspond to assumptions of material self-interest captured by the standard
Nash equilibrium prediction. It was found that in a trust game, those with high
MACH-IV scores tended to follow homo economicus' equilibrium strategies while
those with low MACH-IV scores tended to deviate from the equilibrium, and
instead made choices that reflected widely accepted moral standards and social
preferences.
