Macmillan Publishers Macmillan Publishers Ltd, also known as The Macmillan
Group, is a privately held international publishing company owned by Georg von
Holtzbrinck Publishing Group. It has offices in 41 countries worldwide and
operates in more than thirty others. History. Macmillan was founded in 1843 by
Daniel and Alexander Macmillan, two brothers from the Isle of Arran, Scotland.
Daniel was the business brain, while Alexander laid the literary foundations,
publishing such great authors as Charles Kingsley (1855), Thomas Hughes (1859),
Francis Turner Palgrave (1861), Christina Rossetti (1862), Matthew Arnold
(1865) and Lewis Carroll (1865). Alfred Tennyson joined the list in 1884,
Thomas Hardy in 1886 and Rudyard Kipling in 1890. As the company evolved, the
brothers' vision continued to inspire the publishing of major writers including
W. B. Yeats, Rabindranath Tagore, Sean O'Casey, John Maynard Keynes, Charles
Morgan, Hugh Walpole, Margaret Mitchell, C. P. Snow, Rumer Godden and Ram
Sharan Sharma. Beyond literature, their vision led to the creation of such
enduring titles as "Nature" (1869), the "Grove Dictionary of Music and
Musicians" (1877) and Sir Robert Palgrave's "Dictionary of Political Economy"
(1894–99). Macmillan established an office in New York City. It sold its
American division in 1896, which published as the Macmillan Company. Macmillan
Publishers re-entered the American market in 1954 under the name St. Martin's
Press. After retiring from politics in 1964, former Prime Minister of the
United Kingdom Harold Macmillan became chairman of the company, serving until
his death in December 1986. The company was one of the oldest independent
publishing houses until 1995, when a 70% share of the company was bought by
German media giant Georg von Holtzbrinck Publishing Group ("Verlagsgruppe Georg
von Holtzbrinck GmbH"). Holtzbrinck purchased the remaining shares in 1999,
ending the Macmillan family's ownership of the company. Since 2007 the CEO of
Macmillan Publishers Ltd has been Annette Thomas. Macmillan in the United
States. George Edward Brett opened the first Macmillan office in the United
States in 1869 and Macmillan sold its U.S. operations to the Brett family,
George Platt Brett, Sr. and George Platt Brett, Jr. in 1896, resulting in the
creation of an American company, Macmillan Publishing, also called the
Macmillan Company. Even with the split of the American company from its parent
company in England, George Brett, Jr. and Harold Macmillan remained close
personal friends. George P. Brett, Jr. made the following comments in a letter
dated 23 January 1947 to Daniel Macmillan about his family's devotion to the
American publishing industry:"For the record my grandfather was employed by
Macmillan's of England as a salesman. He came to the United States with his
family in the service of Macmillan's of England and built up a business of
approximately $50,000 before he died. He was succeeded . . . by my father, who
eventually incorporated The Macmillan Company of New York and built up business
of about $9,000,000. I succeeded my father, and we currently doing a business
of approximately $12,000,000. So then, the name of Brett and the name of
Macmillan have been and are synonymous in the United States." Pearson acquired
the Macmillan name in America in 1998, following its purchase of the Simon &
Schuster educational and professional group (which included various Macmillan
properties). Holtzbrinck purchased it from them in 2001. McGraw-Hill continues
to market its pre-kindergarten through elementary school titles under its
Macmillan/McGraw-Hill brand. U.S. operations of Georg von Holtzbrinck are now
known as Macmillan. The current CEO of Macmillan U.S. is John Turner Sargent,
Jr. E-books. By some estimates, as of 2009 e-books account for three to five
per cent of total book sales, and are the fastest growing segment of the
market. According to "The New York Times", Macmillan and other major publishers
"fear that massive discounting e-books by retailers including Amazon, Barnes &
Noble and Sony could ultimately devalue what consumers are willing to pay for
books." In response, the publisher introduced a new boilerplate contract for
its authors that established a royalty of 20 per cent of net proceeds on e-book
sales, a rate five per cent lower than most other major publishers. Following
the announcement of the Apple iPad on January 27, 2010—a product that comes
with access to the iBookstore—Macmillan gave Amazon.com two options: continue
to sell e-books based on a price of the retailer's choice (the "wholesale
model"), with the e-book edition released several months after the hardcover
edition is released, or switch to the agency model introduced to the industry
by Apple, in which both are released simultaneously and the price is set by the
publisher. In the latter case, Amazon.com would receive a 30 per cent
commission. Amazon responded by pulling all Macmillan books, both electronic
and physical, from their website (although affiliates selling the books were
still listed). On January 31, 2010, Amazon chose the agency model and
"capitulated" to the change demanded by Macmillan, in spite of Amazon's belief
that the new model leads to e-book prices that are "needlessly high."
