Macroeconomics Macroeconomics (from Greek prefix "makros-" meaning "large" +
"economics") is a branch of economics dealing with the performance, structure,
behavior, and decision-making of an economy as a whole, rather than individual
markets. This includes national, regional, and global economies. With
microeconomics, macroeconomics is one of the two most general fields in
economics. Macroeconomists study aggregated indicators such as GDP,
unemployment rates, and price indices to understand how the whole economy
functions. Macroeconomists develop models that explain the relationship between
such factors as national income, output, consumption, unemployment, inflation,
savings, investment, international trade and international finance. In
contrast, microeconomics is primarily focused on the actions of individual
agents, such as firms and consumers, and how their behavior determines prices
and quantities in specific markets. While macroeconomics is a broad field of
study, there are two areas of research that are emblematic of the discipline:
the attempt to understand the causes and consequences of short-run fluctuations
in national income (the business cycle), and the attempt to understand the
determinants of long-run economic growth (increases in national income).
Macroeconomic models and their forecasts are used by both governments and large
corporations to assist in the development and evaluation of economic policy and
business strategy. Basic macroeconomic concepts. Macroeconomics encompasses a
variety of concepts and variables, but three are central topics for
macroeconomic research. Macroeconomic theories usually relate the phenomena of
output, unemployment, and inflation. Outside of macroeconomic theory, these
topics are also extremely important to all economic agents including workers,
consumers, and producers. Output and income. National output is the total value
of everything a country produces in a given time period. Everything that is
produced and sold generates income. Therefore, output and income are usually
considered equivalent and the two terms are often used interchangeably. Output
can be measured as total income, or, it can be viewed from the production side
and measured as the total value of final goods and services or the sum of all
value added in the economy. Macroeconomic output is usually measured by Gross
Domestic Product (GDP) or one of the other national accounts. Economists
interested in long-run increases in output study economic growth. Advances in
technology, accumulation of machinery and other capital, and better education
and human capital all lead to increased economic output over time. However,
output does not always increase consistently. Business cycles can cause short-
term drops in output called recessions. Economists look for macroeconomic
policies that prevent economies from slipping into recessions and that lead to
faster long-term growth. Unemployment. The amount of unemployment in an economy
is measured by the unemployment rate, the percentage of workers without jobs in
the labor force. The labor force only includes workers actively looking for
jobs. People who are retired, pursuing education, or discouraged from seeking
work by a lack of job prospects are excluded from the labor force. Unemployment
can be generally broken down into several types that are related to different
causes. Classical unemployment occurs when wages are too high for employers to
be willing to hire more workers. Wages may be too high because of minimum wage
laws or union activity. Consistent with classical unemployment, frictional
unemployment occurs when appropriate job vacancies exist for a worker, but the
length of time needed to search for and find the job leads to a period of
unemployment. Structural unemployment covers a variety of possible causes of
unemployment including a mismatch between workers' skills and the skills
required for open jobs. Large amounts of structural unemployment can occur when
an economy is transitioning industries and workers find their previous set of
skills are no longer in demand. Structural unemployment is similar to
frictional unemployment since both reflect the problem of matching workers with
job vacancies, but structural unemployment covers the time needed to acquire
new skills not just the short term search process. While some types of
unemployment may occur regardless of the condition of the economy, cyclical
unemployment occurs when growth stagnates. Okun's law represents the empirical
relationship between unemployment and economic growth. The original version of
Okun's law states that a 3% increase in output would lead to a 1% decrease in
unemployment. Inflation and deflation. A general price increase across the
entire economy is called inflation. When prices decrease, there is deflation.
Economists measure these changes in prices with price indexes. Inflation can
occur when an economy becomes overheated and grows too quickly. Similarly, a
declining economy can lead to deflation. Central bankers, who control a
country's money supply, try to avoid changes in price level by using monetary
policy. Raising interest rates or reducing the supply of money in an economy
will reduce inflation. Inflation can lead to increased uncertainty and other
negative consequences. Deflation can lower economic output. Central bankers try
to stabilize prices to protect economies from the negative consequences of
price changes. Changes in price level may be result of several factors. The
quantity theory of money holds that changes in price level are directly related
to changes in the money supply. Most economists believe that this relationship
explains long-run changes in the price level. Short-run fluctuations may also
be related to monetary factors, but changes in aggregate demand and aggregate
supply can also influence price level. For example, a decrease in demand
because of a recession can lead to lower price levels and deflation. A negative
supply shock, like an oil crisis, lowers aggregate supply and can cause
inflation. Macroeconomic models. Aggregate Demand-Aggregate Supply. The AD-AS
model has become the standard textbook model for explaining the macroeconomy.
This model shows the price level and level of real output given the equilibrium
in aggregate demand and aggregate supply. The aggregate demand curve's downward
slope means that more output is demanded at lower price levels. The downward
slope is the result of two effects: the Pigou or real balance effect, which
states that as real price fall real wealth increases, so consumers demand more
goods, and the Keynes or interest rate effect, which states that as prices fall
the demand for money declines causing interest rates to decline and borrowing
for investment and consumption to increase. In the conventional Keynesian use
of the AS-AD model, the aggregate supply curve is horizontal at low levels of
output and becomes inelastic near the point of potential output, which
corresponds with full-employment. Since the economy cannot produce beyond more
than potential output, any AD expansion will lead to higher price levels
instead of higher output. The AD-AS diagram can model a variety of
macroeconomic phenomena including inflation. When demand for goods exceeds
supply there is an inflationary gap where demand-pull inflation occurs and the
AD curve shifts upward to a higher price level. When the economy faces higher
costs, cost-push inflation occurs and the AS curve shifts upward to higher
price levels. The AS-AD diagram is also widely used as pedagogical tool to
model the effects of various macroeconomic policies. IS/LM. The IS/LM model
represents the equilibrium in interest rates and output given by the
equilibrium in the goods and money markets. The goods market is represented by
the equilibrium in investment and saving (IS), and the money market is
represented by the equilibrium between the money supply and liquidity
preference. The IS curve consists of the points where investment, given the
interest rate, is equal to savings, given output. The IS curve is downward
sloping because output and the interest rate have an inverse relationship in
the goods market: As output increases more money is saved, which means interest
rates must be lower to spur enough investment to match savings. The LM curve is
upward sloping because interest rates and output have a positive relationship
in the money market. As output increases, the demand for money increases, and
interest rates increase. The IS/LM model is often used to demonstrate the
effects of monetary and fiscal policy. Textbooks frequently use the IS/LM
model, but it does not feature the complexities of most modern macroeconomic
models. Nevertheless, these models still feature similar relationships to those
in IS/LM. Development. Origins. In the typical view of the quantity theory,
money velocity (V) and the quantity of goods produced (Q) would be constant, so
any increase in money supply (M) would lead to a direct increase in price level
(P). The quantity theory of money was a central part of the classical theory of
the economy that prevailed in the early twentieth century. Keynes and his
followers. Macroeconomics, at least in its modern form, began with the
publication of John Maynard Keynes's "General Theory of Employment, Interest
and Money". When the Great Depression struck, classical economists had
difficulty explaining how goods could go unsold and workers could be left
unemployed. In classical theory, prices and wages would drop until the market
cleared, and all goods and labor were sold. Keynes offered a new theory of
economics that explained why markets might not clear, which would evolve (later
in the 20th century) into a group of macroeconomic schools of thought known as
Keynesian economics - also called Keynesianism or Keynesian theory. In Keynes's
theory, the quantity theory broke down because people and businesses tend to
hold on to their cash in tough economic times, a phenomenon he described in
terms of liquidity preferences. Keynes also explained how the multiplier effect
would magnify a small decrease in consumption or investment and cause declines
throughout the economy. Keynes also noted the role uncertainty and animal
spirits can play in the economy. The generation following Keynes combined the
macroeconomics of the "General Theory" with neoclassical microeconomics to
create the neoclassical synthesis. By the 1950s, most economists had accepted
the synthesis view of the macro economy. Economists like Paul Samuelson, Franco
Modigliani, James Tobin, and Robert Solow developed formal Keynesian models,
and contributed formal theories of consumption, investment, and money demand
that fleshed out the Keynesian framework. Monetarism. Milton Friedman updated
the quantity theory of money to include a role for money demand. He argued that
the role of money in the economy was sufficient to explain the Great Depression
and aggregate demand oriented explanations were not necessary. Friedman argued
that monetary policy was more effective than fiscal policy; however, Friedman
doubted the government has ability to "fine-tune" the economy with monetary
policy. He generally favored a policy of steady growth in money supply instead
of frequent intervention. Friedman also challenged the Phillips Curve
relationship between inflation and unemployment. Friedman and Edmund Phelps
(who was not a monetarist) proposed an "augmented" version of the Phillips
Curve that excluded the possibility of a stable, long-run tradeoff between
inflation and unemployment. When the oil shocks of the 1970s created a high
unemployment and high inflation, Friedman and Phelps were vindicated.
Monetarism was particularly influential in the early 1980s. Monetarism fell out
of favor when central banks found it difficult to target money supply instead
of interest rates as monetarists recommended. Monetarism also became
politically unpopular when the central banks created recessions in order to
slow inflation. New classicals. New classical macroeconomics further challenged
the Keynesian school. A central development in new classical thought came when
Robert Lucas introduced rational expectations to macroeconomics. Prior to
Lucas, economists had generally used adaptive expectations where agents were
assumed to look at the recent past to make expectations about the future. Under
rational expectations, agents are assumed to be more sophisticated. A consumer
will not simply assume a 2% inflation rate because that has been the average
the past few years; he will look at current monetary policy and economic
conditions to make an informed forecast. When new classical economists
introduced rational expectations into their models, they showed that monetary
policy could only have a limited impact. Lucas also made an influential
critique of Keynesian empirical models. He argued that forecasting models based
on empirical relationships would be unstable. He advocated models based on
fundamental economic theory that would, in principle, be more stable as
economies changed. Following Lucas's critique, new classical economists, led by
Edward C. Prescott and Finn E. Kydland created real business cycle (RBC) models
of the macroeconomy. RBC models were created by combining fundamental equations
from neo-classical microeconomics. RBC models explained recessions and
unemployment with changes in technology instead changes in the markets for
goods or money. Critics of RBC models argue that money clearly plays an
important role in the economy, and the idea that technological regress can
explain recent recessions is also implausible. Despite questions about the
theory behind RBC models, they have clearly been influential in economic
methodology. New Keynesian response. New Keynesian economists responded to the
new classical school by adopting rational expectations and focusing on
developing micro-founded models that are immune to the Lucas critique. Stanley
Fischer and John B. Taylor produced early work in this area by showing that
monetary policy could be effective even in models with rational expectations
when contracts locked-in wages for workers. Other new Keynesian economists
expanded on this work and demonstrated other cases where inflexible prices and
wages led to monetary and fiscal policy having real effects. Like classical
models, new classical models had assumed that prices would be able to adjust
perfectly and monetary policy would only lead to price changes. New Keynesian
models investigated sources of sticky prices and wages, which would not adjust,
allowing monetary policy to impact quantities instead of prices. By the late
1990s economists had reached a rough consensus. The rigidities of new Keynesian
theory were combined with rational expectations and the RBC methodology to
produce dynamic stochastic general equilibrium (DSGE) models. The fusion of
elements from different schools of thought has been dubbed the new neoclassical
synthesis. These models are now used by many central banks and are a core part
of contemporary macroeconomics.
