Majority A majority is a subset of a set consisting of more than half of the
set's elements. This can be compared to a plurality, which is a subset larger
than any other subset considered; i.e. a plurality is not necessarily a
majority as the largest subset considered may consist of less than half the
set's elements. In British English, majority and plurality are often used as
synonyms, and the term majority is also alternatively used to refer to the
winning margin, i.e. the number of votes separating the first-place finisher
from the second-place finisher. A majority may be called a simple majority to
contrast with other types of majority: an overall majority, in parliamentary
systems, is the difference of legislators between the government and its
opposition; an absolute majority is a majority of "all" electors, not just
those who voted; and a supermajority is a stronger majority than a simple
majority. Example. Here, Memphis has a plurality (42%) of the first
preferences, but not a majority. We can contrast this by looking at the fourth
preferences, where the majority of voters (58%) have placed Memphis last. In
all single-winner voting systems apart from the simple plurality voting,
Memphis will lose as a majority of voters do not want the city as capital.
Parliamentary rules. In parliamentary procedure, the term 'majority' refers to
"more than half." As it relates to a vote, a majority is more than half of the
votes cast (noting that an abstention is simply the refusal to vote). The
definition of "majority vote" can differ, however, from one parliamentary
authority to another. Robert's Rules of Order defines a majority as being more
than one half of the votes cast including votes for ineligible candidates or
choices. "The Standard Code of Parliamentary Procedure" (abbreviated "TSC")
defines a majority as being more than half all eligible votes cast. For
example, assume that votes are cast for three people for an office: Alice and
Bob, who are eligible; and Carol, who is ineligible. By "Robert's Rules of
Order", no candidate has been elected as no candidate gained 11 votes. However,
by "The Standard Code", Alice is elected as she gained more than half of the
seventeen eligible votes.
