Majoritarianism Majoritarianism is a traditional political philosophy or agenda
which asserts that a majority (sometimes categorized by religion, language,
social class or some other identifying factor) of the population is entitled to
a certain degree of primacy in society, and has the right to make decisions
that affect the society. This traditional view has come under growing criticism
and democracies have increasingly included constraints in what the
parliamentary majority can do, in order to protect citizens' fundamental
rights. This should not be confused with the concept of a majoritarian
electoral system, which is a simple electoral system which usually gives a
majority of seats to the party with a plurality of votes. A parliament elected
by this method may be called a majoritarian parliament (e.g., the Parliament of
the United Kingdom). Under a democratic majoritarian political structure, the
majority would not exclude any minority from future participation in the
democratic process. Majoritarianism is sometimes pejoratively referred to by
its opponents as "ochlocracy" (literally, "mob rule") or "tyranny of the
majority". Majoritarianism is often referred to as majority rule, but which may
be referring to a majority class "ruling" over a minority class, while not
referring to the decision process called "majority rule". Concept in depth.
Advocates of majoritarianism argue that majority decision making is
intrinsically democratic and that any restriction on majority decision making
is intrinsically undemocratic. If democracy is restricted by a constitution
which cannot be changed by a simple majority decision then yesterday's majority
is being given more weight than today's. One critique of majoritarianism is
that systems without supermajority requirements for changing the rules for
voting can be shown to likely be unstable. If it is restricted by some small
group, such as aristocrats, judges, priests, soldiers, or philosophers, then
society becomes an oligarchy. The only restriction acceptable in a majoritarian
system is that a current majority has no right to prevent a different majority
emerging in the future (this could happen, for example, if a minority persuades
enough of the majority to change its position). In particular, a majority
cannot exclude a minority from future participation in the democratic process.
It should be noted, as it is often a subject of misunderstanding, that
majoritarianism does not prohibit a decision being made by representatives as
long as this decision is made via majority rule, as it can be altered at any
time by any different majority emerging in the future. Among critiques of
majoritarianism is that most decisions in fact take place not by majority rule,
but by plurality, unless the voting system artificially restricts candidates or
options to two only. In turn, due to Arrow's paradox, it is not possible to
have plurality voting systems with more than two options that retain adherence
to both certain "fairness" criteria and rational decision-making criteria.
Types. Majoritarianism, as a concept of government, branches out into several
forms. The classic form includes unicameralism and a unitary state. Qualified
majoritarianism is a more inclusionary form, with degrees of decentralization
and federalism. Integrative majoritarianism incorporates several institutions
to preserve minority groups and foster moderate political parties. History and
legacy. There are relatively few instances of large-scale majority rule in
recorded history, most notably the majoritarian system of Athenian democracy
and other ancient Greek city-states. However, some argue that none of those
Greek city-states were truly majority rule, particularly due to their exclusion
of women, non-landowners, and slaves from decision-making processes. Most of
the famous ancient philosophers staunchly opposed majoritarianism, because
decisions based on the will of the uneducated and/or uninformed 'masses' are
not necessarily wise or just. Plato is a prime example with his "Republic",
which describes a societal model based on a tripartite class structure.
Anthropologist David Graeber offers a reason as to why majority democratic
government is so scarce in the historical record. "Majority democracy, we might
say, can only emerge when two factors coincide: 1. a feeling that people should
have equal say in making group decisions, and 2. a coercive apparatus capable
of enforcing those decisions." Graeber argues that those two factors almost
never meet: "Where egalitarian societies exist, it is also usually considered
wrong to impose systematic coercion. Where a machinery of coercion did exist,
it did not even occur to those wielding it that they were enforcing any sort of
popular will." Majoritarianism (as a theory), similar to democracy, has often
been used as a pretext by sizable or aggressive minorities to politically
oppress other smaller (or civically inactive) minorities, or even sometimes a
civically inactive majority (see Richard Nixon's reference to the "Silent
Majority" that he asserted supported his policies). This agenda is most
frequently encountered in the realm of religion: In essentially all Western
nations, for instance, Christmas Day—and in some countries, other important
dates in the Christian calendar as well—are recognized as legal holidays;
plus a particular denomination may be designated as the state religion and
receive financial backing from the government (examples include the Church of
England in England and the Lutheran Church in the Scandinavian countries).
Virtually all countries also have one or more official languages, often to the
exclusion of some minority group or groups within that country who do not speak
the language or languages so designated. In most cases, those decisions have
not been made using a majoritarian referendum, and even in the rare case when a
referendum has been used, a new majority is not allowed to emerge at any time
and repeal it. Reform and backlash. In recent times—especially beginning in
the 1960s—some forms of majoritarianism have been countered by liberal
reformers in many countries: in the 1963 case "Abington School District v.
Schempp", the United States Supreme Court declared that school-led prayer in
the nation's public schools was unconstitutional, and since then many
localities have sought to limit, or even prohibit, religious displays on public
property. The movement toward greater consideration for the rights of
minorities within a society is often referred to as pluralism. This has
provoked a backlash from some advocates of majoritarianism, who lament the
Balkanization of society they claim has resulted from the gains made by the
multicultural agenda; these concerns were articulated in a 1972 book, "The
Dispossessed Majority", written by Wilmot Robertson. Multiculturalists, in
turn, have accused majoritarians of racism and/or xenophobia.
