Marginalism Marginalism is a theory of economics that attempts to explain the
discrepancy in the value of goods and services by reference to their secondary,
or marginal, utility. The reason why the price of diamonds is higher than that
of water, for example, owes to the greater additional satisfaction of the
diamonds over the water. Thus, while the water has greater total utility, the
diamond has greater marginal utility. The theory has been used in order explain
the difference in wages among essential and non-essential services, such as why
the wages of an air-conditioner repairman exceed those of a childcare worker.
The theory arose in the mid-to-late nineteenth century in response to the
normative practice of classical economics and growing socialist debates about
social and economic activity. Marginalism was an attempt to raise the
discipline of economics to the level of objectivity and universalism so that it
would not be beholden to normative critiques. The theory has since come under
attack for its failure to understand the nature of the market and for its
inability to account for new empirical data. Although the central concept of
marginalism is that of marginal utility, marginalists, following the lead of
Alfred Marshall, drew upon the idea of marginal physical productivity in
explanation of cost. The neoclassical tradition that emerged from British
marginalism abandoned the concept of utility and gave marginal rates of
substitution a more fundamental role in analysis. Marginalism is an integral
part of mainstream economic theory. Important marginal concepts. Marginality.
Constraints are conceptualized as a "border" or "margin". The location of the
margin for any individual corresponds to his or her "endowment", broadly
conceived to include opportunities. This endowment is determined by many things
including physical laws (which constrain how forms of energy and matter may be
transformed), accidents of nature (which determine the presence of natural
resources), and the outcomes of past decisions made both by others and by the
individual. A value that holds true given particular constraints is a
"marginal" value. A change that would be affected as or by a specific loosening
or tightening of those constraints is a "marginal" change. Neoclassical
economics usually assumes that marginal changes are infinitesimals or limits.
(Though this assumption makes the analysis less robust, it increases
tractability.) One is therefore often told that “marginal” is synonymous
with “very small”, though in more general analysis this may not be
operationally true (and would not in any case be literally true). Frequently,
economic analysis concerns the marginal values associated with a change of one
unit of a resource, because decisions are often made in terms of units;
marginalism seeks to explain unit prices in terms of such marginal values.
Marginal use. The marginal use of a good or service is the specific use to
which an agent would put a given increase, or the specific use of the good or
service that would be abandoned in response to a given decrease. Marginalism
assumes, for any given agent, economic rationality and an ordering of possible
states-of-the-world, such that, for any given set of constraints, there is an
attainable state which is best in the eyes of that agent. Descriptive
marginalism asserts that choice amongst the specific means by which various
anticipated specific states-of-the-world (outcomes) might be affected is
governed only by the distinctions amongst those specific outcomes; prescriptive
marginalism asserts that such choice "ought" to be so governed. On such
assumptions, each increase would be put to the specific, feasible, previously
unrealized use of greatest priority, and each decrease would result in
abandonment of the use of lowest priority amongst the uses to which the good or
service had been put. Marginal utility. The marginal utility of a good or
service is the utility of its marginal use. Under the assumption of economic
rationality, it is the utility of its least urgent possible use "from" the best
feasible combination of actions in which its use is included. In 20th century
mainstream economics, the term “utility” has come to be formally "defined"
as a "quantification" capturing preferences by assigning greater quantities to
states, goods, services, or applications that are of higher priority. But
marginalism and the concept of marginal utility predate the establishment of
this convention within economics. The more general conception of utility is
that of "use" or "usefulness", and this conception is at the heart of
marginalism; the term “marginal utility” arose from translation of the
German “Grenznutzen”, which literally means "border use", referring
directly to the marginal use, and the more general formulations of marginal
utility do not treat quantification as an "essential" feature. On the other
hand, none of the early marginalists insisted that utility were "not"
quantified, some indeed treated quantification as an essential feature, and
those who did not still used an assumption of quantification for expository
purposes. In this context, it is not surprising to find many presentations that
fail to recognize a more general approach. Quantified marginal utility. Under
the special case in which usefulness can be quantified, the change in utility
of moving from state formula_1 to state formula_2 is (where “c.p.”
indicates that the "only" independent variable to change is formula_6).
Mainstream neoclassical economics will typically assume that is well defined,
and use “marginal utility” to refer to a partial derivative The “law”
of diminishing marginal utility. The “law” of diminishing marginal utility
(also known as a “Gossen's First Law”) is that, "ceteris paribus", as
additional amounts of a good or service are added to available resources, their
marginal utilities are decreasing. This “law” is sometimes treated as a
tautology, sometimes as something proven by introspection, or sometimes as a
mere instrumental assumption, adopted only for its perceived predictive
efficacy. Actually, it is not quite any of these things, though it may have
aspects of each. The “law” does not hold under all circumstances, so it is
neither a tautology nor otherwise proveable; but it has a basis in prior
observation. However, if there "is" a complementarity across uses, then an
amount added can bring things past a desired tipping point, or an amount
subtracted cause them to fall short. In such cases, the marginal utility of a
good or service might actually be "increasing". Without the presumption that
utility is quantified, the "diminishing" of utility should not be taken to be
itself an arithmetic subtraction. It is the movement from use of higher to
lower priority, and may be no more than a purely ordinal change. When
quantification of utility is assumed, diminishing marginal utility corresponds
to a utility function whose "slope" is continually or continuously decreasing.
In the latter case, if the function is also smooth, then the “law” may be
expressed Neoclassical economics usually supplements or supplants discussion of
marginal utility with indifference curves, which were originally derived as the
level curves of utility functions, or can be produced without presumption of
quantification, but are often simply treated as axiomatic. In the absence of
complementarity of goods or services, diminishing marginal utility implies
convexity of indifference curves (though such convexity would also follow from
quasiconcavity of the utility function). Marginal rate of substitution. The
"rate of substitution" is the "least favorable" rate at which an agent is
willing to exchange units of one good or service for units of another. The
marginal rate of substitution (“MRS”) is the rate of substitution at the
margin — in other words, given some constraint(s). But, when the goods and
services are continuously divisible, in the limiting case and the marginal rate
of substitution is the slope of the indifference curve (multiplied by
formula_15). If, for example, Lisa will not trade a goat for anything less than
two sheep, then her And if she will not trade a sheep for anything less than
two goats, then her But if she would trade one gram of banana for one ounce of
ice cream "and vice versa", then When indifference curves (which are
essentially graphs of instantaneous rates of substitution) and the convexity of
those curves are not taken as given, the “law” of diminishing marginal
utility is invoked to explain diminishing marginal rates of substitution — a
willingness to accept fewer units of good or service formula_19 in substitution
for formula_20 as one's holdings of formula_19 grow relative to those of
formula_20. If an individual has a stock or flow of a good or service whose
marginal utility is less than would be that of some other good or service for
which he or she could trade, then it is in his or her interest to effect that
trade. Of course, as one thing is traded-away and another is acquired, the
respective marginal gains or losses from further trades are now changed. On the
assumption that the marginal utility of one is diminishing, and the other is
not increasing, all else being equal, an individual will demand an increasing
ratio of that which is acquired to that which is sacrificed. (One important way
in which all else might not be equal is when the use of the one good or service
complements that of the other. In such cases, exchange ratios might be
constant.) If any trader can better his or her own marginal position by
offering an exchange more favorable to other traders with desired goods or
services, then he or she will do so. Marginal cost. At the highest level of
generality, a marginal cost is a marginal opportunity cost. In most contexts,
however, “marginal cost” will refer to marginal "pecuniary" cost — that
is to say marginal cost measured by forgone money. A thorough-going marginalism
sees marginal cost as increasing under the “law” of diminishing marginal
utility, because applying resources to one application reduces their
availability to other applications. Neoclassical economics tends to disregard
this argument, but to see marginal costs as increasing in consequence of
diminishing returns. Application to price theory. Marginalism and neoclassical
economics typically explain price formation broadly through the interaction of
curves or schedules of supply and demand. In any case buyers are modelled as
pursuing typically lower quantities, and sellers offering typically higher
quantities, as price is increased, with each being willing to trade until the
marginal value of what they would trade-away exceeds that of the thing for
which they would trade. Demand. Demand curves are explained by marginalism in
terms of marginal rates of substitution. At any given price, a prospective
buyer has some marginal rate of substitution of money for the good or service
in question. Given the “law” of diminishing marginal utility, or otherwise
given convex indifference curves, the rates are such that the willingness to
forgo money for the good or service decreases as the buyer would have ever more
of the good or service and ever less money. Hence, any given buyer has a demand
schedule that generally decreases in response to price (at least until quantity
demanded reaches zero). The aggregate quantity demanded by all buyers is, at
any given price, just the sum of the quantities demanded by individual buyers,
so it too decreases as price increases. Supply. Both neoclassical economics and
thorough-going marginalism could be said to explain supply curves in terms of
marginal cost; however, there are marked differences in conceptions of that
cost. Marginalists in the tradition of Marshall and neoclassical economists
tend to represent the supply curve for any producer as a curve of marginal
pecuniary costs objectively determined by physical processes, with an upward
slope determined by diminishing returns. A more thorough-going marginalism
represents the supply curve as a "complementary demand curve" — where the
demand is "for" money and the purchase is made "with" a good or service. The
shape of that curve is then determined by marginal rates of substitution of
money for that good or service. Markets. By confining themselves to limiting
cases in which sellers or buyers are both “price takers” — so that demand
functions ignore supply functions or "vice versa" — Marshallian marginalists
and neoclassical economists produced tractable models of “pure” or
“perfect” competition and of various forms of “imperfect” competition,
which models are usually captured by relatively simple graphs. Other
marginalists have sought to present more realistic explanations, but this work
has been relatively uninfluential on the mainstream of economic thought. The
paradox of water and diamonds. The “law” of diminishing marginal utility is
said to explain the “paradox of water and diamonds”, most commonly
associated with Adam Smith (though recognized by earlier thinkers). Human
beings cannot even survive without water, whereas diamonds, in Smith's day,
were ornamentation or engraving bits. Yet water had a very small price, and
diamonds a very large price. Marginalists explained that it is the "marginal"
usefulness of any given quantity that matters, rather than the usefulness of a
"class" or of a "totality". For most people, water was sufficiently abundant
that the loss or gain of a gallon would withdraw or add only some very minor
use if any, whereas diamonds were in much more restricted supply, so that the
loss or gain was much greater. That is not to say that the price of any good or
service is simply a function of the marginal utility that it has for any one
individual nor for some ostensibly typical individual. Rather, individuals are
willing to trade based upon the respective marginal utilities of the goods that
they have or desire (with these marginal utilities being distinct for each
potential trader), and prices thus develop constrained by these marginal
utilities. History. Proto-marginalist approaches. Perhaps the essence of a
notion of diminishing marginal utility can be found in Aristotle's "Politics",
whereïn he writes A great variety of economists concluded that there was
"some" sort of inter-relationship between utility and rarity that effected
economic decisions, and in turn informed the determination of prices.
Eighteenth-century Italian mercantilists, such as Antonio Genovesi, Giammaria
Ortes, Pietro Verri, Marchese Cesare di Beccaria, and Count Giovanni Rinaldo
Carli, held that value was explained in terms of the general utility and of
scarcity, though they did not typically work-out a theory of how these
interacted. In "Della moneta" (1751), Abbé Ferdinando Galiani, a pupil of
Genovesi, attempted to explain value as a ratio of two ratios, "utility" and
"scarcity", with the latter component ratio being the ratio of quantity to use.
Anne Robert Jacques Turgot, in "Réflexions sur la formation et la distribution
de richesse" (1769), held that value derived from the general utility of the
class to which a good belonged, from comparison of present and future wants,
and from anticipated difficulties in procurement. Like the Italian mercantists,
Étienne Bonnot, Abbé de Condillac saw value as determined by utility
associated with the class to which the good belong, and by estimated scarcity.
In "De commerce et le gouvernement" (1776), Condillac emphasized that value is
not based upon cost but that costs were paid because of value. This last point
was famously restated by the Nineteenth Century proto-marginalist, Richard
Whately, who in "Introductory Lectures on Political Economy" (1832) wrote
(Whately's student Senior is noted below as an early marginalist.) Marginalists
before the Revolution. The first unambiguous published statement of any sort of
theory of marginal utility was by Daniel Bernoulli, in “Specimen theoriae
novae de mensura sortis”. This paper appeared in 1738, but a draft had been
written in 1731 or in 1732. In 1728, Gabriel Cramer produced fundamentally the
same theory in a private letter. Each had sought to resolve the St. Petersburg
paradox, and had concluded that the marginal desirability of money decreased as
it was accumulated, more specifically such that the desirability of a sum were
the natural logarithm (Bernoulli) or square root (Cramer) thereof. However, the
more general implications of this hypothesis were not explicated, and the work
fell into obscurity. In “A Lecture on the Notion of Value as Distinguished
Not Only from Utility, but also from Value in Exchange”, delivered in 1833
and included in "Lectures on Population, Value, Poor Laws and Rent" (1837),
William Forster Lloyd explicitly offered a general marginal utility theory, but
did not offer its derivation nor elaborate its implications. The importance of
his statement seems to have been lost on everyone (including Lloyd) until the
early 20th century, by which time others had independently developed and
popularized the same insight. In "An Outline of the Science of Political
Economy" (1836), Nassau William Senior asserted that marginal utilities were
the ultimate determinant of demand, yet apparently did not pursue implications,
though some interpret his work as indeed doing just that. In “De la mesure de
l’utilité des travaux publics” (1844), Jules Dupuit applied a conception
of marginal utility to the problem of determining bridge tolls. In 1854,
Hermann Heinrich Gossen published "Die Entwicklung der Gesetze des menschlichen
Verkehrs und der daraus fließenden Regeln für menschliches Handeln", which
presented a marginal utility theory and to a very large extent worked-out its
implications for the behavior of a market economy. However, Gossen's work was
not well received in the Germany of his time, most copies were destroyed
unsold, and he was virtually forgotten until rediscovered after the so-called
Marginal Revolution. The Marginal Revolution. Marginalism as a formal theory
can be attributed to the work of three economists, Jevons in England, Menger in
Austria, and Walras in Switzerland. William Stanley Jevons first proposed the
theory in articles in 1863 and 1871. Similarly, Carl Menger presented the
theory in 1871. Menger explained why individuals use marginal utility to decide
amongst trade-offs, but while his illustrative examples present utility as
quantified, his essential assumptions do not. Marie-Esprit-Léon Walras
introduced the theory in "Éléments d'économie politique pure", the first
part of which was published in 1874. (American John Bates Clark is also
associated with the origins of Marginalism, but he did little to advance the
theory. This moment in the late 19th century marked a turning point in economy
theory. With the introduction of these theories, the analysis of production and
exchange turned away from social theory and towards the quest of a scientific
objectivity. Classical economics had focused on the causal relations among
social activities, which were connected with the production and distribution of
wealth. Classical economists asked questions about the true basis of value,
activities that contributed to national wealth, systems of rights, or about the
forms of government under which people grow rich. But in the late 19th century,
in response to attacks from socialists and debates about how society works, and
as a means to escape the conundrums of value theory and to answer how values
could become prices, economists developed the theory of marginalism. This
movement in economics disengaged economics from descriptive and normative
commitments with the aim to withdraw economics from debates about how society
worked and what kind of society we wanted to live in, and escalate it to an
objective and universal realm. The second generation. Although the Marginal
Revolution flowed from the work of Jevons, Menger, and Walras, their work might
have failed to enter the mainstream were it not for a second generation of
economists. In England, the second generation were exemplified by Philip Henry
Wicksteed, by William Smart, and by Alfred Marshall; in Austria by Eugen von
Böhm-Bawerk and by Friedrich von Wieser; in Switzerland by Vilfredo Pareto;
and in America by Herbert Joseph Davenport and by Frank A. Fetter. There were
significant, distinguishing features amongst the approaches of Jevons, Menger,
and Walras, but the second generation did not maintain distinctions along
national or linguistic lines. The work of von Wieser was heavily influenced by
that of Walras. Wicksteed was heavily influenced by Menger. Fetter referred to
himself and Davenport as part of “the American Psychological School”, named
in imitation of the Austrian “Psychological School”. (And Clark's work from
this period onward similarly shows heavy influence by Menger.) William Smart
began as a conveyor of Austrian School theory to English-language readers,
though he fell increasingly under the influence of Marshall. Böhm-Bawerk was
perhaps the most able expositor of Menger's conception. He was further noted
for producing a theory of interest and of profit in equilibrium based upon the
interaction of diminishing marginal utility with diminishing marginal
productivity of time and with time preference. (This theory was adopted in full
and then further developed by Knut Wicksell and, with modifications including
formal disregard for time-preference, by Wicksell's American rival Irving
Fisher.) Marshall was the second-generation marginalist whose work on marginal
utility came most to inform the mainstream of neoclassical economics,
especially by way of his "Principles of Economics", the first volume of which
was published in 1890. Marshall constructed the demand curve with the aid of
assumptions that utility was quantified, and that the marginal utility of money
was constant (or nearly so). Like Jevons, Marshall did not see an explanation
for supply in the theory of marginal utility, so he synthesized an explanation
of demand thus explained with supply explained in a more classical manner,
determined by costs which were taken to be objectively determined. (Marshall
later actively mischaracterized the criticism that these costs were themselves
ultimately determined by marginal utilities.) The Marginal Revolution and
Marxism. Although the doctrines of marginalism and the Marginal Revolution are
often interpreted as a response to Marxist economics, the first volume of "Das
Kapital" was not published until July 1867, after the works of Jevons, Menger,
and Walras were written or well under way. Hayek and Bartley speculate that
Marx may have come across the works of one or more of these figures, and that
his inability to formulate a viable critique may account for his failure to
complete "Kapital". Scholars have suggested that the success of the generation
who followed the preceptors of the Revolution was their ability to formulate
straightforward responses to Marxist economic theory. The most famous of these
was that of Böhm-Bawerk, “Zum Abschluss des Marxschen Systems” (1896), but
the first was Wicksteed's “The Marxian Theory of Value. "Das Kapital": a
criticism” (1884, followed by “The Jevonian criticism of Marx: a
rejoinder” in 1885). The most famous early Marxist responses were Rudolf
Hilferding's "Böhm-Bawerks Marx-Kritik" (1904) and "Политической
экономии рантье" ("The Economic Theory of the Leisure Class",
1914) by Никола́й Ива́нович Буха́рин (Nikolai
Bukharin). Followers of Henry George similarly consider marginalism and
neoclassical economics a reaction to "Progress and Poverty", which was
published in 1879.) Eclipse. In his 1881 work "Mathematical Psychics", Francis
Ysidro Edgeworth presented the indifference curve, deriving its properties from
marginalist theory which assumed utility to be a differentiable function of
quantified goods and services. But it came to be seen that indifference curves
could be considered as somehow "given", without bothering with notions of
utility. In 1915, Евгений Евгениевич Слуцкий (Eugen
Slutsky) derived a theory of consumer choice solely from properties of
indifference curves. Because of the World War, the Bolshevik Revolution, and
his own subsequent loss of interest, Slutsky's work drew almost no notice, but
similar work in 1934 by John Richard Hicks and R. G. D. Allen derived much the
same results and found a significant audience. (Allen subsequently drew
attention to Slutksy's earlier accomplishment.) Although some of the third
generation of Austrian School economists had by 1911 rejected the
quantification of utility while continuing to think in terms of marginal
utility, most economists presumed that utility must be a sort of quantity.
Indifference curve analysis seemed to represent a way of dispensing with
presumptions of quantification, albeït that a seemingly arbitrary assumption
(admitted by Hicks to be a “rabbit out of a hat”) about decreasing marginal
rates of substitution would then have to be introduced to have convexity of
indifference curves. For those who accepted that superseded marginal utility
analysis had been superseded by indifference curve analysis, the former became
at best somewhat analogous to the Bohr model of the atom — perhaps
pedagogically useful, but “old fashioned” and ultimately incorrect.
Revival. When Cramer and Bernoulli introduced the notion of diminishing
marginal utility, it had been to address a paradox of gambling, rather than the
paradox of value. The marginalists of the revolution, however, had been
formally concerned with problems in which there was neither risk nor
uncertainty. So too with the indifference curve analysis of Slutsky, Hicks, and
Allen. The expected utility hypothesis of Bernoulli "et alii" was revived by
various 20th century thinkers, perhaps most notably Ramsey (1926), v. Neumann
and Morgenstern (1944), and Savage (1954). Although this hypothesis remains
controversial, it brings not merely utility but a quantified conception thereof
back into the mainstream of economic thought, and would dispatch the
Ockhamistic argument. (It should perhaps be noted that, in expected utility
analysis, the “law” of diminishing marginal utility corresponds to what is
called “risk aversion”.) Meanwhile, the Austrian School continues to
develop its ordinalist notions of marginal utility analysis, formally
demonstrating that from them proceed the decreasing marginal rates of
substitution of indifference curves. Criticisms. Marxist attacks on
marginalism. Maurice Dobb argued that prices derived through marginalism depend
on the distribution of income. The ability of consumers to express their
preferences is dependent on their spending power. As the theory asserts that
prices arise in the act of exchange, Dobb argues that it cannot explain how the
distribution of income affects prices and consequently cannot explain prices.
Dobb also criticized the "motives" behind marginal utility theory. Jevons
wrote, for example, "so far as is consistent with the inequality of wealth in
every community, all commodities are distributed by exchange so as to produce
the maximum social benefit." (See Fundamental theorems of welfare economics.)
Dobb contended that this statement indicated that marginalism is intended to
insulate market economics from criticism by making prices the natural result of
the given income distribution. Marxist adaptations to marginalism. Some
economists strongly influenced by the Marxian tradition such as Oskar Lange,
Włodzimierz Brus, and Michal Kalecki have attempted to integrate the insights
of classical political economy, marginalism, and neoclassical economics. They
believed that Marx lacked a sophisticated theory of prices, and neoclassical
economics lacked a theory of the social frameworks of economic activity. Some
other Marxists have also argued that on one level there is no conflict between
marginalism and Marxism: one could employ a marginalist theory of supply and
demand within the context of a “big picture” understanding of the Marxist
notion that capitalists exploit labor. Structural critiques. Social theorist
Roberto Mangabeira Unger’s critique of Marginalism begins with Walras’
equilibrium theory, which attempted to achieve a certainty of economic analysis
by putting aside normative controversies of social organization. Unger finds
three weaknesses that crippled the theory: foremost, the theory claimed that
equilibrium would be spontaneously generated in a market economy. In reality, a
self-adjusting equilibrium fails to occur. Second, the theory puts forth a
determinate image of the market. Historically, however, the market has been
shown to be indeterminate with different market arrangements. Third, the
polemical use of efficiency fails to account for the differences of
distribution among individuals, classes, and generations. The consequences of
the marginalist movement were profound for the study of economics, according to
Unger. The most immediate problem is that under this generalizing tendency of
economics, there is no means by which to incorporate empirical evidence and
thus to reimagine the world and develop new theories and new directions. In
this way, the discipline is always self-referential and theoretical.
Furthermore, the lack of a normative view of the world curtails the ability to
propose anything more than a policy prescription, which by definition always
assumes a given context. The discipline can only rationalize the world and
support a status quo. Lastly, Unger finds that this turn in economics ended up
universalizing debates in macroeconomics and leaving the discipline without any
historical perspective. A consequence, for example, was that Keynes’ solution
to a particular historical crisis was turned into a general theory when it
should only be understood as a response to a particular situation.
