Marginal rate of substitution In economics, the marginal rate of substitution
is the rate at which a consumer is ready to give up one good in exchange for
another good while maintaining the same level of utility. At consumption
levels, our marginal rates of substitution are identical. Marginal rate of
substitution as the slope of indifference curve. Under the standard assumption
of neoclassical economics that goods and services are continuously divisible,
the marginal rates of substitution will be the same regardless of the direction
of exchange, and will correspond to the slope of an indifference curve (more
precisely, to the slope multiplied by -1) passing through the consumption
bundle in question, at that point: mathematically, it is the implicit
derivative. MRS of X for Y is the amount of Y for which a consumer is willing
to exchange X locally. The MRS is different at each point along the
indifference curve thus it is important to keep locally in the definition.
Further on this assumption, or otherwise on the assumption that utility is
quantified, the marginal rate of substitution of good or service X for good or
service Y (MRSxy) is also equivalent to the marginal utility of X over the
marginal utility of Y. Formally, It is important to note that when comparing
bundles of goods X and Y that give a constant utility (points along an
indifference curve), the marginal utility of X is measured in terms of units of
Y that is being given up. For example, if the MRS"xy"Â =Â 2, the consumer will
give up 2 units of Y to obtain 1 additional unit of X. As one moves down a
(standardly convex) indifference curve, the marginal rate of substitution
decreases (as measured by the absolute value of the slope of the indifference
curve, which decreases). This is known as the law of diminishing marginal rate
of substitution. Since the indifference curve is convex with respect to the
origin and we have defined the MRS as the negative slope of the indifference
curve, Simple mathematical analysis. Assume the consumer utility function is
defined by formula_4, where "U" is consumer utility, "x" and "y" are goods.
Then the marginal rate of substitution can be computed via partial
differentiation, as follows. where formula_7 is the marginal utility with
respect to good "x" and formula_8 is the marginal utility with respect to good
"y". The marginal rate of substitution is defined by minus the slope of the
indifference curve at whichever commodity bundle quantities are of interest.
That turns out to equal the ratio of the marginal utilities: Therefore, when
the consumer is choosing his utility maximized market basket on his budget
line, This important result tells us that utility is maximized when the
consumer's budget is allocated so that the marginal utility per unit of money
spent is equal for each good. If this equality did not hold, the consumer could
increase his/her utility by cutting spending on the good with lower marginal
utility per unit of money and increase spending on the other good.
