Marginal revenue In microeconomics, marginal revenue (R') is the additional
revenue that will be generated by increasing product sales by 1 unit. It can
also be described as the unit revenue the last item sold has generated for the
firm. In a perfectly competitive market, the additional revenue generated by
selling an additional unit of a good is equal to price the firm is able to
charge the buyer of the good. This is because a firm in a competitive market
will always get the same price for every unit it sells regardless of the number
of units the firm sells since the firm's sales can never impact the industry's
price. However, a monopoly determines the entire industry's sales. As a result,
it will have to lower the price of all units sold to increase sales by 1 unit.
Therefore the Marginal Revenue generated is always less (lower) than the price
the firm is able to charge for the unit sold since each reduction in price
causes unit revenue to decline on every good the firm sells. The marginal
revenue (the increase in total revenue) is the price the firm gets on the
additional unit sold, less the revenue lost by reducing the price on all other
units that were sold prior to the decrease in price. Definition. Marginal
revenue is equal to the ratio of the change in revenue for some change in
quantity sold to that change in quantity sold. This can also be represented as
a derivative when the change in quantity sold becomes arbitrarily small. More
formally, define the revenue function to be the following By the product rule,
marginal revenue is then given by For a firm facing perfectly competition,
price does not change with quantity sold (formula_3), so marginal revenue is
equal to price. For a monopoly, the price decreases with quantity sold
(formula_4), so marginal revenue is less than price (for positive formula_5).
Marginal revenue curve. The marginal revenue curve is affected by the same
factors as the demand curve - changes in income, change in the prices of
complements and substitutes, change in populations. These factors can cause the
R curve to shift and rotate. Relationship between marginal revenue and
elasticity. where e is the price elasticity of demand. If demand is inelastic
(e < 1) then R' will be negative, because to sell a marginal (infinitesimal)
unit the firm would have to lower the selling price so much that it would lose
more revenue on the pre-existing units than it would gain on the incremental
unit. If demand is elastic (e > 1) R' will be positive, because the additional
unit would not drive down the price by so much. If the firm is a perfect
competitor, so that it is so small in the market that its quantity produced and
sold has no effect on the price, then the price elasticity of demand is
negative infinity, and marginal revenue simply equals the (market-determined)
price. Marginal revenue and rule of thumb pricing. Profit maximization requires
that a firm produce where marginal revenue equals marginal costs. Firm managers
are unlikely to have complete information concerning their marginal revenue
function or their marginal costs. Fortunately the profit maximization
conditions can be expressed in a “more easily applicable form” or rule of
thumb. Thus if e is - 2 and MC is $5.00 then price is $10.00. ( - C')/  = - 1/
e is called the Lerner index after economist Abba Lerner. The Lerner index is a
measure of market power - the ability of a firm to charge a price that exceeds
marginal cost. The index varies from zero to 1. The greater the difference
between price and marginal cost the closer the index value is to 1. The Lerner
index increases as demand becomes less elastic. if you can sell 10 units at $20
each or 11 units at $19 each, then your marginal revenue from the eleventh unit
is (11 × 19) - (10 × 20) = $9.
