Marginal cost In practice the above definition of marginal cost as the change
in total cost as a result of an increase in output of one unit is inconsistent
with the differential definition of marginal cost for virtually all non-linear
functions. This is as the definition finds the tangent to the total cost curve
at the point q which assumes that costs increase at the same rate as they were
at q. A new definition may be useful for marginal unit cost (MUC) using the
current definition of the change in total cost as a result of an increase of
one unit of output defined as: TC(q+1)-TC(q) and re-defining marginal cost to
be the change in total as a result of an infinitesimally small increase in q
which is consistent with its use in economic literature and can be calculated
differentially. In general terms, marginal cost at each level of production
includes any additional costs required to produce the next unit. If producing
additional vehicles requires, for example, building a new factory, the marginal
cost of those "extra" vehicles includes the cost of the new factory. In
practice, the analysis is segregated into short and long-run cases, and over
the longest run, all costs are marginal. At each level of production and time
period being considered, marginal costs include all costs that vary with the
level of production, and other costs are considered fixed costs. If the cost
function is differentiable joining, the marginal cost is the cost of the next
unit produced referring to the basic volume. If the cost function is not
differentiable, the marginal cost can be expressed as follows. A number of
other factors can affect marginal cost and its applicability to real world
problems. Some of these may be considered market failures. These may include
information asymmetries, the presence of negative or positive externalities,
transaction costs, price discrimination and others. Cost functions and
relationship to average cost. In the simplest case, the total cost function and
its derivative are expressed as follows, where Q represents the production
quantity, VC represents variable costs, FC represents fixed costs and TC
represents total costs. Since (by definition) fixed costs do not vary with
production quantity, it drops out of the equation when it is differentiated.
The important conclusion is that marginal cost "is not related to" fixed costs.
This can be compared with average total cost or ATC, which is the total cost
divided by the number of units produced and "does" include fixed costs. For
discrete calculation without calculus, marginal cost equals the change in total
(or variable) cost that comes with each additional unit produced. In contrast,
incremental cost is the composition of total cost from the surrogate of
contributions, where any increment is determined by the contribution of the
cost factors, not necessarily by single units. For instance, suppose the total
cost of making 1 shoe is $30 and the total cost of making 2 shoes is $40. The
marginal cost of producing the second shoe is $40 - $30 = $10. the cost
associated with producing the marginal unit and the increase in average costs
for all units produced due to the “damage” to the entire productive process
(∂AC/∂q)q. The first component is the per unit or average cost. The second
unit is the small increase in costs due to the law of diminishing marginal
returns which increases the costs of all units of sold. Therefore, the precise
formula is: MC = AC + (∂AC/∂q)q. Marginal costs can also be expressed as
the cost per unit of labor divided by the marginal product of labor. Economies
of scale. Economies of scale is a concept that applies to the long run, a span
of time in which all inputs can be varied by the firm so that there are no
fixed inputs or fixed costs. Production may be subject to economies of scale
(or diseconomies of scale). Economies of scale are said to exist if an
additional unit of output can be produced for less than the average of all
previous units— that is, if long-run marginal cost is below long-run average
cost, so the latter is falling. Conversely, there may be levels of production
where marginal cost is higher than average cost, and average cost is an
increasing function of output. For this generic case, minimum average cost
occurs at the point where average cost and marginal cost are equal (when
plotted, the marginal cost curve intersects the average cost curve from below);
this point will "not" be at the minimum for marginal cost if fixed costs are
greater than 0. Perfectly competitive supply curve. The portion of the marginal
cost curve above its intersection with the average variable cost curve is the
supply curve for a firm operating in a perfectly competitive market. (the
portion of the MC curve below its intersection with the AVC curve is not part
of the supply curve because a firm would not operate at price below the shut
down point) This is not true for firms operating in other market structures.
For example, while a monopoly "has" an MC curve it does not have a supply
curve. In a perfectly competitive market, a supply curve shows the quantity a
seller's willing and able to supply at each price - for each price there is a
unique quantity that would be supplied. The one-to-one relationship simply is
absent in the case of a monopoly. With a monopoly there could be an infinite
number of prices associated with a given quantity. It all depends on the shape
and position of the demand curve and its accompanying marginal revenue curve.
Decisions taken based on marginal costs. In perfectly competitive markets,
firms decide the quantity to be produced based on marginal costs and sale
price. If the sale price is higher than the marginal cost, then they supply the
unit and sell it. If the marginal cost is higher than the price, it would not
be profitable to produce it. So the production will be carried out until the
marginal cost is equal to the sale price. In other words, firms refuse to sell
if the marginal cost is higher than the market price. Relationship to fixed
costs. Marginal costs are not affected by changes in fixed cost. Marginal costs
can be expressed as ∆C(q)∕∆Q. Since fixed costs do not vary with (depend
on) changes in quantity, MC is ∆VC∕∆Q. Thus if fixed cost were to double
MC would not be affected and consequently the profit maximizing quantity and
price would not change. This can be illustrated by graphing the short run total
cost curve and the short run variable cost curve. The shape of the curves are
identical. Each curve initially decreases at a decreasing rate, reaches an
inflection point, then increases at a increasing rate. The only difference
between the curves is that the SRVC curve begins from the origin while the SRTC
curve originates on the y-axis. The distance of the origin of the SRTC above
the origin represents the fixed cost - the vertical distance between the
curves. This distance remains constant as the quantity produced, Q, increases.
MC is the slope of the SRVC curve. A change in fixed cost would be reflected by
a change in the vertical distance between the SRTC and SRVC curve. Any such
change would have no effect on the shape of the SRVC curve and therefore its
slope at any point - MC. Externalities. Externalities are costs (or benefits)
that are not borne by the parties to the economic transaction. A producer may,
for example, pollute the environment, and others may bear those costs. A
consumer may consume a good which produces benefits for society, such as
education; because the individual does not receive all of the benefits, he may
consume less than efficiency would suggest. Alternatively, an individual may be
a smoker or alcoholic and impose costs on others. In these cases, production or
consumption of the good in question may differ from the optimum level. Negative
externalities of production. Much of the time, private and social costs do not
diverge from one another, but at times social costs may be either greater or
less than private costs. When marginal social costs of production are greater
than that of the private cost function, we see the occurrence of a negative
externality of production. Productive processes that result in pollution are a
textbook example of production that creates negative externalities. Such
externalities are a result of firms externalising their costs onto a third
party in order to reduce their own total cost. As a result of externalising
such costs we see that members of society will be negatively affected by such
behavior of the firm. In this case, we see that an increased cost of production
on society creates a social cost curve that depicts a greater cost than the
private cost curve. In an equilibrium state we see that markets creating
negative externalities of production will overproduce that good. As a result,
the socially optimal production level would be lower than that observed.
Positive externalities of production. When marginal social costs of production
are less than that of the private cost function, we see the occurrence of a
positive externality of production. Production of public goods are a textbook
example of production that create positive externalities. An example of such a
public good, which creates a divergence in social and private costs, includes
the production of education. It is often seen that education is a positive for
any whole society, as well as a positive for those directly involved in the
market. Examining the relevant diagram we see that such production creates a
social cost curve that is less than that of the private curve. In an
equilibrium state we see that markets creating positive externalities of
production will under produce that good. As a result, the socially optimal
production level would be greater than that observed. Social costs. Of great
importance in the theory of marginal cost is the distinction between the
marginal "private" and "social" costs. The marginal private cost shows the cost
associated to the firm in question. It is the marginal private cost that is
used by business decision makers in their profit maximization goals, and by
individuals in their purchasing and consumption choices. Marginal social cost
is similar to private cost in that it includes the cost functions of private
enterprise but "also" that of society as a whole, including parties that have
no direct association with the private costs of production. It incorporates all
negative and positive externalities, of both production and consumption. Hence,
when deciding whether or how much to buy, buyers take account of the cost to
society of their actions "if" private and social marginal cost coincide. The
equality of price with social marginal cost, by aligning the interest of the
buyer with the interest of the community as a whole is a necessary condition
for economically efficient resource allocation.
