Marginal utility In economics, the marginal utility of a good or service is the
gain (or loss) from an increase (or decrease) in the consumption of that good
or service. Economists sometimes speak of a law of diminishing marginal
utility, meaning that the first unit of consumption of a good or service yields
more utility than the second and subsequent units. The marginal decision rule
states that a good or service should be consumed at a quantity at which the
marginal utility is equal to the marginal cost. The concept of marginal utility
played a crucial role in the marginal revolution of the late 19th century, and
led to the replacement of the labor theory of value by neoclassical value
theory in which the relative prices of goods and services are simultaneously
determined by marginal rates of substitution in consumption and marginal rates
of transformation in production, which are equal in economic equilibrium.
Marginality. The term "marginal" refers to a small change, starting from some
baseline level. As Philip Wicksteed explained the term, Frequently the marginal
change is assumed to start from the "endowment", meaning the total resources
available for consumption (see Budget constraint). This endowment is determined
by many things including physical laws (which constrain how forms of energy and
matter may be transformed), accidents of nature (which determine the presence
of natural resources), and the outcomes of past decisions made by the
individual himself or herself and by others. For reasons of tractability, it is
often assumed in neoclassical analysis that goods and services are continuously
divisible. Under this assumption, marginal concepts, including marginal
utility, may be expressed in terms of differential calculus. Marginal utility
can then be defined as the first derivative of the total satisfaction obtained
from consumption of a good or service, with respect to the amount of
consumption of that good or service. In practice the smallest relevant division
may be quite large. Sometimes economic analysis concerns the marginal values
associated with a change of one unit of a discrete good or service, such as a
motor vehicle or a haircut. For a motor vehicle, the total number of motor
vehicles produced is large enough for a continuous assumption to be reasonable:
this may not be true for, say, an aircraft carrier. Utility. Different concepts
of "utility" underlie different theories in which marginal utility plays a
role. Economists have commonly described utility as if it were "quantifiable",
that is, as if different levels of utility could be compared along a numerical
scale. This has affected the development and reception of theories of marginal
utility. Quantitative concepts of utility allow familiar arithmetic operations,
and further assumptions of continuity and differentiability greatly increase
tractability. Contemporary mainstream economic theory frequently defers
metaphysical questions, and merely notes or assumes that preference structures
conforming to certain rules can be usefully "proxied" by associating goods,
services, or their uses with quantities, and "defines" "utility" as such a
quantification. Another conception is Benthamite philosophy, which equated
usefulness with the production of pleasure and avoidance of pain, assumed
subject to arithmetic operation. British economists, under the influence of
this philosophy (especially by way of John Stuart Mill), viewed utility as "the
feelings of pleasure and pain" and further as a ""quantity" of feeling"
(emphasis added). Though generally pursued outside of the mainstream methods,
there are conceptions of utility that do not rely on quantification. For
example, the Austrian school generally attributes value to "the satisfaction of
needs", and sometimes rejects even the "possibility" of quantification. It has
been argued that the Austrian framework makes it possible to consider rational
preferences that would otherwise be excluded. In any standard framework, the
same object may have different marginal utilities for different people,
reflecting different preferences or individual circumstances. no Diminishing
marginal utility. This refers to the utility which one obtains with the
increase in the stock that one already had. "The law of diminishing marginal
utility is at the heart of the explanation of numerous economic phenomena,
including time preference and the value of goods... The law says, first, that
the marginal utility of each (homogenous) unit decreases as the supply of units
increases (and vice versa); second, that the marginal utility of a larger-sized
unit is greater than the marginal utility of a smaller-sized unit (and vice
versa). The first law denotes the law of diminishing marginal utility, the
second law the law of increasing total utility." An individual can typically
partially order the potential uses of a good or service. For example, a ration
of water might be used to sustain oneself, a dog, or a rose bush, and these can
be prioritised. These examples relate to individuals, but are irrelevant at a
macro level. The fact that a tipping point may be reached does not imply that
marginal utility will continue to increase indefinitely thereafter. For
example, beyond some point, further doses of antibiotics would kill no
pathogens at all, and might even become harmful to the body. Simply put, as the
rate of commodity consumption "increases", marginal utility "decreases". If
commodity consumption continues to rise, marginal utility at some point falls
to zero, reaching maximum total utility. Further increase in consumption of
units of commodities causes marginal utility to become negative; this signifies
dissatisfaction. Independence from presumptions of self-interested behavior.
While the above example of water rations conforms to ordinary notions of self-
interested behavior, the concept and logic of marginal utility are independent
of the presumption that people pursue self-interest. For example, one can
conceive of an individual who gave highest priority to the rose bush, next
highest to the dog, and last to himself. In that case, if the individual has
three rations of water, then the marginal utility of any one of those rations
is that of watering the person. With just two rations, the person is left
unwatered and the marginal utility of either ration is that of watering the
dog. Likewise, a person could give highest priority to the needs of one of her
neighbors, next to another, and so forth, placing her own welfare last; the
concept of diminishing marginal utility would still apply. Marginalist theory.
Marginalism explains choice with the hypothesis that people decide whether to
effect any given change based on the marginal utility of that change, with
rival alternatives being chosen based upon which has the greatest marginal
utility. Market price and diminishing marginal utility. If an individual has a
stock or flow of a good or service whose marginal utility is less than would be
that of some other good or service for which he or she could trade, then it is
in his or her interest to effect that trade. Of course, as one thing is traded-
away and another is acquired, the respective marginal gains or losses from
further trades are now changed. On the assumption that the marginal utility of
one is diminishing, and the other is not increasing, all else being equal, an
individual will demand an increasing ratio of that which is acquired to that
which is sacrificed. (One important way in which all else might not be equal is
when the use of the one good or service complements that of the other. In such
cases, exchange ratios might be constant.) If any trader can better his or her
own marginal position by offering a trade more favorable to complementary
traders, then he or she will do so... In an economy with money, the marginal
utility of a quantity is simply that of the best good or service that it could
purchase. In this way it is useful for explaining supply and demand, as well as
essential aspects of models of imperfect competition. The paradox of water and
diamonds. The “paradox of water and diamonds”, most commonly associated
with Adam Smith (though recognized by earlier thinkers). is the apparent
contradiction that water possesses a value far lower than diamonds, even though
water is far more vital to a human being. Marginalists explained that it is the
"marginal" usefulness of any given quantity that determines its price, rather
than the usefulness of a "class" or of a "totality". For most people, water was
sufficiently abundant that the loss or gain of a gallon would withdraw or add
only some very minor use if any; whereas diamonds were in much more restricted
supply, so that the lost or gained use would be much greater. That is not to
say that the price of any good or service is simply a function of the marginal
utility that it has for any one individual nor for some ostensibly typical
individual. Rather, individuals are willing to trade based upon the respective
marginal utilities of the goods that they have or desire (with these marginal
utilities being distinct for each potential trader), and prices thus develop
constrained by these marginal utilities. Quantified marginal utility. Under the
special case in which usefulness can be quantified, the change in utility of
moving from state formula_1 to state formula_2 is (where “c.p.” indicates
that the "only" independent variable to change is formula_6). Mainstream
neoclassical economics will typically assume that is well defined, and use
“marginal utility” to refer to a partial derivative and diminishing
marginal utility is similarly taken to correspond to History. The concept of
marginal utility grew out of attempts by economists to explain the
determination of price. The term “marginal utility”, credited to the
Austrian economist Friedrich von Wieser by Alfred Marshall, was a translation
of Wieser's term “Grenznutzen” ("border-use"). Proto-marginalist
approaches. Perhaps the essence of a notion of diminishing marginal utility can
be found in Aristotle's "Politics", wherein he writes (There has been marked
disagreement about the development and role of marginal considerations in
Aristotle's value theory.) A great variety of economists concluded that there
was "some" sort of inter-relationship between utility and rarity that effected
economic decisions, and in turn informed the determination of prices.
Eighteenth-century Italian mercantilists, such as Antonio Genovesi, Giammaria
Ortes, Pietro Verri, Marchese Cesare di Beccaria, and Count Giovanni Rinaldo
Carli, held that value was explained in terms of the general utility and of
scarcity, though they did not typically work-out a theory of how these
interacted. In "Della moneta" (1751), Abbé Ferdinando Galiani, a pupil of
Genovesi, attempted to explain value as a ratio of two ratios, "utility" and
"scarcity", with the latter component ratio being the ratio of quantity to use.
Anne Robert Jacques Turgot, in "Réflexions sur la formation et la distribution
de richesse" (1769), held that value derived from the general utility of the
class to which a good belonged, from comparison of present and future wants,
and from anticipated difficulties in procurement. Like the Italian mercantists,
Étienne Bonnot, Abbé de Condillac, saw value as determined by utility
associated with the class to which the good belong, and by estimated scarcity.
In "De commerce et le gouvernement" (1776), Condillac emphasized that value is
not based upon cost but that costs were paid because of value. This last point
was famously restated by the Nineteenth Century proto-marginalist, Richard
Whately, who in "Introductory Lectures on Political Economy" (1832) wrote
(Whatley's student Senior is noted below as an early marginalist.) Marginalists
before the Revolution. The first unambiguous published statement of any sort of
theory of marginal utility was by Daniel Bernoulli, in “Specimen theoriae
novae de mensura sortis”. This paper appeared in 1738, but a draft had been
written in 1731 or in 1732. In 1728, Gabriel Cramer had produced fundamentally
the same theory in a private letter. Each had sought to resolve the St.
Petersburg paradox, and had concluded that the marginal desirability of money
decreased as it was accumulated, more specifically such that the desirability
of a sum were the natural logarithm (Bernoulli) or square root (Cramer)
thereof. However, the more general implications of this hypothesis were not
explicated, and the work fell into obscurity. In “A Lecture on the Notion of
Value as Distinguished Not Only from Utility, but also from Value in
Exchange”, delivered in 1833 and included in "Lectures on Population, Value,
Poor Laws and Rent" (1837), William Forster Lloyd explicitly offered a general
marginal utility theory, but did not offer its derivation nor elaborate its
implications. The importance of his statement seems to have been lost on
everyone (including Lloyd) until the early 20th century, by which time others
had independently developed and popularized the same insight. In "An Outline of
the Science of Political Economy" (1836), Nassau William Senior asserted that
marginal utilities were the ultimate determinant of demand, yet apparently did
not pursue implications, though some interpret his work as indeed doing just
that. In “De la mesure de l’utilité des travaux publics” (1844), Jules
Dupuit applied a conception of marginal utility to the problem of determining
bridge tolls. In 1854, Hermann Heinrich Gossen published "Die Entwicklung der
Gesetze des menschlichen Verkehrs und der daraus fließenden Regeln für
menschliches Handeln", which presented a marginal utility theory and to a very
large extent worked-out its implications for the behavior of a market economy.
However, Gossen's work was not well received in the Germany of his time, most
copies were destroyed unsold, and he was virtually forgotten until rediscovered
after the so-called Marginal Revolution. The Marginal Revolution. Marginalism
eventually found a foot-hold by way of the work of three economists, Jevons in
England, Menger in Austria, and Walras in Switzerland. William Stanley Jevons
first proposed the theory in “A General Mathematical Theory of Political
Economy” (PDF), a paper presented in 1862 and published in 1863, followed by
a series of works culminating in his book "The Theory of Political Economy" in
1871 that established his reputation as a leading political economist and
logician of the time. Jevons' conception of utility was in the utilitarian
tradition of Jeremy Bentham and of John Stuart Mill, but he differed from his
classical predecessors in emphasizing that "value depends entirely upon
utility", in particular, on "final utility upon which the theory of Economics
will be found to turn." He later qualified this in deriving the result that in
a model of exchange equilibrium, price ratios would be proportional to not only
to ratios of "final degrees of utility" but costs of production. Carl Menger
presented the theory in "Grundsätze der Volkswirtschaftslehre" (translated as
"Principles of Economics") in 1871. Menger's presentation is peculiarly notable
on two points. First, he took special pains to explain "why" individuals should
be expected to rank possible uses and then to use marginal utility to decide
amongst trade-offs. (For this reason, Menger and his followers are sometimes
called “the Psychological School”, though they are more frequently known as
“the Austrian School” or as “the Vienna School”.) Second, while his
illustrative examples present utility as quantified, his essential assumptions
do not. (Menger in fact crossed-out the numerical tables in his own copy of the
published "Grundsätze".) Menger also developed the law of diminishing marginal
utility. Menger's work found a significant and appreciative audience. Marie-
Esprit-Léon Walras introduced the theory in "Éléments d'économie politique
pure", the first part of which was published in 1874 in a relatively
mathematical exposition. Walras's work found relatively few readers at the time
but was recognized and incorporated two decades later in the work of Pareto and
Barone. An American, John Bates Clark, is sometimes also mentioned. But, while
Clark independently arrived at a marginal utility theory, he did little to
advance it until it was clear that the followers of Jevons, Menger, and Walras
were revolutionizing economics. Nonetheless, his contributions thereafter were
profound. The second generation. Although the Marginal Revolution flowed from
the work of Jevons, Menger, and Walras, their work might have failed to enter
the mainstream were it not for a second generation of economists. In England,
the second generation were exemplified by Philip Henry Wicksteed, by William
Smart, and by Alfred Marshall; in Austria by Eugen von Böhm-Bawerk and by
Friedrich von Wieser; in Switzerland by Vilfredo Pareto; and in America by
Herbert Joseph Davenport and by Frank A. Fetter. There were significant,
distinguishing features amongst the approaches of Jevons, Menger, and Walras,
but the second generation did not maintain distinctions along national or
linguistic lines. The work of von Wieser was heavily influenced by that of
Walras. Wicksteed was heavily influenced by Menger. Fetter referred to himself
and Davenport as part of “the American Psychological School”, named in
imitation of the Austrian “Psychological School”. (And Clark's work from
this period onward similarly shows heavy influence by Menger.) William Smart
began as a conveyor of Austrian School theory to English-language readers,
though he fell increasingly under the influence of Marshall. Böhm-Bawerk was
perhaps the most able expositor of Menger's conception. He was further noted
for producing a theory of interest and of profit in equilibrium based upon the
interaction of diminishing marginal utility with diminishing marginal
productivity of time and with time preference. (This theory was adopted in full
and then further developed by Knut Wicksell and, with modifications including
formal disregard for time-preference, by Wicksell's American rival Irving
Fisher.) Marshall was the second-generation marginalist whose work on marginal
utility came most to inform the mainstream of neoclassical economics,
especially by way of his "Principles of Economics", the first volume of which
was published in 1890. Marshall constructed the demand curve with the aid of
assumptions that utility was quantified, and that the marginal utility of money
was constant (or nearly so). Like Jevons, Marshall did not see an explanation
for supply in the theory of marginal utility, so he synthesized an explanation
of demand thus explained with supply explained in a more classical manner,
determined by costs which were taken to be objectively determined. (Marshall
later actively mischaracterized the criticism that these costs were themselves
ultimately determined by marginal utilities.) The Marginal Revolution and
Marxism. Karl Marx acknowledged that “nothing can have value, without being
an object of utility”, but, in his analysis, “use-value as such lies
outside the sphere of investigation of political economy”, with labor being
the principal measure of value under capitalism. The doctrines of marginalism
and the Marginal Revolution are often interpreted as somehow a response to
Marxist economics. In fact, the first volume of "Das Kapital" was not published
until July 1867, after the works of Jevons, Menger, and Walras were written or
well under way; and Marx was still a relatively obscure figure when these works
were completed. It is unlikely that any of them knew anything of him. (On the
other hand, Hayek or Bartley has suggested that Marx, voraciously reading at
the British Museum, may have come across the works of one or more of these
figures, and that his inability to formulate a viable critique may account for
his failure to complete any further volumes of "Kapital" before his death.)
Nonetheless, it is not unreasonable to suggest that part of what contributed to
the success of the generation who followed the preceptors of the Revolution was
their ability to formulate straightforward responses to Marxist economic
theory. The most famous of these was that of Böhm-Bawerk, “Zum Abschluss des
Marxschen Systems” (1896), but the first was Wicksteed's “The Marxian
Theory of Value. "Das Kapital": a criticism” (1884, followed by “The
Jevonian criticism of Marx: a rejoinder” in 1885). Only a few Marxist replies
were initially made to marginalism, of which the most famous were Rudolf
Hilferding's "Böhm-Bawerks Marx-Kritik" (1904) and "Политической
экономии рантье" (1914) by Никола́й Ива́нович
Буха́рин (Nikolai Bukharin). However, over the course of the 20th
century a considerable literature developed on the conflict between marginalism
and the labour theory of value, with the work of the neo-Ricardian economist
Piero Sraffa providing an important critique of marginalism. Reformulation. In
his 1881 work "Mathematical Psychics", Francis Ysidro Edgeworth presented the
indifference curve, deriving its properties from marginalist theory which
assumed utility to be a differentiable function of quantified goods and
services. Later work attempted to generalize to the indifference-curve
formulations of utility and marginal utility in avoiding unobservable measures
of utility. In 1915, Eugen Slutsky derived a theory of consumer choice solely
from properties of indifference curves. Because of the World War, the Bolshevik
Revolution, and his own subsequent loss of interest, Slutsky's work drew almost
no notice, but similar work in 1934 by John Richard Hicks and R. G. D. Allen
derived much the same results and found a significant audience. (Allen
subsequently drew attention to Slutsky's earlier accomplishment.) Although some
of the third generation of Austrian School economists had by 1911 rejected the
quantification of utility while continuing to think in terms of marginal
utility, most economists presumed that utility must be a sort of quantity.
Indifference curve analysis seemed to represent a way of dispensing with
presumptions of quantification, albeït that a seemingly arbitrary assumption
(admitted by Hicks to be a “rabbit out of a hat”) about decreasing marginal
rates of substitution would then have to be introduced to have convexity of
indifference curves. For those who accepted that indifference-curve analysis
superseded earlier marginal-utility analysis, the latter became at best perhaps
pedagogically useful, but “old fashioned” and observationally unnecessary.
Revival. When Cramer and Bernoulli introduced the notion of diminishing
marginal utility, it had been to address a paradox of gambling, rather than the
paradox of value. The marginalists of the revolution, however, had been
formally concerned with problems in which there was neither risk nor
uncertainty. So too with the indifference curve analysis of Slutsky, Hicks, and
Allen. The expected utility hypothesis of Bernoulli "et alii" was revived by
various 20th century thinkers, with early contributions by Ramsey (1926), v.
Neumann and Morgenstern (1944), and Savage (1954). Although this hypothesis
remains controversial, it not only brings utility, but a quantified conception
of utility, back into the mainstream of economic thought. A major reason why
quantified models of utility are influential today is that risk and uncertainty
have been recognized as central topics in contemporary economic theory.
Quantified utility models simplify the analysis of risky decisions because,
under quantified utility, diminishing marginal utility implies “risk
aversion”. In fact, many contemporary analyses of saving and portfolio choice
require stronger assumptions than diminishing marginal utility, such as the
assumption of “prudence”, which means convex marginal utility. Meanwhile,
the Austrian School continued to develop its ordinalist notions of marginal
utility analysis, formally demonstrating that from them proceed the decreasing
marginal rates of substitution of indifference curves.
