Marijuana Policy Project The Marijuana Policy Project (MPP) is the largest
organization working solely on marijuana policy reform in the United States in
terms of its budget, number of members, and staff. Its stated aims are to: (1)
increase public support for non-punitive, non-coercive marijuana policies; (2)
identify and activate supporters of non-punitive, non-coercive marijuana
policies; (3) change state laws to reduce or eliminate penalties for the
medical and non-medical use of marijuana; and (4) gain influence in Congress.
MPP advocates taxing and regulating the possession and sale of marijuana in a
manner similar to alcohol, envisions a nation where marijuana education is
honest and realistic, and believes treatment for problem marijuana users should
be non-coercive and geared toward reducing harm. History. MPP co-founders Rob
Kampia, Chuck Thomas, and Mike Kirshner originally worked at the National
Organization for the Reform of Marijuana Laws (NORML). In 1995, after months of
in-fighting, NORML director Richard Cowan fired Kampia, Thomas, and another
staffer who had been pressing Cowan for organizational change. Kirshner quit
NORML at the same time. Kampia, Thomas, and Kirshner began creating their own
organization, implementing the ideas they'd pushed at NORML. On January 25,
1995, the three activists incorporated the Marijuana Policy Project (MPP) as a
not-for-profit organization in the District of Columbia. MPP has grown to over
32,000 dues-paying members and is the largest marijuana policy reform group in
the United States. The organization has 21 staffers and an annual budget of
about $2.85 million. Organization. MPP, like many advocacy groups, is divided
into two legal entities, one a lobbying group and the other an educational
group. The public education branch can accept tax-deductible donations, while
the lobbying group can use its funds to directly influence politicians. 100% of
MPP’s funding comes from the individual contributions of their more than
32,000 members. MPP supporters come from every U.S. state, Puerto Rico, Great
Britain, Canada, Australia, and elsewhere. State-level advocacy. The Marijuana
Policy Project devotes a significant amount of its efforts to changing laws at
the state level. Its campaign committees spearheaded and provided the majority
of funding for the six of the nine most recent state medical marijuana laws and
two of only three decriminalization laws to pass in the last decade. MPP has
also led efforts to regulate marijuana similarly to alcohol by drafting and
lobbying for state legislation and leading initiative campaigns. MPP supports
marijuana policy reform in every state where sensible bills are introduced.
Currently, it is particularly active in advocating for medical marijuana bills
in the state legislatures of Illinois, Maryland, New Hampshire, and New York.
In addition, in 2013, MPP will have paid lobbyists in support of legislation to
decriminalize small amounts of marijuana in Vermont and in support of ending
marijuana prohibition in Rhode Island. Also in 2012, MPP is planning to support
medical marijuana initiatives and to play a leading role in a ballot measure to
end marijuana prohibition in Colorado. State legislative victories. Delaware In
May 2011, the Delaware Legislature passed and Governor Jack Markell signed SB
17, which allows qualified, registered patients to obtain three ounces of
marijuana every 14 days from state-regulated compassion centers. MPP led the
two-year grassroots and lobbying efforts to pass the bill, which is based on
MPP’s model bill. This made Delaware the sixteenth state, plus the District
of Columbia, to adopt a medical marijuana law. Maryland In April and May 2011,
the Maryland General Assembly approved and Governor Martin O'Malley signed an
affirmative defense bill, removing criminal penalties from qualifying patients
who possess up to an ounce of marijuana and establishing a work group to study
a more comprehensive law. The bill improves upon a sentencing mitigation bill
the legislature enacted in 2003, following four years of lobbying by MPP. MPP
also played a leading role in the 2011 victory, including in-person lobbying,
working with patients, and testifying before legislative committees. Rhode
Island In January 2006, the Rhode Island Legislature overwhelmingly overrode
Governor Donald Carcieri’s veto of MPP’s bill to protect medical marijuana
patients from arrest, making Rhode Island the 11th medical marijuana state.
This was the first state medical marijuana law to be enacted over the veto of a
governor. In June 2009, the Rhode Island Legislature again overwhelmingly
overrode Gov. Carcieri’s veto of MPP’s bill to create “compassion
centers” to provide medical marijuana to qualified patients, making Rhode
Island the second state (after New Mexico) to license and regulate medical
marijuana dispensing. In June 2012, the Rhode Island Legislature passed and
Gov. Lincoln Chafee signed twin bills to decriminalize the simple possession of
marijuana. MPP led the three-year lobbying and grassroots effort for the bills,
which reduce the penalty for possession of up to an ounce of marijuana to a
$150 civil fine for most offenses. Vermont In May 2004, at the conclusion of
MPP’s intensive, three-year lobbying campaign, Vermont became the ninth state
to enact a medical marijuana law — and only the second state (after Hawaii)
to do so through its legislature, rather than through a ballot initiative. In
May 2011, the Vermont Legislature approved S. 17, which added four non-profit
dispensaries to the existing law. MPP played an instrumental role in passing
this legislation, by funding a two-year lobbying effort and helping elect a
governor who supports sensible marijuana policies. Ballot initiatives. Alaska
In 2004, MPP provided the majority of funding for an initiative to regulate
marijuana in Alaska, which failed with 44% of the vote (but still set what was
at the time the record for the largest vote to end marijuana prohibition in any
state). Arizona In November 2010, the Arizona Medical Marijuana Policy Project,
a ballot initiative campaign backed by MPP, successfully passed a ballot
initiative making the use and possession of medical marijuana legal and
establishing approximately 120 non-profit dispensaries around the state. This
made Arizona the 15th state to adopt a medical marijuana law. District of
Columbia In November 2009, MPP successfully lobbied for the removal of the so-
called "Barr Amendment" from the D.C. appropriations bill. MPP led the fight to
end Congressional interference, which, for over 10 years, blocked the District
of Columbia from implementing a medical marijuana initiative that passed with
nearly 70% of the vote in 1998. MPP even retained the amendment's namesake,
former Georgia Representative Bob Barr, to lobby for the amendment’s removal
after he reversed his position in 2007. Following the removal of the amendment,
MPP successfully lobbied the District Council to improve the language they were
considering to implement the initiative and lobbied the executive branch for
reasonable regulations. The regulations went into effect on April 15, 2011.
Massachusetts In November 2008, MPP’s ballot initiative to remove the threat
of arrest and jail for possessing an ounce or less of marijuana passed
overwhelmingly in Massachusetts. The successful initiative — the first
statewide decriminalization initiative ever — replaced the threat of arrest
and jail with a $100 fine. The measure also eliminated criminal offender (CORI)
reports as they pertain to arrests for simple marijuana possession, which,
prior to the initiative, could have resulted in individuals being denied
housing, jobs, or loans for college. Michigan Also in November 2008, 63% of
Michigan voters passed a medical marijuana ballot initiative spearheaded by
MPP”s campaign committee. The initiative — which received a majority of the
vote in each of Michigan’s 83 counties — permits terminally and seriously
ill patients to use medical marijuana with their doctors' approval. Its passage
made Michigan the 13th medical marijuana state and the first in the Midwest.
Montana In November 2004, MPP funded and ran the campaign that succeeded in
passing a statewide medical marijuana initiative in Montana with 62% of the
vote. Nevada In November 2006, MPP’s high-profile ballot initiative to tax
and regulate marijuana in Nevada received 44% of the vote, tying with Alaska
for the then all-time largest vote ever to end marijuana prohibition in a
state. (That number was since surpassed in November 2010, when 46% of
California voters supported Proposition 19, a ballot initiative to regulate,
tax, and control marijuana in the state.) Federal lobbying. MPP not only works
to reform marijuana policy state-by-state, but also on the federal level. Some
of MPP’s key federal goals include: building support for legislation that
would treat marijuana like alcohol under federal law, persuading members of
Congress to introduce and support legislation designed to protect medical
marijuana patients and providers, monitoring the Department of Justice to
ensure that the department honors its pledge to not prosecute individuals
acting in compliance with state medical marijuana laws, generating media
coverage to pressure the National Institute on Drug Abuse (NIDA) to provide
marijuana for an FDA-approved study related to PTSD, and lobbying for passage
of an amendment to a congressional appropriations bill that would eliminate all
funding for the drug czar’s office, among others. Since MPP’s founding,
positive medical marijuana bills have been introduced in six consecutive
Congresses. In addition, in the summers of 2003, 2004, 2005, 2006, and 2007,
the U.S. House debated and voted on an appropriations amendment advocated for
primarily by MPP. In July 2003, 152 members of Congress voted in favor of the
Hinchey amendment to the spending bill for the U.S. Justice Department. The
legislation would have prevented the DEA from spending any money to raid or
arrest medical marijuana patients and caregivers in states with medical
marijuana laws. In July 2007, following an intensive MPP lobbying campaign, MPP
helped to garner 165 votes in the U.S. House of Representatives for the Hinchey
Amendment — an all-time record of support for medical marijuana access. In
December 2009, MPP successfully lobbied for the removal of the “Barr
Amendment” from the D.C. Appropriations bill. MPP led the fight to end
Congressional interference, which, for over 10 years, blocked the District of
Columbia from implementing a medical marijuana initiative that passed with over
70% of the vote. MPP even retained the amendment’s namesake, former Georgia
Rep. Bob Barr, to lobby for the amendment’s removal after he reversed his
position in 2007. Following the removal of the amendment, MPP successfully
lobbied the District Council to improve the language they were considering to
implement the initiative and lobbied the executive branch for reasonable
regulations. Those regulations went into effect on April 15, 2011. MPP is
currently lobbying the 112th Congress on behalf of several pending marijuana-
related bills. For the first time ever, a bill to end federal marijuana
prohibition has been introduced. H.R. 2306, the Ending Federal Marijuana
Prohibition Act of 2012, would remove marijuana from the list of controlled
substances and would eliminate all federal penalties related to marijuana
(except in cases where marijuana is transferred into another state in violation
of that state’s laws). MPP is also lobbying on behalf of medical marijuana on
the federal level. In May 2011, three bills to benefit medical marijuana
patients and their providers were introduced in the U.S. House of
Representatives. The “States’ Medical Marijuana Patient Protection Act”
would modify federal law so that individuals acting in compliance with state
law are immune from federal prosecution. The “Small Business Tax Equity Act
of 2011” and the “Small Business Banking Improvement Act of 2011” address
critical tax and banking issues faced by medical marijuana centers and
dispensaries as they attempt to serve patients, comply with statewide
regulations, and pay their fair share of taxes. Finally, during the 112th
session of Congress, U.S. Reps. Jared Polis (D-CO) and Ron Paul (R-TX) plan to
introduce an amendment to the FY2012 (or FY2013) Financial Services
Appropriations bill. This amendment would cut $23 million in duplicative and
wasteful discretionary government spending by zero-funding the Office of
National Drug Control Policy (ONDCP), commonly known as the “Drug Czar’s
Office.” MPP has been actively engaged in efforts to defund the ONDCP for
nearly 10 years. Sex scandal. In August 2009, seven MPP staffers quit over an
alleged incident of sexual misconduct by executive director Rob Kampia
involving a female subordinate after an office happy hour. According to former
employees, department heads at the organization unanimously asked Kampia to
move into a different position than executive director over the incident. In
January 2010, Kampia was "encouraged" by the MPP Board of Directors to take a
three-month leave of absence, and his return was subject to "convincing the
board he had dealt with his issues." In April 2010, Kampia returned to the
organization after the leave of absence. War on Drug Czar. Deciding that
government propaganda was a major obstacle to its ballot initiatives, MPP
launched its "War on Drug Czar" campaign at the end of 2002, filing numerous
complaints against Office of National Drug Control Policy chief John P.
Walters. In a December 5, 2002 Reuters article, Rob Kampia proclaimed, "We want
him out of the picture. We want him excommunicated from the federal government
forever.” The complaints, filed with state officials, focused on ONDCP
leaders' visits to Alaska, Montana, Nevada, and Oregon. Director John Walters
traveled to Nevada and Oregon and Deputy Director Scott Burns traveled to
Alaska and Montana to speak against marijuana reform initiatives. However, they
did not file any campaign expense reports, which laws in those states require
for persons or organizations spending money to either support or oppose ballot
measures. TV and radio ad campaigns. In July 2006, MPP launched a radio
advertising campaign that called out prominent public officials, including
former President George W. Bush, former California Governor Arnold
Schwarzenegger, former Vice President Al Gore, and Supreme Court Justice
Clarence Thomas for using marijuana. The ad, which ran on 141 radio stations
nationwide, asked: "Is it fair to arrest three quarters of a million people a
year for doing what presidents and a Supreme Court justice have done?" In early
July 2009, MPP introduced a television ad spot advocating taxing and regulating
marijuana as a sensible policy change for California, a state facing a huge
budget deficit. The ad featured a California woman explaining that responsible
marijuana consumers, like herself, want a taxed and regulated system of
marijuana distribution so that they can pay their fair share of taxes, which
could then be put back into California schools. The ad was the first of its
kind and was very controversial, with some California television stations
refusing to air it. Nonetheless, the ad received a lot of press coverage,
including an appearance on NBC's Today Show by MPP's former director of federal
policies, Aaron Houston.
