Market structure The imperfectly competitive structure is quite identical to
the realistic market conditions where some monopolistic competitors,
monopolists, oligopolists, and duopolists exist and dominate the market
conditions. The elements of Market Structure include the number and size
distribution of firms, entry conditions, and the extent of differentiation.
These somewhat abstract concerns tend to determine some but not all details of
a specific concrete market system where buyers and sellers actually meet and
commit to trade. Competition is useful because it reveals actual customer
demand and induces the seller (operator) to provide service quality levels and
price levels that buyers (customers) want, typically subject to the seller’s
financial need to cover its costs. In other words, competition can align the
seller’s interests with the buyer’s interests and can cause the seller to
reveal his true costs and other private information. In the absence of perfect
competition, three basic approaches can be adopted to deal with problems
related to the control of market power and an asymmetry between the government
and the operator with respect to objectives and information: (a) subjecting the
operator to competitive pressures, (b) gathering information on the operator
and the market, and (c) applying incentive regulation. The correct sequence of
the market structure from most to least competitive is perfect competition,
imperfect competition, oligopoly, and pure monopoly. The main criteria by which
one can distinguish between different market structures are: the number and
size of producers and consumers in the market, the type of goods and services
being traded, and the degree to which information can flow freely. References.
The market form can equally be known to an extent by the barriers on entry and
exit. It is to be noted that the Perfectly Competitive market, there exists
"free entry and exit"; this applies to prospective/existing buyers and sellers.
Though, this is not the case with the Imperfect market structure.
