Market power In economics, market power is the ability of a firm to profitably
raise the market price of a good or service over marginal cost. In perfectly
competitive markets, market participants have no market power. A firm with
market power can raise prices without losing its customers to competitors.
Market participants that have market power are therefore sometimes referred to
as "price makers," while those without are sometimes called "price takers."
Significant market power is when prices exceed marginal cost and long run
average cost, so the firm makes economic profits. A firm with market power has
the ability to individually affect either the total quantity or the prevailing
price in the market. Price makers face a downward-sloping demand curve, such
that price increases lead to a lower quantity demanded. The decrease in supply
as a result of the exercise of market power creates an economic deadweight loss
which is often viewed as socially undesirable. As a result, many countries have
anti-trust or other legislation intended to limit the ability of firms to
accrue market power. Such legislation often regulates mergers and sometimes
introduces a judicial power to compel divestiture. A firm usually has market
power by virtue of controlling a large portion of the market. In extreme cases
- monopoly and monopsony - the firm controls the entire market. However, market
size alone is not the only indicator of market power. Highly concentrated
markets may be contestable if there are no barriers to entry or exit, limiting
the incumbent firm's ability to raise its price above competitive levels.
Market power gives firms the ability to engage in unilateral anti-competitive
behavior. Some of the behaviours that firms with market power are accused of
engaging in include predatory pricing, product tying, and creation of
overcapacity or other barriers to entry. If no individual participant in the
market has significant market power, then anti-competitive behavior can take
place only through collusion, or the exercise of a group of participants'
collective market power. The Lerner index and Herfindahl index may be used to
measure market power. Oligopoly. When several firms control a significant share
of market sales, the resulting market structure is called an oligopoly or
oligopsony. An oligopoly may engage in collusion, either tacit or overt, and
thereby exercise market power. An explicit agreement in an oligopoly to affect
market price or output is called a cartel. The behavior of firms in perfect
competition or monopoly can be treated as a simple optimization, but an
oligopoly requires game theoretic analysis. Monopoly power. Monopoly power is
an example of market failure which occurs when one or more of the participants
has the ability to influence the price or other outcomes in some general or
specialized market. The most commonly discussed form of market power is that of
a monopoly, but other forms such as monopsony, and more moderate versions of
these two extremes, exist. A well known example of monopolistic market power is
Microsoft's market share in PC operating systems. The "United States v.
Microsoft" case dealt with an allegation that Microsoft illegally exercised its
market power by bundling its web browser with its operating system. In this
respect, the notion of dominance and dominant position in EU Antitrust Law is a
strictly related aspect. Source of market power. A monopoly can raise prices
and retain customers because the monopoly has no competitors. If a customer has
no other place to go to obtain the goods or services, they either pay the
increased price or do without. Thus the key to market power is to preclude
competition through high barriers of entry. Barriers to entry that are
significant sources of market power are control of scarce resources, increasing
returns to scale, technological superiority and government created barriers to
entry. OPEC is an example of an organization that has market power due to
control over scarce resources - oil. Increasing returns to scale are another
important source of market power. Firms experiencing increasing returns to
scale are also experiencing decreasing average total costs. Firms in such
industries become more profitable with size. Therefore over time the industry
is dominated by a few large firms. This dominance makes it difficult for start
up firms to succeed. Firms like power companies, cable television companies and
wireless communication companies with large start up costs fall within this
category. A company wishing to enter such industries must have the financial
ability to spend millions of dollars before starting operations and generating
any revenue. Similarly established firms also have a competitive advantage over
new firms. An established firm threatened by a new competitor can lower prices
to drive out the competition. Microsoft is a firm that has substantial pricing
or market power due to technological superiority in its design and production
processes. Finally government created barriers to entry can be a source of
market power. A prime example are patents granted to pharmaceutical companies.
These patents give the drug companies a virtual monopoly in the protected
product for the term of the patent. Measuring market power. Concentration
ratios are the most common measures of market power. The four-firm
concentration ratio measures the percentage of total industry output
attributable to the top four companies. For monopolies the four firm ratio is
100 per cent while the ratio is zero for perfect competition. Another measure
of concentration is the Herfindahl-Hirschman Index (HHI) which is calculated by
"summing the squares of the percentage market shares of all participants in the
market." The HHI index for perfect competition is zero; for monopoly, 10,000.
The four firm concentration domestic (U.S) ratios for cigarettes is 93%; for
automobiles, 84% and for beer, 85%. Market power and elasticity of demand. Note
that PED will be negative, so the ratio is always greater than one. The higher
the P/MC ratio, the more market power the firm possesses. As PED increases in
magnitude, the P/MC ratio approaches one, and market power approaches zero.
