Market system A market system is any systematic process enabling many market
players to bid and ask: helping bidders and sellers interact and make deals. It
is not just the price mechanism but the entire system of regulation,
qualification, credentials, reputations and clearing that surrounds that
mechanism and makes it operate in a social context. Because a market system
relies on the assumption that players are constantly involved and unequally
enabled, a market system is distinguished specifically from a voting system
where candidates seek the support of voters on a less regular basis. However,
the interactions between market and voting systems are an important aspect of
political economy, and some argue they are hard to differentiate, e.g. systems
like cumulative voting and runoff voting involve a degree of market-like
bargaining and tradeoff, rather than simple statements of choice. Types. In
economics, market forms are studied. These look at the impacts of a particular
form on larger markets, rather than technical characteristics of how bidders
and sellers interact. Heavy reliance on many interacting market systems and
forms is a feature of capitalism, and advocates of socialism often criticize
market features. Competition is the regulatory mechanism of the market system.
This article does not discuss the political impact of any particular system nor
applications of a particular mechanism to any particular problem in real life.
For more on specific types of real-life markets, see commodity markets,
insurance markets, bond markets, energy markets, flea markets, debt markets,
stock markets, online auctions, media exchange markets, real estate market,
each of which is explained in its own article with features of its application,
referring to market systems as such if needed. One of the most important
characteristics of a market economy, also called a free enterprise economy, is
the role of aÂ limited government. Protocols. The market itself provides a
medium of exchange for the contracts and coupons and cash to seek prices
relative to each other, and for those to be publicized. This publication of
current prices is a key feature of market systems, and is often relevant far
beyond the current groups of buyers and sellers, affecting others' supply and
demand decisions, e.g. whether to produce more of a commodity whose price is
now falling. The term 'laissez-faire' ("let alone") is sometimes used to
describe some specific compromise between regulation and black market,
resulting in the political struggle to define or exploit "free markets". This
is not an easy matter to separate from other debates about the nature of
capitalism. There is no such thing as a "free" market other than in the sense
of a black market, and most free-market advocates favor at least some form of
regulated market, e.g. to prevent outright fraud, theft, and retain some degree
of credibility with the larger public. This political debate is out of the
scope of this article, other than to note that the "free" market is usually a
"less regulated" market, but not qualitatively different from other regulated
markets, in any society with laws, and that what opponents of "free markets"
usually seek is some kind of moral purchasing rather than pure rationing. As
this debate suggests, key debates over market systems relate to their
accessibility, safety, fairness, and ability to guarantee clearance and closure
of all transactions in a reasonable period of time. Importance of trust. The
degree of trust in a political or economic authority (such as a bank or central
bank) is often critical in determining the success of a market. A market system
depends inherently on a stable money system to ensure that units of account and
standards of deferred payment are uniform across all players - and to ensure
that the balance of contracts due within that market system are accepted as a
store of value, i.e. as "collateral" of the holder of the contract, which
justifies "credit" from a lender of cash. Banks, themselves, are often
described in terms of markets, as "transducers of trust" between lenders (who
deposit money) and borrowers (who take it out again). Trust in the bank to
manage this process makes more economic activity possible. However, critics
say, this trust is also quite easy to abuse, and has many times proven
difficult to limit or control (see business cycle), resulting in 'runs on
banks' and other such 'crises of trust' in 'the system'. However, market
systems are usually flexible enough to be refined and have its detailed rules
adjusted so as to regain the trust of participants relatively quickly - most
market systems tend to degrade gracefully, with a few exceptions, e.g.
hyperinflation, South Sea bubble, tulip boom, dotcom boom, depression, that are
very damaging, but nonetheless relatively infrequent.
