Market socialism Market socialism refers to various economic systems where the
means of production are either publicly owned or cooperatively owned and
operated for a profit in a market economy. The profit generated by the firms
would be used to directly remunerate employees or would be the source of public
finance or could be distributed amongst the population through a social
dividend. Theoretically, the fundamental difference between market socialism
and a non-market socialism is the existence of a market for the means of
production and capital goods. Market socialism is distinguished from models of
mixed economies, because unlike the mixed economy, models of market socialism
are complete and self-regulating systems. Additionally, market socialism is
contrasted with social democratic policies implemented in capitalist market
economies. While social democracy aims to achieve greater equality through
taxes, subsidies and social welfare projects, market socialism does so through
changes in patterns of enterprise ownership and management. Early forms of
market socialism consisted of proposals for cooperative enterprises operating
in a free-market economy, so that exploitation would be eliminated and
individuals would receive the full product of their labor. Early market
socialism was expressed by Ricardian socialists, mutualists and individualist
anarchists and was based on the theories of classical economics. Contemporary
models of market socialism are based on neoclassical economic theory beginning
in the early twentieth century. Early neoclassical models of socialism include
a role for a central planning board (CPB) in setting prices to equal marginal
cost in order to achieve pareto efficiency. Alternative models of market
socialism outlined models where socially-owned enterprises operate free markets
to maximize economic profit. In contemporary models proposed by economists such
as John Roemer and James Yunker, public ownership is achieved through public
ownership of equity. Market socialism has also been used to refer to reformed
economic systems in Marxist-Leninist states, such as the People's Republic of
China, where a free price system is utilized for the allocation and
distribution of all resources in the state sector. In this model, state
ownership is reserved for "strategic" sectors of the economy. Within this
model, the state would utilize indirect market mechanisms (fiscal, monetary and
Industrial policy) to influence economic activity in the same manner
governments affect economic decisions in capitalist economies, including the
use of (external) regulation over the otherwise autonomously-operating state
enterprises. However, proponents of this model do not consider it to be a form
of market socialism in the neoclassical sense, and instead describe it as an
alternative economic model called the "socialist market economy". Theoretical
history. Classical economics. Proponents of early free-market socialism include
the Ricardian socialist economists, the classical liberal philosopher John
Stuart Mill, and the anarchist philosopher Pierre-Joseph Proudhon. This form of
market socialism has been termed "free market socialism" because it does not
involve planners. Pierre-Joseph Proudhon developed a theoretical system called
mutualism, which attacks the legitimacy of existing property rights, subsidies,
corporations, banking, and rent. Proudhon envisioned a decentralized market
where people would enter the market with equal power, negating wage slavery.
Proponents believe that cooperatives, credit unions, and other forms of worker
ownership would become viable without being subject to the state. Market
socialism has also been used to describe some individualist anarchist works
which argue that free markets help workers and weaken capitalists. Neoclassical
economics. The earliest models of this form of market socialism were developed
by Leon Walras, Enrico Barone (1908) and Oskar R. Lange (c. 1936). Lange and
Fred M. Taylor proposed that central planning boards set prices through "trial
and error", making adjustments as shortages and surpluses occurred rather than
relying on a free price mechanism. If there were shortages, prices would be
raised; if there were surpluses, prices would be lowered. Raising the prices
would encourage businesses to increase production, driven by their desire to
increase their profits, and in doing so eliminate the shortage. Lowering the
prices would encourage businesses to curtail production to prevent losses,
which would eliminate the surplus. Therefore, it would be a simulation of the
market mechanism, which Lange thought would be capable of effectively managing
supply and demand. H. D. Dickinson published two articles proposing a form of
market socialism: "Price Formation in a Socialist Community" ("The Economic
Journal" 1933) and "The Problems of a Socialist Economy" ("The Economic
Journal" 1934). Dickinson proposed a mathematical solution whereby the problems
of a socialist economy could be solved by a central planning agency. The
central agency would have the necessary statistics on the economy, as well as
the capability of using statistics to direct production. The economy could be
represented as a system of equations. Solution values for these equations could
be used to price all goods at marginal cost and direct production. Hayek (1935)
argued against the proposal to simulate markets with equations. Dickinson
(1939) adopted the Lange-Taylor proposal to simulate markets through trial and
error. The Lange-Dickinson version of market socialism kept capital investment
out of the market. Lange (1926 p65) insisted that a central planning board
would have to set capital accumulation rates arbitrarily. Lange and Dickinson
saw potential problems with bureaucratization in market socialism. According to
Dickinson "the attempt to check irresponsibility will tie up managers of
socialist enterprises with so much red tape and bureaucratic regulation that
they will lose all initiative and independence" Dickinson 1938 p214). In the
Economics of Control (1944) Abba Lerner admitted that capital investment would
be politicized in market socialism. More contemporary models include "Coupon
Socialism" (by the economist John Roemer) and "Economic Democracy" (by the
philosopher David Schweickart). Bardham and Roemer suggested a form of Market
Socialism where there was a "stock market" that distributed capital fairly
between the workers. In this stock market, there is no buying or selling of
stocks, which leads to negative externalities associated with a concentration
of capital ownership. The Bardham and Roemer model satisfied the main
requirements of both Socialism (workers own all the factors of productionnot
just labour) and market economies (prices determine efficient allocation of
resources). A New Zealand Economist, Steven O'Donnell, expanded on the Bardham
and Roemer model and decomposed the capital function in a general equilibrium
system to take account of entrepreneurial activity in market socialist
economies. O'Donnell (2003) set up a model that could be used as a blueprint
for transition economies, and the results suggested that although market
socialist models were inherently unstable in the long term, in the short term
they would provide the economic infrastructure necessary for a successful
transition from Socialist to market economy. Yugoslav economists Jaroslav Vanek
and Branko Horvat promoted a model of market socialism dubbed the "Illyrian
model", where firms were socially-owned by their employees and based on
worker's self-management, competing in open and free markets. Anti-Equilibrium
economics. Another form of market socialism was promoted by critics of central
planning and general equilibrium theory, the most notable economists being Alec
Nove and Janos Kornai. In particular, Alec Nove's "feasible socialism" proposed
a mixed economy consisting of state-run enterprises, autonomous publicly-owned
firms, cooperatives, and small-scale private enterprise operating in an economy
consisting of both markets and indirect macroeconomic planning. Theoretical
basis. The key theoretical basis for market socialism is the negation of the
underlying expropriation of surplus value present in other, exploitative, modes
of production. Socialist theories that favored the market date back to the
Ricardian socialists, who advocated a free-market combined with state ownership
of the means of production. An important base for the first definition of
market socialism in economic theory is the Lange Model, which states that an
economy in which all production is performed by the state, but in which there
is a functioning price mechanism, has similar properties to a market economy
under perfect competition, in that it achieves Pareto efficiency.
Implementation. Peter Drucker described the U.S. system of regulated pension
funds providing capital to financial markets as "pension fund socialism".
William H. Simon characterized pension fund socialism as "a form of market
socialism", concluding that it was promising but perhaps with prospects more
limited than those envisioned by its enthusiasts. Other uses of the term.
Although the name is similar, it markedly differs from the socialist market
economy and Socialist-oriented market economy, which is practiced within the
People's Republic of China and Socialist Republic of Vietnam, respectively.
Market socialism has also been used as a name for any attempt by a Soviet-style
economy to introduce market elements into its economic system. In this sense,
"market socialism" was first attempted during the 1920s in the Soviet Union as
the New Economic Policy (NEP), but soon abandoned. Later, elements of "market
socialism" were introduced in Hungary (where it was nicknamed "goulash
communism"), Czechoslovakia and Yugoslavia (see Titoism) in the 1970s and
1980s. The Economy of Belarus has been described as a "market socialist"
system. Modern Vietnam and Laos also describe themselves as market socialist
systems. The Soviet Union attempted to introduce a market socialist system with
its perestroika reforms under Mikhail Gorbachev. During the later stages there
was talk within top circles that the government should create the Socialist
Market Economy; however, they never reached an agreement of how much socialism
and market was to be featured. Historically, these kinds of "market socialist"
systems attempt to retain state ownership of the "commanding heights of the
economy", such as heavy industry, energy, and infrastructure, while introducing
decentralised decision making and giving local managers more freedom to make
decisions and respond to market demands. Market socialist systems also allow
private ownership and entrepreneurship in the service and other secondary
economic sectors. The market is allowed to determine prices for consumer goods
and agricultural products, and farmers are allowed to sell all or some of their
products on the open market and keep some or all of the profit as an incentive
to increase and improve production. Socialist market economy. The Chinese
experience with socialism with Chinese characteristics is frequently referred
to as a "socialist market economy" in which the "commanding heights" remain in
state ownership, but a substantial portion of both the state and private
sectors of economy are governed by free market practices, including a stock
exchange for trading equity. The free-market is the arbitrator for most
economic activity, with economic planning being relegated to macro-economic
government indicative planning that does not encompass the microeconomic
decision-making that is left to the individual organizations and state-owned
enterprises. This model includes a significant amount of privately owned firms
that operate as a business for profit, but only for consumer goods and
services. Directive centralized planning composed of mandatory output
requirements and production quotas have been displaced by the free-market
mechanism (for most of the economy) and directive planning in larger state
industries. One of the major changes between the old planned economy and the
socialist market model is the corporatization state institutions, with 150 of
them reporting directly to the central government. By 2008, these state-owned
corporations have became increasingly dynamic and generated lots of revenue for
the state, with the state-sector leading the recovery of economic growth in
2009 in the wake of the financial crises. The Socialist Republic of Vietnam
pursued market-oriented reforms in 1986, resulting in what is officially called
a "Socialist-oriented market economy", a system that utilizes market forces to
distribute consumer goods produced by state-run, collectively owned and
privately owned enterprises. Proponents of socialist market economic systems
argue from a Marxist perspective, stating that a planned socialist economy can
only be brought about by first establishing a comprehensive commodity market
economy and letting it fully develop until it exhausts its historical stage and
gradually transforms itself into a planned economy. They argue that the
economic system of the USSR and its satellite states attempted to go from a
natural economy to a planned economy by decree, without passing through the
necessary market economy phase of development. Proponents of socialist-directed
market economies distinguish themselves from market socialists, and state that
market socialists believe that only through utilizing the market mechanism can
socialism be achieved, and that planned economies are ineffective or
undesirable.
