Marriage gap The marriage gap describes observed economic and political
disparities between those who are married and those who are single. The
marriage gap can be compared to, and should not be confused with, the gender
gap. Politics and marriage. As part of the marriage gap, unmarried people are
"considerably more liberal" than married people. With little variation between
professed moderates, married people respond to be conservative 9 percent more,
and single people respond to be liberal 10 percent more. Married people tend to
hold political opinions that differ from those of people who have never
married. Party affiliation in the United States. In the U.S., being a married
woman is correlated with a higher level of support for the Republican Party,
and being single with the Democratic Party. There is no significant difference
between married people. 32 percent of married people call themselves
Republicans and 31 percent say they are Democrats, while among single people,
19 percent are Republicans and 38 percent Democrats. The difference is most
striking between married and single women. Married women respond as being
Republicans 15 percent more; single women respond as being Democrats 11 percent
more. Marriage and cohabitation. It is not clear that legally or religiously
formalized marriages are associated with better outcomes than long-term
cohabitation. Part of the issue is that in many western countries, married
couples will have cohabited before marrying, so that the stability of the
resulting marriage might be attributable to the cohabitation having worked.
Penny Mansfield quoted in the Guardian of 17-7-2007 Interpreting the data. The
marriage gap is susceptible to multiple interpretations because it is not clear
to what extent it is attributable to causation and what to correlation. It may
be that people who already have a number of positive indicators of future
wellbeing in terms of wealth and education are more likely to get married.
Penny Mansfield of quoted in the Guardian of 17-7-2007
