Marxist philosophy Marxist philosophy or Marxist theory are terms that cover
work in philosophy that is strongly influenced by Karl Marx's materialist
approach to theory or that is written by Marxists. It may be broadly divided
into Western Marxism, which drew out of various sources, and the official
philosophy in the Soviet Union, which enforced a rigid reading of Marx called
""diamat"" (for "dialectical materialism"), in particular during the 1930s. The
phrase "Marxist philosophy" itself does not indicate a strictly defined sub-
field of philosophy, because the diverse influence of Marxist theory has
extended into fields as varied as aesthetics, ethics, ontology, epistemology,
theoretical psychology and philosophy of science, as well as its obvious
influence on political philosophy and the philosophy of history. The key
characteristics of Marxism in philosophy are its materialism and its commitment
to political practice as the end goal of all thought. Louis Althusser, for
example, defined philosophy as "class struggle in theory", thus radically
separating himself from those who claimed philosophers could adopt a "God's eye
view" as a purely neutral judge. Just as the young Marx had left university and
German Idealism to encounter the proletariat, which permitted him to modify his
perspective on practice and theory, "intellectuals" couldn't content themselves
with instructing the masses from their chairs (as the "organic intellectual"
conception denounced by Antonio Gramsci) but personally had to take part in the
social struggles of their times. Marxism and Philosophy. The philosopher
Étienne Balibar wrote in 1993 that ""there is no Marxist philosophy and there
never will be"; on the other hand, "Marx is more important for philosophy than
ever before."" So even the existence of Marxist philosophy is debatable (the
answer may depend on what is meant by "philosophy," a complicated question in
itself). Balibar's remark is intended to explain the significance of the final
line of Karl Marx's 11 "Theses on Feuerbach" (1845), which can be read as an
epitaph for philosophy: ""The philosophers have only interpreted the world, in
various ways; the point is to change it"". If this claim (which Marx originally
intended as a criticism of German Idealism and the more moderate Young
Hegelians) is still more or less the case in the 21st century, as many Marxists
would claim, then Marxist theory is in fact the practical continuation of the
philosophical tradition, while much of philosophy is still politically
irrelevant. Many critics, both philosophers outside Marxism and some Marxist
philosophers, feel that this is too quick a dismissal of the post-Marxian
philosophical tradition. Much sophisticated and important thought has taken
place after the writing of Marx and Engels; much or perhaps even all of it has
been influenced, subtly or overtly, by Marxism. Simply dismissing all
philosophy as sophistry might condemn Marxism to a simplistic empiricism or
economism, crippling it in practice and making it comically simplistic at the
level of theory. Nonetheless, the force of Marx's opposition to Hegelian
idealism and to any "philosophy" divorced from political practice remains
powerful even to a contemporary reader. Marxist and Marx-influenced 20th
century theory, such as (to name a few random examples) the critical theory of
the Frankfurt School, the political writing of Antonio Gramsci, and the neo-
Marxism of Fredric Jameson, must take Marx's condemnation of philosophy into
account, but many such thinkers also feel a strong need to remedy the perceived
theoretical problems with orthodox Marxism. Such problems might include a too-
simple economic determinism, an untenable theory of ideology as "false
consciousness," or a simplistic model of state power rather than hegemony. So
Marxist philosophy must continue to take account of advances in the theory of
politics developed after Marx, but it must also be wary of a descent into
theoreticism or the temptations of idealism. Althusser proposed a 'new
definition' of philosophy as "class struggle in theory"... marxism had proper
signification (and original "problematic") "only" insofar as it was the theory
of "the" tendency towards communism, and "in view" of its realization. The
criteria of acceptation or rejectal of a 'marxist' proposition was always the
same, whether it was presented as 'epistemological' or as 'philosophical': it
was in the act of rendering intelligible a "communist policy", or not."
("Ecrits pour Althusser", 1991, p.98). However, "Althusser never ceased to put
in question the "images of communism" that Marxist theory and ideology carried
on: but he did it in the name of communism itself." Althusser thus criticized
the evolutionist image which made of communism an ultimate stage of history, as
well as the apocalyptic images which made it a "society of transparence",
"without contradiction" nor ideology. Balibar observes that, in the end,
Althusser enjoined the most sober definition of communism, exposed by Marx in
"The German Ideology": "Communism is "not a state of the future, but the real
movement which destroys the existing state of being."." The Philosophy of Marx.
There are endless interpretations of the "philosophy of Marx", from the
interior of the Marxist movement as well as in its exterior. Although some have
separated Marx's works between a "young Marx" (in particular the "Economic and
Philosophical Manuscripts of 1844") and a "mature Marx" or also by separating
it into purely philosophical works, economics works and political and
historical interventions, Étienne Balibar (1993) has pointed out that Marx's
works can be divided into "economic works" ("Das Kapital", 1867),
"philosophical works" and "historical works" ("The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis
Bonaparte", the 1871 "Civil War in France" which concerned the Paris Commune
and acclaimed it as the first "dictatorship of the proletariat", etc.) Marx's
philosophy is thus inextricably linked to his critique of political economy and
to his historical interventions in the workers' movement, such as the 1875
"Critique of the Gotha Program" or "The Communist Manifesto", written with
Engels (who was observing the Chartist movement) a year before the Revolutions
of 1848. Both after the defeat of the French socialist movement during Louis
Napoleon Bonaparte's 1851 coup and then after the crushing of the 1871 Paris
Commune, Marx's thought transformed itself. Marxism's philosophical roots were
thus commonly explained as derived from three sources: English political
economy, French republicanism and radicalism, and German idealist philosophy.
Although this "three sources" model is an oversimplification, it still has some
measure of truth. On the other hand, Costanzo Preve (1990) has assigned four
"masters" to Marx: Epicurus (to whom he dedicated his thesis, "Difference of
natural philosophy between Democritus and Epicurus", 1841) for his materialism
and theory of clinamen which opened up a realm of liberty; Jean-Jacques
Rousseau, from which come his idea of egalitarian democracy; Adam Smith, from
whom came the idea that the grounds of property is labour; and finally Hegel.
"Vulgar Marxism" (or codified dialectical materialism) was seen as little other
than a variety of economic determinism, with the alleged determination of the
ideological superstructure by the economical infrastructure. This positivist
reading, which mostly based itself on Engels' latter writings in an attempt to
theorize "scientific socialism" (an expression coined by Engels) has been
challenged by Marxist theorists, such as Lukacs, Gramsci, Althusser or, more
recently, Étienne Balibar. Hegel. Marx develops a comprehensive, theoretical
understanding of political reality early in his intellectual and activist
career by means of a critical adoption and radicalization of the categories of
18th and 19th century German Idealist thought. Of particular importance is
Hegel's appropriation of Aristotle's organicist and essentialist categories in
the light of Kant's transcendental turn. Marx builds off of four contributions
Hegel makes to our philosophical understanding. They are: (1) the replacement
of mechanism and atomism with Aristotelean categories of organicism and
essentialism, (2) the idea that world history progresses through stages, (3)
the difference between natural and historical (dialectical) change, and (4) the
idea that dialectical change proceeds through contradictions in the thing
itself. (1) Aristotelian Organicism and Essentialism (a) Hegel adopts the
position that chance is not the basis of phenomena and that events are governed
by laws. Some have falsely attributed to Hegel the position that phenomena are
governed by transcendent, supersensible ideas that ground them. On the
contrary, Hegel argues for the organic unity between universal and particular.
Particulars are not mere token types of universals; rather, they relate to each
other as a part relates to a whole. This latter has import for Marx's own
conception of law and necessity. (b) In rejecting the idea that laws merely
describe or independently ground phenomena, Hegel revives the Aristotlean
position that law or principle is something implicit in a thing, a potentiality
which is not actual but which is in the process of becoming actual. This means
that if we want to know the principle governing something, we have to observe
its typical life-process and figure out its characteristic behavior. Observing
an acorn on its own, we can never deduce that it is an oak tree. To figure out
what the acorn is - and also what the oak tree is - we have to observe the line
of development from one to the other. (c) The phenomena of history arise from a
whole with an essence which undergoes transformation of form and which has an
end or telos. For Hegel, the essence of humanity is freedom, and the telos of
that essence is the actualization of that freedom. Like Aristotle, Hegel
believes the essence of a thing is revealed in the entire, typical process of
development of that thing. Looked at purely formally, human society has a
natural line of development in accordance with its essence just like any other
living thing. This process of development appears as a succession of stages of
world history. (2) The Stages of World History Human history passes through
several stages, in each of which is materialized a higher level of human
consciousness of freedom. Each stage also has its own principle or law
according to which it develops and lives in accordance with this freedom. Yet
the law is not free-standing. It is delivered by means of the actions of men
which spring from their needs, passions, and interests. Teleology, according to
Hegel, is not opposed to the efficient causation provided by passion; on the
contrary, the latter is the vehicle realizing the former. Hegel consistently
lays more stress on passion than on the more historically specifiable interests
of men. Marx will reverse this priority. (3) The Difference Between Natural and
Historical Change Hegel distinguishes as Aristotle did not between the
application of organic, essentialist categories to the realm of human history
and the realm of organic nature. According to Hegel, human history strives
toward perfectibility, but nature does not. Marx deepens and expands this idea
into the claim that humankind itself can adapt society to its own purposes
rather than adapting themselves to it. Natural and historical change, according
to Hegel, have two different kinds of essences. Organic natural entities
develop through a straightforward process, relatively simple to comprehend at
least in outline. Historical development, however, is a more complex process.
Its specific difference is its "dialectical" character. The process of natural
development occurs in a relatively straight line from the germ to the fully
realized being and back to the germ again. Some accident from the outside might
come along to interrupt this process of development, but if left to its own
devices, it proceeds in a relatively straightforward manner. Society's
historical development is internally more complex. The transaction from
potentiality to actuality is mediated by consciousness and will. The essence
realized in the development of human society is freedom, but freedom is
precisely that ability to negate the smooth line of development and go off in
novel, hitherto unforeseen directions. As humankind's essence reveals itself,
that revelation is at the same time the subversion of itself. Spirit is
constantly at war with itself. This appears as the contradictions constituting
the essence of Spirit. (4) Contradiction In the development of a natural thing,
there is by and large no contradiction between the process of development and
the way that development must appear. So the transition from an acorn, to an
oak, to an acorn again occurs in a relatively uninterrupted flow of the acorn
back to itself again. When change in the essence takes place, as it does in the
process of evolution, we can understand the change mostly in mechanical terms
using principles of genetics and natural selection. The historical process,
however, never attempts to preserve an essence in the first place. Rather, it
develops an essence through successive forms. This means that at any moment on
the path of historical change, there is a contradiction between what exists and
what is in the process of coming-to-be. The realization of a natural thing like
a tree is a process that by and large points back toward itself: every step of
the process takes place in order to reproduce the genus. In the historical
process, however, what exists, what is actual, is imperfect. It is inimical to
the potential. What is trying to come into existence - freedom - inherently
negates everything preceding it and everything existing, since no actual
existing human institution can possibly embody pure human freedom. So the
actual is both itself and its opposite (as potential). And this potential
(freedom) is never inert but constantly exerts an impulse toward change. The
rupture with German Idealism and the Young Hegelians. Marx did not study
directly with Hegel, but after Hegel died Marx studied under one of Hegel's
pupils, Bruno Bauer, a leader of the circle of Young Hegelians to whom Marx
attached himself. However, Marx and Engels came to disagree with Bruno Bauer
and the rest of the Young Hegelians about socialism and also about the usage of
Hegel's dialectic. Having achieved his thesis on the "Difference of natural
philosophy between Democritus and Epicurus" in 1841, the young Marx
progressively broke away with the Prussian university and its teachings
impregnated by German Idealism (Kant, Fichte, Schelling and Hegel). Along with
Engels, who observed the Chartist movement in the United Kingdom, he cut away
with the environment in which he grew up and encountered the proletariat in
France and Germany. He then wrote a scathing criticism of the Young Hegelians
in two books, "The Holy Family" (1845), and "The German Ideology" (1845), in
which he criticized not only Bauer but also Max Stirner's "The Ego and Its Own"
(1844), considered as one of the founding book of individualist anarchism. Max
Stirner claimed that all ideals were inherently alienating, and that replacing
God by the Humanity, as did Ludwig Feuerbach in "The Essence of Christianity"
(1841), was not sufficient. According to Stirner, any ideals, God, Humanity,
the Nation, or even the Revolution alienated the "Ego". Marx also criticized
Proudhon, who had become famous with his cry "Property is theft!", in "The
Poverty of Philosophy" (1845). Marx's early writings are thus a response
towards Hegel, German Idealism and a break with the rest of the Young
Hegelians. Marx, "stood Hegel on his head," in his own view of his role, by
turning the idealistic dialectic into a materialistic one, in proposing that
material circumstances shape ideas, instead of the other way around. In this,
Marx was following the lead of Feuerbach. His theory of alienation, developed
in the "Economic and Philosophical Manuscripts of 1844" (published in 1932),
inspired itself from Feuerbach's critique of the alienation of Man in God
through the objectivation of all his inherent characteristics (thus man
projected on God all qualities which are in fact man's own quality which
defines the "human nature"). But Marx also criticized Feuerbach for being
insufficiently materialistic, as Stirner himself had pointed out, and explained
that the alienation described by the Young Hegelians was in fact the result of
the structure of the economy itself. Furthermore, he criticized Feuerbach's
conception of human nature in his sixth thesis on Feuerbach as an abstract
"kind" which incarnated itself in each singular individual: "Feuerbach resolves
the essence of religion into the essence of man ("menschliche Wesen", human
nature). But the essence of man is no abstraction inherent in each single
individual. In reality, it is the ensemble of the social relations." Thereupon,
instead of founding itself on the singular, concrete individual subject, as did
classic philosophy, including contractualism (Hobbes, John Locke and Rousseau)
but also political economy, Marx began with the totality of social relations:
labour, language and all which constitute our human existence. He claimed that
individualism was the result of commodity fetishism or alienation. Some critics
have claimed that meant that Marx enforced a strict social determinism which
destroyed the possibility of free will. Criticisms of the "human rights". In
the same way, following Babeuf, considered as one of the founder of communism
during the French Revolution, he criticized the 1789 "Declaration of the Rights
of Man and of the Citizen" as a "bourgeois declaration" of the rights of the
"egoistic individual", ultimately based on the "right to private property",
which economism deduced from its own implicit "philosophy of the subject",
which asserts the preeminence of an individual and universal subject over
social relations. On the other hand, Marx also criticized Bentham's
utilitarianism. Alongside Freud, Nietzsche, and Durkheim, Marx thus takes a
place amongst the 19th century philosophers who criticized this pre-eminence of
the subject and its consciousness. Instead, Marx saw consciousness as
political. According to Marx, the recognition of these individual rights was
the result of the universal extension of market relations to all of society and
to all of the world, first through the primitive accumulation of capital
(including the first period of European colonialism) and then through the
globalization of the capitalist sphere. Such individual rights were the
symmetric of the "right for the labourer" to "freely" sell his labor force on
the marketplace through juridical contracts, and worked in the same time as an
ideological means to discompose the collective grouping of producers required
by the Industrial Revolution: thus, in the same time that the Industrial Era
requires masses to concentrate themselves in factories and in cities, the
individualist, "bourgeois" ideology separated themselves as competing homo
economicus. But the communist revolution does not end with the negation of
individual liberty and equality ("collectivism"), but with the "negation of the
negation": "individual property" in the capitalist regime is in fact the
"expropriation of the immediate producers." "Self-earned private property, that
is based, so to say, on the fusing together of the isolated, independent
laboring-individual with the conditions of his labor, is supplanted by
capitalistic private property, which rests on exploitation of the nominally
free labor of others, i.e., on wage-labor... The capitalist mode of
appropriation, the result of the capitalist mode of production, produces
capitalist private property. This is the first negation of individual private
property, as founded on the labor of the proprietor. But capitalist production
begets, with the inexorability of a law of Nature, its own negation. It is the
negation of negation. This does not re-establish private property for the
producer, but gives him individual property based on the acquisition of the
capitalist era: i.e., on co-operation and the possession in common of the land
and of the means of production. Criticisms of Feuerbach. In direct contrast to
German philosophy, which descends from heaven to earth, here we ascend from
earth to heaven. That is to say, we do not set out from what men say, imagine,
conceive, nor from men as narrated, thought of, imagined, conceived, in order
to arrive at men in the flesh. We set out from real, active men, and on the
basis of their real life process we demonstrate the development of the
ideological reflexes and echoes of this life process. The phantoms formed in
the human brain are also, necessarily, sublimates of their material life
process, which is empirically verifiable and bound to material premises.
Morality, religion, metaphysics, all the rest of ideology and their
corresponding forms of consciousness, thus no longer retain the semblance of
independence. They have no history, no development; but men, developing their
material production and their material intercourse, alter, along with this,
their real existence, their thinking, and the products of their thinking. Life
is not determined by consciousness, but consciousness by life. Also, in his
"Theses on Feuerbach" (1845), in which the young Marx broke with Feuerbach's
idealism, he writes that "the philosophers have only described the world, in
various ways, the point is to change it," and his materialist approach allows
for and empowers such change. This opposition between various subjective
interpretations given by philosophers, which may be, in a sense, compared with
"Weltanschauung" designed to legitimize the current state of affairs, and
effective transformation of the world through "praxis", which combines theory
and practice in a materialist way, is what distinguish "Marxist philosophers"
with the rest of philosophers. Indeed, Marx's break with German Idealism
involves a new definition of philosophy; Louis Althusser, founder of
"Structural Marxism" in the 1960s, would define it as "class struggle in
theory". Marx's movement away from university philosophy and towards the
workers' movement is thus inextricably linked to his rupture with his earlier
writings, which pushed Marxist commentators to speak of a "young Marx" and a
"mature Marx", although the nature of this cut poses problems. A year before
the Revolutions of 1848, Marx and Engels thus wrote "The Communist Manifesto",
which was prepared to an imminent revolution, and ended with the famous cry:
"Proletarians of all countries, unite!". However, Marx's thought changed again
following Louis-Napoleon Bonaparte's December 2, 1851 coup, which put an end to
the French Second Republic and created the Second Empire which would last until
the 1870 Franco-Prussian War. Marx thereby modified his theory of alienation
exposed in the "Economic and Philosophical Manuscripts of 1844" and would
latter arrive to his theory of commodity fetishism, exposed in the first
chapter of the first book of "Das Kapital" (1867). This abandon of the early
theory of alienation would be amply discussed, several Marxist theorists,
including Marxist humanists such as the Praxis School, would return to it.
Others, such as Althusser, would claim that the "epistemological break" between
the "young Marx" and the "mature Marx" was such that no comparisons could be
done between both works, marking a shift to a "scientific theory" of society.
In 1844-5, when Marx was starting to settle his account with Hegel and the
Young Hegelians in his writings, he critiqued the Young Hegelians for limiting
the horizon of their critique to religion and not taking up the critique of the
state and civil society as paramount. Indeed in 1844, by the look of Marx's
writings in that period (most famous of which is the "Economic and
Philosophical Manuscripts of 1844", a text that most explicitly elaborated his
theory of alienation), Marx's thinking could have taken at least three possible
courses: the study of law, religion, and the state; the study of natural
philosophy; and the study of political economy. He chose the last as the
predominant focus of his studies for the rest of his life, largely on account
of his previous experience as the editor of the newspaper "Rheinische Zeitung"
on whose pages he fought for freedom of expression against Prussian censorship
and made a rather idealist, legal defense for the Moselle peasants' customary
right of collecting wood in the forest (this right was at the point of being
criminalized and privatized by the state). It was Marx's inability to penetrate
beneath the legal and polemical surface of the latter issue to its materialist,
economic, and social roots that prompted him to critically study political
economy. Historical materialism. "In the social production of their existence,
men inevitably enter into definite relations, which are independent of their
will, namely relations of production appropriate to a given stage in the
development of their material forces of production. The totality of these
relations of production constitutes the economic structure of society, the real
foundation, on which arises a legal and political superstructure and to which
correspond definite forms of social consciousness. The mode of production of
material life conditions the general process of social, political and
intellectual life. It is not the consciousness of men that determines their
existence, but their social existence that determines their consciousness." In
this brief popularization of his ideas, Marx emphasized that social development
sprang from the inherent contradictions within material life and the social
superstructure. This notion is often understood as a simple historical
narrative: primitive communism had developed into slave states. Slave states
had developed into feudal societies. Those societies in turn became capitalist
states, and those states would be overthrown by the self-conscious portion of
their working-class, or proletariat, creating the conditions for socialism and,
ultimately, a higher form of communism than that with which the whole process
began. Marx illustrated his ideas most prominently by the development of
capitalism from feudalism, and by the prediction of the development of
socialism from capitalism. The base-superstructure and stadialist formulations
in the 1859 preface took on canonical status in the subsequent development of
orthodox Marxism, in particular in dialectical materialism ("diamat", as it was
known in the Soviet Union). They also gave way to a vulgar Marxism as plain
economic determinism (or economism), which has been criticized by various
Marxist theorists. "Vulgar Marxism" was seen as little other than a variety of
economic determinism, with the alleged determination of the ideological
superstructure by the economical infrastructure. However, this positivist
reading, which mostly based itself on Engels' latter writings in an attempt to
theorize "scientific socialism" (an expression coined by Engels) has been
challenged by Marxist theorists, such as Antonio Gramsci or Althusser. Some
believe that Marx regarded them merely as a short-hand summary of his huge
ongoing work-in-progress (which was only published posthumously over a hundred
years later as "Grundrisse"). These sprawling, voluminous notebooks that Marx
put together for his research on political economy, particularly those
materials associated with the study of "primitive communism" and pre-capitalist
communal production, in fact, show a more radical turning "Hegel on his head"
than heretofore acknowledged by most mainstream Marxists and Marxiologists. In
lieu of the Enlightenment belief in historical progress and stages espoused by
Hegel (often in a racist, Eurocentric manner, as in his "Lectures on the
Philosophy of History"), Marx pursues in these research notes a decidedly
empirical approach to analyzing historical changes and different modes of
production, emphasizing without forcing them into a teleological paradigm the
rich varieties of communal productions throughout the world and the critical
importance of collective working-class antagonism in the development of
capitalism. Moreover, Marx's rejection of the necessity of bourgeois revolution
and appreciation of the obschina, the communal land system, in Russia in his
letter to Vera Zasulich; respect for the egalitarian culture of North African
Muslim commoners found in his letters from Algeria; and sympathetic and
searching investigation of the global commons and indigenous cultures and
practices in his notebooks, including the "Ethnological Notebooks" that he kept
during his last years, all point to a historical Marx who was continuously
developing his ideas until his deathbed and does not fit into any pre-existing
ideological straitjacket. Differences within Marxist philosophy. Some varieties
of Marxist philosophy are strongly influenced by G.W.F. Hegel, emphasizing
totality and even teleology: for example, the work of Georg Lukács, whose
influence extends to contemporary thinkers like Fredric Jameson. Others
consider "totality" merely another version of Hegel's "spirit," and thus
condemn it as a crippling, secret idealism. Theodor Adorno, a leading
philosopher of the Frankfurt School, who was strongly influenced by Hegel,
tried to take a middle path between these extremes: Adorno contradicted Hegel's
motto "the true is the whole" with his new version, "the whole is the false,"
but he wished to preserve critical theory as a negative, oppositional version
of the utopia described by Hegel's "spirit." Adorno believed in totality and
human potential as ends to be striven for, but not as certainties. The status
of humanism in Marxist thought has been quite contentious. Many Marxists,
especially Hegelian Marxists and also those committed to political programs
(such as many Communist Parties), have been strongly humanist. These humanist
Marxists believe that Marxism describes the true potential of human beings, and
that this potential can be fulfilled in collective freedom after the Communist
revolution has removed capitalism's constraints and subjugations of humanity. A
particular version of the humanism within the marxism is represented by the
school of Lev Vygotsky and his school in theoretical psychology (Alexis
Leontiev, Laszlo Garai). The Praxis school based its theory on the writings of
the young Marx, emphasizing the humanist and dialectical aspects thereof.
However, other Marxists, especially those influenced by Louis Althusser, are
just as strongly anti-humanist. Anti-humanist Marxists believe that ideas like
"humanity," "freedom," and "human potential" are pure ideology, or theoretical
versions of the bourgeois economic order. They feel that such concepts can only
condemn Marxism to theoretical self-contradictions which may also hurt it
politically.
