Marxism–Leninism Marxism–Leninism is a communist ideology, officially based
upon the theories of Karl Marx, Friedrich Engels and Vladimir Lenin, that
promotes the development and creation of an international communist society
through the leadership of a vanguard party presiding over a revolutionary
socialist state that represents a dictatorship of the proletariat.
Marxism–Leninism (and its derivatives) was the dominant ideology of the
international Communist movement following the ascension of Joseph Stalin in
the Soviet Union, and as such, it is the political ideology and movement most
often associated with the word "Communism". A society organised through a
vanguard party on Marxist-Leninist principles seeks to purge anything
considered bourgeois, or idealist from it; in addition, it seeks to implement
universal atheism through the abolition of religion. It supports the creation
of a single-party state; it rejects political pluralism external to communism,
claiming that the proletariat need a single, able and unifying political party
through which to represent themselves and exercise political leadership.
Through the policy of democratic centralism, the communist party is the supreme
political institution of the Marxist-Leninist state and is the prime legal
force of societal organisation. Marxism–Leninism is a far-left ideology based
on principles of class conflict, egalitarianism, dialectical materialism,
rationalism, and social progress. It is anti-bourgeois, anti-capitalist, anti-
conservative, anti-fascist, anti-imperialist, anti-liberal, anti-reactionary,
and is opposed to bourgeois democracy. Additionally, Marxism–Leninism opposes
certain aspects of other forms of Marxian socialism, including left communism
and council communism, as well as certain aspects of non-Marxist socialist
movements, such as anarchism and syndicalism. The Marxist-Leninist state
utilizes a state socialist economy, based on scientific planning and democratic
consensus. It supports public ownership and organisation of the economy through
the abolition of private ownership of land and the means of production, which
become common property utilised by the people through the state. In the past,
it typically replaced the role of market in the capitalist economy with
centralized state management of the economy, which is known as a command
economy. However in recent decades an alternative Marxist-Leninist economy that
exists is the Socialist market economy that has been used by the People's
Republic of China, Socialist Republic of Vietnam and historically by the
People's Republic of Hungary and the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia.
Etymology. Historical. Within five years of Vladmir Lenin's death in 1924,
Stalin completed his rise to power in the Soviet Union. According to G.
Lisichkin, Marxism–Leninism as a separate ideology was compiled by Stalin in
his book "The questions of Leninism". During the period of Stalin's rule in the
Soviet Union, Marxism–Leninism was proclaimed the official ideology of the
state. Whether Stalin's practices actually followed the principles of Karl Marx
and Lenin is still a subject of debate among historians and political
scientists. Trotskyists in particular believe that Stalinism contradicted
authentic Marxism and Leninism, and they initially used the term
"Bolshevik–Leninism" to describe their own ideology of anti-Stalinist (and
later anti-Maoist) communism. Left communists rejected "Marxism–Leninism" as
an anti-Marxist current. The term "Marxism–Leninism" is often used by those
who believe that Lenin's legacy was successfully carried forward by Joseph
Stalin (Stalinists). However, it is also used by some who repudiate the
repressive aspects of Stalinism, such as the supporters of Nikita Khrushchev.
After the Sino–Soviet split, communist parties of the Soviet Union and the
People's Republic of China each claimed to be the sole intellectual heir to
Marxism–Leninism. In China, the claim that Mao had "adapted
Marxism–Leninism to Chinese conditions" evolved into the idea that he had
updated it in a fundamental way applying to the world as a whole; consequently,
the term "Marxism–Leninism–Mao Zedong Thought" (commonly known as Maoism)
was increasingly used to describe the official Chinese state ideology as well
as the ideological basis of parties around the world who sympathized with the
Communist Party of China (such as the Communist Party of the Philippines,
Marxist–Leninist/Mao Zedong Thought, founded by Jose Maria Sison in 1968).
Following the death of Mao, Peruvian Maoists associated with the Communist
Party of Peru (Sendero Luminoso) subsequently coined the term
Marxism–Leninism–Maoism, arguing that Maoism was a more advanced stage of
Marxism. Following the Sino–Albanian split, a small portion of
Marxist–Leninists began to downplay or repudiate the role of Mao Zedong in
the International Communist Movement in favor of the Party of Labor of Albania
and a stricter adherence to Stalin. In North Korea, Marxism–Leninism was
officially superseded in 1977 by Juche, in which concepts of class and class
struggle, in other words Marxism itself, play no significant role. However, the
government is still sometimes referred to as Marxist–Leninist—or, more
commonly, Stalinist—due to its political and economic structure (see History
of North Korea). In the other four "de jure" socialist states existing
today—China, Cuba, Laos, and Vietnam—the ruling Parties hold
Marxism–Leninism as their official ideology, although they give it different
interpretations in terms of practical policy. Current usage. Some contemporary
communist parties continue to regard Marxism–Leninism as their basic
ideology, although some have modified it to adapt to new and local political
circumstances. In party names, the appellation "Marxist–Leninist" is normally
used by a communist party who wishes to distinguish itself from some other (and
presumably 'revisionist') communist party in the same country. Popular
confusion abounds concerning the complex terminology describing the various
schools of Marxist-derived thought. The appellation "Marxist–Leninist" is
often used by those not familiar with communist ideology in any detail (e.g.
many newspapers and other media) as a synonym for any kind of Marxism.
Components. Social. Marxism–Leninism supports widespread universal social
welfare. Improvements in public health and education, provision of child care,
provision of state-directed social services, and provision of social benefits
are deemed by Marxist-Leninists to help to raise labour productivity and
advance a society in development towards a communist society. This is part of
Marxist-Leninists' advocacy of promoting and reinforcing the operation of a
planned socialist economy. It advocates universal education with a focus on
developing the proletariat with knowledge, class consciousness, and
understanding the historical development of communism. Marxist-Leninist policy
on family law has typically involved: the elimination of the political power of
the bourgeoisie, the abolition of private property, and an education that
teaches citizens to abide by a disciplined and self-fulfilling lifestyle
dictated by the social norms of communism as a means to establish a new social
order. Marxism–Leninism supports the emancipation of women and ending the
exploitation of women. The advent of a classless society, the abolition of
private property, society collectively assuming many of the roles traditionally
assigned to mothers and wives, and women becoming integrated into industrial
work has been promoted as the means to achieve women's emancipation. Marxist-
Leninist cultural policy focuses upon modernization and distancing society
from: the past, the bourgeoisie, and the old intelligentsia. Agitprop and
various associations and institutions are used by the Marxist-Leninist state to
educate society with the values of communism. Both cultural and educational
policy in Marxist-Leninist states have emphasized the development of a "New
Man" – a class conscious, knowledgeable, heroic proletarian person devoted to
work and social cohesion as opposed to the antithetic "bourgeois individualist"
associated with cultural backwardness and social atomisation. Economic. The
economy of a Marxist-Leninist state is a socialist economy, based on workers'
ownership and control of the means of production (i.e., factories, farms,
etc.). The state, being the dictatorship of the proletariat, serves as a
safeguard for the ownership and as the coordinator of production through a
universal economic plan. For the purpose of reducing waste and increasing
efficiency, scientific planning replaces market mechanisms and price mechanisms
as the guiding principle of the economy. The Marxist-Leninist state's huge
purchasing power replaces the role of market forces, with macroeconomic
equilibrium not being achieved through market forces but by economic planning
based on scientific assessment. In the socialist economy, the value of a good
or service is based on its use value, rather than its cost of production or its
exchange value. The profit motive as a driving force for production is replaced
by social obligation to fulfil the economic plan. Wages are set and
differentiated according to skill and intensity of work. While socially
utilised means of production are under public control, personal belongings or
property of a personal nature that doesn't involve mass production of goods
remains relatively unaffected by the state. Because Marxism-Leninism has
historically only been the state ideology of countries who were economically
undeveloped prior to socialist revolution (or whose economies were nearly
obliterated by war, such as the German Democratic Republic), the primary goal
before achieving full communism was the development of socialism in itself.
Such was the case in the Soviet Union, where the economy was largely agrarian
and urban industry was in a primitive stage. To develop socialism, the economy
went through a period of massive industrialisation, in which much of the
peasant population moved into urban areas while those remaining in the rural
areas began working in the new collective agricultural system. Since the mid-
1930s, Marxism-Leninism has advocated a socialist consumer society based upon
egalitarianism, asceticism, and self-sacrifice. Previous attempts to replace
the consumer society as derived from capitalism with a non-consumerist society
failed and in the mid-1930s permitted a consumer society, a major change from
traditional Marxism's anti-market and anti-consumerist theories. These reforms
were promoted to encourage materialism and acquisitiveness in order to
stimulate economic growth. This pro-consumerist policy has been advanced on the
lines of "industrial pragmatism" as it advances economic progress through
bolstering industrialization. The ultimate goal of the Marxist-Leninist economy
is the emancipation of the individual from alienating work, and therefore
freedom from having to perform such labour to receive access to the material
necessities for life. It is argued that freedom from necessity would maximise
individual liberty, as individuals would be able to pursue their own interests
and develop their own talents while only performing labour by free will without
external coercion. The stage of economic development in which this is possible
is contingent upon advances in the productive capabilities of society. This
advanced stage of social relations and economic organisation is called "pure
communism". Political system. Marxism–Leninism supports the creation of a
single-party state led by a Marxist-Leninist communist party as a means to
develop socialism and then communism. The political structure of the Marxist-
Leninist state involves the rule of a communist vanguard party over a
revolutionary socialist state that represents the will and rule of the
proletariat. Through the policy of democratic centralism, the communist party
is the supreme political institution of the Marxist-Leninist state. Elections
are held in Marxist-Leninist states for all positions within the legislative
structure, municipal councils, national legislatures and presidencies. In most
Marxist-Leninist states this has taken the form of directly electing
representatives to fill positions, though in some states; such as China, Cuba,
and the former Yugoslavia; this system also included indirect elections such as
deputies being elected by deputies as the next lower level of government. These
elections are not competitive multiparty elections and most are not multi-
candidate elections; usually a single communist party candidate is chosen to
run for office in which voters vote either to accept or reject the candidate.
Where there have been more than one candidates, all candidates are officially
vetted before being able to stand for candidacy and the system has frequently
been structured to give advantage to official candidates over others.
Marxism–Leninism asserts that society is united upon common interests
represented through the communist party and other institutions of the Marxist-
Leninist state and in Marxist-Leninist states where opposition political
parties have been permitted they have not been permitted to advocate political
platforms significantly different from the communist party. Marxist-Leninist
communist parties have typically exercised close control over the electoral
process of such elections, including involvement with nomination, campaigning,
and voting – including counting the ballots. International relations.
Marxism–Leninism aims to create an international communist society. It
opposes colonialism and imperialism and advocates decolonization and anti-
colonial forces. It supports anti-fascist international alliances and has
advocated the creation of "popular fronts" between communist and non-communist
anti-fascists against strong fascist movements. History. Founding of
Bolshevism, 1905–1907 Russian Revolution, and World War I (1903–1917).
Marxism–Leninism is the descendant of interpretation of the theories of Karl
Marx, Friedrich Engels, and Vladimir Lenin. It was officially created after
Lenin's death during the regime of Josef Stalin in the Soviet Union and
continued to be the official ideology of the Soviet Communist Party after de-
Stalinization. However the basis for elements of Marxism–Leninism predate
this. Marxism–Leninism descends from the Bolshevik ("Majority") faction of
the Russian Social Democratic Labour Party (RSDLP) that was founded in the
RSDLP's Second Congress in 1903. The Bolshevik faction led by Lenin advocated
an active, politically committed vanguard party membership while opposing trade
union based membership of social democratic parties. The Bolsheviks supported a
vanguard Marxist party composed of active militants committed to socialism who
would initiate communist revolution. The Bolsheviks advocated the policy of
democratic centralism that would allow members to elect their leaders and
decide policy but that once policy was set, members would be obligated to have
complete loyalty in their leaders. Lenin attempted and failed to bring about
communist revolution in Russia in the Russian Revolution of 1905–7. During
the revolution, Lenin advocated mass action and that the revolution "accept
mass terror in its tactics". During the revolution Lenin advocated militancy
and violence of workers as a means to pressure the middle class to join and
overthrow the Tsar. Bolshevik emigres briefly poured into Russia to take part
in the revolution. Prior and after the failed revolution, the Bolshevik
leadership voluntarily resided in exile to evade Tsarist Russia's secret
police, such as Lenin who resided in Switzerland. Most importantly, the
experience of this revolution caused Lenin to conceive of the means of
sponsoring communist revolution, through propaganda, agitation, a well-
organized and disciplined but small political party, and through psychological
manipulation of aroused masses. In the aftermath of the failed revolution of
1905–7, Bolshevik revolutionaries were forced back into exile in 1908 in
Switzerland as well as other anti-Tsarist revolutionaries including the
Mensheviks, the Socialist Revolutionaries, and anarchists. Membership in both
the Bolshevik and Menshevik ranks diminished from 1907 to 1908 and the number
of people taking part in strikes in 1907 was 26 percent of the figure during
the year of the revolution in 1905, it dropped in 1908 to 6 percent of that
figure, and in 1910 it was 2 percent of that figure. The period of 1908 to 1917
was one of dissillusionment in the Bolshevik party over Lenin's leadership,
with members opposing him for scandals involving his expropriations and methods
of raising money for the party. One important development after the events the
1905-7 revolution was Lenin's endorsement of colonial revolt as a powerful
reenforcement to revolution in Europe. This was an original development by
Lenin, as prior to the 20th century Marxists did not pay serious attention to
colonialism and colonial revolt. Facing leadership challenges from the
"Forward" group, Lenin usurped the all-Party Congress of the RSDLP in 1912, to
seize control of it and make it an exclusively Bolshevik party loyal to his
leadership. Almost all the members elected to the party's Central Committee
were Leninists while former RDSLP leaders not associated with Bolshevism were
removed from office. Lenin remained highly unpopular in the early 1910s, and
was so unpopular amongst international socialist movement that by 1914 it
considered censoring him. At the outset of World War I in 1914, the Bolsheviks
opposed the war unlike most other socialist parties across Europe that
supported their national governments. Lenin and a small group of anti-war
socialist leaders, including Rosa Luxemburg and Karl Liebknecht, denounced
established socialist leaders of having betrayed the socialist ideal via their
support of the war. In response to the outbreak of World War I, Lenin wrote his
book "Imperialism, the Highest Stage of Capitalism" from 1915 to 1916 and
published in 1917 in which he argued that capitalism directly leads to
imperialism. As a means to destabilize Russia on the Eastern Front, Germany's
High Command allowed Lenin to travel across Germany and German-held territory
into Russia in April 1917, anticipating him partaking in revolutionary
activity. October Revolution, aftermath conflict, and the creation of the
Soviet Union (1917–1924). In March 1917, Tsar Nicholas II abdicated his
throne and a provisional government quickly filled the vacuum, proclaiming
Russia a republic months later. This was followed by the October Revolution by
the Bolsheviks, who seized control in a quick coup d'état against the
Provisional Government, resulting in the formation of the Russian Soviet
Federative Socialist Republic (RSFSR), the first country in history committed
to the establishment of communism. However, large portions of Russia were held
under the leadership of either pro-Tsarist or anti-communist military
commanders who formed the White movement to oppose the Bolsheviks, resulting in
civil war between the Bolsheviks' Red Army and the anti-Bolshevik White Army.
Amidst civil war between the Reds and the Whites, the RSFSR inherited the war
that the Russian Empire was fighting against Germany that was ended a year
later with an armistice. However, that was followed by a brief Allied military
intervention by the United Kingdom, the United States, France, Italy, Japan and
others against the Bolsheviks. In response to the October Revolution, communist
revolution broke out in Germany and Hungary from 1918 to 1920, involving
creation of the Bavarian Soviet Republic, the failed Spartacist uprising in
Berlin in 1919, and the creation of the Hungarian Soviet Republic. These
communist forces were soon crushed by anti-communist forces and attempts to
create an international communist revolution failed. However, a successful
communist revolution occurred in Mongolia in 1924, resulting in the creation of
the Mongolian People's Republic. The entrenchment of Bolshevik power began in
1918 with the expulsion of Mensheviks and Socialist Revolutionaries from the
workers' soviets. The Bolshevik government established the Cheka, a secret
police force dedicated to confronting anti-Bolshevik elements. The Cheka was
the predecessor to the NKVD and the KGB. Initially, opposition to the Bolshevik
regime was strong as a response to Russia's poor economic conditions, with the
Cheka reporting no less than 118 uprisings, including the Kronstadt Revolt.
Lenin repressed opposition political parties. Intense political struggle
continued until 1922. Initial Bolshevik economic policies from 1917 to 1918
were cautious with limited nationalizations of private property. Lenin was
immediately committed to avoid antagonizing the peasantry by making efforts to
coax them away from the Socialist Revolutionaries, allowing a peasant takeover
of nobles' estates while no immediate nationalizations were enacted on
peasants' property. Beginning in mid-1918, the Bolshevik regime enacted what is
known as "war communism", an economic policy that aimed to replace the free
market with state control over all means of production and distribution. This
was done through the Decree on Nationalization that declared the
nationalization of all large-scale private enterprises while requisitioning
grain away from peasants and providing it to workers in cities and Red soldiers
fighting the Whites. The result was economic chaos as the monetary economy
collapsed and was replaced by barter and black marketeering. The requisitioning
of grain away from the peasantry to workers resulted in peasants losing
incentive to labour, resulting in a drop in production, producing a food
shortage crisis in the cities that provoked strikes and riots that seriously
challenged the Bolshevik regime, with the most serious being the Kronstadt
Revolt of 1921. The New Economic Policy was started in 1921 as a backwards step
from war communism, with the restoration of a degree of capitalism and private
enterprise. 91 percent of industrial enterprises were returned to private
ownership or trusts. Importantly, Lenin declared that the development of
socialism would not be able to be pursued in the manner originally thought by
Marxists. Lenin stated "Our poverty is so great that we cannot at one stroke
restore full-scale factory, state, socialist production". A key aspect that
affected the Bolshevik regime was the backward economic conditions in Russia
that were considered unfavourable to orthodox Marxist theory of communist
revolution. Orthodox Marxists claimed at the time that Russia was ripe for the
development of capitalism, not yet for socialism. Lenin advocated the need of
the development of a large corps of technical intelligentsia to assist the
industrial development of Russia and thus advance the Marxist economic stages
of development, as it had too few technical experts at the time. The New
Economic Policy was tumultuous; economic recovery took place but alongside
famine (1921–1922) and a financial crisis (1924). However by 1924,
considerable economic progress had been achieved and by 1926 the economy
regained its 1913 production level. Stalinism and World War II (1924–1945).
As Lenin neared death after suffering strokes, he declared in his testament of
December 1922 an order to remove Joseph Stalin from his post as General
Secretary and replace him by "some other person who is superior to Stalin only
in one respect, namely, in being more tolerant, more loyal, more polite and
more attentive to comrades". When Lenin died in January 1924, the testament was
read out to a meeting of the party's Central Committee. However, party members
believed that Stalin had improved his reputation in 1923 and ignored Lenin's
order. Lev Kamenev and Grigory Zinoviev believed that the real threat to the
party came from Trotsky, head of the Red Army, due to his association with the
army and his powerful personality. Kamenev and Zinoviev collaborated with
Stalin in a power-sharing triumvirate where Stalin retained his position as
General Secretary. The confrontation between the triumvirate and Trotsky began
over the debate between the policy of Permanent Revolution as advocated by
Trotsky and Socialism in One Country as advocated by Stalin. Trotsky's
Permanent Revolution advocated rapid industrialization, elimination of private
farming, and having the Soviet Union promote the spread of communist revolution
abroad. Stalin's Socialism in One Country stressed moderation and development
of positive relations between the Soviet Union and other countries to increase
trade and foreign investment. Stalin was not particularly committed to these
positions, but used them as a means to isolate Trotsky. In 1925, Stalin's
policy won the support of the 14th Party Congress while Trotsky was defeated.
From 1925 to 1927, Stalin abandoned his triumvirate with Kamenev and Zinoviev
and formed an alliance with the most right-wing elements of the party, Nikolai
Bukharin, Alexei Rykov, and Mikhail Tomsky. The 1927 Party Conference gave
official endorsement to the policy of Socialism in One Country, while Trotsky
along with Kamenev and Zinoviev (both now allied with Trotsky against Stalin)
were expelled from the Party's Politburo. In 1929, Stalin seized control of the
Party. Upon Stalin attaining power, Bolshevism became associated with
Stalinism, whose policies included: rapid industrialization, Socialism in One
Country, a centralized state, collectivization of agriculture, and
subordination of interests of other communist parties to those of the Soviet
party. In 1929, he enacted harsh radical policy towards the wealthy peasantry
(Kulaks) and turned against Bukharin, Rykov, and Tomsky, who favoured a more
moderate approach to the Kulaks. He accused them of plotting against the
Party's agreed strategy and forced them to resign from the Politburo and
political office. Trotsky was exiled from the Soviet Union in 1929. Opposition
to Stalin by Trotsky led to a dissident Bolshevik ideology called Trotskyism
that was repressed under Stalin's rule. Stalin's regime was a totalitarian
state under his dictatorship. Stalin exercised extensive personal control over
the Communist Party and unleashed an unprecedented level of violence to
eliminate any potential threat to his regime. While Stalin exercised major
control over political initiatives, their implementation was in the control of
localities, often with local leaders interpreting the policies in a way that
served themselves best. This abuse of power by local leaders exacerbated the
violent purges and terror campaigns carried out by Stalin against members of
the Party deemed to be traitors. Stalin unleashed the Great Terror campaign
against alleged "socially dangerous" and "counterrevolutionary" persons that
resulted in the Great Purge of 1936–1938 during which 1.5 million people were
arrested from 1937–1938 and 681,692 of those were executed. The Stalinist era
saw the introduction of a system of forced labour of convicts and political
dissidents, the Gulag system, of that created in the early 1930s. Political
developments in the Soviet Union from 1929 to 1941 included Stalin dismantling
the remaining elements of democracy from the Party by extending his control
over its institutions and eliminating any possible rivals. The Party's ranks
grew in numbers with the Party modifying its organization to include more trade
unions and factories. In 1936, the Soviet Union adopted a new constitution that
ended weighted voting preference for workers as in its previous constitutions,
and created universal suffrage for all people over the age of eighteen. The
1936 Constitution also split the Soviets into two legislatures, the Soviet of
the Union – representing electoral districts, and the Soviet of the
Nationalities – that represented the ethnic makeup of the country as a whole.
By 1939, with the exception of Stalin himself, none of the original Bolsheviks
of the October Revolution of 1917 remained in the Party. Unquestioning loyalty
to Stalin was expected by the regime of all citizens. Economic developments in
the Soviet Union from 1929 to 1941 included the acceleration of
collectivization of agriculture. In 1930, 23.6 percent of all agriculture was
collectivized; by 1941, 98 percent of all agriculture was collectivized. This
process of collectivization included "dekulakization", in which kulaks were
forced off their land, persecuted, and killed in a wave of terror unleashed by
the Soviet state against them. The collectivization policies resulted in
economic disaster with severe fluctuations in grain harvests, catastrophic
losses in the number of livestock, a substantial drop in the food consumption
of the country's citizens, and the allegedly intentional Holodomor famine in
the Ukraine. Modern sources estimate that between 2.4 and 7.5 million
Ukrainians died in the Holodomor famine. Vast industrialization was initiated,
mostly based on the basis of preparation for an offensive war against the West
– with a focus on heavy industry. However, even at its peak, industry of the
Soviet Union remained well behind that of the United States. Industrialization
led to a massive urbanization in the country. Unemployment was virtually
eliminated in country during the 1930s. Social developments in the Soviet Union
from 1929 to 1941 included the relinquishment of the relaxed social control and
allowance of experimentation under Lenin to Stalin's promotion of a rigid and
authoritarian society based upon discipline – mixing traditional Russian
values with Stalin's interpretation of Marxism. Organized religion was
repressed, especially minority religious groups. Education was transformed,
under Lenin, the education system took allowed relaxed discipline in schools
that became based upon Marxist theory, but Stalin reversed this in 1934 with a
conservative approach taken with the reintroduction of formal learning, the use
of examinations and grades, the assertion of full authority of the teacher, and
the introduction of school uniforms. Art and culture became strictly regulated
under the principles of Socialist Realism, and Russian traditions that Stalin
admired were allowed to continue. Foreign policy in the Soviet Union from 1929
to 1941 resulted in substantial changes in the Soviet Union's approach to its
foreign policy. The rise of Adolf Hitler and the Nazis in Germany in 1933
resulted in the Soviet Union initially terminating the political connections it
previously had established with Germany in the 1920s and Stalin turned to
accommodate Czechoslovakia and the West against Hitler. The Soviet Union
promoted various anti-fascist fronts across Europe and created agreements with
France to challenge Germany. With the Suddeten agreement in 1938, Soviet
foreign policy reversed, with Stalin abandoning anti-German policies and
adopting pro-German policies. In 1939, the Soviet Union and Nazi Germany agreed
to both a non-aggression pact and an agreement to invade and partition Poland
between them, resulting in the invasion of Poland in September 1939 by Germany
and the Soviet Union and the beginning of World War II, with the Allies
declaring war on Germany. The German invasion of the Soviet Union resulted in
the substantial realignment of multiple Soviet policies. The Soviet Union was
brought into World War II and joined the Western Allies in a common front
against the Axis Powers. The war brought the threat of physical disintegration
of the Soviet Union, as German forces were initially welcomed as liberators by
many Belarussians, Georgians, and Ukrainians. Soviet forces initially faced
disastrous losses from 1941 to 1942. Stalin enacted total war policy in
response. Communist insurrection against Axis occupation took place in several
countries. In China, the Communist Party of China led by Mao Zedong reluctantly
abandoned the civil war with the Kuomintang and cooperated with it against
Japanese occupation forces. In Yugoslavia, the communist Yugoslav Partisans led
by Josip Broz Tito, held up an effective guerrilla resistance movement to the
Axis occupiers. The Partisans managed to form a communist Yugoslav state called
Democratic Federal Yugoslavia in liberated territories in 1943 and by 1944,
with the assistance of Soviet forces, seized control of Yugoslavia, entrenching
a communist regime in Yugoslavia. Soviet forces rebounded in 1943 with the
victories at the Battle of Stalingrad and the Battle of Kursk, and from 1943 to
1945 they pushed back German forces and sieged Berlin in 1945. By the end of
World War II, the Soviet Union had become a major military superpower. With the
collapse of the Axis Powers, Soviet satellite states were established
throughout Eastern Europe, creating a large communist bloc of states in Europe.
Cold War, de-Stalinization, and Maoism (1945–1980). Tensions between the
Western Allies and the communist Eastern allies accelerated after the end of
World War II, resulting in the Cold War between the Soviet-led communist East
and the American-led capitalist West. Key events that began the Cold War
included Soviet, Yugoslav, Bulgarian, and Albanian intervention in the Greek
civil war on the side of the communists, and the creation of the Berlin
blockade by the Soviet Union in 1948. China returned to civil war between the
Western-backed Kuomintang versus Mao Zedong's Communists supported by the
Soviet Union with the Communists seizing control of all of mainland China in
1949, creating the People's Republic of China (PRC). Direct conflict between
the East and West erupted in the Korean War, when the United Nations Security
Council, with the absence of the Soviet Union at the time of the vote, voted
for international intervention in Korea to stop the civil war. The United
States and other Western powers used the war to prop up South Korea against
Soviet and PRC-backed communist North Korea led by Kim Il-Sung. The war ended
in armistice and stalemate in 1953. Stalin's attempts to enforce submission of
its Eastern European allies to the economic and political agenda of the Soviet
Union sparked opposition and rejection in Yugoslavia by Tito. Stalin denounced
Tito and removed Yugoslavia from the Comintern. Tito in return rejected
Stalinism and the Eastern bloc, forging a non-aligned position between East and
West that developed into the Non-Aligned Movement and the development of an
autonomous Marxist-Leninist ideology of Titoism. In 1953, Stalin died of a
stroke, ending his 29 years of influence and rule over the Soviet Union. With
the death of Stalin in 1953, Nikita Khrushchev gradually ascended to power in
the Soviet Union and announced a radical policy of de-Stalinization of the
Communist Party and the country, condemning Stalin for excesses and tyranny.
Gulag forced labour camps were dismantled. Anti-Stalinist figures such as
Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn were allowed the freedom to criticize Stalin. The cult
of personality associated with Stalin was eliminated. Stalinists were removed
from office. Khrushchev ended Stalin's policy of Socialism in One Country and
committed the Soviet Union to actively support communist revolution throughout
the world. The policies of de-Stalinization were promoted as an attempt to
restore the legacy of Lenin. The death of Stalin, however did not result in the
end of the Cold War. The conflict continued and escalated. Communist revolution
erupted in the Americas in this period, including revolutions in Bolivia, Cuba,
El Salvador, Grenada, Nicaragua, Peru, and Uruguay. In Cuba in 1959, forces led
by Fidel Castro and Argentine revolutionary Che Guevara overthrew the regime of
Fulgencio Batista and established a communist regime there with ties to the
Soviet Union. American attempts to overthrow the Castro regime with the failed
Bay of Pigs Invasion by Cuban exiles supported by the CIA failed. Shortly
afterwards, a diplomatic dispute erupted when the U.S. discovered Soviet
nuclear missiles placed in Cuba, resulting in the Cuban Missile Crisis. The
standoff between the two superpowers was resolved by the Soviet Union agreeing
to remove its nuclear missiles from Cuba in exchange for the United States
removing its nuclear missiles from Turkey. Bolivia faced Marxist-Leninist
revolution in the 1960s that included Che Guevara as a leader until being
killed there by government forces. Uruguay faced Marxist-Leninist revolution
from the Tupamaros movement from the 1960s to the 1970s. A brief dramatic
episode of Marxist-Leninist revolution took place in North America during the
October Crisis in the province of Quebec in Canada, where the Marxist-Leninist
and Quebec separatist "Front de libération du Québec" (FLQ) kidnapped the
British Trade Commissioner in Canada, James Cross, and Quebec government
minister Pierre Laporte who was later killed, it issued a manifesto condemning
what it considered English Canadian imperialism in French Quebec calling for an
independent, socialist Quebec. The Canadian government in response issued a
crackdown on the FLQ and suspended civil liberties in Quebec, forcing the FLQ
leadership to flee to exile in Cuba where the Cuban government accepted their
entry. Daniel Ortega of the Marxist-Leninist movement called the Sandinista
National Liberation Front seized power in Nicaragua in 1979 and faced armed
opposition from the Contras supported by the United States. The United States
launched military intervention in Grenada to prevent the establishment of a
Marxist-Leninist regime there. The Salvadoran Civil War from 1980 to 1992
involved Marxist-Leninist rebels fighting against El Salvador's right-wing
government. Developments of Marxism–Leninism and communist revolution
occurred in Asia in this period. The People's Republic of China under Mao
Zedong developed its own unique brand of Marxism–Leninism known as Maoism.
Tensions erupted between the PRC and the Soviet Union over a number of issues,
including border disputes, resulting in the Sino-Soviet Split in the 1960s.
After the split, the PRC eventually pursued detente with the United States as a
means to challenge the Soviet Union. This was inaugurated with the visit of
U.S. President Richard Nixon to the PRC in 1972 and the US supporting the PRC
replacing the Republic of China as the representative of China at the United
Nations and taking its seat at the UN Security Council. The death of Mao
eventually saw the Deng Xiaoping politically outmaneuver Mao's chosen successor
to power in the People's Republic of China. Deng made controversial economic
reforms to the PRC's economy involving effective economic liberalization under
the policy of Socialism with Chinese Characteristics. His reforms helped to
gradually transform the PRC into one of the world's fastest growing economies.
Another major conflict erupted between the East and West in the Cold War in
Asia during the Vietnam War. French colonial forces had failed to hold back
independence forces led by the communist leader Ho Chi Minh in North Vietnam.
French forces retreated from Vietnam and were replaced by American forces
supporting a Western-backed client regime in South Vietnam. Despite being a
superpower and having a superior arsenal of weapons at its disposal, the United
States was unable to make substantial gains against North Vietnam's proxy
guerilla army in South Vietnam, the Viet Cong. With the direct intervention of
North Vietnam in the South with the Tet Offensive of 1968, US forces suffered
heavy losses. The American public turned against the war eventually resulting
in a withdrawal of US troops and the seizure of Saigon by communist forces in
1975 and communist victory in Vietnam. Communist regimes were established in
Vietnam's neighbour states in 1975, such as in Laos and the creation of the
Khmer Rouge regime of Democratic Kampuchea (Cambodia). The Khmer Rouge regime
became notorious for the mass genocide of the Cambodian population. The Khmer
Rouge was overthrown in 1979 by an invasion by Vietnam that assisted the
establishment of a new Marxist-Leninist regime, the People's Republic of
Kampuchea, that opposed the policies of the Khmer Rouge. A new front of
Marxist-Leninist revolution erupted in Africa, with revolutions in Benin,
Congo-Brazzaville, and Somalia; Marxist-Leninist liberation fronts in Angola
and Mozambique revolting against Portguese colonial rule; the overthrow of
Haile Selassie and the creation of the Derg communist military junta in
Ethiopia; blacks led by Robert Mugabe in Rhodesia revolting against white-
minority rule there. Angola, Benin, Congo-Brazzaville, Ethiopia, Mozambique,
Somalia and Zimbabwe (formerly Rhodesia) all became Marxist-Leninist states
between 1969 and 1979. Focus on apartheid white minority rule in South Africa
brought tensions between East and West, the Soviet Union officially supported
the overthrow of apartheid while the West and the US in particular maintained
official neutrality on the matter. The Western position became precarious and
condemned after the Soweto uprising in 1976 and the killing of black South
African rights activist Steve Biko in 1977. Under US President Jimmy Carter,
the West joined the Soviet Union and others in enacting sanctions against
weapons trade and weapons-grade material to South Africa. However forceful
actions by the US against apartheid South Africa were diminished under US
President Ronald Reagan, as the Reagan administration feared the rise of
communist revolution in South Africa as had happened in Zimbabwe against white
minority rule. In 1979, the Soviet Union intervened in Afghanistan to secure
the communist regime there, though the act was seen as an invasion by Afghans
opposed to Afghanistan's communist regime and by the West. The West responded
to the Soviet military actions by boycotting the Moscow Olympics of 1980 and
providing clandestine support to the Mujahadeen, including Osama bin Laden, as
a means to challenge the Soviet Union. The war became a Soviet equivalent of
the Vietnam War to the United States – it remained a stalemate throughout the
1980s. Reform and Collapse (1980–1992). Social resistance to the policies of
Marxist-Leninist regimes in Eastern Europe accelerated in strength with the
rise of the Solidarity, the first non-communist controlled trade union in the
Warsaw Pact that was formed in the People's Republic of Poland in 1980. In
1985, Mikhail Gorbachev rose to power in the Soviet Union and began policies of
radical political reform involving political liberalization, called Perestroika
and Glasnost. Gorbachev's policies were designed at dismantling authoritarian
elements of the state that were developed by Stalin, while aiming for a return
to a supposed ideal Leninist state that retained single-party structure while
allowing the democratic election of competing candidates within the Communist
Party for political office. Gorbachev also aimed to seek detente with the West
and end the Cold War that was no longer economically sustainable to be pursued
by the Soviet Union. The Soviet Union and the United States under US President
George H. W. Bush joined in pushing for the dismantlement of apartheid and
oversaw the dismantlement of South African colonial rule over Namibia.
Meanwhile the eastern European communist states politically deteriorated in
response to the success of the Polish Solidarity movement and the possibility
of Gorbachev-style political liberalization. In 1989, revolts across Eastern
Europe and China against Marxist-Leninist regimes. In China, the government
refused to negotiate with student protestors resulting in the Tianamen Square
attacks that stopped the revolts by force. The revolts culminated with the
revolt in East Germany against the Stalinist regime of Erich Honecker and
demands for the Berlin Wall to be torn down. The event in East Germany
developed into a popular mass revolt with sections of the Berlin Wall being
torn down and East and West Berliners uniting. Gorbachev's refusal to use
Soviet forces based in East Germany to suppress the revolt was seen as a sign
that the Cold War had ended. Honecker was pressured to resign from office and
the new government committed itself to reunification with West Germany. The
Stalinist regime of Nicolae Ceaușescu in Romania was forcefully overthrown in
1989 and Ceaușescu was executed. The other Warsaw Pact regimes fell in 1989
with the exception of the Socialist People's Republic of Albania that continued
until 1992. Unrest and eventual collapse of communism also occurred in
Yugoslavia, though for different reasons than those of the Warsaw Pact. The
death of Tito in 1980 and the subsequent vacuum of strong leadership allowed
the rise of rival ethnic nationalism in the multinational country. The first
leader to exploit such nationalism for political purposes was communist
official Slobodan Milošević who used it to seize power as President of
Serbia, and demanded concessions to Serbia and Serbs by the other republics in
the Yugoslav federation. This resulted in a surge of Slovene and Croat
nationalism in response and the collapse of the League of Communists of
Yugoslavia in 1990, the victory of nationalists in multiparty elections in most
of Yugoslavia's constituent republics, and eventually civil war between the
various nationalities beginning in 1991. The SFRY was dissolved in 1992. The
Soviet Union itself collapsed between 1990 and 1991, with a rise of
secessionist nationalism and a political power dispute between Gorbachev and
the new non-communist leader of the Russian Federation, Boris Yeltsin. With the
Soviet Union collapsing, Gorbachev prepared the country to become a loose non-
communist federation of independent states called the Commonwealth of
Independent States. Hardline communist leaders in the military reacted to
Gorbachev's policies with the August Coup of 1991 in which hardline communist
military leaders overthrew Gorbachev and seized control of the government. This
regime only lasted briefly as widespread popular opposition erupted in street
protests and refused to submit. Gorbachev was restored to power, but the
various Soviet republics were now set for independence. On December 25, 1991,
Gorbachev officially announced the dissolution of the Soviet Union, ending the
existence of the world's first communist-led state. Modern-day Marxism-Leninism
(1992–present). Since the fall of the Eastern European communist regimes, the
Soviet Union, and a variety of African communist regimes, only a few currently
remain, including: China, Cuba, Laos, North Korea, and Vietnam. Most communist
parties outside those in power have fared poorly in elections. However the
Communist Party of the Russian Federation has remained a significant political
force. In Asia, a number of Marxist-Leninist regimes and powerful movements
continue to exist. The People's Republic of China has continued the agenda of
Deng's reforms by initiating significant privatization of the economy. However
no corresponding political liberalization has occurred as happened in eastern
European countries. North Korean leader Kim Il-Sung died in 1994 and was
replaced by his son, Kim Jong-il who initially pursued a policy of detente with
South Korea and the West in exchange for economic support from the West. Later
in 2011, Kim Jong Il has died and has been replaced by Kim Jong Un, Kim Jong
Il's son. However talks broke down and the initiative failed. The Naxalite-
Maoist insurgency has continued between the governments of India and Bangladesh
against various Marxist-Leninist movements, unabated since the 1960s. Maoist
rebels in Nepal engaged in a civil war from 1996 to 2006 that managed to topple
the monarchy there and create a republic. In the Philippines, the Maoist-
oriented Communist Party of the Philippines and its armed wing, the New Peoples
Army has been waging armed revolution against the Philippine government since
1968. Cuba has allied itself with the popular radical socialist politics of
Bolivarianism as supported by Hugo Chavez of Venezuela. Castro and Chavez
formed a common front against American imperialism and capitalism. Unlike
Marxism–Leninism, Bolivarianism accepts the existence of religion and
multiparty democracy. Castro and Chavez have also been joined with the radical
socialist agenda of Evo Morales of Bolivia and Rafael Correa of Ecuador.
Marxist-Leninist leader Daniel Ortega returned to power in Nicaragua in 2007.
In the Internal conflict in Peru, the Peruvian government faces opposition from
Marxist-Leninist and Maoist militants.
