Mass mobilization Mass mobilization (also known as social mobilization or
popular mobilization) refers to mobilization of civilian population as part of
contentious politics. Mass mobilization is often used by grassroots-based
social movements, including revolutionary movements, but can also become a tool
of elites and the state itself. The process usually takes the form of large
public gatherings such as mass meetings, marches, parades, processions and
demonstrations. Those gatherings usually are part of a protest action. Mass
mobilization is defined as a process that engages and motivates a wide range of
partners and allies at national and local levels to raise awareness of and
demand for a particular development objective through face-to-face dialogue.
Members of institutions, community networks, civic and religious groups and
others work in a coordinated way to reach specific groups of people for
dialogue with planned messages. In other words, social mobilization seeks to
facilitate change through a range of players engaged in interrelated and
complementary efforts. Government mass mobilization. Governments can utilize
mass mobilization to provide national support for the causes they are working
for. Many governments attempt to mobilize the population to participate in
elections and other voting events. In particular, it is important for political
parties in any country to be able to mobilize voters in order to gain support
for their party, which affects voter turnout in general. Examples. Nazi Germany
applied mass mobilization techniques to win support for the fascist regime. The
Nazi party mobilized the population with mass meetings, parades, and other
gatherings. These events appealed to the people's emotion to cause patriotic
fanaticism for the fascist cause. Mass mobilization in social media. Social
Media and the internet have made mass mobilization easier to organize and
disseminate ideas. The internet has grown in political importance, and has
played a significant role in many mass mobilization efforts. Examples. Arab
Spring. The Arab Spring is a revolutionary wave of demonstrations and protests
occurring in the Arab world that began on Saturday, 18 December 2010. To date,
rulers have been forced from power in Tunisia, Egypt, Libya, and Yemen; civil
uprisings have erupted in Bahrain and Syria; major protests have broken out in
Algeria, Iraq, Jordan, Kuwait, Morocco, and Oman; and minor protests have
occurred in Lebanon, Mauritania, Saudi Arabia, Sudan, and Western Sahara.
Clashes at the borders of Israel in May 2011, as well as protests by Arab
minority in Iranian Khuzestan, have also been inspired by the regional Arab
Spring. The protests have shared techniques of mostly civil resistance in
sustained campaigns involving strikes, demonstrations, marches, rallies, as
well as the use of social media to organize, communicate, and raise awareness
in the face of state attempts at repression and Internet censorship.
Nonviolence vs Violent Tactics. According to Donatella della Porta and Sidney
Tarrow, the mechanism that produces violence in the declining phase of the
collective action cycle is a result of the competition that arises among
different sectors of the social movement. Together they formed a theory stating
that as mass mobilization winds down, political violence rises in magnitude and
intensity. Examples. Italy. In his study of the wave of mass protests that took
place in Italy between 1965 and 1975, Sidney Tarrow stated that “the final
stages of the cycle, there was an increase in the deliberate use of violence
against others. But this increase was a function of the decline of mass
protest, not of its extension. Indeed, deliberate targeted violence did not
become common until 1972-3, when all the other forms of collective action had
declined.” All of which leads him to forcefully conclude that “[organized
violence was the product of demobilization.” Donatella della Porta, in her
comparative analysis of political violence and cycles of protest in Italy and
Germany between 1960 and 1990, maintains that “when mass mobilization
declined, the movements went back to more institutional forms of collective
action, whereas small groups resorted to more organized forms of violence.”
USSR. Mark R. Beissinger, in his study on cycles of protest and nationalist
violence in the Soviet Union between 1987 and 1992, also detects this pattern,
but in this case violence takes the form of ethnic communal conflict rather
than terrorism. As he says, “the rise of violence in the USSR in significant
part was associated with the decline of nonviolent mobilization contesting
interrepublican borders.” Russia. During the 1870s, the “populists” or
“nihilists”, the proponents of a Russian variant of anarchism, organized
the so-called “pilgrimages to the people”, which involved small groups of
members of the urban, petit bourgeois intelligentsia going into small villages
to persuade peasants of the necessity of revolution. However, their efforts had
little effect on the peasantry, and it was after this bitter experience that
they made the momentous decision to adopt terrorist tactics. Hamas. Hamas was
created in 1987, coinciding with the start of the First Intifada in the
occupied territories. Hamas was the Palestinian wing of the Muslim Brotherhood,
and it started out as a religious, social and political movement with no
involvement in violence. During the Intifada, Hamas challenged the political
monopoly of the Palestinian Liberation Organization (PLO). Its first violent
actions occurred in early 1989, but were sporadic and did not amount to an
armed campaign. In fact, its military or terrorist branch, the al-Qassam
Brigades, was not created until 1992. The standard explanation in the
literature for Hamas’ eventual involvement in terrorism mentions the attempt
to block the peace negotiations between Israel and the PLO. Ultimately,
violence was instrumental in the competition between nationalist and Islamist
organizations for representation of the Palestinian people. Mass demonstrations
occurred mainly during the first year of the revolt. Afterwards, most actions
consisted of stone-throwing, strikes, and commercial boycotts. In the end, only
the more militant hard-core was involved in these activities. There are
grounds, therefore, to assert that in the case of Hamas, terrorist violence was
employed at the end of the cycle of mobilization of the Intifada. Although it
cannot be denied that many other factors may have played a role, it is clear
that terrorism only erupted when the social movement was exhausted.
