Means of production Means of production refers to physical, non-human inputs
used in production—the factories, machines, and tools used to produce wealth
— along with both infrastructural capital and natural capital. This includes
the classical factors of production minus financial capital and minus human
capital. They include two broad categories of objects: "instruments of labour"
(tools, factories, infrastructure, "etc.") and "subjects of labour" (natural
resources and raw materials). People operate on the subjects of labour, using
the instruments of labour, to create a product; or, stated another way, labour
acting on the means of production creates a product. When used in the broad
sense, the "means of production" includes the "means of distribution" which
includes stores, banks, and railroads. The term can be simply and picturesquely
described in an agrarian society as the soil and the shovel; in an industrial
society, the mines and the factories. Related terms. "Factors of production"
are defined by Karl Marx in "Das Kapital" as labour, subjects of labour, and
instruments of labour; i.e., the term is equivalent to means of production plus
labour. The factors of production are often listed in economic writings derived
from the classical school as "land, labour and capital". Marx sometimes used
the term "productive forces" equivalently with "factors of production;" in
"Capital", he uses "factors of production," in his famous Preface to the
"Critique of Political Economy", he uses "productive forces" (note that this is
in the English versions and may depend on the translation.) "Production
relations" (Marx: "Produktionsverhältnis") are the relations humans enter into
with each other in using the means of production to produce. Examples of such
relations are employer/employee, buyer/seller, the technical division of labour
in a factory, and property relations. "Mode of production" (Marx:
"Produktionsweise") (In political context) - the facilities and resources for
producing goods. Study of how people take over other governments using force
and violence, not talks and agreements. Marxist analysis of ownership of the
Means of Production within capitalism. The analysis of people's relationships
with the means of production is one element that stands at the basis of
Marxism. Marx argued that, while in pre-capitalist societies it is clearly the
laborer that uses the means of production to create product; in capitalism,
whose nature as a mode of production is embodied in its drive to reproduce and
increase capital, it is more realistic to say that the means of production uses
the laborer. The idea of "factors of production" is typically used as an
explanation for income as duly paid to owners of each means of production and
also to the workers themselves within capitalism. By comparison, the term
"means of production" applies to these means independent of their ownership and
their compensation, and regardless of whether the mode of production is
capitalist, feudal, slave, communal, or otherwise. To the question of why
classes exist in human societies in the first place, Karl Marx offered an
historical explanation that it was the cultural practice of Ownership of the
Means of Production that gives rise to them. This explanation differs
dramatically from other explanations based on "differences in ability" between
individuals or on religious or political affiliations giving rise to castes.
This explanation is consistent with the bulk of Marxist theory in which
Politics and Religion are seen as mere outgrowths (superstructures) of the
basic underlying economic reality of a people. There are two subtle but
important points to the Ownership of the Means of Production. The first being
that owning the Means of Production is not the same thing as owning physical
property, nor is it equal to owning money. Rather OMP refers to a cultural
practice in which a few individuals within a larger corporation (or company)
control and decide what is done with the entire profit created by that
corporation. The conclusion ultimately reached is that while the "owners" of a
corporation only contribute a tiny fraction of the total labor and time in
creating profit, they have complete control over that profit and how it is
used. The practice of OMP in human societies is then a type of game where some
people are labeled owners (or Bourgeoisie) and other people are labeled workers
(or Proletariat). The bourgeoisie have complete control over both how the
proletariat are paid in wages and complete control over how the profit from
production is used, thus giving rise to a class division. Contrarian
interpretations of this practice might state that wages paid to workers are
subsumed under the regular costs of maintaining business. However, Marx
considered it a reification to treat labor as just another "factor" in
production; it implied an inversion of means and ends, so that people were
effectively used as things. Marx's ideas are often employed in economic
analysis by socialists who advocate public ownership of some or all of the
means of production. The affinity between labor movement causes and this
advocacy is very strong - and often shared by social democrats, socialists,
communists and greens. Marxists define economic systems in terms of how the
means of production are used, and which social class controls them. Thus, in
capitalism, the means of production are controlled by the bourgeoisie, (the
capitalists - the owners of capital). In the pure ideal of upper-stage
socialism (see: Pure communism), such as that communism is supposed to be, the
MoP are controlled by the workers production cooperative associations directly.
In fact this situation has only been historically realized temporarily such as
in the Israeli kibbutz or the very early Soviets before the adoption of state
capitalism and entrenchment of the communist party as a New Class, or in
isolated or preliminary form such as in the final phase of the Second Spanish
Republic, or various experimental utopian communities; although in embryonic
form. References. Institute of Economics of the Academy of Sciences of the
U.S.S.R. (1957). "Political Economy: A Textbook". London: Lawrence and Wishart.
