Measures of national income and output A variety of measures of national income
and output are used in economics to estimate total economic activity in a
country or region, including gross domestic product (GDP), gross national
product (GNP), net national income (NNI), and adjusted national income (NNI*
adjusted for natural resource depletion). All are specially concerned with
counting the total amount of goods and services produced within some
"boundary". The boundary is usually defined by geography or citizenship, and
may also restrict the goods and services that are counted. For instance, some
measures count only goods and services that are exchanged for money, excluding
bartered goods, while other measures may attempt to include bartered goods by
"imputing" monetary values to them. National accounts. Arriving at a figure for
the total production of goods and services in a large region like a country
entails a large amount of data-collection and calculation. Although some
attempts were made to estimate national incomes as long ago as the 17th
century, the systematic keeping of national accounts, of which these figures
are a part, only began in the 1930s, in the United States and some European
countries. The impetus for that major statistical effort was the Great
Depression and the rise of Keynesian economics, which prescribed a greater role
for the government in managing an economy, and made it necessary for
governments to obtain accurate information so that their interventions into the
economy could proceed as well-informed as possible. Market value. In order to
count a good or service it is necessary to assign some value to it. The value
that the measures of national income and output assign to a good or service is
its market value – the price it fetches when bought or sold. The actual
usefulness of a product (its use-value) is not measured – assuming the use-
value to be any different from its market value. Three strategies have been
used to obtain the market values of all the goods and services produced: the
product (or output) method, the expenditure method, and the income method. The
product method looks at the economy on an industry-by-industry basis. The total
output of the economy is the sum of the outputs of every industry. However,
since an output of one industry may be used by another industry and become part
of the output of that second industry, to avoid counting the item twice we use
not the value output by each industry, but the value-added; that is, the
difference between the value of what it puts out and what it takes in. The
total value produced by the economy is the sum of the values-added by every
industry. The expenditure method is based on the idea that all products are
bought by somebody or some organisation. Therefore we sum up the total amount
of money people and organisations spend in buying things. This amount must
equal the value of everything produced. Usually expenditures by private
individuals, expenditures by businesses, and expenditures by government are
calculated separately and then summed to give the total expenditure. Also, a
correction term must be introduced to account for imports and exports outside
the boundary. The income method works by summing the incomes of all producers
within the boundary. Since what they are paid is just the market value of their
product, their total income must be the total value of the product. Wages,
proprieter's incomes, and corporate profits are the major subdivisions of
income. The output approach. The output approach focuses on finding the total
output of a nation by directly finding the total value of all goods and
services a nation produces. Because of the complication of the multiple stages
in the production of a good or service, only the final value of a good or
service is included in total output. This avoids an issue often called 'double
counting', wherein the total value of a good is included several times in
national output, by counting it repeatedly in several stages of production. In
the example of meat production, the value of the good from the farm may be $10,
then $30 from the butchers, and then $60 from the supermarket. The value that
should be included in final national output should be $60, not the sum of all
those numbers, $100. The values added at each stage of production over the
previous stage are respectively $10, $20, and $30. Their sum gives an
alternative way of calculating the value of final output.  The income approach.
All remaining value added generated by firms is called the "residual" or
profit. If a firm has stockholders, they own the residual, some of which they
receive as dividends. Profit includes the income of the entrepreneur - the
businessman who combines factor inputs to produce a good or service. NDP at
factor cost = Compensation of employees + Net interest + Rental & royalty
income + Profit of incorporated and unincorporated NDP at factor cost The
expenditure approach. The expenditure approach is basically an output
accounting method. It focuses on finding the total output of a nation by
finding the total amount of money spent. This is acceptable, because like
income, the total value of all goods is equal to the total amount of money
spent on goods. The basic formula for domestic output takes all the different
areas in which money is spent within the region, and then combines them to find
the total output. \mathrm{GDP} = C + I + G + \left ( \mathrm{X} - M \right ) C
= household consumption expenditures / personal consumption expenditures I =
gross private domestic investment G = government consumption and gross
investment expenditures X = gross exports of goods and services M = gross
imports of goods and services Note: (X - M) is often written as XN, which
stands for "net exports" Definitions. The names of the measures consist of one
of the words "Gross" or "Net", followed by one of the words "National" or
"Domestic", followed by one of the words "Product", "Income", or "Expenditure".
All of these terms can be explained separately. Note that all three counting
methods should in theory give the same final figure. However, in practice minor
differences are obtained from the three methods for several reasons, including
changes in inventory levels and errors in the statistics. One problem for
instance is that goods in inventory have been produced (therefore included in
Product), but not yet sold (therefore not yet included in Expenditure). Similar
timing issues can also cause a slight discrepancy between the value of goods
produced (Product) and the payments to the factors that produced the goods
(Income), particularly if inputs are purchased on credit, and also because
wages are collected often after a period of production. GDP and GNP. Gross
domestic product (GDP) is defined as "the value of all final goods and services
produced in a country in 1 year". Gross National Product (GNP) is defined as
"the market value of all goods and services produced in one year by labour and
property supplied by the residents of a country." National income and welfare.
Because of this, other measures of welfare such as the Human Development Index
(HDI), Index of Sustainable Economic Welfare (ISEW), Genuine Progress Indicator
(GPI), gross national happiness (GNH), and sustainable national income (SNI)
are used. Difficulties in Measurement of National Income. There are many
difficulties when it comes to measuring national income, however these can be
grouped into conceptual difficulties and practical difficulties. Bibliography.
Australian Bureau of Statistics, "Australian National Accounts: Concepts,
Sources and Methods", 2000. This fairly large document has a wealth of
information on the meaning of the national income and output measures and how
they are obtained.
