Mediastrike Mediastrike is an independent media activist organisation based in
Adelaide, Australia. Aim. Mediastrike is a leftist organisation that's stated
aim is to challenge mainstream media by producing accurate, independent
coverage of news and current affairs on a local, national and international
level and Mediastrike's slogan ""The media is a weapon and it's aimed at you.
Shoot back"" embodies this aim. The organisation publications both in print
media, and online differ from other leftist media in that the publications are
entirely free with a view to mass distribution, with costs covered through
other events as well as through voluntary donations. Mediastrike uses citizen
journalists as well content provided by other, mainly leftist organisations to
provide content for both its online and print publications. Print Publications.
The group has begun work on a free zine named "The Antidote", the first issue
of which is currently being distributed. "The Antidotes" stated slogan of
""Immunizing our community against corporate news propaganda"" restates this
organizations aim of producing reliable independent reporting on contemporary
political and social justice issues. The zine is also available online [http://
word.mediastrike.org/wp-content/uploads/2007/01/antidote_read.pdf.org]. The
second issue of the zine is still in planning stage. Film Screenings. The
organisation has already held a series of low-cost documentary screenings.
Topics include issues as diverse as the history of media reporting from
conflict zones throughout the 20th century and the "Battle of Seattle" anti-
corporate globalisation protest. Further film screenings are planned as part of
a mini-film festival, probably centering on the ongoing war in Iraq from both
the perspective of Iraqi civilians affected by the war and the perspective of
American soldiers serving in Iraq. Online. Owing to the low cost of running
media organisations online, Mediastrike is currently focusing on providing a
greater volume of online media through its website. Mediastrike.org presents
original articles, as well as reproducing selections from other mainstream and
leftist media organisations. The move towards a greater emphasis on online
publication has reduced the amount of time it takes to get information out (a
major limitation of smallscale print media). Events. Mediastrike has also held
a protest against workchoices aimed primarily at youth. The rally, entitled
"slave revolt", brought together Adelaide punk bands and speakers in opposition
to the Howard governments controversial industrial relations legislation
changes "WorkChoices". The event also featured a performance by the Adelaide
based "rambutan circus collective".
