Melanesia Melanesia is a subregion of Oceania extending from the western end of
the Pacific Ocean to the Arafura Sea, and eastward to Fiji. The region
comprises most of the islands immediately north and northeast of Australia. The
name "Melanesia" (from Greek: μέλας "black"; νῆσος, "islands") was
first used by Jules Dumont d'Urville in 1832 to denote an ethnic and
geographical grouping of islands distinct from Polynesia and Micronesia.
Definition. The term Melanesia has "fuzzy edges" and can be used in either an
anthropological or a geographical context. In the former, the term refers to
one of the three regions of Oceania whose pre-colonial population generally
belongs to one ethno-cultural family as a result of centuries of maritime
migrations. The geographic conception of Melanesia is used as a reference to
the area where political, ethnic, and linguistic distinctions are not relevant.
The term is also present in geopolitics, where the Melanesian Spearhead Group
Preferential Trade Agreement is a regional trade treaty involving the states of
Vanuatu, Solomon Islands, Papua New Guinea and Fiji. People. The original
inhabitants of the group of islands now named Melanesia were likely the
ancestors of the present-day Papuan-speaking people. They appear to have
occupied these islands as far east as the main islands in the Solomon Islands,
including Makira and possibly the smaller islands farther to the east. It was
particularly along the north coast of New Guinea and in the islands north and
east of New Guinea that the Austronesian people came into contact with these
pre-existing populations of Papuan-speaking peoples, probably around 4,000
years ago. There was probably a long period of interaction that resulted in
many complex changes in genetics, languages, and culture. It is possible that
from this area a very small group of people (speaking an Austronesian language)
departed to the east to become the forebears of the Polynesian people. This
finding is, however, contradicted by a study published by Temple University
finding that Polynesians and Micronesians have little genetic relation to
Melanesians; instead, they found significant distinctions between groups living
within the Melanesian islands. Melanesians, together with Papuan people and
Australian Aborigines, are the only known modern humans whose prehistoric
ancestors interbred with the Denisova hominin, sharing 4%–6% of their genome
with this ancient human species. In the world, blond hair is exceptionally rare
among those without European heritage. However, Melanesians of some islands are
one of the few non-European peoples and the only dark-skinned group of people
outside Australia known to have blond hair. Languages. Most of the languages of
Melanesia are members of the Austronesian or Papuan language families. By one
count, there are 1,319 languages in Melanesia, scattered across a small amount
of land. The proportion of 716 sq. kilometers per language is by far the most
dense rate of languages in relation to land mass in the earth, almost three
times as dense as in Nigeria, a country famous for its high number of languages
in a compact area. In addition to this large number of indigenous languages,
there are also a number of pidgins and creoles. Most notable among these are
Tok Pisin, Hiri Motu, Solomon Islands Pijin, Bislama, and Papuan Malay.
Government. Formerly, in most parts of the area, leaders were chosen not
through inheritance, but based on their personality. Key qualities were the
candidates' power of persuasion, choosing high-placed women as sexual partners,
and other physical qualities such as combat skills. Today, however, because of
the Western influences of colonisation, the island countries of the southwest
Pacific have similar, European-style governments, and leadership is thus taken
up by democratically elected officials. Solomon Islands and Papua New Guinea
are constitutional monarchies. Parliaments in the region use English or French,
a legacy of colonial rule. Traditional leaders in some islands still have
considerable social power. Associated islands. Norfolk Island, listed above,
has archaeological evidence of East Polynesian rather than Melanesian
settlement. Rotuma in Fiji has strong affinities culturally and ethnologically
to Polynesia. Based on ethnological factors, some of the islands to the west of
the Moluccas, such as Flores, Sumba, Timor, Halmahera, Alor, and Pantar can
also be considered to be part of Melanesia, although most people in this area
do not make use of the term.
