Mental accounting A concept first named by Richard Thaler (1980), mental
accounting attempts to describe the process whereby people code, categorize and
evaluate economic outcomes. One detailed application of mental accounting, the
behavioral life cycle hypothesis (Shefrin & Thaler, 1988), posits that people
mentally frame assets as belonging to either current income, current wealth or
future income and this has implications for their behavior as the accounts are
largely non-fungible and marginal propensity to consume out of each account is
different. Mental accounting, utility, value and transaction. In mental
accounting theory, "framing" means that the way a person subjectively frames a
transaction in their mind will determine the utility they receive or expect.
This concept is similarly used in prospect theory, and many mental accounting
theorists adopt that theory as the value function in their analysis. Another
very important concept used to understand mental accounting is that of modified
utility function. There are two values attached to any transaction -
acquisition value and transaction value. "Acquisition value" is the money that
one is ready to part with for physically acquiring some good. "Transaction
value" is the value one attaches to having a good deal. If the price that one
is paying is equal to the mental reference price for the good, the transaction
value is zero. If the price is lower than the reference price, the transaction
utility is positive. Mental accounting cost. More generally, a mental
accounting cost or mental transaction cost, a kind of transaction cost, is the
cost of making a useful decision, especially of a consumer making a useful
decision to buy, and may set a lower bound on useful price granularity in a
market. Fallacies and biases. Mental accounting is subject to many logical
fallacies and cognitive biases. For example, people behave differently when
they are using credit card and cash. If they use credit card to pay for a bet,
they will tend to bet larger than if they use cash. This shows how people uses
mental accounting to treat money as if they are not the same when it's in the
form of credit card and cash.
