Menu cost In economics, a menu cost is the cost to a firm resulting from
changing its prices. The name stems from the cost of restaurants literally
printing new menus, but economists use it to refer to the costs of changing
nominal prices in general. In this broader definition, menu costs might include
updating computer systems, re-tagging items, and hiring consultants to develop
new pricing strategies as well as the literal costs of printing menus. More
generally, the menu cost can be thought of as resulting from costs of
information, decision and implementation resulting in bounded rationality.
Because of this expense, firms sometimes do not always change their prices with
every change in supply and demand, leading to price stickiness. Generally, the
effect on the firm of small shifts in price (by changes in supply and/or
demand, or else because of slight adjustments in monetary policy) are
relatively minor compared to the costs of notifying the public of this new
information. Therefore, the firm would rather exist in slight than incur the
menu costs. History. The concept of a lump-sum cost (menu cost) to changing the
price was originally introduced by Sheshinski and Weiss (1977) in their paper
looking at the effect of inflation on the frequency of price-changes. The idea
of applying it as a general theory of Nominal Price Rigidity was simultaneously
put forward by several New Keynesian economists in 1985-6. George Akerlof and
Janet Yellen put forward the idea that due to bounded rationality firms will
not want to change their price unless the benefit is more than a small amount.
This bounded rationality leads to inertia in nominal prices and wages which can
lead to output fluctuating at constant nominal prices and wages. Gregory Mankiw
took the menu-cost idea and focussed on the welfare effects of changes in
output resulting from sticky prices. Michael Parkin also put forward the idea.
The menu cost idea was also extended to wages as well as prices by Olivier
Blanchard and Nobuhiro Kiyotaki. The new Keynesian explanation of price
stickiness relied on introducing imperfect competition with price (and wage)
setting agents. This started a shift in macroeconomics away from using the
model of perfect competition with price taking agents to using imperfectly
competitive equilibria with price and wage setting agents (mostly adopting
monopolistic competition). Huw Dixon and Claus Hansen showed that even if menu
costs applied to a small sector of the economy, this would influence the rest
of the economy and lead to prices in the rest of the economy becoming less
responsive to changes in demand. Deeper analysis. Consider a hypothetical firm
in a hypothetical economy, with a concave graph describing the relationship
between the price of its good and the firm's corresponding profit. As always,
the profit maximizing point lies at the very top for the curve. Now suppose
that there exists a drop in aggregate output. While this causes real wages to
fall (shifting the profit curve upward, allowing more profit for the same
price), it also diminishes demand for the firm's product (shifting the curve
down). Suppose the net effect is a downward shift (as it usually is). The
result is a maximum profit associated with a lower price (the max profit shifts
to the left a bit, as a result of the profit curve moving). Suppose the old
price (and thus the old maximizing profit price) was M and the new maximizing
price is N. Also suppose the new maximum profit is B and new profit
corresponding to the old price is A. Thus price M yields A in profit and price
N yields B in profit. Now suppose there is a menu cost, Z, in changing from
price M to price N. Because the firm must pay Z to make this change, they will
only pay it if Z < B-A. Thus tiny fluctuations in the economy leads to small
differences in B and A so firms do not change their price, even if Z is small.
Note that if Z is zero, then prices will change all the time, allowing for
firms to squeeze out every bit of profit from every change in the economy.
