Miami model The Miami model is the tactics employed by law enforcement agencies
during demonstrations in Miami, Florida relating to the negotiations for the
Free Trade Area of the Americas (FTAA) trade agreement in November 2003. On
November 13, 2003, four days before the FTAA, the city passed City of Miami
Ordinance 54-6.1, outlawing a broad range of items that could be construed as
weapons or devices for disrupting public order, as in a "sleeping dragon" and
outlawed any coordinated group of two or more people who are attempting to get
public attention and disrupt the normal flow of traffic. In addition, any
gathering of 8 or more people lasting more than 30 minutes without a permit
would be considered illegal. The ordinance was designed specifically for the
FTAA and had a sunset provision built into it. Miami-Dade State Attorney Kathy
Fernandez Rundle responded to allegations of police brutality saying "The
police were very professional, very controlled... I think we have a model here
for the rest of the world to emulate in the future when these sort of events
take place." Further allegations and complaints were met with assurances by
authorities that police had acted 'according to plan'. Political activists and
academics continue to use the term to refer to a framework of similar tactics
used by law enforcement in subsequent events, including trade meetings and
political conventions. Miami protests. Miami Activist Defense and National
Lawyers Guild filed a federal lawsuit against the City, the Mayor, Police Chief
Timoney, Homeland Defense Secretary Ridge, and Attorney General Ashcroft for
rampant abuse of the constitution. The American Civil Liberties Union of
Florida filed numerous lawsuits claiming excessive use of force and illegal
serches. The City and County of Miami have paid close $500,000 in settlements
in thee cases. In 2007, the AFL-CIO filed an additional lawsuit claiming that
their 1st and 4th Amendment rights had been violated. Among the groups which
organized against the FTAA were the Green Bloc, United for Peace and Justice,
Root Cause, several AFL-CIO affiliated unions, Midwest Unrest, Pittsburgh
Organizing Group, Food Not Bombs and many others. Film. "The Miami Model" is
also the title of a documentary film, produced by Indymedia, about the FTAA,
the police action in Miami, and political organizing led by people of color in
the Miami area.
