Microcredit Microcredit is the extension of very small loans (microloans) to
impoverished borrowers who typically lack collateral, steady employment and a
verifiable credit history. It is designed not only to support entrepreneurship
and alleviate poverty, but also in many cases to empower women and uplift
entire communities by extension. In many communities worldwide, in developed
and developing nations alike, women lack the highly stable employment histories
that traditional lenders tend to require. This reality might result from
factors such as leaving the paid workforce to care for children and elderly
relatives. As of 2009 an estimated 74 million men and women held microloans
that totalled US$38 billion. Grameen Bank reports that repayment success rates
are between 95 and 98 per cent. Microcredit is a division of microfinance,
which is the provision of a wider range of financial services, especially
savings accounts, to the poor. Modern microcredit is generally considered to
have originated with the Grameen Bank founded in Bangladesh in 1983. Many
traditional banks subsequently introduced microcredit despite initial
misgivings. The United Nations declared 2005 the International Year of
Microcredit. As of 2012, microcredit is widely used in developing countries and
is presented as having "enormous potential as a tool for poverty alleviation."
Critics argue, however, that microcredit has not had a positive impact on
gender relationships, does not alleviate poverty, has led many borrowers into a
debt trap and constitutes a "privatization of welfare". The first randomized
evaluation of microcredit, conducted by Esther Duflo and others, showed mixed
results: there was no effect on household expenditure, gender equity, education
or health, but the number of new businesses increased by one third compared to
a control group. Professor Dean Karlan from Yale University says that whilst
microcredit generates benefits it isn't the panacea that it has been purported
to be. He advocates also giving the poor access to savings accounts. History.
Early beginnings. Ideas relating to microcredit can be found at various times
in modern history. Jonathan Swift inspired the Irish Loan Funds of the 18th and
19th centuries. In the mid-19th century, Individualist anarchist Lysander
Spooner wrote about the benefits of numerous small loans for entrepreneurial
activities to the poor as a way to alleviate poverty. At about the same time,
but independently to Spooner, Friedrich Wilhelm Raiffeisen founded the first
cooperative lending banks to support farmers in rural Germany. In the 1950s,
Akhtar Hameed Khan began distributing group-oriented credit in East Pakistan.
Khan used the Comilla Model, in which credit is distributed through community-
based initiatives. The project failed due to the over-involvement of the
Pakistani government, and the hierarchies created within communities as certain
members began to exert more control over loans than others. Modern microcredit.
The origins of microcredit in its current practical incarnation can be linked
to several organizations founded in Bangladesh, especially the Grameen Bank.
The Grameen Bank, which is generally considered the first modern microcredit
institution, was founded in 1976 by Muhammad Yunus. Yunus began the project in
a small town called Jobra, using his own money to deliver small loans at low-
interest rates to the rural poor. Grameen Bank was followed by organizations
such as BRAC in 1972 and ASA in 1978. Microcredit reached Latin America with
the establishment of PRODEM in Bolivia in 1986; a bank that later transformed
into the for-profit BancoSol. Microcredit quickly became a popular tool for
economic development, with hundreds of institutions emerging throughout the
third world. Though the Grameen Bank was formed initially as a non-profit
organization dependent upon government subsidies, it later became a corporate
entity and was renamed Grameen II in 2002. Muhammad Yunus was awarded the Nobel
Peace Prize in 2006 for his work providing microcredit services to the poor.
Principles. Economic principles. Microcredit is ideally based on a unique set
of principles that are readily distinguished from trends in the wider credit
market. Microcredit organizations were initially created as alternatives to the
"loan-sharks" known to take advantage of clients. Indeed, many microlenders
began as non-profit organizations and operated with government funds or private
subsidies. By the 1980s, however the "financial systems approach," influenced
by neoliberalism and propagated by the Harvard Institute for International
Development, became the dominant ideology among microcredit organizations. The
commercialization of microcredit officially began in 1984 with the formation of
Unit Desa (BRI-UD) within the Bank Rakyat Indonesia. Unit Desa offered
‘kupedes’ microloans based on market interest rates. Ironically, many
microcredit organizations now function as independent banks. This has led to
their charging higher interest rates on loans and placing more emphasis on
savings programs. Notably, Unit Desa has charged in excess of 20 per cent on
small business loans. The application of neoliberal economics to microcredit
has generated much debate among scholars and development practitioners, with
some claiming that microcredit bank directors, such as Muhammad Yunus, apply
the practices of loan sharks for their personal enrichment. Indeed, the
academic debate foreshadowed a Wall-street style scandal involving the Mexican
microcredit organization Compartamos. Even so, the numbers indicate that
ethical microlending and investor profit can go hand-in-hand. In the 1990s a
rural finance minister in Indonesia showed how Unit Desa could lower its rates
by about 8% while still bringing attractive returns to investors. Today,
smaller investment firms are adopting the microlending movement's original
ideals. For instance, whereas small coffee farmers in Honduras are typically
charged an 18% bank rate, a private investment firm in the US has room to offer
more ethical loan terms and offer an attractive return to investors. Group
lending. Though lending to groups has long been a key part of microcredit,
microcredit initially began with the principle of lending to individuals.
Despite the use of solidarity circles in 1970s Jobra, Grameen Bank and other
early microcredit institutions initially focused on individual lending. Indeed,
Muhammad Yunus propagated the notion that every person has the potential to
become an entrepreneur. The use of group-lending was motivated by economics of
scale, as the costs associated with monitoring loans and enforcing repayment
are significantly lower when credit is distributed to groups rather than
individuals. Many times the loan to one participant in group-lending depends
upon the successful repayment from another member, thus transferring repayment
responsibility off of microcredit institutions to loan recipients. Lending to
women. Lending to women has become an important principle in microcredit, with
banks and NGOs such as BancoSol, WWB, and Pro Mujer catering to women
exclusively. Though Grameen Bank initially tried to lend to both men and women
at equal rates, women presently make up ninety-five percent of the bank’s
clients. Women continue to make up seventy-five percent of all microcredit
recipients worldwide. Exclusive lending to women began in the 1980s when
Grameen Bank found that women have higher repayment rates, and tend to accept
smaller loans than men. Subsequently, many microcredit institutions have used
the goal of empowering women to justify their disproportionate loans to women.
Examples. Grameen Bank in Bangladesh is the oldest and probably best-known
microfinance institution in the world. In India, the National Bank for
Agriculture and Rural Development (NABARD) finances more than 500 banks that
on-lend funds to self-help groups (SHGs). SHGs comprise twenty or fewer
members, of whom the majority are women from the poorest castes and tribes.
Members save small amounts of money, as little as a few rupees a month in a
group fund. Members may borrow from the group fund for a variety of purposes
ranging from household emergencies to school fees. As SHGs prove capable of
managing their funds well, they may borrow from a local bank to invest in small
business or farm activities. Banks typically lend up to four rupees for every
rupee in the group fund. In Asia borrowers generally pay interest rates that
range from 30% to 70% without commission and fees. Nearly 1.4 million SHGs
comprising approximately 20 million women now borrow from banks, which makes
the Indian SHG-Bank Linkage model the largest microfinance program in the
world. Similar programs are evolving in Africa and Southeast Asia with the
assistance of organizations like IFAD, Opportunity International, Catholic
Relief Services, Compassion International, CARE, APMAS, Oxfam, Tearfund and
World Vision. Grameen Bank launched their US operations in New York in April
2008. Bank of America has announced plans to award more than $3.7 million in
grants to nonprofits to use in backing microloan programs. ACCION USA, the US
subsidiary of the better-known ACCION International, has provided US$117
million in microloans since 1991, with an over 90% repayment rate. One research
study of the Grameen model shows that poorer individuals are safer borrowers
because they place more value on the relationship with the bank. Even so,
efforts to replicate Grameen-style solidarity lending in developed countries
have generally not succeeded. For example, the Calmeadow Foundation tested an
analogous peer-lending model in three locations in Canada during the 1990s. It
concluded that a variety of factors — including difficulties in reaching the
target market, the high risk profile of clients, their general distaste for the
joint liability requirement, and high overhead costs — made solidarity
lending unviable without subsidies. Microcredits have also been introduced in
Israel, Russia, Ukraine and other nations where micro-loans help small business
entrepreneurs overcome cultural barriers in the mainstream business society.
The Israel Free Loan Association (IFLA) has lent more than $100 million in the
past two decades to Israeli citizens of all backgrounds. Peer-to-peer lending
over the Web. The principles of microcredit have also been applied in
attempting to address several non-poverty-related issues. Among these, multiple
Internet-based organizations have developed platforms that facilitate a
modified form of peer-to-peer lending where a loan is not made in the form of a
single, direct loan, but as the aggregation of a number of smaller
loans—often at a negligible interest rate. There are several ways by which
the general public can participate in alleviating poverty using Web platforms.
New platforms that connect lenders to micro-entrepreneurs are emerging on the
Web, for example Kiva, Zidisha, Lend for Peace, and the Microloan Foundation.
Another WWW-based microlender United Prosperity uses a variation on the usual
microlending model; with United Prosperity the micro-lender provides a
guarantee to a local bank which then lends back double that amount to the
micro-entrpreneur. United Prosperity claims this provides both greater leverage
and allows the micro-entrepreneur to develop a credit history with their local
bank for future loans. In 2009, the US-based nonprofit Zidisha became the first
peer-to-peer microlending platform to link lenders and borrowers directly
across international borders without local intermediaries. Vittana allows peer-
to-peer lending for student loans in developing countries. Impact. Microcredit
is being justified by its positive impact on poverty reduction, income,
consumption, the creation of businesses, education and health, the empowerment
of women and the empowerment of the poor in general. Critics argue that
microcredit has driven poor households into a debt trap, that the money from
loans is used for consumption, that men actually use the money for which their
female relatives get into debt and that microcredit does not alleviate poverty
or improve health and education. At the 2008 Innovations for Poverty Action/
Financial Access Initiative Microfinance Research conference, economist
Jonathan Morduch of New York University noted there are only one or two
methodologically sound studies of microfinance's impact. Grameen Foundation has
released two papers summarizing the state of research on the impact of
microfinance on poverty: "Measuring the Impact of Microfinance, Taking Stock of
What We Know" by Nathanael Goldberg (now with Innovations for Poverty Action)
and an update, "Measuring the Impact of Microfinance: Taking Another Look" by
Professor Kathleen Odell. These two papers identify scores of findings
indicating positive impact in research conducted over the last twenty years, as
well as some findings that suggest limited or negative impact in some cases.
Income, consumption and the creation of businesses. Tazul Islam suggests that
microcredit has a "positive impact on enterprise and household income and asset
accumulation". However, the positive economic impacts associated with
microcredit are not as extensive as once thought. A study by Dean Karlan of
Yale University in the Philippines compared two groups in Manila: a treatment
group, financed through microcredit, and a control group that did not receive
microcredit. The study showed that in this case many microcredits were loaned
to people with existing business, and not to those seeking to establish new
businesses. The businesses became more profitable and laid off unproductive
employees including friends and relatives that they previously had felt obliged
to employ. The first randomized evaluation of the impact of introducing
microcredit in a new market has been undertaken in slums in Hyderabad, India,
in 2008. Half the slums were randomly selected for opening branches of banks
that provided microcredits while the remainder were not. The study showed that
fifteen to 18 months after lending began, there was no effect on average
monthly expenditure per capita, but expenditure on durable goods increased and
the number of new businesses increased by one third. Poverty. Milford Bateman,
the author of "Why Doesn't Microfinance Work?", argues that microcredit offers
only an "illusion of poverty reduction". "As in any lottery or game of chance,
a few in poverty do manage to establish microenterprises that produce a decent
living," he argues, but "these isolated and often temporary positives are
swamped by the largely overlooked negatives." Bateman concludes that "The
international development community is now faced with the reality that,
overall, microfinance has been a development policy blunder of quite historic
proportions." Sociologist Jonathan H. Westover, Ph.D. found that much of the
evidence on the effectiveness of microfinance for alleviating poverty is based
in anecdotal reports or case studies. He initially found over 100 articles on
the subject, but included only the 6 which used enough quantitative data to be
representative, and none of which employed rigorous methods such as randomized
control trials similar to those reported by Innovations for Poverty Action and
the M.I.T. Jameel Poverty Action Lab. One of these studies found that
microfinance reduced poverty. Two others were unable to conclude that
microfinance reduced poverty, although they attributed some positive effects to
the program. Other studies concluded similarly, with surveys finding that a
majority of participants feel better about finances with some feeling worse.
According to Islam the Grameen Bank does not reach the poorest, since the
clients of the bank tend to be clustered around the poverty line of
predominantly moderately poor or vulnerable non-poor. Of the poor who join
Grameen bank’s microcredit program, a high percentage often drop out after
only a few loan cycles, while many others eventually drop out in later loan
cycles as loan amounts begin to exceed their repayment capacity. Some problems
with microcredit are mistakenly alleged in The Micro Debt, a film by the Danish
journalist Tom Heinemann. After a thorough investigation in December 2010 by
the Norwegian Foreign Ministry, the alleged problems have been proven to be
false and no further actions against the Grameen Bank and its founder, Muhammad
Yunnis, have been taken. The documentary by Heinemann also looks at the
effectiveness of Grameen Bank and alleges that it has little impact on poverty
by highlighting the purported continued poverty of Sufiya Begum, the original
loan recipient of Grameen, in Jobra Village. This allegation is disputed, since
documentary maker Gayle Ferraro found the woman alive and well, confirming the
original Grameen story. Risks like sickness and natural disasters are a
critical dimension of poverty and poor people rely heavily on informal savings
to manage these risks. Microfinance institutions could provide savings services
to this population to reduce these risks, but not all of them have been
successful at doing so. For example, a study of microcredit institutions in
Bolivia in 2003, for example, found that they were very slow to deliver quality
microsavings services because of easy access to cheaper forms of external
capital. Microcredit has been blamed for many suicides in India: aggressive
lending by microcredit companies in Andhra Pradesh is said to have resulted in
over 80 deaths in 2010. Interest rates, stock offerings and repayment rates.
There has been much criticism of the high interest rates charged to borrowers.
For example, Bangladesh's former Finance and Planning Minister M. Saifur Rahman
charged in 2005 that some microfinance institutions use excessive interest
rates. Sharma has criticized microfinance institutions for creating small-debt
traps for the poor in Andhra Pradesh in India with high interest rates and
coercive methods of recovery. A 2008 study in Bangladesh showed that some loan
recipients sink into a cycle of debt, using a microcredit loan from one
organization to meet interest obligations from another. Field officers who are
in a position of power locally and are remunerated based on repayment rates
sometimes use coercive and even violent tactics to collect installments on the
microcredit loans. The real average portfolio yield cited by the sample of 704
microfinance institutions that voluntarily submitted reports to the
MicroBanking Bulletin in 2006 was 22.3% annually. However, annual rates charged
to clients are higher, as they also include local inflation and the bad debt
expenses of the microfinance institution. Muhammad Yunus has recently made much
of this point, and in his latest book argues that microfinance institutions
that charge more than 15% above their long-term operating costs should face
penalties. A related issue is interest rate disclosure: Many suppliers of
microcredit quote their rates to clients using the flat calculation method,
which significantly understates the true Annual Percentage Rate. In Andhra
Pradesh, the villagers who take out the loan often did not know the interest
that they were being charged and were not aware of the consequences of taking
multiple loans as they take the second loan to clear the first loan. The
issuing of stocks through IPOs (Initial Public Offerings) by microfinance
institutions has also been criticized. In July 2010 India's biggest MFI, SKS
Microfinance also went public. In both instances Muhammad Yunus publicly stated
his disagreement, saying that the poor should be the only beneficiaries of
microfinance. Tucker argued in 1995 that the 98% repayment rate of Grameen’s
loans only refer to first-time loans, that they are often repaid by new loans
and that the practice of lending only to groups of women puts lenders under
pressure because each member can only obtain a new loan if each member has
repaid the previous loan. Gender. A 1996 study in Bangladesh acknowledges the
"success" of reaching women with microcredit as "highly impressive", but also
notes that loans are often given over to male relatives or husbands. In a
minority of cases there was even an increase in domestic violence for women who
did not get the loan or had to wait a long time to get the loan. The study also
showed that women are more likely to retain control over their loans in
traditional women’s work like livestock rearing that are considered
“women’s work”. A 2008 study of microcredit programs in Bangladesh found
that women often act merely as collection agents for their husbands and sons,
such that the men spend the money themselves while women are saddled with the
credit risk. The bigger the size of the loan, women lose their control more.
For example, a study in Bangladesh showed that women have 100% control over
loans that are smaller than 1000 Taka but only 46% of control if the loan is
bigger than 4,000 Taka. A study in India showed that women may be put under
pressure by their male relatives to join a credit group and indebt themselves.
A study in Bangladesh showed that microcredit increases dowries, with women
forced at times to take microcredit loans as the only means to pay these
increased dowries for their daughters. The first randomized evaluation of the
introduction of microcredit, carried out in Hyderabad in India, found no impact
on women's decision-making. A large majority of microloans is awarded to women,
often under the pretense of ensuring their empowerment. Parmar takes issue with
the idea that empowerment can be given to women by (mostly male) development
practitioners in the form of loans, arguing that empowerment is a self-directed
process. Johnson argues for the inclusion of more female employees in
microcredit institutions, and gender awareness training for existing staff.
Additionally, Leach claims that men must be included in the process of lending
to women in order to diminish gender antagonism, as men often feel excluded
from microcredit services. Some authors argue that microcredit not only
empowers women, but men as well. For example, Cheston and Kuhn say that
microcredit programs have the "potential" to transform power relations and
empower the poor — both men and women. Education and health. Tazul Islam
asserts a positive influence of microcredit on the level of education, health
and nutrition. However, the first randomized evaluation of microcredit, carried
out in Hyderabad in India, did not find any evidence of an impact on education
and health. Improvement. Many scholars and practitioners suggest an integrated
package of services ('a credit-plus' approach) rather than just providing
credits. When access to credit is combined with savings facilities, non-
productive loan facilities, insurance, enterprise development (production-
oriented and management training, marketing support) and welfare-related
services (literacy and health services, gender and social awareness training),
the adverse effects discussed above can be diminished. Some argue that more
experienced entrepreneurs who are getting loans should be qualified for bigger
loans to ensure the success of the program. One of the principal challenges of
microcredit is providing small loans at an affordable cost. The global average
interest and fee rate is estimated at 37%, with rates reaching as high as 70%
in some markets. The reason for the high interest rates is not primarily cost
of capital. Indeed, the local microfinance organizations that receive zero-
interest loan capital from the online microlending platform Kiva charge average
interest and fee rates of 35.21%. Rather, the principal reason for the high
cost of microcredit loans is the high transaction cost of traditional
microfinance operations relative to loan size. Microcredit practitioners have
long argued that such high interest rates are simply unavoidable. The result is
that the traditional approach to microcredit has made only limited progress in
resolving the problem it purports to address: that the world's poorest people
pay the world's highest cost for small business growth capital. The high costs
of traditional microcredit loans limit their effectiveness as a poverty-
fighting tool. Borrowers who do not manage to earn a rate of return at least
equal to the interest rate may actually end up poorer as a result of accepting
the loans. According to a recent survey of microfinance borrowers in Ghana
published by the Center for Financial Inclusion, more than one-third of
borrowers surveyed reported struggling to repay their loans. In recent years,
microcredit providers have shifted their focus from the objective of increasing
the volume of lending capital available, to address the challenge of providing
microfinance loans more affordably. Analyst David Roodman contends that in
mature markets, the average interest and fee rates charged by microfinance
institutions tend to fall over time. Bibliography. Following is a selected
bibliography about microcredit.
