Microeconomics Microeconomics (from Greek prefix micro- "μικρό" meaning
"small" + "economics"- "οικονομια") is a branch of economics that
studies the behavior of individual households and firms in making decisions on
the allocation of limited resources. Typically, it applies to markets where
goods or services are bought and sold. Microeconomics examines how these
decisions and behaviors affect the supply and demand for goods and services,
which determines prices, and how prices, in turn, determine the quantity
supplied and quantity demanded of goods and services. This is in contrast to
macroeconomics, which involves the "sum total of economic activity, dealing
with the issues of growth, inflation, and unemployment." Microeconomics also
deals with the effects of national economic policies (such as changing taxation
levels) on the aforementioned aspects of the economy. Particularly in the wake
of the Lucas critique, much of modern macroeconomic theory has been built upon
'microfoundations'—i.e. based upon basic assumptions about micro-level
behavior. One of the goals of microeconomics is to analyze market mechanisms
that establish relative prices amongst goods and services and allocation of
limited resources amongst many alternative uses. Microeconomics analyzes market
failure, where markets fail to produce efficient results, and describes the
theoretical conditions needed for perfect competition. Significant fields of
study in microeconomics include general equilibrium, markets under asymmetric
information, choice under uncertainty and economic applications of game theory.
Also considered is the elasticity of products within the market system.
Assumptions and definitions. The theory of supply and demand usually assumes
that markets are perfectly competitive. This implies that there are many buyers
and sellers in the market and none of them have the capacity to significantly
influence prices of goods and services. In many real-life transactions, the
assumption fails because some individual buyers or sellers have the ability to
influence prices. Quite often, a sophisticated analysis is required to
understand the demand-supply equation of a good model. However, the theory
works well in situations meeting these assumptions. Mainstream economics does
not assume "a priori" that markets are preferable to other forms of social
organization. In fact, much analysis is devoted to cases where so-called market
failures lead to resource allocation that is suboptimal by some standard
(defense spending is the classic example, profitable to all for use but not
directly profitable for anyone to finance). In such cases, economists may
attempt to find policies that will avoid waste, either directly by government
control, indirectly by regulation that induces market participants to act in a
manner consistent with optimal welfare, or by creating "missing markets" to
enable efficient trading where none had previously existed. This is studied in
the field of collective action and public choice theory. "Optimal welfare"
usually takes on a Paretian norm, which in its mathematical application of
Kaldor–Hicks method. This can diverge from the Utilitarian goal of maximising
utility because it does not consider the distribution of goods between people.
Market failure in positive economics (microeconomics) is limited in
implications without mixing the belief of the economist and their theory. The
demand for various commodities by individuals is generally thought of as the
outcome of a utility-maximizing process, with each individual trying to
maximise their own utility. The interpretation of this relationship between
price and quantity demanded of a given good assumes that, given all the other
goods and constraints, the set of choices which emerges is that one which makes
the consumer happiest. Modes of operation. It is assumed that all firms are
following rational decision-making, and will produce at the profit-maximizing
output. Given this assumption, there are four categories in which a firm's
profit may be considered to be. Opportunity cost. Opportunity cost of an
activity (or goods) is equal to the best next alternative foregone. Although
"opportunity cost" can be hard to quantify, the effect of opportunity cost is
universal and very real on the individual level. In fact, this principle
applies to all decisions, not just economic ones. Since the work of the
Austrian economist Friedrich von Wieser, opportunity cost has been seen as the
foundation of the marginal theory of value. Opportunity cost is one way to
measure the cost of something. Rather than merely identifying and adding the
costs of a project, one may also identify the next best alternative way to
spend the same amount of money. The forgone profit of this "next best
alternative" is the opportunity cost of the original choice. A common example
is a farmer that chooses to farm their land rather than rent it to neighbors,
wherein the opportunity cost is the forgone profit from renting. In this case,
the farmer may expect to generate more profit alone. Similarly, the opportunity
cost of attending university is the lost wages a student could have earned in
the workforce, rather than the cost of tuition, books, and other requisite
items (whose sum makes up the total cost of attendance). Note that opportunity
cost is not the "sum" of the available alternatives, but rather the benefit of
the single, best alternative. Possible opportunity costs of a city's decision
to build a hospital on its vacant land are the loss of the land for a sporting
center, "or" the inability to use the land for a parking lot, "or" the money
that could have been made from selling the land, "or" the loss of any of the
various other possible uses — but not all of these in aggregate. The true
opportunity cost would be the forgone profit of the most lucrative of those
listed. One question that arises here is how to determine a money value for
each alternative to facilitate comparison and assess opportunity cost, which
may be more or less difficult depending on the things we are trying to compare.
For example, many decisions involve environmental impacts whose monetary value
is difficult to assess because of scientific uncertainty. Valuing a human life
or the economic impact of an Arctic oil spill involves making subjective
choices with ethical implications. It is imperative to understand that no
decision on allocating time is free. No matter what one chooses to do, they are
always giving something up in return. An example of opportunity cost is
deciding between going to a concert and doing homework. If one decides to go
the concert, then they are giving up valuable time to study, but if they choose
to do homework then the cost is giving up the concert. Any decision in
allocating capital is likewise: there is an opportunity cost of capital, or a
hurdle rate, defined as the expected rate one could get by investing in similar
projects on the open market. Opportunity cost is vital in understanding
microeconomics and decisions that are made. Applied microeconomics. Applied
microeconomics includes a range of specialized areas of study, many of which
draw on methods from other fields. Industrial organization examines topics such
as the entry and exit of firms, innovation, and the role of trademarks. Labor
economics examines wages, employment, and labor market dynamics. Financial
economics examines topics such as the structure of optimal portfolios, the rate
of return to capital, econometric analysis of security returns, and corporate
financial behavior. Public economics examines the design of government tax and
expenditure policies and economic effects of these policies (e.g., social
insurance programs). Political economy examines the role of political
institutions in determining policy outcomes. Health economics examines the
organization of health care systems, including the role of the health care
workforce and health insurance programs. Urban economics, which examines the
challenges faced by cities, such as sprawl, air and water pollution, traffic
congestion, and poverty, draws on the fields of urban geography and sociology.
Law and economics applies microeconomic principles to the selection and
enforcement of competing legal regimes and their relative efficiencies.
Economic history examines the evolution of the economy and economic
institutions, using methods and techniques from the fields of economics,
history, geography, sociology, psychology, and political science. Development.
The modern field of microeconomics arose as an effort of neoclassical economics
school of thought to put economic ideas into mathematical mode. An early
attempt was made by Antoine Augustine Cournot Researches on the Mathematical
Principles of the Theory of Wealth (1838) in describing a spring water duopoly
that now bears his name. Latter William Stanley Jevons's Theory of Political
Economy (1871), Carl Menger's Principles of Economics (1871), and Léon
Walras's Elements of Pure Economics (1874–1877) gave way to what was called
the Marginal Revolution. Some common ideas behind those works were models or
arguments characterized by rational economic agents maximizing utility under a
budget constrain. This arose as a necessity of arguing against the labour
theory of value associated with classical economists such as Adam Smith, David
Ricardo and Karl Marx. Walras also went as far as developing the concept of
general equilibrium of an economy. Alfred Marshall's textbook, Principles of
Economics was published in 1890 and became the dominant textbook in England for
a generation. His main point was that marginalists went too far in emphasizing
utility as an attempt to explain prices over costs of production. To correct
that he presented the idea that prices were determined by supply and demand
curves. The demand curve could be derived by aggregating individual consumer
demand curves, which were themselves based on the consumer problem of
maximizing utility. The supply curve could be derived by aggregating individual
producer supply curves, which depended first on constructing cost curves and
then analyzing how much each producer was willing to sell his goods at a given
price level. The cost curves depended on solving a producer problem of
minimizing costs under a given production function. He also introduced the
notion of different market periods: mainly short run and long run. This set of
ideas gave way to what was latter called perfect competition. A new impetus was
given to field when around 1933. Joan Robinson and Edward H. Chamberlin,
published respectively, The Economics of Imperfect Competition (1933) and The
Theory of Monopolistic Competition (1933), introducing models of imperfect
competition. Although Marshall himself had already considered both the monopoly
case and Cournot had built his duopoly model, a whole new set of models grew
out of this new literature. In particular the monopolistic competition model
results in a non efficient equilibrium. Latter on some market models were built
using game theory, particularly regarding oligopolies. In 1937 The Nature of
the Firm was published by Ronald Coase introducing the notion of transaction
costs (the term itself was coined in the fifties), which explained why firms
have an advantage over a group of independent contractors working with each
other. The idea was that there were transaction costs in the use of the market:
search and information costs, bargaining costs, etc. which give an advantage to
a firm which can internalize the production process required to deliver a
certain good to the market. A related result was published by Coase in his
“The Problem of Social Cost” (1960) which deals with problem of
externalities: the presence of transaction costs prevents agents from
bargaining among themselves to arrive at mutually beneficial agreement. This
then becomes relevant in context of regulations. Around the seventies the study
of market failures came again into focus with the study of information
asymmetry. In particular three authors emerged from this period: George
Akerlof, Michael Spence and Joseph Stiglitz. Akerlof considered the problem of
bad quality cars driving good quality cars out of the market in his classic
“The Market for Lemons” (1970) because of the presence of asymmetrical
information between buyers and sellers. Spence explained that signaling was
fundamental in the labour market, because since employers cant know beforehand
which of the candidates are the most productive, a college degree becomes a
signaling device which allows a firm to hire new personnel. More recently
Kahneman and Tversky published their paper "Prospect Theory: An Analysis of
Decision under Risk" in 1979 criticizing the very idea of the rational economic
agent. The main point is that there an asymmetry in the psychology of the
economic agent which gives a much higher value to losses that to gains. This
article is usually regarded as the beginning of behavioral economics and has
consequences particularly regarding the world of finance.
