Micronesia Micronesia is a subregion of Oceania, comprising thousands of small
islands in the western Pacific Ocean. It is distinct from Melanesia to the
south, and Polynesia to the east. The Philippines lie to the west, and
Indonesia to the southwest. The name Micronesia derives from the Greek "mikros"
(ŒºŒπŒ∫œÅœåœÇ), meaning small, and "nesos" (ŒΩ·øÜœÉŒøœÇ), meaning island. The
term was first proposed to distinguish the region in 1831 by Jules Dumont
d'Urville. Geography. Total Land Area: History. The only empire known to have
originated in Micronesia was based in Yap. Much of the area came under European
domination quite early. In the early 17th century Spain colonized Guam, the
Northern Marianas, and the Caroline Islands (what would later become the
Federated States of Micronesia and Palau), creating the Spanish East Indies,
which was governed from the Spanish Philippines. Spanish-German Treaty of 1899.
After the explosion of the Maine in Havana's Harbor sent by the U.S.A. to
"protect" American commercial interests in Cuba, and the Spanish‚ÄìAmerican War
in 1898, Spain lost many of its remaining colonies. Cuba became independent
while the United States took possession of Puerto Rico and Spain's Pacific
colonies of the Philippines and Guam. This left Spain with the remainder of the
Spanish East Indies in the Pacific, about 6000 islands that were tiny, sparsely
populated, and not very productive, and that were both ungovernable after the
loss of the administrative center of Manila, and undefendable after the entire
loss of two Spanish fleets in 1898 a year still known in Spain as the "Year of
the national disaster" or "the loss of the 400 years Empire". The Spanish
government therefore decided to sell them to a new colonial power: Germany. The
treaty was signed on February 12, 1899 by Spanish Prime Minister Francisco
Silvela and transferred the Caroline Islands, the Mariana Islands, Palau and
other possessions to Germany. The islands were then placed under control of
German New Guinea. Recent history. During the World War I, Germany's Pacific
island territories were seized and they became League of Nations Mandates in
1923. Nauru became an Australian mandate, while Germany's other territories in
Micronesia were given as a mandate to Japan and were named the South Pacific
Mandate. Following Japan's defeat in the Second World War, its mandate became a
United Nations Trusteeship, the Trust Territory of the Pacific Islands, ruled
by the United States. Today, most of Micronesia are independent states, except
for Guam and Wake Island, which are U.S. territories, and for the Northern
Mariana Islands, which are a U.S. commonwealth. People. The people today form
many ethnicities, but are all descended from and belong to the Micronesian
culture. The Micronesian culture was one of the last native cultures of the
region to develop. It developed from a mixture of Melanesians, Polynesians, and
Filipinos. Because of this mixture of descent, many of the ethnicities of
Micronesia feel closer to some groups in Melanesia, Polynesia or the
Philippines. A good example of this are the Yapese who are related to
Austronesian tribes in the Northern Philippines. Languages. These are
apparently no more closely related to Micronesian languages than they are to
languages of the Philippines, Malaysia, and Indonesia (Kirch, 2000:
pp.¬ 166‚Äì167). On the eastern edge of the Federated States of Micronesia, the
languages Nukuoro and Kapingamarangi represent an extreme westward extension of
Polynesian. Regional organizations. The region is home to the Micronesian
Games, a quadrennial international multi-sport event involving all Micronesia's
countries and territories except Wake Island. In September 2007, journalists in
the region founded the Micronesian Media Association.
