Mierscheid law The Mierscheid law is hypothesis, published in the German
magazine "Vorwärts" on 14 July 1983 and attributed to the fictitious
politician Jakob Maria Mierscheid. It forecasts the Social Democratic Party of
Germany (SPD)'s share of the popular vote based on the size of crude steel
production in Western Germany: where the West German crude steel production was
38.6 million tonnes, and the vote share of the SPD 38.5%. For the early
election in 2005 the vote share was 38.4%, with a mean crude steel value of
40.0 million tonnes. Over the last ten elections, the two values were within
two units nine times, and within one unit seven times. Possible refutation of
the hypothesis in 2005. In the German federal elections of 18 September 2005
(which were originally due to be held in 2006), the law appeared not to hold,
since the SPD obtained 34.3% of the relevant votes while the crude steel
production of the "old" "Länder" (i.e. those states that belonged to the
Federal Republic of Germany before reunification) in the previous year was 39.9
million tonnes. However, an article attributed to Jakob Mierscheid, published
on the German Federal Parliament's website provided a correction to the
hypothesis, to take account of the special situation. Since the elections had
been brought forward, it was argued that the last months of the year should be
discounted, yielding a steel production figure of 33.5 million tonnes. The
graph included in the article showed a good match, thus supporting the
(corrected) hypothesis. This "ad hoc" hypothesis alteration might be considered
an example of the Texas sharpshooter fallacy. Following the 2005 elections, an
article was published by the statistical office of the state of Baden-
Württemberg attempting to further refine the model in the form of the
Mierscheid-Walla Law. This article also mentions promising but inconclusive
attempts to replace steel production with other measures that exhibited a
degree of apparent correlation, such as the export value of automobiles,
employment levels in the field of legal advice, the price of coffee, and the
number of accidents on town roads.
