Militarism Militarism is defined as: New Oxford American Dictionary (2007)
Alternative definitions include "aggressiveness that involves the threat of
using military force", the "glorification of the ideals of a professional
military class" and the "predominance of the armed forces in the administration
or policy of the state" (see also: stratocracy and military junta). Militarism
has been a significant element of the imperialist or expansionist ideologies of
several nations throughout history. Prominent examples include the Ancient
Assyrian Empire, the Greek city state of Sparta, the Roman Empire, the Aztec
nation, the Kingdom of Prussia, the British Empire, the Empire of Japan, the
Russian Soviet Federative Socialist Republic (which would later become part of
the Soviet Union), the Italian Colonial Empire during the reign of Benito
Mussolini, Nazi Germany and American Imperialism. After World War II,
militarism appeared in many of the post-colonial nations of Asia (i.e. North
Korea, Myanmar and Thailand) and Africa (i.e. Liberia, Nigeria and Uganda).
Militarist regimes also emerged in Latin America; some, such as the right-wing
administration of Augusto Pinochet in Chile, gained power in coups through U.S.
support, while others, such as the leftist Hugo Chavez of Venezuela, were
elected. By nation. Korean Militarism. North Korea. Sŏn'gun, often spelled
Songun, is North Korea's "Military First" policy, which prioritizes the Korean
People's Army in the affairs of state and allocates national resources to the
army first. "Military First" as a principle guides political and economic life
in North Korea, with "Military First Politics" dominating the political system,
"a line of Military First Economic Construction" acting as an economic system,
and "Military First Ideology" serving as the guiding ideology. "Songun"
elevates the Korean People's Army within North Korea as an organization and as
a state function, granting it the primary position in the North Korean
government and society. It guides domestic policy and international
interactions. It is the framework for the government, designating the military
as the "supreme repository of power." The North Korean government grants the
Korean People's Army the highest economic and resource-allocation priority, and
positions it as the model for society to emulate. "Songun" is also the
ideological concept behind a shift in policies since 1994 which emphasize the
people's military over all other aspects of state and society. Germany. The
roots of German militarism can be found in 19th-century Prussia and the
subsequent unification of Germany under Prussian leadership. After Napoleon
conquered Prussia in 1806, one of the conditions of peace was that Prussia
should reduce its army to no more than 42,000 men. In order that the country
should not again be so easily conquered, the King of Prussia enrolled the
permitted number of men for one year, then dismissed that group, and enrolled
another of the same size, and so on. Thus, in the course of ten years, he was
able to gather an army of 420,000 men who had at least one year of military
training. The officers of the army were drawn almost entirely from among the
land-owning nobility. The result was that there was gradually built up a large
class of professional officers on the one hand, and a much larger class, the
rank and file of the army, on the other. These enlisted men had become
conditioned to obey implicitly all the commands of the officers, creating a
class-based culture of deference. This system led to several consequences.
Since the officer class also furnished most of the officials for the civil
administration of the country, the interests of the army came to be considered
as identical to the interests of the country as a whole. A second result was
that the governing class desired to continue a system which gave them so much
power over the common people, contributing to the continuing influence of the
Junker noble classes. Militarism in Germany continued after World War I and the
fall of the German monarchy. During the period of the Weimar Republic
(1919–1933), the Kapp Putsch, an attempted coup d'état against the
republican government, was launched by disaffected members of the armed forces.
After this event, some of the more radical militarists and nationalists were
subsumed into the NSDAP, while more moderate elements of militarism declined.
The third reich was a strongly militarist state; after its fall in 1945,
militarism in German culture was dramatically reduced as a backlash against the
Nazi period. The Federal Republic of Germany today maintains a large, modern
military and has one of the highest defence budgets in the world, although the
defence budget accounts for less than 1.5 percent of Germany's GDP and is lower
than e.g. that of France or Great Britain. Contemporary opinions vary but
Germans predominantly oppose unilateral military actions and are suspicious of
all claims advocating them. Japan. In parallel with 20th-century German
militarism, Japanese militarism began with a series of events by which the
military gained prominence in dictating Japan's affairs. This was evident in
15th-century Japan's "Sengoku" period or "Age of Warring States", where
powerful samurai warlords or shogun played a significant role in Japanese
politics. Japan's militarism is deeply rooted in the ancient samurai tradition,
centuries before Japan's modernization. Even though a militarist philosophy was
intrinsic to the shogunates, a nationalist style of militarism developed after
the Meiji Restoration, which restored the Emperor to power and began the Empire
of Japan. It is exemplified by the 1882 Imperial Rescript to Soldiers and
Sailors, which called for all members of the armed forces to have an absolute
personal loyalty to the Emperor. In the 20th century (approximately in the
1920s), two factors contributed both to the power of the military and chaos
within its ranks. One was the Cabinet Law, which required the Imperial Japanese
Army (IJA) and Imperial Japanese Navy (IJN) to nominate servinet could be
formed. This essentially gave the military veto power over the formation of any
Cabinet in the ostensibly parliamentary country. Another factor was "gekokujo",
or institutionalized disobedience by junior officers. It was not uncommon for
radical junior officers to press their goals, to the extent of assassinating
their seniors. In 1936, this phenomenon resulted in the February 26 Incident,
in which junior officers attempted a coup d'état and killed leading members of
the Japanese government. The rebellion enraged Emperor Hirohito and he ordered
its suppression, which was successfully carried out by loyal members of the
military. In the 1930s, the Great Depression wrecked Japan's economy and gave
radical elements within the Japanese military the chance to realize their
ambitions of conquering all of Asia. In 1931, the Kwantung Army (a Japanese
military force stationed in Manchuria) staged the Mukden Incident, which
sparked the Invasion of Manchuria and its transformation into the Japanese
puppet state of Manchukuo. Six years later, the Marco Polo Bridge Incident
outside Peking sparked the Second Sino-Japanese War (1937-1945). Japanese
troops streamed into China, conquering Peking, Shanghai, and the national
capital of Nanjing; the last conquest was followed by the Nanjing Massacre. In
1940, Japan entered into an alliance with Nazi Germany and Fascist Italy, two
similarly militaristic states in Europe, and advanced out of China and into
Southeast Asia. This brought about the intervention of the United States, which
embargoed all petroleum to Japan. The embargo eventually precipitated the
Attack on Pearl Harbor and the entry of the U.S. into World War II. In 1945,
Japan surrendered to the United States, beginning the Occupation of Japan and
the purging of all militarist influences from Japanese society and politics. In
1947, the new Constitution of Japan supplanted the Meiji Constitution as the
fundamental law of the country, replacing the rule of the Emperor with
parliamentary government. With this event, the Empire of Japan officially came
to an end and the modern State of Japan was founded. United States. In the late
nineteenth and early twentieth centuries political and military leaders
reformed the US federal government to establish a stronger central government
than had ever previously existed for the purpose of enabling the nation to
pursue an imperial policy in the Pacific and in the Caribbean and economic
militarism to support the development of the new industrial economy. This
reform was the result of a conflict between Neo-Hamiltonian Republicans and
Jeffersonian-Jacksonian Democrats over the proper administration of the state
and direction of its foreign policy. The conflict pitted proponents of
professionalism, based on business management principles, against proponents
favoring more local control in the hands of laymen and political appointees.
After the end of the American Civil War the national army fell into disrepair.
Reforms based on various European states including Imperial Britain, Imperial
Germany, and Switzerland were made so that it would become responsive to
control from the central government, prepared for future conflicts, and develop
refined command and support structures; it led to the development of
professional military thinkers and cadre. During this time the intellectual
ideas of Social Darwinism propelled the development of an American overseas
expansion in the Pacific and Caribbean. This required modifications for a more
efficient central government due to the added administration requirements. The
enlargement of the U.S. Army for the Spanish-American War was considered
essential to the occupation and control of the new territories acquired from
Spain in its defeat (Guam, the Philippines, Puerto Rico, and Cuba). The
previous limit by legislation of 24,000 men was expanded to 60,000 regulars in
the new army bill on 2 February 1901, with allowance at that time for expansion
to 80,000 regulars by presidential discretion at times of national emergency.
Again, U.S. forces were enlarged immensely for World War I. Officers such as
George S. Patton were permanent captains at the start of the war and received
temporary promotions to colonel. Between the first and second world wars, the
US Marine Corps engaged in questionable activities in the Banana Wars in Latin
America. Retired Major General Smedley Butler, at the time of his death the
most decorated Marine, spoke strongly against a trend to what he considered
trends toward fascism and militarism. The Latin American expeditions ended with
Franklin D. Roosevelt's Good Neighbor Policy of 1934. Butler briefed Congress
on what he described as a business plot for a military coup, for which he had
been suggested as leader; the matter was partially corroborated, but the real
threat has been disputed. There is little evidence that any serious military
coups were planned in the US. During the American Civil War those officers who
were sympathetic to the Confederacy resigned their commissions rather than
mutiny. After World War II, there were major cutbacks, such that units
responding early in the Korean War, under United Nations authority (e.g., Task
Force Smith) were unprepared, resulting in catastrophic performance. It should
be noted that when Harry S. Truman fired Douglas MacArthur, the tradition of
civilian control held and MacArthur left without any hint of military coup.
Serious permanent buildups were a result of the Cold War. Dwight D. Eisenhower,
a retired top military commander elected as a civilian President, warned of the
development of a military-industrial complex, more complex than many
traditional ideas of militarism. In the Cold War, there emerged many civilian
academics and industrial researchers, such as Henry Kissinger and Herman Kahn,
who had significant input into the use of military force. It has been argued
that the United States has shifted to a state of neomilitarism since the end of
the Vietnam War. This form of militarism is distinguished by the reliance on a
relatively small number of volunteer fighters; heavy reliance on complex
technologies; and the rationalization and expansion of government advertising
and recruitment programs designed to promote military service. The Military
budget of the United States for 2008 was $740,800,000,000. [http://www.gao.gov/
financial/fy2008/08stmt.pdf] India. Rise of militarism in India dates back to
the British Raj with the rise of several Indian independence movement
organizations such as Indian National Army led by Subhash Chandra Bose. The INA
played a crucial role on pressuring the British Raj after it occupied Andaman
and Nicobar Islands with the help of Imperial Japan, but the movement lost
momentum due to lack of support by Indian National Congress, Battle of Imphal
and Bose's sudden death. After India gained independence in 1947, tensions with
neighboring Pakistan over Kashmir dispute also led to rise militarism in India
which also saw a boost during the various events that led to the political
integration of India. After the Sino-Indian War in 1962, India dramatically
expanded its military prowess which helped India emerge victorious during the
Indo-Pakistani War of 1971. The rise of Kashmiri insurgency and recent events
such as the Kargil War assured that the Indian government remained committed to
military expansion. Israel. Israel's many security difficulties since the
establishment of the State have led to a prominence of security in politics and
civil society, resulting in many of Israel's top politicians being former high-
ranking military officials (partial list: Yitzhak Rabin, Ariel Sharon, Ezer
Weizman, Ehud Barak, Shaul Mofaz, Moshe Dayan, Yitzhak Mordechai, and Amram
Mitzna).
