Minarchism Minarchism (also known as minimal statism) is a libertarian
capitalist political philosophy. It is variously defined by sources. In the
strictest sense, it maintains that the state is necessary and that its only
legitimate function is the protection of individuals from aggression, theft,
breach of contract, and fraud, and the only legitimate governmental
institutions are the military, police, and courts. In the broadest sense, it
also includes fire departments, prisons, the executive, and legislatures as
legitimate government functions. Such states are generally called night-
watchman states. Minarchists argue that the state has no authority to use its
monopoly on force to interfere with free transactions between people, and see
the state's sole responsibility as ensuring that contracts between private
individuals and property are protected, through a system of law courts and
enforcement. Minarchists generally believe a laissez-faire approach to the
economy is most likely to lead to economic prosperity. Ideology. Some
minarchists justify the state on the grounds that it is the logical consequence
of adhering to the non-aggression principle. Some argue that a state is
inevitable. Some minarchists argue that anarchism is immoral because it implies
that the non-aggression principle is optional, because the enforcement of laws
under anarchism is open to competition. Another common justification is that
private defense and court firms would tend to show bias, unevenly representing
the interests of paying clients. Robert Nozick in "Anarchy, State, and Utopia"
argued that a night watchman state provides a framework that allows for any
political system that respects fundamental individual rights. The issue of
taxation is polarizing among minarchists. Some minarchists support taxation on
principle or see it as a necessary evil to address the free rider problem,
while others believe it is morally wrong. Ayn Rand is notable for her
opposition to taxation, while also holding that the elimination of taxation in
a society should occur gradually. Another polarizing issue among minarchists is
whether citizens should have to pay the government to enforce their contracts.
Objectivism. Ayn Rand's philosophy, Objectivism, supports the establishment of
a minarchist state responsible for a court system, police, and military.
Objectivism views government as "the means of placing the retaliatory use of
physical force under objective control—i.e., under objectively defined laws;"
thus, government is both legitimate and critically important in order to
protect individual rights. Rand opposed so-called "rational anarchism," because
she saw putting police and courts on the market as an inherent miscarriage of
justice. Objectivism holds that the proper functions of a government are ""the
police", to protect men from criminals—"the armed services", to protect men
from foreign invaders—"the law courts", to settle disputes among men
according to objectively defined laws," the executive, and legislatures.
Furthermore, in protecting individual rights, the government is acting as an
agent of its citizens and "has no rights except the rights "delegated" to it by
the citizens" and it must act in an impartial manner according to specific,
objectively defined laws. Etymology. Samuel Edward Konkin III, an agorist,
coined the term "" in 1971 to describe libertarians who defend some form of
compulsory government. Konkin invented the term "minarchism" as an alternative
to the cumbersome phrase "limited-government libertarianism". It is ostensibly
formed as "min(imal)" + "-archy" (government) + "-ism" (system) – "system of
minimal government". Criticisms. Anarcho-capitalists generally argue that
government violates the non-aggression principle by its nature because
governments use force against those who have not stolen private property,
vandalized private property, assaulted anyone, or committed fraud. Many also
argue that monopolies tend to be corrupt and inefficient. Murray Rothbard
argued that all government services, including defense, are inefficient because
they lack a market-based pricing mechanism regulated by the voluntary decisions
of consumers purchasing services that fulfill their highest-priority needs and
by investors seeking the most profitable enterprises to invest in. Therefore,
the state's monopoly on the use of force is a violation of natural rights. He
wrote, "The defense function is the one reserved most jealously by the State.
It is vital to the State's existence, for on its monopoly of force depends its
ability to extract taxes from the citizens. If citizens were permitted
privately owned courts and armies, then they would possess the means to defend
themselves against invasive acts by the government as well as by private
individuals." In his book "Power and Market", he argued that geographically
large minarchist states are indifferent from a unified minarchist world
monopoly government. Rothbard wrote that governments were not inevitable,
noting that it often took hundreds of years for aristocrats to set up a state
out of anarchy. He also argued that if a minimal state allows individuals to
freely secede from the current jurisdiction to join a competing jurisdiction,
then it does not by definition constitute a state. Anarchists generally argue
that private defense and court firms would have to have a good reputation in
order to stay in business. Furthermore, Linda & Morris Tannehill argue that no
coercive monopoly of force can arise on a free market and that a government's
citizenry can’t desert them in favor of a competent protection and defense
agency. Proponents of an economically interventionist state argue it is best to
evaluate the merits of government intervention on a case-by-case basis in order
to address recessions ("see economic interventionism") or existential threats.
Social liberals and social democrats argue that a government ought to
appropriate private wealth in order to ensure care for disadvantaged or
dependent people such as children, the elderly, the physically and mentally
disabled, immigrants, the homeless, the poor, the unemployed, caretakers, or
victimized minority groups. Social conservatives argue that the state should
maintain a moral outlook and legislate against behavior commonly regarded as
culturally destructive or immoral; that, indeed, the state cannot survive if
its citizens do not have a certain kind of character, integrity and civic
virtue, and so ignoring the state's role in forming people's ethical
dispositions can be disastrous.
