Ministry (government department) A ministry is a specialised organisation
responsible for a sector of government public administration, sometimes led by
a minister or a senior public servant, that can have responsibility for one or
more departments, agencies, bureaus, commissions or other smaller executive,
advisory, managerial or administrative organisations. Ministries are usually
subordinate to the cabinet, and prime minister, president or chancellor. A
government will usually have numerous ministries, each with a specialised field
of providing public service. National ministries vary greatly between
countries, but some common ones include Ministry of Defence, Ministry of
Foreign Affairs, Ministry of Finance, and Ministry of Health. Examples. United
Kingdom. In the United Kingdom, all government organizations that consist of
civil servants, and which may or may not be headed by a government minister or
secretary of state, are considered as departments. The term "ministry" has been
retained for the Ministry of Defence and Ministry of Justice. Canada. In
Canada, five of the ten provincial governments use the term "ministry" to
describe their departments (namely Ontario, Quebec, Saskatchewan, British
Columbia, and Alberta) but the other six, along with the federal government,
use the terms "department" or "agency". Despite the difference in nomenclature,
both the provincial and federal governments use the term "minister" to describe
the head of a ministry or department. The specific tasks assigned to a minister
is referred to as his or her "portfolio". New Zealand. New Zealand's state
agencies include a large number of ministries and a smaller number of
departments. Increasingly, state sector agencies are styled neither as
ministries nor as departments. All New Zealand agencies are under the direction
of one or more ministers or associate ministers, whether they are styled
"ministries" or not, though each body also has an apolitical chief executive.
In ministries and departments, these chief executives often have the title of
Secretary. Other countries. Some countries such as Sweden, Norway, Switzerland,
the Philippines and the United States do not use the term "ministry" for their
sectors of government public administration, and instead call them
"departments". In Hong Kong, the term "bureau" is used, and departments are
subordinate to bureaux, while in Mexico, ministries are referred to as
secretariats. The government departments of the Soviet Union before 1946 were
named "People's Commissariats". In the European Union, departments are termed
Directorate(s)-General with the civil servant in charge called a Director-
General (in the European Commission, the political head of the department is
one of the European Commissioners). Fictional ministries. The term "ministry"
has also been widely used in satire and parody to describe fictional
departments.
