Miscegenation Miscegenation (; from the Latin "miscere" "to mix" + "genus"
"kind") is the mixing of different racial groups through marriage,
cohabitation, sexual relations, and procreation. The term "miscegenation" has
been used since the 19th century to refer to interracial marriage and
interracial sex, and more generally to the process of racial admixture, which
has taken place since ancient history. The term entered historical records
during European colonialism and the Age of Discovery, but societies such as
China and Japan also had restrictions on marrying with peoples they considered
to be of a different race. Historically the term has been used in the context
of laws banning interracial marriage and sex, so-called anti-miscegenation
laws. Today, the use of the phrase is considered offensive. Usage. In the
present day, the word miscegenation is avoided by many scholars, because the
term suggests a concrete biological phenomenon, rather than a categorization
imposed on certain relationships. The term's historical use in contexts that
typically implied disapproval is also a reason why more unambiguously neutral
terms such as "interracial", "interethnic" or "cross-cultural" are more common
in contemporary usage. The term remains in use among scholars when referring to
past practices concerning multiraciality, such as anti-miscegenation laws that
banned interracial marriages. In Spanish, Portuguese and French, the words used
to describe the mixing of races are "mestizaje", "mestiçagem" and
"métissage". These words, much older than the term miscegenation, are derived
from the Late Latin "mixticius" for "mixed", which is also the root of the
Spanish word "mestizo". Portuguese also uses "miscigenação", derived from the
same Latin root as the English word. These non-English terms for "race-mixing"
are not considered as offensive as "miscegenation", although they have
historically been tied to the caste system (Casta) that was established during
the colonial era in Spanish-speaking Latin America. Some groups in South
America, however, consider the use of the word "mestizo" offensive because it
was used during the times of the colony to refer specifically to the mixing
between the conquistadores and the indigenous people. Today, the mixes among
races and ethnicities are diverse, so it is considered preferable to use the
term "mixed-race" or simply "mixed" ("mezcla"). In Portuguese-speaking Latin
America (i.e., Brazil), a milder form of caste system existed, although it also
provided for legal and social discrimination among individuals belonging to
different races, since slavery for blacks existed until the late 19th century.
Miscegenation occurred significantly from the very first settlements, with
their descendants achieving high rank in government and society. To this day,
the Brazilian class system is drawn mostly around socio-economic lines, not
racial ones (in a manner similar to other former Portuguese colonies). The
concept of miscegenation is tied to concepts of racial difference. As the
different connotations and etymologies of miscegenation and "mestizaje"
suggest, definitions of race, "race mixing" and multiraciality have diverged
globally as well as historically, depending on changing social circumstances
and cultural perceptions. Mestizo are people of mixed white and indigenous,
usually Amerindian ancestry, who do not self-identify as indigenous peoples or
Native Americans. In Canada, however, the Métis, who also have partly
Amerindian and partly white, often French-Canadian, ancestry, have identified
as an ethnic group and are a constitutionally recognized aboriginal people. (In
Canada these are referred to as Métis. A very famous one was Louis Riel.) The
differences between related terms and words which encompass aspects of racial
admixture show the impact of different historical and cultural factors leading
to changing social interpretations of race and ethnicity. Thus the Comte de
Montlosier, in exile during the French Revolution, equated class difference in
18th-century France with racial difference. Borrowing Boulainvilliers'
discourse on the "Nordic race" as being the French aristocracy that invaded the
plebeian "Gauls", he showed his contempt for the lowest social class, the Third
Estate, calling it "this new people born of slaves ... mixture of all races and
of all times". Etymological history. "Miscegenation" comes from the Latin
"miscere", "to mix" and "genus", "kind". The word was coined in the U.S. in
1863, and the etymology of the word is tied up with political conflicts during
the American Civil War over the abolition of slavery and over the racial
segregation of African-Americans. The reference to "genus" was made to
emphasize the supposedly distinct biological differences between whites and
non-whites, though all humans belong to the same genus, "Homo", same species,
"Homo sapiens" and same subspecies, "Homo sapiens sapiens". The word was coined
in an anonymous propaganda pamphlet published in New York City in December
1863, during the American Civil War. The pamphlet was entitled "Miscegenation:
The Theory of the Blending of the Races, Applied to the American White Man and
Negro". It purported to advocate the intermarriage of whites and blacks until
they were indistinguishably mixed, as a desirable goal, and further asserted
that this was the goal of the Republican Party. The pamphlet was a hoax,
concocted by Democrats, to discredit the Republicans by imputing to them what
were then radical views that offended against the attitudes of the vast
majority of whites, including those who opposed slavery. There was already much
opposition to the war effort. The pamphlet and variations on it were reprinted
widely in both the north and south by Democrats and Confederates. Only in
November 1864 was the pamphlet exposed as a hoax. The hoax pamphlet was written
by David Goodman Croly, managing editor of the "New York World", a Democratic
Party paper, and George Wakeman, a "World" reporter. By then, the word
"miscegenation" had entered the common language of the day as a popular
buzzword in political and social discourse. The issue of miscegenation, raised
by the opponents of Abraham Lincoln, featured prominently in the election
campaign of 1864. In the United States, miscegenation has referred primarily to
the intermarriage between whites and non-whites, especially blacks. Before the
publication of "Miscegenation", the word amalgamation, borrowed from
metallurgy, had been in use as a general term for ethnic and racial
intermixing. A contemporary usage of this metaphor was that of Ralph Waldo
Emerson's private vision in 1845 of America as an ethnic and racial smelting-
pot, a variation on the concept of the melting pot. Opinions in the U.S on the
desirability of such intermixing, including that between white Protestants and
Irish Catholic immigrants, were divided. The term miscegenation was coined to
refer specifically to the intermarriage of blacks and whites, with the intent
of galvanising opposition to the war. The concept of miscegenation. Franz Boas
(considered to be the father of American cultural anthropology) as well as many
of his students, such as Ashley Montagu, considered race to be an invalid
concept. From this point of view, if the concept of race is invalid, then
miscegenation as the crossing of races is equally invalid. These ideas are
pursued in greater depth in Ashley Montagu's books on the subject. Laws banning
miscegenation. Laws banning "race-mixing" were enforced in certain U.S. states
from 1691 until 1967, in Nazi Germany (the Nuremberg Laws) from 1935 until
1945, and in South Africa during the early part of the Apartheid era
(1949–1985). All these laws primarily banned marriage between spouses of
different racially or ethnically defined groups, which was termed
"amalgamation" or "miscegenation" in the U.S. The laws in Nazi Germany and many
of the U.S. states, as well as South Africa, also banned sexual relations
between such individuals. In the United States, the various state laws
prohibited the marriage of whites and blacks, and in many states also the
intermarriage of whites with Native Americans or Asians. In the U.S., such laws
were known as anti-miscegenation laws. From 1913 until 1948, 30 out of the then
48 states enforced such laws. Although an "Anti-Miscegenation Amendment" to the
United States Constitution was proposed in 1871, in 1912–1913, and in 1928,
no nation-wide law against racially mixed marriages was ever enacted. In 1967,
the United States Supreme Court unanimously ruled in "Loving v. Virginia" that
anti-miscegenation laws are unconstitutional. With this ruling, these laws were
no longer in effect in the remaining 16 states that still had them. The Nazi
ban on interracial marriage and interracial sex was enacted in September 1935
as part of the Nuremberg Laws, the "Gesetz zum Schutze des deutschen Blutes und
der deutschen Ehre" (The Law for the Protection of German Blood and German
Honour). The Nuremberg Laws classified Jews as a race, and forbade marriage and
extramarital sexual relations between persons of Jewish origin and persons of
"German or related blood". Such intercourse was condemned as "Rassenschande"
(lit. "race-disgrace") and could be punished by imprisonment (usually followed
by deportation to a concentration camp) and even by death. The Prohibition of
Mixed Marriages Act in South Africa, enacted in 1949, banned intermarriage
between different racial groups, including between whites and non-whites. The
Immorality Act, enacted in 1950, also made it a criminal offense for a white
person to have any sexual relations with a person of a different race. Both
laws were repealed in 1985. History of ethnoracial admixture and attitudes
towards miscegenation. Africa. Africa has a long history of interracial mixing
with Arabs and later European men having sexual relations with black African
women as well as taking them as wives. Arabs played a big role in the African
slave trade and unlike the trans-atlantic trade most of the black African
slaves in the Arab slave trade were women. Most of them were used as sexual
slaves by the Arab men and some were even taken as wives. Sir Richard Francis
Burton writes during his expedition to Africa about relationships between black
women and white men. He writes, "The women are well disposed toward strangers
of fair complexion, apparently with the permission of their husbands." There
are several mulatto populations throughout Africa mostly the results of
interracial relationships between Arab and European men and black women. In
South Africa there are big mulatto communities like the Coloureds and Griqua
formed by White colonists taking native African wives. In Namibia there is a
community called the Rehoboth Basters formed by the interracial marriage of
Dutch/German men and black African women. In the former Portuguese Africa (now
known as Angola, Mozambique and Cape Verde) racial mixing between white
Portuguese and black Africans was fairly common, especially in Cape Verde where
the majority of the population is of mixed descent. There have been some
recorded cases of Chinese merchants and labourers taking African wives
throughout Africa as many Chinese workers were employed to build railways and
other infrastructural projects in Africa. These labour groups were made up
completely of men with very few Chinese women coming to Africa. In West Africa,
especially Nigeria there are many cases of Lebanese men taking African women.
Many of their offsprings have gained prominent positions in Africa. Flight
Lieutenant Jerry John Rawlings, who has a Scottish father and a black Ghanaian
mother became the President and Head of State of Ghana. Jean Ping, the son of a
Chinese trader and a black Gabonese mother, became the Deputy Prime Minister as
well as the Foreign minister of Gabon and is currently the Chairperson of the
Commission of the African Union in 2009. Ian Khama son of a Botswanian leader
and a white mother is the President of Botswana and the paramount chief of the
Bamangwato people. Indian men, who have long been traders in East Africa, at
times married among local African women. The British Empire brought many Indian
workers into East Africa to build the Uganda Railway. Indians eventually
populated South Africa, Kenya, Uganda, Tanzania, Malawi, Rwanda, Zambia,
Zimbabwe and Zaire in small numbers. These interracial unions were mostly
unilateral marriages between Indian men and East African women. Réunion. The
majority of the population of Réunion is defined as mixed race. In the last
350 years, various ethnic groups (Africans, Chinese, English, French,
Gujuratis, Tamil Indians) have arrived and settled on the island. There have
been mixed race people on the island since its first permanent inhabitation in
1665. Madagascar. Intermarriage between Chinese men and native Malagasy women
was not uncommon. Several thousands Cantonese men intermarried and cohabited
with Malagasy women. 98% of the Chinese traced their origin from Guangdong more
specifically Cantonese district of Shunde. For example the census alone in 1954
census found 1, 111 "irregular" Chinese-Malagasy unions, and 125 legitimate,
i.e., legally married. Registered by their mothers under a Malagasy name.
Intermarriage between French men and Native Malagasy women was not uncommon
either. Americas. Canada. The 2006 Census counted 289,400 mixed unions
(marriages and common-law unions) involving a visible minority person with a
non-visible minority person or a person from a different visible minority
group. This was a 33.1% increase from 2001. Among all mixed unions in 2006,
247,600 couples were in unions involving a visible minority person and someone
who was not a visible minority. The groups most likely to be involved in a
mixed union were Japanese (74.4%), Latin Americans (47%) and blacks (40.6%).
Jamaica and Haiti. By some estimates, 80,000 North American and European women
(most of them over the age of 40) visit Jamaica and Haiti every year for sex
with young men (mostly in their 20s). They're called "milk bottles". HIV/AIDS
infection rates in the Caribbean are much higher than in Canada or the U.S.
Even so, female sex tourists in the Caribbean are not preoccupied by the risk.
United States. Historically, "race mixing" between black and white people was
taboo in the United States. So-called anti-miscegenation laws, barring blacks
and whites from marrying or having sex, were established in colonial America as
early as 1691. The 1691 Virginia law was amended in 1705 to remove Indian-white
from the prohibition. Thomas Jefferson's policy proposal for dealing with
Native Americans was "to let our settlements and theirs meet and blend
together, to intermix, and become one people." He regretted in 1813 that white-
Indian war had prevented this: “They would have mixed their blood with ours,
and been amalgamated and identified with us within no distant period of
time.“ The taboo among American whites surrounding white-black can be seen as
a historical consequence of the oppression and racial segregation of African-
Americans. In many U.S. states interracial marriage was already illegal when
the term miscegenation was invented in 1863. The first laws banning interracial
marriage were introduced in the late 17th century in the slave-holding colonies
of Virginia (1691) and Maryland (1692). Later these laws also spread to
colonies and states where slavery did not exist. It has also been argued that
the first laws banning interracial marriage were a response by the planter
elite to the problems they were facing due to the socio-economic dynamics of
the plantation system in the Southern colonies. The bans in Virginia and
Maryland were established at a time when slavery was not yet fully
institutionalized. At the time, most forced laborers on the plantations were
indentured servants, and they were mostly white. Some historians have suggested
that the at-the-time unprecedented laws banning interracial marriage were
originally invented by planters as a divide and rule tactic after the uprising
of servants in Bacon's Rebellion. According to this theory, the ban on
interracial marriage was issued to split up the racially mixed, increasingly
mixed-race labour force into whites, who were given their freedom, and blacks,
who were later treated as slaves rather than as indentured servants. By
forbidding interracial marriage, it became possible to keep these two new
groups separated and prevent a new rebellion. In 1918, there was considerable
controversy in Arizona when an Indian farmer B. K. Singh married the sixteen
year-old daughter of one of his white tenants. During and after slavery, most
American whites regarded interracial marriage between whites and blacks as
taboo. However, during slavery many white American men and women did conceive
children with black partners. These children automatically became slaves if the
mother was a slave or were born free if the mother was free, as slavery was
matrilineal. Some children were freed by their slave-holding fathers or bought
to be emancipated if the father was not the owner. Many children of these
unions formed enclaves under names such as Colored and Gens de couleur, etc.
Most mixed-raced descendants merged into the African-American ethnic group
during Jim Crow, while over the centuries a minority of mixed-raced Americans
passed and became white, and others exist to this day in small mixed enclaves
of Mestees such as the Melungeons and Lumbee. Genetic research suggests that a
considerable minority of white Americans (estimated at 1/3 of the population by
some geneticists such as Mark Shriver) has some distant African-American
ancestry, and that the majority of black Americans have some European ancestry.
After the Civil War and the abolition of slavery in 1865, the marriage of white
and black Americans continued to be taboo, especially but not only in the
former slave states. The Motion Picture Production Code of 1930, also known as
Hays Code, explicitly stated that the depiction of ""miscegenation... is
forbidden."" One important strategy intended to discourage the marriage of
white Americans and Americans of partly African descent was the promulgation of
the one-drop theory, which held that any person with any known African
ancestry, however remote, must be regarded as "black." This definition of
blackness was encoded in the anti-miscegenation laws of various U.S. states,
such as Virginia's Racial Integrity Act of 1924. The plaintiffs in "Loving v.
Virginia", Mildred Jeter and Richard Loving became the historically most
prominent interracial couple in the US through their legal struggle against
this act. In the mid 19th to 20th centuries, the Chinese that migrated were
almost entirely of Cantonese origin. Hundreds of thousands of Chinese men in
the U.S, mostly of Cantonese origin from Taishan migrated to the United States.
Anti-miscegenation laws in many states prohibited Chinese men from marrying
white women. After the Emancipation Proclamation, many intermarriages in some
states were not recorded and historically, Chinese American men married African
American women in high proportions to their total marriage numbers due to few
Chinese American women being in the United States. After the Emancipation
Proclamation, many Chinese Americans immigrated to the Southern states,
particularly Arkansas, to work on plantations. For example, in 1880, the tenth
US Census of Louisiana alone counted 57% of interracial marriages between these
Chinese Americans to be with African Americans and 43% to be with European
American women. Between 20 and 30 percent of the Chinese who lived in
Mississippi married black women before 1940. In mids 1850s, 70 to 150 Chinese
were living in New york city and 11 of them married Irish women. In 1906 the
New York Times (6 August) reported that 300 white women(Irish American) were
married to Chinese men in New York, with many more cohabited. In 1900, based on
Liang research, of the 120,000 men in more than 20 Chinese communities in the
United States, he estimated that one out of every twenty Chinese men
(Cantonese) was married to white women. Accusations of support for
miscegenation were commonly made by slavery defenders against Abolitionists
before the Civil War. After the War, similar charges were used by white
segregationists against advocates of equal rights for African Americans. They
were said to be secretly plotting the destruction of the white race through
miscegenation. In the 1950s, segregationists alleged a Communist plot funded by
the Soviet Union with that goal. In 1957, segregationists cite the anti-semitic
hoax "A Racial Program for the Twentieth Century" as evidence for these claims.
In 1958, the Christian fundamentalist preacher Jerry Falwell, at the time a
defender of segregation, in a sermon railed against integration, warning that
it would lead to miscegenation, which would "destroy our race eventually."
Asians were also specifically included in some state laws. California continued
to ban Asian/white marriages until the Perez v. Sharp decision in 1948. In the
United States, segregationists and Christian identity groups have claimed that
several passages in the Bible, for example the stories of Phinehas and of the
so-called "curse of Ham," should be understood as referring to miscegenation
and that certain verses expressly forbid it. Most theologians read these verses
and references as forbidding inter-religious marriage, rather than inter-racial
marriage. Miscegenation has become increasingly accepted in the United States
since the Civil Rights movement and up to the present day. Approval of mixed
marriages in national opinion polls has risen from 4% in 1958, 20% in 1968 (at
the time of the SCOTUS decision), 36% in 1978, to 48% in 1991, 65% in 2002, 77%
in 2007 and 86% in 2011. The most notable American of mixed race is the current
President of the United States, Barack Obama, who is the product of a mixed
marriage between a black father and white mother. Nevertheless, as late as
2009, a Louisiana justice of the peace refused to issue a marriage license to
an interracial couple, justifying the decision on grounds of concern for any
children the couple might have. In recent years, interracial pornographic
films, which most commonly refers to black male/white female films, have
increased in popularity, becoming one of the fastest-growing and biggest-
selling genres. Hawaii. The majority of Hawaiian Chinese were Cantonese
migrants from Guangdong with minority from Hakka. If all people with Chinese
ancestry in Hawaii (including the Chinese-Hawaiians) are included, they form
about 1/3 of Hawaii's entire population. Many thousands of them married women
of Hawaiian, Hawaiian/European and European origin. A large percentage of the
Chinese men married Hawaiian and Hawaiian/European women. While an minority
married white women in Hawaii were with Portuguese women. The 12592 Asiatic-
Hawaiians enumerated in 1930 were the result of Chinese men intermarrying with
Hawaiian and part Hawaiian/European. Most Asiatic-Hawaiians men also married
Hawaiians and European women (and vice versa). On the census some Chinese with
little native blood would be classified as Chinese not an Asiatic-Hawaiians due
to dilution of native blood. Intermarriage started to decline in the 1920s.
Portuguese and other caucasian women married Chinese men. These unions between
Chinese men and Portuguese women resulted in children of mixed Chinese
Portuguese parentage, called Chinese-Portuguese. For two years to 30 June 1933,
38 of these children were born, they were classified as pure Chinese because
their fathers were Chinese. A large amount of mingling took place between
Chinese and Portuguese, Chinese men married Portuguese, Spanish, Hawaiian,
Caucasian-Hawaiian, etc. Only one Chinese man was recorded marrying an American
woman. Chinese men in Hawaii also married Puerto Rican, Portuguese, Japanese,
Greek, and half -white women. Latin America. About 300,000 Cantonese coolies
and migrants (almost all males) were shipped in 1849 to 1874 to Latin america,
many of them intermarried and cohabited with the Black, Mestizo, and European
population of Cuba, Peru, Guyana, and Trinidad. About 100,000 Cantonese coolies
(almost all males) in 1849 to 1874 migrated to Peru and intermarried with
Peruvian women of mestizo, European, Ameridian, European/mestizo, African and
mulatto origin. Many Peruvian Chinese today are of mixed Chinese, Spanish,
African, Ameridian. Estimates for Chinese-Peruvian is about 1.3 – 1.6
millions. Asian Peruvians are estimated to be 3% of the population, but one
source places the number of citizens with some Chinese ancestry at 4.2 million,
which equates to 15% of the country's total population. 120,000 Cantonese
coolies (all males) entered Cuba under contract for 80 years, most did not
married, but Hung Hui (1975:80) cites there was an frequency of sexual activity
between black women and Cantonese coolies. According to Osberg (1965:69) the
free Chinese practice of buying slave women and freeing them expressly for
marriage. In the nineteenth and twentieth centuries, Chinese men (Cantonese)
engaged in sexual activity with white Cuban women and black Cuban women, and
from such relations many children were born. (For a British Caribbean model of
Chinese cultural retention through procreation with black women, see Patterson,
322-31). In the CIA World Factbook. Cuba. 2008. 15 May 2008 estimated 114,240
Chinese-Cuban coolies with only 300 pure Chinese. In the study of Genetic
origin, admixture, and asymmetry in maternal and paternal human lineages in
Cuba. Thirty-five Y-chromosome SNPs were typed in the 132 male individuals of
the Cuban sample. The study does not include any people with some Chinese
ancestry. All the samples were White Cubans and Black Cubans. 2 out of 132 male
sample belong to East Asian Haplogroup O2 which is found in significant
frequencies among Cantonese people is found in 1.5% of Cuban population. The
Chinese in Costa Rica originated from the Cantonese male migrants. Pure Chinese
make up only 1% of the Costa Rican population but according to Jacqueline M.
Newman, as close to ten percent of the people in Costa Rica are Chinese, if we
count the people who are Chinese, married to a Chinese, or of mixed Chinese
descent. Than ten percent of three and a half million is a sizable number. Most
Chinese immigrants since then have been Cantonese, but in the last decades of
the 20th century, a number of immigrants have also come from Taiwan. Many men
came alone to work and married Costa Rican women and speak Cantonese. However
the majority of the descendants of the first Chinese immigrants no longer speak
cantonese and feel themselves to be Costa Ricans. They married Tican women (Who
an blend of Europeans, Caztizos, Mestizos, Indian, Black). An Tican is also an
White person with small portion of non-white blood like Caztizos. The census In
1989 shows about 98% of the of Costa Ricans were either White, Castizos,
Mestizos, with 80% being White or Caztizos. Around 20,000 Mostly Cantonese and
some Hakka coolies migrated to Jamaica, Guyana, Trinidad. Many of them also
intermarried with Black women and East Indian women due to Chinese women being
an few. Unlike in Trinidad Tobago and Guyana who were predominantly Cantonese
men who intermarried with Black women and East Indian women. The Chinese who
migrated to Jamaica and intermarried Black women were mostly Hakka. According
to the 1946 Census from Jamaica and Trinidad alone, 12,394 Chinese were located
between Jamaica and Trinidad. 5,515 of those who lived in Jamaica were Chinese-
Jamaicans and another 3,673 were Chinese-Trinidadians living in Trinidad 4,061
local born, 5,515 Chinese coloured (one Chinese parent). In Trinidad, there
were 9,314: 2,366 China-born, 2,926 local born, 349 born abroad (from other
colonies), 3,673 Chinese coloured. In Jamaica and other Caribbean nations as
well many Chinese males over generations took up African wives, gradually
assimilating or absorbing many Chinese descendants into the African Caribbean
community or the overall mixed-race community. In Guyana, the Chinese were
mostly Cantonese men who intermarried with the local women. Because almost all
of the Chinese indentured immigrants were men, they tended to intermarry with
both East Indians and Africans, and thus the Chinese of Guyana did not remain
as physically distinct as other groups. Their offspring also tended to
intermarried with the local African and East Indian Guyanese rather than with
the Chinese colored, as result some Guyanese who have little Chinese ancestry
are not included in the Census, some may also don't know of there Chinese
ancestry. Asia. Inter-ethnic marriage in Southeast Asia dates back to the
spread of Indian culture, Hinduism and Buddhism to the region. From the 1st
century onwards, mostly male traders and merchants from the Indian subcontinent
frequently intermarried with the local female populations in Cambodia, Burma,
Champa, central Siam, the Malay Peninsula, and Malay Archipelago. Many
Indianized kingdoms arose in Southeast Asia during the Middle Ages. From the
9th century onwards, a large number of mostly male Arab traders from the Middle
East settled down in the Malay Peninsula and Malay Archipelago, and they
intermarried with the local Malay, Indonesian and Filipina female populations.
This contributed to the spread of Islam in Southeast Asia. From the 14th to the
17th centuries, many Chinese, Indian and Arab traders settled down within the
maritime kingdoms of Southeast Asia and intermarried with the local female
populations. This tradition continued among Portuguese traders who also
intermarried with the local populations. In the 16th and 17th centuries,
thousands of Japanese people also travelled to Southeast Asia and intermarried
with the local women there. From the tenth to twelfth century, Persian women
were to be found in Guangzhou (Canton), some of them in the tenth century like
Mei Zhu in the harem of the Emperor Liu Chang, and in the twelfth century large
numbers of Persian women lived there, noted for wearing mulitiple earrings and
"quarrelsome dispositions". Multiple women originating from the Persian Gulf
lived in Guangzhou's foreign quarter, they were all called "Persian women"
(波斯婦 Po-ssu-fu or Bosifu). Some scholars did not differentiate between
Persian and Arab, and some say that the Chinese called all women coming from
the Persian Gulf "Persian Women". Genetic evidence shows Persian women
intermarried with Cantonese men of Guangzhou. Yao Yonggang et al. reported that
Kivisild detected one W mtDNA out of 69 Guangzhou Cantonese population, an
common Middle Easterner and Iranian marker. The white men who sailed to Asia in
the 16th century left a generation of mixed-race offspring that, at the high
point of empire building, was more than one-million strong. Some 100,000
Amerasians stayed in Vietnam after the fall of Saigon. During and after the
Indonesian National Revolution (1945–1965) around 300,000 people, pre-
dominantly Eurasians, left Indonesia to go to the Netherlands. In the 19th
century and early 20th century, there was a network of small numbers of Chinese
prostitutes being trafficked across Asia, in countries such as China, Japan,
Korea, Singapore and British India, in what was then known as the ’Yellow
Slave Traffic’. There was also a network of prostitutes from continental
Europe being trafficked to India, Ceylon, Singapore, China and Japan at around
the same time, in what was then known as the ’White Slave Traffic’. During
World War II, Japanese soldiers engaged in war rape during their invasions
across East Asia and Southeast Asia. The term "comfort women" is a euphemism
for the estimated 200,000, mostly Korean and Chinese, women who were employed
as prostitutes in Japanese military brothels during World War II. Some Dutch
women, captured in Dutch colonies in Asia, were also forced into sexual
slavery. More than 20,000 Indonesian women and nearly 300 Dutch women. Sex
tourism has emerged in the late 20th century as a controversial aspect of
Western tourism and globalization. Sex tourism is typically undertaken
internationally by tourists from wealthier countries. Author Nils Ringdal
alleged that three out of four men between the ages of 20 and 50 who have
visited Asia or Africa have paid for sex. Central Asia. Today Central Asians
are a mixed race of various peoples such as Mongols, Turkics, Iranics. The
Mongol invasion of Central Asia in 13th century resulted in the massacre of
mostly white Iranic population and other Indo-European people as well as large
numbers of intermarriage and assimilation. Modern Genetic shows that Central
Asian Turkic people and Hazara are an mixture of Northeast Asians and Indo-
European people. Caucasian ancestry is prevalent in almost all central Asian
Turkic people. Kazakhs, Hazara, Karakalpaks, Crimean Tatars have more European
mtdna than European y-dna, Kyrgyz have mostly European y-dna with substantial
European mtdna. Other Turkic people like Uyghurs, Uzbeks, have mostly European
y-dna but also an significant high percentages of European mtdna. Turkmen have
predominately European y-dna and mtdna. China. There have been various periods
in the history of China where a number of Arabs, Persians and Turks from the
Western Regions (Central Asia and West Asia) migrated to China, beginning with
the arrival of Islam during the Tang Dynasty in the 7th century. Due to the
majority of these immigrants being male, some have decided to intermarry with
local Chinese females. Intermarriage was initially discouraged by the Tang
Dynasty. In 836 Lu Chun was appointed as governor of Canton, he was disgusted
to find Chinese living with foreigners and intermarriage between Chinese and
foreigners. Lu enforced separation, banning interracial marriages, and made it
illegal for foreigners to own property. Lu Chun believed his principles were
just and upright. The 836 law specifically banned Chinese from forming
relationships with "Dark peoples" or "People of colour", which was used to
describe foreigners, such as "Iranians, Sogdians, Arabs, Indians, Malays,
Sumatrans", among others. The Song Dynasty allowed third-generation immigrants
with official titles to intermarry with Chinese imperial princesses. Iranian,
Arab, and Turkic women also migrated to China and mixed with Chinese. From the
tenth to twelfth century, Persian women were to be found in Guangzhou (Canton),
some of them in the tenth century like Mei Zhu in the harem of the Emperor Liu
Chang, and in the twelfth century large numbers of Persian women lived there,
noted for wearing mulitiple earrings and "quarrelsome dispositions". Multiple
women originating from the Persian Gulf lived in Guangzhou's foreign quarter,
they were all called "Persian women" (波斯婦 Po-ssu-fu or Bosifu). Genetic
evidence shows Persian women intermarried with Cantonese men of Guangzhou. Yao
Yonggang et al. reported that Kivisild detected one W mtDNA out of 69 Guangzhou
Cantonese population, an common Middle Easterner and Iranian marker. Iranian
women as dancers were in demand in China during this period. During the Sui
dynasty, ten young dancing girls were sent from Persia to China. During the
Tang dynasty bars were often attended by Iranian or Sogdian waitresses who
performed dances for clients. During the Five Dynasties and Ten Kingdoms Period
(Wudai) (907–960), there are examples of Persian women marrying Chinese
emperors. Some Chinese officials from the Song Dynasty era also married women
from Dashi (Arabia). Of the Han Chinese Li family in Quanzhou, Li Nu, the son
of Li Lu, visited Hormuz in Persia in 1376, married a Persian or an Arab girl,
and brought her back to Quanzhou. He then converted to Islam, Li Nu was the
ancestor of the Ming Dynasty reformer Li Chih. By the 14th century, the total
population of Muslims in China had grown to 4 million. After Mongol rule had
been overthrown by the Ming Dynasty in 1368, this led to a violent Chinese
backlash against West and Central Asians. In order to contain the violence, the
Ming administration instituted a policy where all West and Central Asian males
were required to intermarry with native Chinese females, hence assimilating
them into the local population. Their descendants are today known as the Hui
people. 6.7% Hui people's maternal genetics have an Caucasian origin, while
slightly over 30% paternal genetics also have an Caucasian origin. In the 19th
century, the Hui rebelled against the Chinese government trying to create an
independent state. Han women who married Hui men became Hui, and Han men who
married Hui women also became Hui. In the frontier districts of Sichuan,
numerous half Chinese-Tibetans were found. Tibetan women were glad to marry
Chinese traders and soldiers. Some Chinese traders married Tibetan girls.
Traders and officials in ancient times were often forbidden to bring Chinese
women with them to Tibet, so they had to marry Tibetan women, the male
offspring where considered Chinese and female offspring as Tibetan. Special
names were used for these children of Chinese fathers and Tibetan mothers. They
are often assimilated into the Tibetan population. Chinese and Nepalese in
Tibet married Tibetan women. In Qinghai, premarital sex between Tibetan girls
and Han Chinese was common, some Tibetan girls boasted of their sexual
conquests of Han Chinese boys. Chinese men also married Turkic Uyghur women in
Xinjiang from 1880–1949. Sometimes poverty influenced Uyghur women to marry
Chinese. These marriages were not recognized by local mullahs since Muslims
women were not allowed to marry non-Muslim men under Islamic law. This did not
stop the women because they enjoyed advantages, not being subject to Islamic
law and they were not subjected to certain taxes. Uyghur women married to
Chinese also did not have to wear a veil and they received their husband's
property upon his death. These women were forbidden from having burial in
Muslim graves. The children of Chinese men and Uyghur women were considered as
Uyghur. Some Chinese soldiers had Uyghur women as temporary wives, and after
the man's military service was up, the wife was left behind or sold, and if it
was possible, sons were taken, and daughters were sold. European travellers
noted that many Han Chinese in Xinjiang married Uyghur (who were called turki)
women and had children with them. A Chinese was spotted with a "young" and
"good looking" Uyghur wife and another Chinese left behind his Uyghur wife and
child in Khotan. After 1950, some intermarriage between Han and Uyghur
continued. A Han married a Uyghur woman in 1966 and had three daughters with
her, and other cases on intermarriage also continued. Hong Kong. In the study
of mitochondrial DNA control region variation in a population sample Irwin et
al. found U2b mtDNA once, other U2 twice, H11 once and J1 once in 377 HKers
which suggest 1.34% of West Eurasian female admixture in Hong Kong Cantonese
population. These results do not give any information as to the extent of male
European admixture in the Hong Kong population. Many Tanka women conceived
children with foreign men. Ernest John Eitel mentioned in 1889 how important
change had taken place among Eurasian girls, the offspring of illicit
connections: Instead of becoming concubines, they were commonly brought up
respectably and married to Hong Kong Chinese husbands. Some believed many Hong
Kong born Eurasian were assimilated into the Hong Kong society by Intermarriage
with the Cantonese population. A good example of a Cantonese Eurasian is Nancy
Kwan, a Hollywood sex symbol, she was of Eurasian origin born in 1939 in Hong
Kong to a father who was a Cantonese architect and mother who is an model of
British and Scottish descent. The world's most influential martial artist icon
Bruce Lee, was also born to parents of Hong Kong heritage to a Cantonese father
and a Eurasian mother. Ernest John Eitel controversially claimed that most
"half caste" people in Hong Kong were descended exclusively from Europeans
having relationship with Tanka women. The theory that most of the Eurasian
mixed race Hong Kong people are descended only from Tanka women and European
men, and not ordinary Cantonese women, has been backed up by other researchers
who pointed out that Tanka women freely consorted with foreigners due to the
fact that they were not bound by the same Confucian traditions as the
Cantonese, and having a relationship with European men was advantageous for
Tanka women, but Lethbridge criticized it as "a 'myth' propagated by xenophobic
Cantonese to account for the establishment of the Hong Kong Eurasian
community". Carl Smith's study in late 1960s on the protected women seems, to
some degree, support Ernest John Eitel theory. Smith says that the Tankas
experienced certain restrictions within the traditional Chinese social
structure. Being a group marginal to the traditional Chinese society of the
Puntis (Cantonese), they did not have the same social pressure in dealing with
Europeans. The ordinary Cantonese women did not sleep with European men, the
Eurasian population was formed mostly from Tanka and European admixture. Public
Library South Asians have been living in Hong Kong throughout the colonial
period, before the partition of India into the nations of India and Pakistan.
They migrated to Hong Kong and worked as police officers as well as army
officers during colonial rule. 25,000 of the Muslims in Hong Kong trace their
roots back to what is now Pakistan. Around half of them belong to 'local boy'
families, Muslims of mixed Chinese and South Asian ancestry, descended from
early Indian/Pakistani Muslim immigrants who took local Chinese wives and
brought their children up as Muslims. Macau. Due to a few Chinese living in
Macau. The early Macanese ethnic group was formed from Portuguese men with
Malay, Japanese, Indian women. The Portuguese encouraged Chinese migration to
Macau, and most Macanese in Macau were formed from intermarriages between
Portuguese and Chinese. In 1810, the total population of Macau was about 4,033,
of which 1,172 were white men, 1,830 were white women, 425 male slaves, and 606
female slaves. In 1830, the population increased to 4,480 and the breakdown was
1,202 white men, 2,149 white women, 350 male slaves and 779 female slaves.
There is reason to speculate that large numbers of white women were involved in
some forms of prostitution which would probably explain the abnormality in the
ratio between men and women among the white population. Rarely did Chinese
women marry Portuguese initially, mostly women from Goa, Siam, Indo China, or
Malay, were brides of the Portuguese men in Macau. Many Chinese became Macanese
simply by converting to Catholicism, and had no ancestry from Portuguese,
having assimilated into the Macanese people. Majority of the early
intermarriages of people from China with Portuguese were between Portuguese men
and women of Tanka origin, who were considered the lowest class of people in
China and had relations with Portuguese settlers and sailors, or low class
Chinese women. Western men were refused by high class Chinese women, who did
not marry foreigners. while an minority were Cantonese men and Portuguese
women. Macanese men and women also married with the Portuguese and Chinese, as
a result some Macanese became indistinguishable from the Chinese or Portuguese
population. Because the Majority of the population who migrated to Macau was
Cantonese, Macau became an culturely Cantonese speaking society, other ethnic
groups became fluent in Cantonese. Most Macanese had paternal Portuguese
heritage until 1974. It was in 1980s that Macanese and Portuguese women began
to marry men who defined themselves ethnically as Chinese. Which resulted in
many Macanese with Cantonese Paternal ancestry. Literature in Macau was written
about love affairs and marriage between the Tanka women and Portuguese men,
like "A-Chan, A Tancareira", by Henrique de Senna Fernandes. After the handover
of Macau to China in 1999 many Macaunese migrated to other countries. Of the
Portuguese and Macanese women who stayed in Macau married with local Cantonese
men, and many Macanese also now have Cantonese paternal heritage. There is
between 25,000 – 46,000 Macanese, only 5000 – 8000 live in Macau, while
most live in Latin america, America, Portugal. Unlike the Macanese of Macau who
are strictly of Chinese and Portuguese heritage. Many Macanese living abroad
are not entirely of Portuguese and Chinese ancestry, many Macanese men and
women intermarried with the local population of America and Latin America etc.
and have only partial Macanese heritage. Indian subcontinent. The Indian
subcontinent has a long history of inter-ethnic marriage dating back to ancient
history. Various groups of people have been intermarrying for millennia in
South Asia, including groups as diverse as the Dravidian, Indo-Aryan, Austro-
Asiatic and Tibeto-Burman peoples. Invading Greeks, Scythians, Huns, Persians,
Mongols (known as Mughals), and Europeans took Indian wives. 3,000–8,000
years ago, Indo-European-speaking nomadic groups from Europe, the Near East,
Anatolia, and the Caucasus migrated to India. According to 19th-century British
historians, it was these "Aryans" who established the caste system, an elitist
form of social organization that separated the "light-skinned" Indo-Aryan
conquerors from the "conquered dark-skinned" indigenous Dravidian population
through enforcement of "racial endogamy". Much of this was simply conjecture,
fueled by British imperialism; British policies of divide and rule as well as
enumeration of the population into rigid categories during the tenure of
British rule in India contributed towards the hardening of these segregated
caste identities. Since the independence of India from British rule, the
British fantasy of an "Aryan Invasion and subjugation of the dark skinned
Dravidians in India" has become a staple polemic in South Asian geopolitics,
including the propaganda of Indophobia in Pakistan. There is no decisive theory
as to the origins of the caste system in India, and globally renowned
historians and archaeologists like Jim Shaffer, J.P. Mallory, Edwin Bryant, and
others, have disputed the claim of "Aryan Invasion". Some researchers claim
that genetic similarities to Europeans were more common in members of the
higher ranks. Their findings, published in "Genome Research", supported the
idea that members of higher castes are more closely related to Europeans than
are the lower castes. According to the research, invading European populations
were predominantly male who intermarried with local females and formed the
upper castes i.e. the local females had upward mobility in caste which was
denied to local males. However, other researchers have criticized and
contradicted this claim. A study by Joanna L. Mountain et al. of Stanford
University concluded that there was "no clear separation into three genetically
distinct groups along caste lines", although "an inferred tree revealed some
clustering according to caste affiliation". A 2006 study by Ismail Thanseem et
al. of Centre for Cellular and Molecular Biology (India) concluded that the
"lower caste groups might have originated with the hierarchical divisions that
arose within the tribal groups with the spread of Neolithic agriculturalists,
much earlier than the arrival of Aryan speakers", and "the Indo-Europeans
established themselves as upper castes among this already developed caste-like
class structure within the tribes." A 2006 genetic study by the National
Institute of Biologicals in India, testing a sample of men from 32 tribal and
45 caste groups, concluded that the Indians have acquired very few genes from
Indo-European speakers. More recent studies have also debunked the claims that
so-called "Aryans" and "Dravidians" have a "racial divide". A study conducted
by the Centre for Cellular and Molecular Biology in 2009 (in collaboration with
Harvard Medical School, Harvard School of Public Health and the Broad Institute
of Harvard and MIT) analyzed half a million genetic markers across the genomes
of 132 individuals from 25 ethnic groups from 13 states in India across
multiple caste groups. The study establishes, based on the impossibility of
identifying any genetic indicators across caste lines, that castes in South
Asia grew out of traditional tribal organizations during the formation of
Indian society, and were not the product of any Aryan invasion and subjugation
of Dravidian people. Rape and enslavement of Hindu women by invading Islamic
armies was very common. For example, according to the Chachnama by Qazi Ismail,
during the Arab invasion of Sindh (712 CE), Muhammad bin Qasim first attacked
and conquered Debal. It was situated on the sea-coast (not far from modern
Karachi). All males of the age of seventeen and upwards were put to the sword
and their women and children were enslaved. 700 Hindu women, who were under the
protection of Budh (that is, had taken shelter in the temple), were all
captured with their valuable ornaments, and adorned with jewels. Muhammad
despatched one-fifth of the legal spoil to Hajjaj which included seventy-five
damsels, while the other four-fifths were distributed among the soldiers.
Thereafter whichever places he attacked like Rawar, Sehwan, Dhalila,
Brahmanabad and Multan, Hindu soldiers and men with arms were slain, many women
of the higher classes immolated themselves in Jauhar. Most others became prize
of the victors. These women were enslaved and converted, and batches of them
were despatched to the Caliph in regular installments. For example, after Rawar
was taken, many women and children were enslaved, of whom 30 were young ladies
of royal blood. Muhammad Qasim sent all these to Hajjaj, who forwarded them to
Walid the Khalifa. He sold some of these female slaves of royal birth, and some
he presented to others. In Northern India, female slaves captured after every
campaign of the marching army, were converted and married to Muslim soldiers
who settled down in colonies established in places like Mansura, Kuzdar,
Mahfuza and Multan. During the Islamic involvement in India, it was normal for
kings to possess harems filled with native Hindu women won as booties of war.
The most famous one was of Akbar's harem, which had over 5000 women. Most of
these Muslim soldiers were Turks, Afghans, Persians, Mongols (Mughals), other
Central Asians and Arabs. There are even cases of Indian princesses marrying
kings abroad. For example, the Korean text "Samguk Yusa" about the Gaya kingdom
(it was absorbed by the kingdom of Silla later), indicates that in 48 AD, King
Kim Suro of Gaya (the progenitor of the Gimhae Kim clan) took a princess
(Princess Heo) from the "Ayuta nation" (which is the Korean name for the city
of Ayodhya in North India) as his bride and queen. Princess Heo belonged to the
Mishra royal family of Ayodhya. According to the Samguk Yusa, the princess had
a dream about a heavenly fair handsome king from a faraway land who was
awaiting heaven's anointed ride. After Princess Heo had the dream, she asked
her parents, the king and queen of Ayodhya, for permission to set out and seek
the foreign prince, which the king and queen urged with the belief that god
orchestrated the whole fate. That king was no other than King Kim Suro of the
Korean Gaya kingdom. In Goa, a Portuguese colony in India, during the late 16th
century and 17th century, there was a community of over thousand Japanese
slaves and traders, who were either Japanese Christians fleeing persecution in
Japan, or young Japanese women and girls brought or captured as sexual slaves
by Portuguese traders and their South Asian "lascar" crew members from Japan.
In both cases, they often intermarried with the local population in Goa.
Interracial marriages between European men and Indian women were very common
during colonial times. Most of these Indian women usually were Muslim belonging
to aristocratic families and families with royal ancestry. According to the
historian William Dalrymple, about one in three European men had Indian wives
in colonial India. This was primarily because the Europeans (mostly Dutch,
British, French and Portuguese and up to a lesser extent Swedes and Danes) came
to India when they were young and there were very few white women available in
India. The most famous of such interracial liaisons was between the Hyderabadi
noblewoman Khair-un-Nissa and the Scottish resident James Achilles Kirkpatrick.
The 600,000-strong Anglo-Indian community was formed by British soldiers taking
Indian women as wives. Such relationships have had a strong influence on the
arts. "Lakmé", an opera by the Frenchman Léo Delibes, deals with the romantic
relationship between the British officer Gérald and the daughter of a Hindu
high priest Lakmé (Laxmi in Sanskrit). In Ceylon (present day Sri Lanka),
interracial relationships between Dutch, British and Portuguese men and local
women were common. The 65,000-strong Burgher community was formed by the
interracial marriages of Dutch and Portuguese men with local Sinhalese and
Tamil women. In addition to intermarriage, inter-ethnic prostitution in India
was also fairly common at the time, when British officers would frequently
visit Indian "nautch" dancers. In the mid-19th century, there were around
40,000 British soldiers but fewer than 2,000 British officials present in
India. Many British and other European officers had their own harems made up of
Indian women similar to those the Nawabs and kings of India had. In the 19th
century and early 20th century, thousands of women and girls from continental
Europe were also trafficked into British India (and Ceylon), where they worked
as prostitutes servicing both British soldiers and local Indian (and Ceylonese)
men. As British females began arriving in British India in large numbers from
the early-to-mid-19th century, became increasingly uncommon in India as British
women increasingly disapproved of relationships between local woman and their
men. Interracial relationships were also despised after the events of India's
First War of Independence, where Indian sepoys rebelled against the British
East India Company. The idea of protecting British female chastity from the
"lustful Indian male" had a significant influence on the policies of the
British Raj in order to prevent racial miscegenation between the British
females and the native Indian male population. While some restrictive policies
were imposed on British females in order to protect them from miscegenation,
most of these policies were directed against native Indian males. For example,
the 1883 Ilbert Bill, which would have granted Indian judges the right to judge
British offenders, was opposed by many British colonialists on the grounds that
Indian judges cannot be trusted in dealing with cases involving British
females. In the aftermath of the 1919 Amritsar Massacre, the long-held
stereotype of Indian males as dark-skinned rapists lusting after white British
females was challenged by several novels such as "A Passage to India" (1924)
and "The Jewel in the Crown" (1966), both of which involve an Indian male being
wrongly accused of raping a British female. When Burma was ruled under the
administration of British India, millions of Indians, mostly Muslim, migrated
there. The small population mixed descendants of Indian males and local Burmese
females are called "Zerbadees", often in a pejorative sense implying mixed
race. Japan. Inter-ethnic marriage in Japan dates back to the 7th century, when
Chinese and Korean immigrants began intermarrying with the local Japanese
population. In the 1590s, over 50,000 Koreans were forcibly brought to Japan
during Hideyoshi's invasions of Korea, where they intermarried with the local
population. In the 16th and 17th centuries, around 58,000 Japanese travelled
abroad, many of whom intermarried with the local women in Southeast Asia.
During the anti-Christian persecutions in 1596, many Japanese Christians fled
to Macau and other Portuguese colonies such as Goa, where there was a community
of Japanese slaves and traders by the early 17th century. Intermarriage with
the local populations in these Portuguese colonies also took place. Portuguese
traders in Japan also intermarried with the local Christian women. From the
15th century, Chinese, Korean and other Far Eastern visitors frequented
brothels in Japan. This practice later continued among visitors from the
"Western Regions", mainly European traders. This began with the arrival of
Portuguese ships to Japan in the 16th century. Portuguese visitors and their
South Asian (and sometimes African) crewmembers often engaged in slavery in
Japan, where they brought Japanese slaves who were taken to Macau and other
Portuguese colonies in Southeast Asia, the Americas, and India. Later European
East India companies, including those of the Dutch and British, also engaged in
prostitution in Japan. In the early part of the Shōwa era, Japanese
governments executed a eugenic policy to limit the birth of children with
inferior traits, as well as aiming to protect the life and health of mothers.
Family Center staff also attempted to discourage marriage between Japanese
women and Korean men who had been recruited from the peninsula as laborers
following its annexation by Japan in 1910. In 1942, a survey report argued that
"the Korean laborers brought to Japan, where they have established permanent
residency, are of the lower classes and therefore of inferior constitution...By
fathering children with Japanese women, these men could lower the caliber of
the Yamato minzoku." In 1928, journalist Shigenori Ikeda promoted the 21
December as the blood-purity day ("junketsu de") and sponsored free blood-test
at the Tokyo Hygiene laboratory By the early 1930s, detailed "eugenic marriage"
questionnaires were printed or inserted in popular magazines for public
consumption. Promoters like Ikeda were convinced that these marriage surveys
would not only insure the eugenic fitness of spouses but also help avoid class
differences that could disrupt and even destroy marriage. The goal was to
create a database of individuals and their entire households which would enable
eugenicists to conduct in-depth surveys of any given family's genealogy. To
prevent venereal diseases and rape by Japanese soldiers and to provide comfort
to soldiers and head off espionage, the Imperial Japanese Army established
"comfort stations" in the Greater East Asia Co-Prosperity Sphere where around
200,000 women, mostly from Korea and China, were recruited or kidnapped by the
Kempeitai or the Tokeitai as comfort women. "Historians say thousands of
women – as many as 200,000 by some accounts – mostly from Korea, China
and Japan worked in the Japanese military brothels", ; . One of the last
eugenic measures of the Shōwa regime was taken by the Higashikuni government.
On 19 August 1945, the Home Ministry ordered local government offices to
establish a prostitution service for Allied soldiers to preserve the "purity"
of the "Japanese race". The official declaration stated that : "Through the
sacrifice of thousands of "Okichis" of the Shōwa era, we shall construct a to
hold back the mad frenzy of the occupation troops and cultivate and preserve
the purity of our race long into the future..." According to Peter Schrijvers
in ""The GI War against Japan: American Soldiers in Asia and the Pacific during
World War II"", rape "reflects a burning need to establish total dominance of
the other" the enemy. According to Xavier Guillaume, US soldiers' rape of
Japanese women was "general practice". Schrijvers states regarding rapes on
Okinawa that "The estimate of one Okinawan historian for the entire three-month
period of the campaign exceeds 10,000. A figure that does not seem unlikely
when one realizes that during the first 10 days of the occupation of Japan
there were 1,336 reported cases of rape of Japanese women by American soldiers
in Kanagawa prefecture alone". However, despite being told by the Japanese
military that they would suffer rape, torture and murder at the hands of the
Americans, Japanese civilians "were often surprised at the comparatively humane
treatment they received from the American enemy." According to "Islands of
Discontent: Okinawan Responses to Japanese and American Power" by Mark Selden,
the Americans "did not pursue a policy of torture, rape, and murder of
civilians as Japanese military officials had warned." Japanese society, with
its ideology of homogeneity, has traditionally been intolerant of ethnic and
other differences. Men or women of mixed ancestry, foreigners, and members of
minority groups faced discrimination in a variety of forms. In 2005, a United
Nations report expressed concerns about racism in Japan and that government
recognition of the depth of the problem was not total. In 2005, Japanese
Minister Taro Aso called Japan a "one race" nation. The Japanese public was
thus astounded by the sight of some 45,000 so-called "pan pan girls"
(prostitutes) fraternizing with American soldiers during the occupation. In
1946, the 200 wives of U.S. officers landing in Japan to visit their husbands
also had a similar impact when many of these reunited couples were seen walking
hand in hand and kissing in public. Both prostitution and marks of affection
had been hidden from the public until then, and this "democratization of
eroticism" was a source of surprise, curiosity, and even envy. The occupation
set new relationships models for Japanese men and women: the practice of modern
"dating" spread, and activities such as dancing, movies and coffee were not
limited to "pan pan girls" and American troops anymore, and became popular
among young Japanese couples. Korea. Inter-ethnic marriage in Korea dates back
to the arrival of Muslims in Korea during the Middle Ages, when Persian and
Turkic navigators, traders and slaves settled in Korea and married local Korean
people. Some assimilation into Buddhism and Shamanism eventually took place,
owing to Korea's geographical isolation from the Muslim world. There are
several Korean clans that are descended from such intermarriages. For example,
the Deoksu Jang clan, claiming some 30,000 Korean members, view Jang Sunnyong,
a Central Asian who married a Korean female, as their ancestor. Another clan,
Gyeongju Seol, claiming at least 2,000 members in Korea, view a Central Asian
(probably an Uyghur) named Seol Son as their ancestor. There are even cases of
Korean kings marrying princesses from abroad. For example, the Korean text
Samguk Yusa about the Gaya kingdom (it was absorbed by the kingdom of Silla
later), indicate that in 48 AD, King Kim Suro of Gaya (the progenitor of the
Gimhae Kim clan) took a princess (Princess Heo) from the "Ayuta nation" (which
is the Korean name for the city of Ayodhya in North India) as his bride and
queen. Princess Heo belonged to the Mishra royal family of Ayodhya. According
to the Samguk Yusa, the princess had a dream about a heavenly fair handsome
king from a far away land who was awaiting heaven's anointed ride. After
Princess Heo had the dream, she asked her parents, the king and queen of
Ayodhya, for permission to set out and seek the foreign prince, which the king
and queen urged with the belief that god orchestrated the whole fate. That king
was no other than King Kim Suro of the Korean Gaya kingdom. 6,423 Korean women
married US military personnel as war brides during and immediately after the
Korean War. The average number of Korean women marrying US military personnel
each year was about 1,500 per year in the 1960s and 2,300 per year in the
1970s. Since the beginning of the Korean War in 1950, nearly 100,000 Korean
women have immigrated to the United States as the wives of American soldiers.
Based on extensive oral interviews and archival research, Beyond the Shadow of
the Camptowns tells the stories of these women, from their presumed association
with U.S. military camptowns and prostitution to their struggles within the
intercultural families they create in the United States. International
marriages now make up 13% of all marriages in South Korea. Most of these
marriages are unions between a Korean male and a foreign female usually from
China, Japan, Vietnam, the Philippines, United States, Mongolia, Thailand, and
Russia. On the other hand, Korean females have married foreign males from
Japan, China, the United States, Bangladesh, Pakistan, Philippines, and Nepal.
Between 1990 and 2005, there have been 159,942 Korean males and 80,813 Korean
females married to foreigners. South Korea is among the world's most ethnically
homogeneous nations. Koreans have traditionally valued an unmixed blood as the
most important feature of Korean identity. The term "Kosian", referring to
someone who has a Korean father and a non-Korean mother, is considered
offensive by some who prefer to identify themselves or their children as
Korean. Moreover, the Korean office of Amnesty International has claimed that
the word "Kosian" represents racial discrimination. Kosian children, like those
of other mixed-race backgrounds in Korea, often face discrimination. There are
an estimated 35,000 mixed-raced South Koreans, most of them half Caucasian,
according to the Pearl Buck Foundation. Discrimination is far worse against
those who have African American fathers. Malaysia and Singapore. In West
Malaysia and Singapore, the majority of inter-ethnic marriages are between
Chinese and Indians. The offspring of such marriages are informally known as
"Chindian", though the Malaysian government only classifies them by their
father's ethnicity. As the majority of these intermarriages usually involve an
Indian groom and Chinese bride, the majority of Chindians in Malaysia are
usually classified as "Indian" by the Malaysian government. As for the Malays,
who are predominantly Muslim, legal restrictions in Malaysia make it uncommon
for them to intermarry with either the Indians, who are predominantly Hindu, or
the Chinese, who are predominantly Buddhist and Taoist. Non-Muslims are
required to convert to Islam in order to marry Muslims. However, this has not
entirely stopped intermarriage between the Malays and the Chinese and Indians.
There are more Indian-Malay marriages than there are Chinese-Malay ones; this
has led to the emergence of a large Muslim Indian society that is most famously
known for their 24-hour coffee shops and active involvement in the textile
industry. The Muslim Chinese community, on the other hand, is small and has
only a negligible impact on the socio-economy and demography of the region. It
is common for Arabs in Singapore and Malaysia to take local Malay wives, due to
a common Islamic faith. The Chitty people, in Singapore and the Malacca state
of Malaysia, are a Tamil people with considerable Malay descent, which was due
to the first Tamil settlers taking local wives, since they did not bring along
any of their own women with them. According to government statistics, the
population of Singapore as of September 2007 was 4.68 million, of whom
multiracial people, including Chindians and Eurasians, formed 2.4%. In the East
Malaysian states of Sabah and Sarawak, there have been many incidents of
intermarriage between Chinese and native tribes such as the Murut and Dusun in
Sabah, and the Iban and Bisaya in Sarawak. This phenomenon has resulted in a
potpourri of cultures in both states where many people claiming to be of native
descent have some Chinese blood in them, and many Chinese have native blood in
them. The offspring of these mixed marriages are called 'Sino-(name of tribe)',
e.g. Sino-Dusun. Normally, if the father is Chinese, the offspring will adopt
Chinese culture and if the father is native then native culture will be
adopted, but this is not always the case. These Sino-natives are usually fluent
in Malay and English. A smaller number are able to speak Chinese dialects and
Mandarin, especially those who have received education in vernacular Chinese
schools. Burma. Burmese Muslims are the descendants of Bengalis, Indian
Muslims, Arabs, Persians, Turks, Pathans, Chinese Muslims and Malays who
settled and intermarried with the local Burmese population and other Burmese
ethnic groups such as the Rakhine, Shan, Karen, and Mon. The oldest Muslim
group in Burma (Myanmar) are the Rohingya people, who some believed are
descended from Bengalis who intermarried with the native females in the Rakhine
State after the 7th century, but this is just an theory. When Burma was ruled
by the British India administration, millions of Indians, mostly Muslim,
migrated there. The small population of mixed descendants of Indian males and
local Burmese females are called "Zerbadees", often in a pejorative sense
implying mixed race. The Panthays, a group of Chinese Muslims descended from
West Asians and Central Asians, migrated from China and also intermarried with
local Burmese females. In addition, Burma has an estimated 52,000 Anglo-Burmese
people, descended from British and Burmese people. Anglo-Burmese people
frequently intermarried with Anglo-Indian immigrants, who eventually
assimilated into the Anglo-Burmese community. Philippines. Historically,
admixture has been an ever present and pervading phenomenon in the Philippines.
The Philippines were originally settled by Australoid peoples called Negritos
(different from other australoid groups) which now form the country's
aboriginal community. Some Admixture may have occurred between this earlier
group and the mainstream Malayo-Polynesian population. A considerable number of
the population in the town of Cainta, Rizal, are descended from Indian soldiers
who mutinied against the British Indian Army when the British briefly occupied
the Philippines in 1762 to 1763. These Indian soldiers called Sepoy settled in
town and intermarried with native females. Cainta residents of Indian descent
are very visible today, particularly in Barrio Dayap near Brgy. Sto Niño.
There has been a Chinese presence in the Philippines since the 9th century.
However, large-scale migrations of Chinese to the Philippines only started
during the Spanish colonial era, when the world market was opened to the
Philippines. It is estimated that among Filipinos, 10%–20% have some Chinese
ancestry and 1.5% are "full-blooded" Chinese. According to the American
anthropologist Dr. H. Otley Beyer, the ancestry of Filipinos is 2% Arab. This
dates back to when Arab traders intermarried with the local Malay Filipina
female populations during the pre-Spanish history of the Philippines. Major
Arab migration to the Philippines coincided with the spread of Islam in the
region. Filipino-Muslim royal families from the Sultanate of Sulu and the
Sultanate of Maguindanao claim Arab descent even going as far as claiming
direct lineage from the Prophet Muhammad. Such intermarriage mostly took place
around the Mindanao island area, but the arrival of Spanish Conquistadors to
the Philippines abruptly halted the spread of Islam further north into the
Philippines. Intermarriage with Spanish people later became more prevalent
after the Philippines was colonized by the Spanish Empire. When the Spanish
colonized the Philippines, a significant portion of the Filipino population
mixed with the Spanish. When the United States took the Philippines from Spain
during the Spanish-American War, much intermixing of Americans, both white and
black, took place on the island of Luzon where the USA had a Naval Base and Air
Force Base even after the USA gave the Philippines independence after World War
II. First children and descendants of male Filipino population with Spanish
surnames who intermarried with white American female population may be
considered Spanish mestizos. The descendants of Filipinos and Europeans are
today known as mestizos, following the term used in other former Spanish
colonies. Much mixing with the Japanese also took place due to the war rapes of
Filipina women during World War II. Today there is an increasing number of
Japanese men marrying Filipina woman and fathering children by them whose
family remain behind in the Philippines and are financially supported by their
Japanese fathers who make regular visits to the Philippines. Today mixed-race
marriages have a mixed reaction in the Philippines, most urban centers like
Manila and Cebu are more willing to accept interracial marriages than rural
areas. Europe. Germany. During the tempestuous years following World War I, the
French Army occupied the Rhineland, utilising African soldiers amongst their
forces. Their children were known as "Rhineland Bastards". Beginning in 1933,
the mainstream Nazi anti-Semitism considered the Jews as being a group of
people bound by close, so-called genetic (blood) ties, to form a unit, which
one could not join or secede from. The influence of Jews had been declared to
have a detrimental impact on Germany, in order to justify the discriminations
and persecutions of Jews. To be spared from those, one had to prove one's
affiliation with the group of the "Aryan race", as conceived by the Nazis. It
was paradoxical that neither genetic tests nor allegedly racial outward
features in one's physiognomy determined one's affiliation, although the Nazis
talked a lot about physiognomy, but only the records of the religious
affiliations of one's grandparents decided it. However, while earlier the
grandparents had still been able to choose their religion, their grandchildren
in the Nazi era were compulsorily categorised as Jews, thus "non-Aryans", if
three or four grandparents had been enrolled as members of a Jewish
congregation, regardless of whether the persecuted themselves were Jews
according to the Halachah (roughly meaning: Jewish by birth from a Jewish
mother or by conversion), apostates, irreligionists or Christians. The
Nuremberg Laws of 1935 forbade persons "racially" regarded as so-called
"Aryans" and "non-Aryans" to marry; this included all marriages where at least
one partner was a German citizen. "Non-Aryans" comprised mostly Jewish Germans
and Gentile Germans of Jewish descent. However, Germans of extra-European and
especially of African descent and Germans regarded as belonging to the minority
group of Sinti and Roma were also considered as "non-Aryans". Eventually
children – whenever born – within a mixed marriage, as well as children
from extramarital mixed relationships born until 31 July 1936, were
discriminated against as Mischlinge. However, children later born to mixed
parents, not yet married as at the passing of the Nuremberg Laws, were to be
discriminated against as Geltungsjuden, regardless of whether the parents had
meanwhile married abroad or remained unmarried. Eventually children who were
enrolled in a Jewish congregation were also subject to discrimination as
Geltungsjuden. Geltungsjuden were subjected to varying degrees of forced labour
in 1940, partly ordered for all Jewish-classified spouses, either only for
Jewish-classified husbands or only exempting Jewish-classified wives taking
care of minor children. No documents indicate the exemption of a mixed marriage
and especially of its Jewish-classified spouse from some persecutions.
Systematic deportations of Jewish Germans and Gentile Germans of Jewish descent
started on 18 October 1941. German Jews and German Gentiles of Jewish descent
living in "mixed marriages" were in fact mostly spared from deportation. In the
event that a mixed marriage ended by the death of the so-called Aryan spouse or
the divorce of the Jewish-classified spouse, the Jewish-classified spouse
residing within Germany was usually deported soon after unless the couple still
had minor children not counted as Geltungsjuden. In March 1943 an attempt to
deport the Berlin-based Jews and Gentiles of Jewish descent, living in non-
privileged mixed marriages, failed due to public protest by their in-laws of
so-called "Aryan" kinship (see Rosenstraße protest). Also the Aryan-classified
husbands and Mischling-classified children (starting at the age of 16) from
mixed marriages were taken by the Organisation Todt for forced labour, starting
in autumn 1944. A last attempt, undertaken in February/March 1945, ended
because the extermination camps were already liberated. However, 2,600 from all
over the Reich were deported to Theresienstadt, of whom most survived the last
months until their liberation. With the defeat of Nazi Germany in 1945 the laws
banning so-called mixed marriages were lifted again. If couples who had already
lived together during the Nazi era had remained unmarried due to the legal
restrictions then got married after the war, their date of marriage was legally
retroactively backdated if they wished it to the date they formed a couple.
Even if one spouse was already dead, the marriage could be retroactively
recognised. In the West German Federal Republic of Germany 1,823 couples
applied for recognition, which was granted in 1,255 cases. It is estimated that
up to 7,000 postwar black German children with black GI fathers and white
German mothers were adopted by Americans. Hungary. The Avars, Asiatic nomads
who during the late 6th and 7th centuries had formed an extensive empire
largely inhabited by conquered Slavs, made the agricultural Slavs pay taxes,
and used their wives and daughters as concubines. The Hungarians are thought to
have originated in an ancient Finno-Ugric population that originally inhabited
the forested area between the Volga River and the Ural Mountains. At the time
of the Magyar migration in the 10th century, the present-day Hungary was
inhabited by Slavs, numbering about 200,000, who were either assimilated or
enslaved by the Magyars. During the Russian campaign in the 13th century, the
Mongols drove some 40,000 Cuman families, a nomadic tribe, west of the
Carpathian Mountains. The Iranian Jassic people came to Hungary together with
the Cumans after they were defeated by the Mongols. Over the centuries they
were fully assimilated into the Hungarian population. Rogerius, a monk who
survived the Mongol invasion of Hungary, pointed out not only the genocidal
element of the occupation, but also that the Mongols especially "found
pleasure" in humiliating women. Iberian Peninsula. In ancient history, the
Iberian Peninsula was frequently invaded by foreigners who intermarried with
the native population. One of the earliest foreign groups to arrive in the
region were the Indo-European Celts who intermarried with the pre-Indo-European
Iberians in prehistoric Iberia. They were later followed by the Semitic
Phoenicians and Carthaginians and the Indo-European Romans who intermarried
with the pre-Roman peoples of the Iberian Peninsula during Classical Antiquity.
They were in turn followed by the Germanic Visigoths, Suebi and Vandals and the
Iranic Sarmatians and Alans who also intermarried with the local population in
Hispania during late Antiquity. In the 6th century, the region was reconquered
by the Byzantine Empire (Eastern Roman Empire), when Byzantine Greeks also
settled there, before the region was lost again to the Visigothic Kingdom less
than a century later. The offspring of such marriages were known as "Muladi" or
"Muwallad", an Arabic term still used in the modern Arab world to refer to
people with Arab fathers and non-Arab mothers. Some sources consider this term
the origin for the Spanish word "Mulato". However, the Real Academia Española
does not endorse such etymology. In addition, many "Muladi" were also descended
from "Saqaliba" (Slavic) slaves taken from Eastern Europe via the Arab slave
trade. After the Reconquista, which was completed in 1492, most of the Moors
were forced to either flee to Morocco or convert to Christianity. The ones who
converted to Christianity were known as Moriscoes, and they were often
persecuted by the Spanish Inquisition as suspects of heresy on the basis of the
"Limpieza de sangre" ("Cleanliness of blood") doctrine, under which anti-
miscegenation laws were implemented in the Iberian Peninsula. Anyone whose
ancestors had miscegenated with the Moors or Jews were suspected of secretly
practicing Islam or Judaism, so were often particularly monitored by the
Inquisition. The claim to universal "hidalguía" (lowest nobility) of the
Basques was justified by erudites like Manuel de Larramendi (1690–1766)
because the Arab invasion had not reached the Basque territories, so it was
believed that Basques had maintained their original purity, while the rest of
Spain was suspect of miscegenation. In fact, the Arab invasion also reached the
Basque country and there had been a significant Jewish minority in Navarre, but
the hidalguía helped many Basques to official positions in the administration.
In December 2008, a genetic study of the current population of the Iberian
Peninsula, published in the "American Journal of Human Genetics", estimated
that about 10% have North African ancestors and 20% have Sephardi Jews as
ancestors. Since there is no direct link between genetic makeup and religious
affiliation, however, it is difficult to draw direct conclusions between their
findings and forced or voluntary conversion. Nevertheless, the Sephardic result
is in contradiction or not replicated in all the body of genetic studies done
in Iberia and has been later questioned by the authors themselves and by
Stephen Oppenheimer who estimates that much earlier migrations, 5000 to 10,000
years ago from the Eastern Mediterranean might also have accounted for the
Sephardic estimates: "They are really assuming that they are looking at his
migration of Jewish immigrants, but the same lineages could have been
introduced in the Neolithic". The rest of genetic studies done in Spain
estimate the Moorish contribution ranging from 2.5/3.4% to 7.7%. Italian
Peninsula. As was the case in other regions conquered by Muslims, it was
acceptable in Islamic marital law for a Muslim male to marry Christian and
Jewish females in southern Italy when under Islamic rule between the 8th and
11th centuries. In this case, most intermarriages were between Arab and Berber
males from North Africa and the local Greek, Roman and Italian females of
Sicily and southern Italy. Such intermarriages were particularly common in the
Emirate of Sicily, where one writer visiting the place in the 970s expressed
shock at how common it was in rural areas. After the Norman conquest of
southern Italy, all Muslim citizens (whether foreign, native or mixed) of the
Kingdom of Sicily were known as "Moors". After a brief period of Arab-Norman
culture had flourished under the reign of Roger II of Sicily, later rulers had
forced the Moors to either convert to Christianity or be expelled from the
kingdom. In Malta, Arabs and Italians from neighbouring Sicily and Calabria
intermarried with the local inhabitants, who were descended from Phoenicians,
Greeks, Romans and Vandals. The Maltese people are descended from such unions,
and the Maltese language is descended from Siculo-Arabic. At times, the Italian
city-states also played an active role in the Arab slave trade, where Moorish
and Italian traders occasionally exchanged slaves. During World War II,
France's Moroccan troops known as Goumiers committed war rapes in Italy after
the Battle of Monte Cassino and in Germany. In Italy, victims of the mass rape
committed after the Battle of Monte Cassino by Goumiers are known as
"Marocchinate". According to Italian sources, more than 7,000 Italian
civilians, including women and children, were raped by Goumiers. Russia. The
Metis Foundation estimates that there are about 40,000 mixed-race Russians.
Many Chinese men, even those who had left wives and children behind in China,
married local women in the 1920s as a result, especially those women who had
been widowed during the wars and upheavals of the previous decade. Their mixed
race children tended to be given Russian forenames; some retained their
fathers' Chinese surnames, while others took on Russian surnames, and a large
proportion also invented new surnames using their father's entire family name
and given name as the new surname. Southeastern and Eastern Europe. Vikings
explored and eventually settled in territories in Slavic-dominated areas of
Eastern Europe. By 950 AD these settlements were largely Slavicized through
intermarriage with the local population. Eastern Europe was also an important
source for the Arab slave trade at the time, when "Saqaliba" (Slavic) slaves
were taken to the Arab World, where the women and girls often served in harems,
some of whom married their Arab masters. When the Mongol Empire annexed much of
Eastern Europe in the 13th century, the Mongols also intermarried with the
local population and often engaged in war rape during the Mongol invasion of
Europe. In the 11th century, the Byzantine territory of Anatolia was conquered
by the Seljuq Turks, who came from Turkestan in Central Asia. Their Ottoman
Turkish descendants went on to annex the Balkans and much of Eastern Europe in
the 15th and 16th centuries. Due to Islamic marital law allowing a Muslim male
to marry Christian and Jewish females, it was common in the Ottoman Empire for
Turkish males to intermarry with European females. For example, various sultans
of the Ottoman Dynasty often had Greek ("Rûm"), Slavic ("Saqaliba"), Venetian,
Northcaucasian and French wives. Some of these European wives exerted great
influence upon the empire as "Valide Sultan" ("Mother-Sultan"), some famous
examples including Roxelana, a Slavic harem slave who later became Suleiman the
Magnificent's favourite wife, and Aimée du Buc de Rivéry, wife of Abdul Hamid
I and cousin of French Empress Josephine. Due to the common occurrence of such
intermarriages in the Ottoman Empire, they have had a significant impact on the
ethnic makeup of the modern Turkish population in Turkey, which now differs
from that of the Turkic population in Central Asia. In addition to
intermarriage, the large harems of Ottoman sultans often consisted almost
entirely of female concubines who were of Christian European origin. The degree
of miscegenation is very high in the former Soviet Union. Interethnic marriages
made up about 22% of all marriages in Moscow, according to the figures from
1995. The majority of such marriages consist among Russian, Ukrainians,
Byelorussians and other Slavic. Low levels of mixed ancestry are, in some areas
(especially urban), almost universal, and generally go entirely ignored and
unnoticed unless persons wish to identify themselves with ethnic minorities.
Highly visible divergence from the local ethnic majority is also treated
differently, depending on whether the individual identifies with the local
culture or not. In modern times, attitudes towards miscegenation in the former
Soviet Union vary greatly, depending on the race and gender of each partner.
For example, unions between Slavic males and Oriental (Asian) or Turkic,
Northcaucasian, Southcaucasian and Finno-Ugric women are almost universally
tolerated, and their children are generally identified and treated as members
of the local ethnic majority. However, unions between Slavic women and visibly
non-Slavic men may meet varying degrees of discrimination, from light to none
for Asian men (depending also on origin, whether they are immigrants or were
born in the Soviet Union, and where in the Soviet Union they were born), to
some hostility for Finno-Ugric, Turkic and Northcaucasian men (although much of
this is due to the assumption of their faith as Muslim) and Jews, and quite
high intolerance towards those who marry blacks or have children by them (young
African-Russians in Moscow are often scornfully called 'Children of the
Olympics', under the assumption that they were conceived by visiting tourists
during the 1980 Moscow Olympic Games). The situation is also highly affected by
self-identification, since many people of Asian or Turkic blood have
assimilated to the point where they identify themselves as Russian/Ukrainian/
etc. and are socially accepted as such. United Kingdom. Even though 80% of the
genetic characteristics of most indigenous Britons today have been passed down
from a few thousand Ice Age hunters and the genetic makeup of today's
indigenous population is much the same as it was 12,000 years ago, Britain has
a fairly long history of inter-ethnic marriage among the various European
populations that inhabited the island, including the Celtic, Roman, Anglo-Saxon
and Anglo-Norman peoples. Although it is debatable whether these can be
described as ethnic groups with distinct cultural identities. The Celts cannot
be described with a single ethnic identity and various tribal names were used
and a 'Celtic' culture was shared in Europe despite the variety of languages.
Norman and Vikings people rarely held onto an identity and allegiances were
more to leaders and family rather than an ethnic group, there is no evidence
the Vikings for example acted as an distinct ethnic group in Britain and so
called Scandinavian markers may have been in Britain thousands of years in the
Neolithic. Also there were Scandinavians and pre-Viking Scandinavian influence
amongst the Anglo-Saxons as shown in Beowulf and Sutton Hoo. There is no
evidence the Anglo-Saxons used that term or indeed forced their languages or
culture on local Britons, indeed there is no evidence the majority of local
Britons used the term Celt or even spoke a Celtic language, indeed a Germanic
language which evolved into English may have been spoke in large parts of
Britain as Oppenheimer suggests. The numbers of Vikings, Anglo-Saxons, Romans
may be widely exaggerated, Viking, Anglo-Saxons armies may have been small.
Intermarriage with non-European populations began in the late 15th century,
with the arrival of the Romani people, who have Indian origins. The Romani in
Britain intermarried with the local population and became known to the Romani
as the Romanichal. In India, the British East India Company and other European
soldiers intermarried with Indian women. The offspring of these mixed marriages
between the British and Indians were known as Anglo-Indians. Indian wives
sometimes accompanied their husbands back to Britain. The British East India
Company brought many South Asian lascars to Britain, where many settled down
with local white British wives, due to a lack of Asian women in Britain at the
time. Inter-ethnic relationships have become increasingly accepted over the
last several decades. As of 2001, 2% of all marriages in Britain are inter-
ethnic. Despite having a much lower non-white population (9%), mixed marriages
in the United Kingdom are as common as in the United States, although America
has many fewer specific definitions of race (four racial definitions as opposed
to the United Kingdom's 86). As of 2005, it is estimated that nearly half of
British-born African-Caribbean males, a third of British-born African-Caribbean
females, and a fifth of Indian and African males, have white partners. As of
2009, one in 10 children in the UK lives in a mixed-race or mixed-ethnicity
family (families headed by one white-British parents and one white parent not
of British origin are included in the figure) and two out of five Chinese women
have partners of a different race. One out of five Chinese men have partners of
a different race. According to the UK 2001 census, black British males were
around 50% more likely than black females to marry outside their race. British
Chinese women (30%) were twice as likely as their male counterparts (15%) to
marry someone from a different ethnic group. Middle East. A Stanford team found
the greatest diversity outside Africa among people living in the wide crescent
of land stretching from the eastern shore of the Mediterranean to northern
India. Not only was the region among the first colonized by the African
migrants, they theorize, but the large number of European and East Asian genes
among the population indicates that it has long been a human highway, with
large numbers of migrants from both directions conquering, trading and
generally reproducing along its entire length. The same team also found out
that the Bedouin nomads of the Middle East actually have some European and
South Asian blood. In ancient times a Celtic people known as Galatians settled
in what is present day Turkey and thus interbred with the people there. During
the empire of Alexander the Great, many Greek/Macedonian soldiers had inter-
ethnic relationships with women throughout the Middle East all the way to
northwestern India. Later, coastal North Africa and parts of the Middle East
were part of the Roman Empire and many Roman men were posted as soldiers there.
Many of them had inter-ethnic relationships with local Middle-Eastern women.
The Germanic people known as the Vandals also conquered parts of coastal North
Africa during the great migration period which led to opportunities of inter-
ethnic relationships between Germanic men and local North African women. Inter-
ethnic sexual slavery was common during the Arab slave trade throughout the
Middle Ages and early modern period, when women and girls captured from non-
Arab lands often ended up as sexual slaves in the harems of the Arab World.
Most of these slaves came from places such as Sub-Saharan Africa (mainly
"Zanj"), South Asia (Hindus), the North Caucasus (mainly Circassians), Central
Asia (mainly Tartars), and Central and Eastern Europe (mainly "Saqaliba"). The
Barbary pirates also captured 1,250,000 slaves from Western Europe and North
America between the 16th and 19th centuries. It was also common for Arab
conquerors, traders and explorers to marry local females in the lands they
conquered or traded with, in various parts of Africa, Asia (see Asia section)
and Europe (see Europe section). Inter-ethnic relationships were generally
accepted in Arabic society and formed a fairly common theme in medieval Arabic
literature and Persian literature. For example, the Persian poet Nizami, who
had himself married his Kipchak slave girl, wrote "The Seven Beauties" (1196).
Its frame story involves a Persian prince marrying seven foreign princesses,
including Byzantine, Chinese, Indian, Khwarezmian, Maghrebian, Slavic and
Tartar princesses. "Hadith Bayad wa Riyad", a 12th-century Arabic tale from Al-
Andalus, was a love story involving an Iberian girl and a Damascene man. The
"One Thousand and One Nights" tale of "The Man of Al-Yaman and His Six Slave-
Girls" involves a Yemeni man's relationship with foreign slave girls, four of
which are white, black, brown and yellow. Another "One Thousand and One Nights"
tale, "The Ebony Horse", involves the Prince of Persia, Qamar al-Aqmar,
rescuing his lover, the Princess of Sana'a, from the Byzantine Emperor who also
wishes to marry her. One study found that some Arabic-speaking
populations—Palestinians, Jordanians, Syrians, Iraqis, and Bedouins—have
what appears to be substantial mtDNA gene flow from sub-Saharan Africa,
amounting to 10–15% of lineages within the past three millennia. In the case
of Yemenites, the average is higher at 35%. Of particular historic interest
might be the finding that with almost no exceptions the sub-Saharan gene flow
was exclusively female, at least in part as a result of the Arab slave trade.
Between the 11th and 13th centuries, medieval Western Asia was repeatedly
invaded by Europeans (Crusades) and Mongols (Mongol Empire) which led to
opportunities for inter-ethnic relationships between European, Mongol and
Central Asian soldiers with local Arab women. As well as many Europeans, there
were North Africans, South Asians and Central Asians who worked as mercenaries
and traders in the area, most of them converting to Islam and taking local
women as wives. From 839 AD, Viking Varangian mercenaries who were in the
service of the Byzantine Empire, notably Harald Sigurdsson, campaigned in North
Africa, Jerusalem and other places in the Middle East during the Byzantine-Arab
Wars, and interbred with the local population as spoils of warfare or through
eventual settling with many Scandinavian and Slavic Viking men taking Arab or
Anatolian women as wives. There is archaeological evidence these Vikings had
established contact with the city of Baghdad, at the time the center of the
Islamic Empire, and connected with the populace there. A genetic
anthropological study known as The Genographic Project has found what is
believed to be faint genetic traces left by medieval Crusaders in the Middle
East. The team has uncovered a specific DNA signature in Lebanon that is
probably linked to the Christian crusades of the 7th and 8th centuries. It is
believed the Crusaders were welcomed by Christian Arabs long suffering under
Islamic rule and many offered their daughters in marriage to the European
Crusaders who originated from European kingdoms mostly France, England and the
Holy Roman Empire. In the Ottoman Empire, in addition to the Ottoman elites
often taking large numbers of European wives and concubines (see Southeastern
and Eastern Europe section), there were also opportunities for the reverse,
when the empire recruited young Christian boys (mostly Europeans in addition to
Christian Arabs) to become the elite troop of the Turkish Empire, the
Janissaries. These Janissaries were stationed throughout the Turkish empire
including the Middle-East and North Africa leading to inter-ethnic
relationships between European men and women from the Middle East and North
Africa. Further inter-ethnic marriages took place during the European colonial
age when Great Britain, France and Italy ruled various parts of this region.
The majority of these marriages were between European men and local Arab and
Berber women. The concubines of the Ottoman Sultan consisted chiefly of
purchased slaves. Because Islamic law forbade Muslims to enslave fellow
Muslims, the Sultan's concubines were generally of Christian origin. The mother
of a Sultan, though technically a slave, received the extremely powerful title
of "Valide Sultan", and at times became effective ruler of the Empire (see
Sultanate of women). One notable example was Kösem Sultan, daughter of a Greek
Christian priest, who dominated the Ottoman Empire during the early decades of
the 17th century. Another notable example was Roxelana, the favourite wife of
Suleiman the Magnificent. Inter-ethnic sexual slavery still continues today in
a smaller form in the Arab states of the Persian Gulf, where women and children
are trafficked from the post-Soviet states, Eastern Europe, Far East, Africa,
South Asia and other parts of the Middle East. Israel. The modern State of
Israel was established as a nation-state for the Jewish people. The Jewish
identity contains elements of religion (Judaism), ethnicity, and a sense of a
common lineage. In this sense, Jewish miscegenation could be viewed on two
levels; one based on belonging to the Jewish ethnic group or Jewish people, and
the other based on the race of a given Jew. Jewish miscegenation based on
Jewishness (belonging to the Jewish ethnic group or Jewish people) would be
defined on whether one parent is not Jewish, independent of whether either the
Jewish or non-Jewish parent are of the same or different races. Racial
miscegenation would be defined as the union between a Jew of a given race with
a person of a different race, be the other person a Jew or not. Two Jewish
people may still be considered "interracial" if those two Jews are of different
races, although it would not be considered exogamous in the context of Jewish
ethnicity, as both are still Jews. In Israel, all marriages must be approved by
religious celebrants, while civil marriages are legally recognized if performed
abroad. Rules governing marriage are based on strict religious guidelines of
each religion. By Israeli law, authority over all issues related to Judaism in
Israel, including marriage, falls under the Orthodox Chief Rabbinate of Israel.
Orthodox Judaism is the only form of Judaism recognized by the state, and
marriages performed in Israel by non-Orthodox Rabbis are not recognized. The
Rabbinate prohibits marriage in Israel of halakhic Jews (i.e. people born to a
Jewish mother or Jewish by conversion), whether they are Orthodox Jews or not,
to partners who are non-Jewish or who are of Jewish descent that runs through
the paternal line (i.e. not Jewish according to halakha). As a result, in the
state of Israel, people of differing religious traditions cannot legally marry
someone in another religion and multi-faith couples must leave the country to
get married, most often to Central and Northern Greece. The only other option
in Israel for the marriage of a halakhic Jew (Orthodox or not) to a non-Jew, or
for that matter, a Christian to a non-Christian or Muslim to a non-Muslim, is
for one partner to formally convert to the other's religion, be it to Judaism
(Orthodox only), a Christian denomination (such as Eastern Orthodox or
Maronite) or a denomination of Islam (such as Sunni or Shia). As for persons
with patrilineal Jewish descent (i.e. not recognized as Jewish according to
halakha) who wish to marry a halakhic Jew (i.e. born to a Jewish mother or is
Jewish by Orthodox conversion) who is Orthodox or otherwise, is also required
to formally convert to Judaism (Orthodox only) or they cannot legally marry.
According to a Haaretz article "Justice Ministry drafts civil marriage law for
‘refuseniks’" 300,000 people, or 150,000 couples, are affected by marriage
restrictions based on the partners' disparate religious traditions or non-
halakhic Jewish status. Israeli law concerns itself with miscegenation based on
Jewish ethnicity, not miscegenation based on race. Therefore, there are no
restrictions on interracial marriages between Jews of different Jewish ethnic
divisions, or between other co-religionists of different races, although social
stigma may still exist. Many Israeli Jews oppose mixed relationships between
Jewish women and Arab men. A 2007 opinion survey found that more than half of
Israeli Jews believed intermarriage is equivalent to "national treason". A
group of 35 Jewish men, known as "Fire for Judaism", in Pisgat Ze'ev have
started patrolling the town in an effort to stop Jewish women from dating Arab
men. The municipality of Petah Tikva has also announced an initiative to
prevent interracial relationships, providing a telephone hotline for friends
and family to "inform" on Jewish girls who date Arab men as well as
psychologists to provide counselling. The town of Kiryat Gat launched a school
programme in schools to warn Jewish girls against dating local Bedouin men. In
February 2010 Maariv has reported that the Tel Aviv municipality has instituted
an official, government-sponsored "counselling program" to discourage Jewish
girls from dating and marrying Arab boys. "The Times" has also reported on a
vigilante parents’ group policing the Jerusalem neighborhood of Pisgat Ze'ev
to intimidate and discourage local Arab-Jewish couples. The Jewish anti-
missionary group Yad L'achim has also performed paramilitary "rescue
operations" of Jewish women from non-Jewish husbands and celebrates the
"rescued women" on their website. However, according to Halakha, descendants
from a Jewish mother are always defined to be Jewish. Oceania. Australia. Most
of the early Chinese-Australia population consisted of Cantonese migrants from
Guangzhou and Taishan, including some from Fujian, who came during the gold
rush period of the 1850s. Marriage records show that between the 1850s and the
start of the 20th century, there were about 2000 legal marriages between white
women and Chinese men in Australia’s eastern colonies, probably with similar
numbers involved in de facto relationships of various kinds (e.g.,
cohabitation, sexual intimacy, etc.). The number of such marriages declined, as
stories of viciousness and the seduction of white women grew, mixed with
opposition to intermarriage. Rallies against Chinese men marrying white women
became widespread, with many Australian men reviewing Chinese men marrying and
cohabiting with white women as an threat to the white race. In late 1878 there
were 181 marriages between European women and Chinese men, and 171 couples
cohabiting without matrimony, resulting in 586 Eurasian children. Such numbers
of intermarriage continued until the 1880s and the 1930s. Analysis of the 2006
census reveals that 52% of Aboriginal men and 55% of Aboriginal women were
married to non-Aboriginal Australians. New Zealand. Miscegenation is a
politically charged topic in New Zealand, although mixed marriages are very
common and almost universally accepted. People who identify as Māori typically
have ancestors ('tīpuna') from at least two distinct ethnicities. Historically
this has leant itself to the majority belief that "real" Māori were gradually
disappearing from New Zealand and "one people" were forming. This view held
sway in New Zealand until the late 1960s and 70s, when a revival and re-
establishment of Māori culture and tradition coincided with a rejection of the
majority opinion. The belief that Māori were disappearing was partially
founded on the reality of high and ongoing rates of intermarriage between
Europeans and Māori before and since colonisation. During the revival of
Māori culture and tradition this belief began to be challenged by redefining
"Māori" as an ethnic identity as opposed to a racial category. As a result a
person may have one European/Asian/Pacific parent and one Māori parent, but be
considered no less "authentically Māori" than a descendent of two Māori. Two-
thirds of Māori births, half of Pacific births, and a third of white and Asian
births belonged to more than one ethnic group. Portuguese colonies. According
to Gilberto Freyre, a Brazilian sociologist, miscegenation was commonplace in
the Portuguese colonies, and was even supported by the court as a way to boost
low populations and guarantee a successful and cohesive settlement. Thus,
settlers often released African slaves to become their wives. The children were
guaranteed full Portuguese citizenship, provided the parents were married. Some
former Portuguese colonies have large mixed-race populations, for instance,
Brazil, Cape Verde, Mozambique, Timor Leste, Macau and São Tomé and
Príncipe. In the case of Brazil, the influential "Indianist" novels of José
de Alencar (O Guarany, Iracema, and Ubirajara) perhaps went farther than in the
other colonies, advocating miscegenation in order to create a truly Brazilian
race. Mixed marriages between Portuguese and locals in former colonies were
very common in all Portuguese colonies. Miscegenation was still common in
Africa until the independence of the former Portuguese colonies in the mid-
1970s. Demographics of ethnoracial admixture. U.S.. According to the U.S.
Census, in 2000 there were 504,119 Asian-white marriages, 287,576 black-white
marriages, and 31,271 Asian-black marriages. The black-white marriages
increased from 65,000 in 1970 to 558,000 in 2010, according to Census Bureau
figures. In the United States, rates of interracial cohabitation are
significantly higher than those of marriage. Although only 7% of married
African American men have Caucasian American wives, 13% of cohabitating African
American men have Caucasian American partners. 25% of married Asian American
women have Caucasian spouses, but 45% of cohabitating Asian American women are
with Caucasian American men. Of cohabiting Asian men, slightly over 37% of
Asian men have white female partners over 10% married White American women.
Asian American women and Asian American men who live with a white partner, 40
and 27 percent, respectively (Le, 2006b).In 2008, of new marriages including an
Asian man, 80% were to an Asian spouse and 14% to a White spouse; of new
marriages involving an Asian woman, 61% were to an Asian spouse and 31% to a
White spouse. > Almost 30% of Asians and Latinos outmarry, with 86.8 and 90% of
these, respectively, being to a white person. According to Karyn Langhorne
Folan, "...although the most recent census available reported that 70% of
African American women are single, African American women have the greatest
resistance to marrying 'out' of the race." One study on college students noted
that, while 90% of the 80 black men reported experiences in interracial dating,
only 12% of the 140 white men reported such experiences. The massive sexual
survey revealed that 19% of black males had engaged in sexual activity with
white women. A Gallup poll on interracial dating in June 2006 found 75% of
Americans approving of a white man dating a black woman, and 71% approving of a
black man dating a white woman. Among people between the ages of 18 and 29, the
poll found that 95% approved of blacks and whites dating, and about 60% said
they had dated someone of a different race. 69% of Hispanics, 52% of blacks,
and 45% of whites said they have dated someone of another race or ethnic group.
In 1980, just 17% of all respondents said they had dated someone from a
different racial background. However, according to a study from the University
of California at Berkely, using data from over 1 million profiles of singles
from online dating websites, whites were far more reluctant to date outside
their race than non-whites. The study found that over 80% of whites, including
whites who stated no racial preference, contacted other whites, whereas about
3% of whites contacted blacks, a result that held for younger and older
participants. Only 5% of whites responded to inquiries from blacks. Black
participants were ten times more likely to contact whites than whites were to
contact blacks, however black participants sent inquiries to other blacks more
often than otherwise. Interracial marriage is still relatively uncommon,
especially among whites. In 2010, 15% of new marriages were interracial, and of
those only 9% of Whites married outside of their race. Of the 275,000 new
interracial marriages in 2010, 43% were white-Hispanic, 14.4% were white-Asian,
11.9% were white-black and the rest were other combinations. Black-white
marriages are the least common interracial coupling. However, interracial
marriage has become more common over the past decades due to increasing racial
diversity, and liberalizing attitudes toward the practice. According to the
2010 Census, the number of interracial marriages in the U.S. is up 20% since
2000, to around 4.5 million. "A record 14.6% of all new marriages in the United
States in 2008 were between spouses of a different race or ethnicity from one
another. ... Rates more than doubled among whites and nearly tripled among
blacks between 1980 and 2008. But for both Hispanics and Asians, rates were
nearly identical in 2008 and 1980.", according to a Pew Research Center
analysis of demographic data from the U.S. Census Bureau. According to studies
by Jenifer L. Bratter and Rosalind B. King made publicly available on the
Education Resources Information Center, White female-Black male and White
female-Asian male marriages are more prone to divorce than White-White
pairings. Conversely, unions between White males and non-White females (and
between Hispanics and non-Hispanic persons) have similar or lower risks of
divorce than White-White marriages, unions between white male-black female last
longer than white-white pairings or white-Asian pairings. Brazil. Multiracial
Brazilians make up 42.6% of Brazil's population, 79.782 million people, and
they live in all regions of Brazil. Multiracial Brazilians are mainly people of
mixed European, African, East Asian (mostly Japanese) and Amerindian ancestry.
Interracial marriages comprised 22.6% of all marriages in 2000. 15.7% of
blacks, 24.4% of whites and 27.6% of "Pardos" (mixed-race/brown) married
someone whose race was different from their own. Genetic studies of racial
admixture. Miscegenation between two populations reduces the genetic distance
between the populations. During the Age of Discovery which began in the early
15th century, European explorers sailed all across the globe reaching all the
major continents. In the process they came into contact with many populations
that had been isolated for thousands of years. The Tasmanian aboriginals were
one of the most isolated groups on the planet. They were driven to extinction
by European explorers, however a number of their descendants survive today as a
result of admixture with Europeans. This is an example of how modern migrations
have begun to reduce the genetic divergence of the human race. The demographic
composition of the old world has not changed significantly since the age of
discovery. However, the new world demographics were radically changed within a
short time following the voyage of Columbus. The colonization of Americas
brought Native Americans into contact with the distant populations of Europe,
Africa and Asia. As a result many countries in the Americas have significant
and complex multiracial populations. Furthermore many who identify themselves
by only one race still have multiracial ancestry. Admixture in the United
States. Some claim the vast majority of African-Americans possess varying
degrees of European admixture (the average Black American is 20% European)
although studies suggest the Native American admixture in Black Americans is
highly exaggerated; some estimates put average African-American possession of
European admixture at 25% with figures as high as 50% in the Northeast and less
than 10% in the south. A recent study by Mark D. Shriver of a European-American
sample found that the average admixture in the white population is 0.7% African
and 3.2% Native American. However, 70% of the sample had no African admixture.
The other 30% had African admixture ranging from 2% to 20% with an average of
2.3%. By extrapolating these figures to the whole population some scholars
suggest that up to 74 million European-Americans may have African admixture in
the same range (2–20%). Dr Mark Shriver, the team leader of the study, found
that he had 11% West African ancestry though he identifies as white. Studies
based on skin reflectance have shown the color line in the US applied selective
pressure on genes that code for skin color but did not apply any selective
pressure on other invisible African genes. Since there are an estimated 6
genetic loci involved in skin color determination it is possible for someone to
have 15–20% African admixture and not possess any of alleles that code for
dark skin. This is the basis of the passing phenomenon. Thus African admixture
amongst white Americans can increase without any significant change in skin
tone. Conversely amongst African-Americans, an amount of African Admixture is
directly correlated with darker skin since no selective pressure is applied; as
a result, African-Americans may have a much wider range of African admixture
(>0–100%), whereas European-Americans have a lower range (2–20%). A small
overlap exists so that it is possible that someone who identifies himself as
white may have more African admixture than a person who identifies himself as
black. A statistical analysis done in 1958 using historical census data and
historical data on immigration and birth rates, concluded that 21% of the white
population had black ancestors. The growth in the white population could not be
attributed to births in the white population and immigration from Europe alone,
but had received significant contribution from the African American population
as well. In the United States intermarriage among Filipinos with other races is
common. They have the largest number of interracial marriages among Asian
immigrant groups, as documented in California. It is also noted that 21.8% of
Filipino Americans are of mixed blood, second among Asian Americans, and is the
fastest growing. Admixture in Latin America. Background. Prior to the European
conquest of the Americas the demographics of Latin America was naturally 100%
American Indian. Today those who identify themselves as Native Americans are
small minorities in many countries. For example the CIA lists Argentina's
native population at 0.9%, Brazil's at 0.4%, and Uruguay's at 0%. However, the
range varies widely from country to country in Latin America with some
countries having significantly larger Amerindian minorities. According to
official statistics —as reported by the National Commission for the
Development of Indigenous Peoples or CDI— Amerindians make up 10-14% of the
population of Mexico. The early conquest of Latin America was primarily carried
out by male soldiers and sailors from Spain and Portugal. Since they carried
very few European women on their journeys the new settlers married and fathered
children with Amerindian women and also with women imported from Africa. This
process of miscegenation was even encouraged by the Spanish monarchy and it led
to the system of stratification known as the Casta. This system had Europeans
(Spaniards and Portuguese) at the top of the hierarchy followed by those of
mixed race. Unmixed Blacks and Native Americans were at the bottom. A
philosophy of whitening emerged in which Amerindian and African culture was
stigmatized in favor of European values. Many Amerindian languages were lost as
mixed race offspring adopted Spanish and Portuguese as their first languages.
Only towards the end of the 19th century and beginning of the 20th century did
large numbers of Europeans begin to migrate to South America and consequently
altering its demographics. In addition many Africans were shipped to regions
all over the Americas and were present in many of the early voyages of the
conquistadors. Brazil has the largest population of African descendants outside
Africa. Other countries such as Jamaica, Cuba, Puerto Rico, Dominican Republic,
Haiti, Venezuela, Colombia, and Ecuador still have sizeable populations
identified as Black. However countries such as Argentina and Chile do not have
a visible African presence today. Census information from the early 19th
century shows that people categorized as Black made up to 30% of the
population, or around 400,000 people. Though almost completely absent today,
their contribution to Argentine culture is significant include the tango, the
milonga and the zamba, words of Bantu origin. The ideology of whitening
encouraged non-whites to seek white or lighter skinned partners. This dilution
of non-white admixture would be beneficial to their offspring as they would
face less stigmatization and find it easier to assimilate into mainstream
society. After successive generations of European gene flow, non-white
admixture levels would drop below levels at which skin color or physical
appearance is not affected thus allowing individuals to identify as white. In
many regions, the native and black populations were simply overwhelmed by a
succession of waves of European immigration. Historians and scientists are thus
interested in tracing the fate of Native Americans and Africans from the past
to the future. The questions remain about what proportion of these populations
simply died out and what proportion still has descendants alive today including
those who do not racially identify themselves as their ancestors would have.
Admixture testing has thus become a useful objective tool in shedding light on
the demographic history of Latin America. Recent studies. Unlike in the United
States, there were no anti-miscegenation policies in Latin America. Though
still a racially stratified society there were no significant barriers to gene
flow between the three populations. As a result admixture profiles are a
reflection of the colonial populations of Africans, Europeans and Amerindians.
The pattern is also sex biased in that the African and Amerindian maternal
lines are found in significantly higher proportions than African or Amerindian
Y chromosomal lines. This is an indication that the primary mating pattern was
that of European males with Amerindian or African females. According to the
study more than half the white populations of the Latin American countries
studied have some degree of either native American or African admixture (MtDNA
or Y Chromosome). In countries such as Chile and Colombia almost the entire
white population was shown to have some non-white admixture Frank Moya Pons, a
Dominican historian documented that Spanish colonists intermarried with Taíno
women, and, over time, these mestizo descendants intermarried with Africans,
creating a tri-racial Creole culture. 1514 census records reveal that 40% of
Spanish men in the colony of Santo Domingo had Taíno wives. A recent study
conducted in Puerto Rico suggests that over 61% of the population possess
Amerindian mtDNA. Admixture in the Philippines. Historically, admixture has
been an ever present and pervading phenomenon in the Philippines. The
Philippines was originally settled by Australoid peoples called Negritos which
now form the country's aboriginal community. Admixture occurred between this
earlier group and the mainstream Malayo-Polynesian population. There has been
Indian migration to and influence in the Philippines since the precolonial era.
About 25% of the words in the Tagalog language are Sanskrit terms and about 5%
of the country's population possess Indian ancestry from antiquity. There has
been a Chinese presence in the Philippines since the 9th century. However,
large-scale migrations of Chinese to the Philippines only started during the
Spanish colonial era, when the world market was opened to the Philippines. It
is estimated that among Filipinos, 10%–20% have some Chinese ancestry and
1.5% are "full-blooded" Chinese. According to the American anthropologist Dr.
H. Otley Beyer, the ancestry of Filipinos is 2% Arab. This dates back to when
Arab traders intermarried with the local Malay Filipina female populations
during the pre-Spanish history of the Philippines. A recent genetic study by
Stanford University indicates that at least 3.6% of the population are European
or of part European descent from both Spanish and United States colonization.
Admixture among the Romani people. Genetic evidence has shown that the Romani
people ("Gypsies") originated from the Indian subcontinent and mixed with the
local populations in Central Asia, the Middle East, and Europe. In the 1990s,
it was discovered that Romani populations carried large frequencies of
particular Y chromosomes (inherited paternally) that otherwise exist only in
populations from South Asia, in addition to fairly significant frequencies of
particular mitochondrial DNA (inherited maternally) that is rare outside South
Asia. 47.3% of Romani males carry Y chromosomes of haplogroup H-M82 which is
rare outside of the Indian subcontinent. Mitochondrial haplogroup M, most
common in Indian subjects and rare outside Southern Asia, accounts for nearly
30% of Romani people. A more detailed study of Polish Roma shows this to be of
the M5 lineage, which is specific to India. Moreover, a form of the inherited
disorder congenital myasthenia is found in Romani subjects. This form of the
disorder, caused by the 1267delG mutation, is otherwise only known in subjects
of Indian ancestry. This is considered to be the best evidence of the Indian
ancestry of the Romanies. A study from 2001 by Gresham et al. suggests "a
limited number of related founders, compatible with a small group of migrants
splitting from a distinct caste or tribal group". Also the study pointed out
that "genetic drift and different levels and sources of admixture, appear to
have played a role in the subsequent differentiation of populations". The same
study found that "a single lineage ... found across Romani populations,
accounts for almost one-third of Romani males. A similar preservation of a
highly resolved male lineage has been reported elsewhere only for Jewish
priests". See also the Cohen Modal Haplotype. A 2004 study by Morar et al.
concluded that the Romani are "a founder population of common origins that has
subsequently split into multiple socially divergent and geographically
dispersed Gypsy groups". The same study revealed that this population "was
founded approximately 32–40 generations ago, with secondary and tertiary
founder events occurring approximately 16–25 generations ago".
