Missing market A missing market is a situation in microeconomics where a
competitive market allowing the exchange of a commodity would be Pareto-
efficient, but no such market exists. Examples. A classic example of a missing
market is the case of an externality like pollution, where decision makers are
not responsible for some of the consequences of their actions. When a factory
discharges polluted water into a river, that pollution can hurt people who fish
in or get their drinking water from the river downstream, but the factory owner
may have no incentive to consider those consequences. Coordination failure can
also prevent market formation. Again considering the pollution example,
downstream residents might seek to be paid by the factory owner who pollute
their water, but because of the free rider problem it may be difficult
coordinate. Another barrier to pollution markets could be technology. If the
river has several factories along its banks, it may be difficult or impossible
to monitor which factory is responsible for downstream pollution. High
transaction costs might also deter market formation. It may be the case that
both sides could benefit from an exchange of goods, but that setting up such an
exchange is prohibitively expensive. Markets can also be missing if there is a
failure of trust or information. In non zero-sum interactions, it is possible
that the Nash Equilibrium for individuals acting independently will be sub-
optimal, in that both parties could benefit from cooperating, but on their own
will choose not to. An example could be a shortage in footwear, where one
person would like to open a factory to make shoes, and the other would like to
produce socks, but because they are complementary commodities, neither has
incentive to start producing unless he knows that the other will do the same
(see also: prisoner's dilemma). The same applies to alternative automotive
fuels: few filling station owners will be interested in offering the fuel until
alternate-fuel cars are on the road, but people will not buy alternate-fuel
cars until filling stations exist to service them. Solutions. In many cases of
missing markets, it may be possible for the government or another actor to
create circumstances that make market exchange possible. In the case of
pollution, one popular solution is for the government to assign property rights
in order to allow Coase Bargaining. In cases of information failure, futures
markets can help to signal willingness to cooperate. An ownership solution is
for one party to integrate into both activities, thereby internalizing the
benefits, or to use the surplus generated on one side of the market to
subsidize transactions on the other (see two sided markets).
