Mobutism Mobutism also called Mobutuism was an official party ideology of the
Popular Movement of the Revolution ("Mouvement Populaire de la Revolution",
MPR) as well as the official state ideology in Zaire (now the Democratic
Republic of the Congo) during the latter half of the 20th century. Mobutism
encompassed and glorified the thoughts, visions, and policies of Zairian
president and self-proclaimed "Father of the Nation", Mobutu Sese Seko. The
ideology included such major Mobutu initiatives as "Zairianization". The
Popular Movement of the Revolution (MPR) was entrenched as the single legal
political party in a single party state in Zaire. Originally Mobutu designed
the constitution of Zaire to have a figurehead opposition party but later
claimed that the constitution only recommended but did not demand this and thus
a single-party state was created and all other political parties were banned
afterwards in 1966. The ideology laid down in the Manifesto of N'sele,
incorporated "nationalism," "revolution," and "authenticity." Revolution was
described as a "truly national revolution, essentially pragmatic," which called
for "the repudiation of both capitalism and communism", favoured "national
revolution". The Manifesto of N'sele also laid out the intentions of the
government which included expansion of the national government's authority, a
program committed to upgrading labour standards, having the country gain
economic independence, and the creation of an "authentic nationalism" in Zaire.
Mobutu led the MPR and Zaire as a dictator, and denounced the idea of multiple
leaders and political parties in the country saying: "In our African tradition
there are never two chiefs….That is why we Congolese, in the desire to
conform to the traditions of our continent, have resolved to group all the
energies of the citizens of our country under the banner of a single national
party." Mobutu and the MPR were presented in propaganda as being attributed to
the divine and sought to replace Christianity in Zaire with a religious
devotion to Mobutu and the MPR with interior minister Engulu Baanga Mpongo once
saying to supporters of the MPR: "God has sent a great prophet, our prestigious
Guide Mobutu. This prophet is our liberator, our Messiah. Our Church is the
MPR. Its chief is Mobutu. We respect him like one respects a Pope. Our gospel
is Mobutuism. That is why the crucifixes must be replaced by the image of our
Messiah". Mobutu and the MPR pursued a national cultural revival program in
Zaire called "Authenticité" beginning in 1967 which sought to purge colonial
European culture from Zaire and restore local culture, such as by forbidding
Christian names and culture while promoting local African names and culture as
well as forbidding western suits and creating a state-authorized uniform called
the "abacost". The ideology survives today in such organizations as Nzanga
Mobutu's Union of Mobutuist Democrats.
