Modern liberalism in the United States Modern American liberalism includes
Theodore Roosevelt's New Nationalism, Woodrow Wilson's New Freedom, Franklin D.
Roosevelt's New Deal, John F. Kennedy's New Frontier, and Lyndon B. Johnson's
Great Society. It combines social liberalism with support for social justice
and a mixed economy. American liberal causes include voting rights for African
Americans, abortion rights for women, gay rights and government entitlements
such as education and health care. Modern liberalism stands in opposition to
Conservatism in the United States on most issues, but its relationship to
progressivism is debated. Keynesian economic theory has played a central role
in the economic philosophy of modern American liberals. The argument has been
that national prosperity requires government management of the macroeconomy, to
keep unemployment low, inflation in check, and growth high. Modern American
liberals value institutions that defend against economic inequality., "The
Conscience of a Liberal" (2007) p.¬ 267, "I believe in a relatively equal
society, supported by institutions that limit extremes of wealth and poverty. I
believe in democracy, civil liberties, and the rule of law. That makes me a
liberal, and I'm proud of it." They point to the widespread prosperity enjoyed
under a mixed economy in the years since World War II. They believe liberty
exists when access to necessities like health care and economic opportunity are
available to all, and they champion the protection of the environment. Modern
American liberalism is typically associated with the Democratic Party. How
voters identify themselves has been fairly stable over the last two decades. As
of August 2011, 19% of American voters identify themselves as liberals, 38% as
moderates and 41% as conservatives. In 1992, 18% identified as liberal, 40% as
moderates and 35% as conservative. 21st century issues. In early 21st century
political discourse in the United States, liberalism has come to include
support for reproductive rights for women, including abortion, affirmative
action for minority groups historically discriminated against, multilateralism
and support for international institutions, support for individual rights over
corporate interests, support for universal health care for Americans (with a
"single payer" option), and opposition to tax cuts for the rich. American
versus European use of the term "liberalism". Today the word "liberalism" is
used differently in different countries. One of the greatest contrasts is
between the usage in the United States and usage in Continental Europe.
According to Arthur Schlesinger, Jr. (writing in 1956), "Liberalism in the
American usage has little in common with the word as used in the politics of
any European country, save possibly Britain." In continental Europe, liberalism
usually means what is sometimes called classical liberalism, a commitment to
limited government and laissez-faire economics, and more closely corresponds to
the American definition of libertarianism‚Äîitself a term which in Europe is
instead often applied to left-libertarianism. However this is not consistently
the case, as with the: Liberal Democrats (United Kingdom) - especially the
Beveridge Group faction, Liberal People's Party (Sweden), Danish Social Liberal
Party, and the Democratic Movement (France), for example. Some nominally
liberal parties (e.g. VVD in The Netherlands) are actually conservative right
wing "law and order" parties . Demographics of American liberals. Self-
identified liberals are the smallest ideological bloc in the US. They make up
about 20% of the American population, with roughly 6% identifying as very
liberal. Over the last two decades, the proportion of both liberals and
conservatives have increased, while those self-identifying as moderates have
decreased. According to surveys by the New York Times and CBS News, between 18%
and 27% of American adults identify as liberal, versus moderate or
conservative. In recent presidential elections, exit polls show that roughly
20% of the electorate self-identified as "liberal," and, the vast majority of
liberals voted in favor of the Democrats. A Pew Research Center study found
that liberals were the most educated ideological demographic and were tied with
the conservative sub-group, the "Enterprisers", for the most affluent group. Of
those who identified as liberal, 49% were college graduates and 41% had
household incomes exceeding $75,000, compared to 27% and 28% as the national
average, respectively. Liberalism has become the dominant political ideology in
academia, with 44-62% identifying as liberal, depending on the exact wording of
the survey. This compares with 40-46% liberal identification in surveys from
1969-1984. The social sciences and humanities were most liberal, whereas
business and engineering departments were the least liberal, though even in the
business departments, liberals outnumbered conservatives by two to one. This
feeds the common question whether liberals, on average, are more educated than
their political counterparts‚Äì‚Äìconservatives. Two Zogby surveys from 2008
and 2010 indeed affirm that self-identified liberals tend to go to college more
than self-identified conservatives. Polls have found that young Americans are
considerably more liberal than the general population. As of 2009, 30% of the
18-29 cohort was liberal. In 2011, this had changed to 28%, with moderates
picking up the two percent. History of modern liberalism in the United States.
Scholar of liberalism Arthur Schlesinger Jr., writing in 1956, said that
liberalism in the United States includes both a "laissez-faire" form and a
"government intervention" form. He holds that liberalism in the United States
is aimed toward achieving "equality of opportunity for all" but it is the means
of achieving this that changes depending on the circumstances. He says that the
"process of redefining liberalism in terms of the social needs of the 20th
century was conducted by Theodore Roosevelt and his New Nationalism, Woodrow
Wilson and his New Freedom, and Franklin D. Roosevelt and his New Deal. Out of
these three reform periods there emerged the conception of a social welfare
state, in which the national government had the express obligation to maintain
high levels of employment in the economy, to supervise standards of life and
labor, to regulate the methods of business competition, and to establish
comprehensive patterns of social security." Some make the distinction between
"American classical liberalism" and the "new liberalism." Early modern
liberalism. Rossinow (2008) traces the history of the close relations between
liberals and the Left, starting in the 1880s, peaking in the 1930s, and ending
in the 1940s. In the 1880s intellectual reformers typified by sociologist
Lester Frank Ward transformed Victorian liberalism, retaining its commitment to
civil liberties and individual rights while casting off its advocacy of
laissez-faire economics. They at times supported the growing working-class
labor unions, and sometimes even the socialists to their left. These liberals
rallied behind Theodore Roosevelt, Robert LaFollette and Woodrow Wilson to
fight big trusts (big corporations). They stressed ideals of social justice and
the use of government to solve social and economic problems. Women such as Jane
Addams and Florence Kelley were among the leaders of the left-liberal
tradition. There was a tension between sympathy with labor unions and the goal
to apply scientific expertise by disinterested experts. When liberals became
anti-Communist in the 1940s they purged leftists from the liberal movement.
Sociologist Lester Frank Ward (1841‚Äì1913) was a key intellectual and the
first to effectively combine classical liberal theory with progressivism to
help define what would become the modern welfare state after 1933. Political
writer Herbert Croly (1869‚Äì1930) helped to define the new liberalism through
the "New Republic" magazine (1914‚Äìpresent), and numerous influential books.
Croly presented the case for a planned economy, increased spending on
education, and the creation of a society based on the "brotherhood of mankind."
His highly influential 1909 book "The Promise of American Life" proposed to
raise the general standard of living by means of economic planning; Croly
opposed aggressive unionization. In "The Techniques of Democracy" (1915) he
argued against both dogmatic individualism and dogmatic socialism. Liberal
Republicans. The Republican Party had a liberal element, typified in the early
20th century by Theodore Roosevelt in the 1907-1912 period (Roosevelt was more
conservative at other points). Other liberal Republicans included Senator
Robert M. La Follette, Sr. and his sons in Wisconsin (from about 1900 to 1946),
and western leaders such as Senator Hiram Johnson in California, Senator George
W. Norris in Nebraska, Senator Bronson M. Cutting in New Mexico, Congresswoman
Jeannette Rankin in Montana, and Senator William Borah in Idaho. They were
generally liberal in domestic policy, supported unions, and supported much of
the New Deal, but were isolationist in foreign policy. This element died out by
the 1940s. Starting in the 1930s a number of Northeastern Republicans took
liberal positions regarding labor unions, spending and New Deal policies. They
included Mayor Fiorello La Guardia in New York City, Governor Thomas E. Dewey
of New York, Governor Earl Warren of California, Senator Clifford P. Case of
New Jersey, Henry Cabot Lodge, Jr. of Massachusetts, Senator Prescott Bush of
Connecticut (father of George H. W. Bush), Senator Jacob K. Javits of New York,
Governor William Scranton of Pennsylvania, and Governor George Romney of
Michigan. The most notable of them all was Governor Nelson A. Rockefeller of
New York. While the media sometimes called them Rockefeller Republicans, the
liberal Republicans never formed an organized movement or caucus, and lacked a
recognized leader. They promoted economic growth and high state and federal
spending, while accepting high taxes and much liberal legislation, with the
proviso they could administer it more efficiently. They opposed the Democratic
big city machines while welcoming support from labor unions and big business
alike. Religion and social issues were not high on their agenda. In foreign
policy they were internationalists, throwing their support to Dwight D.
Eisenhower over the conservative leader Robert A. Taft in 1952. They were often
called the "Eastern Establishment" by conservatives such as Barry Goldwater The
Goldwater conservatives fought this establishment, defeated Rockefeller in the
1964 primaries, and eventually retired most of its members, although some
became Democrats like Senator Charles Goodell and Mayor John Lindsay in New
York. As President, Richard Nixon adopted many of their positions. After
Congressman John B. Anderson of Illinois bolted the party in 1980 and ran as an
independent against Reagan, the liberal GOP element faded away. Their old
strongholds in the Northeast are now mostly held by Democrats. The New Deal.
President Franklin D. Roosevelt came to office in 1933 amid the economic
calamity of the Great Depression, offering the nation a New Deal intended to
alleviate economic desperation and joblessness, provide greater opportunities,
and restore prosperity. His presidency from 1933 to 1945, the longest in US
history, was marked by an increased role for the federal government in
addressing the nation's economic and social problems. Work relief programs
provided jobs, ambitious projects such as the Tennessee Valley Authority were
created to promote economic development, and a social security system was
established. The Great Depression seemed over in 1936, but a relapse in 1937-38
produced continued long-term unemployment. Full employment was reached with the
total mobilization of US economic, social, and military resources in World War
II. At that point the main relief programs such as WPA and CCC were ended.
Arthur Herman argues that FDR restored prosperity after 1940 by cooperating
closely with big business, although in 1939, when asked: ‚ÄúDo you think the
attitude of the Roosevelt administration toward business is delaying business
recovery?‚Äù the American people responded ‚Äúyes‚Äù by a margin of more than
2-to-1. The New Deal programs to relieve the Depression are generally regarded
as a mixed success in ending unemployment. At the time many New Deal
programs‚Äîespecially CCC‚Äîwere popular. Liberals hailed them for improving
the life of the common citizen, and for providing jobs for the unemployed,
legal protection for labor unionists, modern utilities for rural America,
living wages for the working poor, and price stability for the family farmer.
Economic progress for minorities, however, was hindered by discrimination, an
issue often avoided by Roosevelt's administration. Relief was the immediate
effort to help the one-third of the population that was hardest hit by the
depression. Roosevelt expanded Hoover's FERA work relief program, and added the
Civilian Conservation Corps (CCC), Public Works Administration (PWA), and
starting in 1935 the Works Progress Administration (WPA). In 1935 the Social
Security Act (SSA) and unemployment insurance programs were added. Separate
programs were set up for relief in rural America, such as the Resettlement
Administration and Farm Security Administration. Recovery was the goal of
restoring the economy to pre-Depression levels. It involved "pump priming"
(greater spending of government funds in an effort to stimulate the economy,
including deficit spending), dropping the gold standard, and efforts to
increase farm prices and foreign trade by lowering tariffs. Many programs were
funded through a Hoover program of loans and loan guarantees, overseen by the
Reconstruction Finance Corporation (RFC). Reform was based on the assumption
that the depression was caused by the inherent instability of the market and
that government intervention was necessary to rationalize and stabilize the
economy, and to balance the interests of farmers, business and labor. Reform
measures included the National Industrial Recovery Act (NIRA), regulation of
Wall Street by the Securities Exchange Act (SEA), the Agricultural Adjustment
Act (AAA) for farm programs, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC)
insurance for bank deposits enacted through the Glass‚ÄìSteagall Act of 1933,
and the 1935 National Labor Relations Act (NLRA) (also known as the Wagner Act)
dealing with labor-management relations. Despite urgings by some New Dealers,
there was no major anti-trust program. Roosevelt opposed socialism (in the
sense of state ownership of the means of production), and only one major
program, the Tennessee Valley Authority (TVA), involved government ownership of
the means of production (that is power plants and electrical grids). The
conservatives feared the New Deal meant socialism; Roosevelt noted privately in
1934 that the "old line press harps increasingly on state socialism and demands
the return to the good old days." The New Deal's record came under attack by
New Left historians in the 1960s for its pusillanimity in not attacking
capitalism more vigorously, nor helping blacks achieve equality. The critics
emphasize the absence of a philosophy of reform to explain the failure of New
Dealers to attack fundamental social problems. They demonstrate the New Deal's
commitment to save capitalism and its refusal to strip away private property.
They detect a remoteness from the people and indifference to participatory
democracy, and call instead for more emphasis on conflict and exploitation.
Foreign policies of FDR. In international affairs, Roosevelt's presidency until
1938 reflected the isolationism that dominated practically all of American
politics at the time. After 1938 he moved toward interventionism as the world
hurtled toward war Liberals split on foreign policy: many followed Roosevelt,
while others like John L. Lewis of the CIO, historian Charles A. Beard and the
Kennedy Family opposed him. However, Roosevelt added new conservative
supporters, such as Republicans Henry Stimson who became his Secretary of War
in 1940 and Wendell Willkie, who worked closely with FDR after losing to him in
the 1940s election. Anticipating the post-war period, Roosevelt strongly
supported proposals to create a United Nations organization as a means of
encouraging mutual cooperation to solve problems on the international stage.
His commitment to internationalist ideals was in the tradition of Woodrow
Wilson, except that FDR learned from Wilson's mistakes regarding the League of
Nations; FDR included Republicans in shaping foreign policy, and insisted the
U.S. have a veto at the UN. Liberalism during the Cold War. American liberalism
of the Cold War era was the immediate heir to Franklin Delano Roosevelt's New
Deal and the somewhat more distant heir to the Progressives of the early 20th
century. Rossinow (2008) argues that after 1945 the left-liberal alliance that
operated during the New Deal years split apart for good over the issue of
Communism. Anti-communist liberals, led by Walter Reuther and Hubert Humphrey
expelled the far-left from labor unions and the New Deal Coalition, and
committed the Democratic Party to a strong Cold War policy typified by NATO and
the containment of Communism. Liberals became committed to a quantitative goal
of economic growth that accepted large near-monopolies such as General Motors
and ATT, while rejecting the structural transformation dreamed of by earlier
left-liberals. The far left had its last hurrah in Henry A. Wallace‚Äôs 1948
third-party presidential campaign. Wallace supported further New Deal reforms
and opposed the Cold War, but his campaign was taken over by the far left and
Wallace retired from politics in disgust. In some ways this resembled what in
other countries was referred to as social democracy. However, unlike European
social democrats, US liberals never widely endorsed nationalization of industry
but favored regulation for public benefit. In the 1950s and 1960s, both major
US political parties included liberal and conservative factions. The Democratic
Party had two wings: on the one hand, Northern and Western liberals, on the
other generally conservative Southern whites. Difficult to classify were the
northern big city Democratic "political machines". The urban machines had
supported New Deal economic policies, but faded with the coming of prosperity
and the assimilation of ethnic groups; nearly all collapsed by the 1960s in the
face of racial violence in the cities The Republican Party included the
moderate-to-liberal Wall Street and the moderate-to-conservative Main Street.
The more liberal wing, strongest in the Northeast, was far more supportive of
New Deal programs, labor unions, and an internationalist foreign policy.
Support for anti-Communism sometimes came at the expense of civil liberties.
For example, ADA co-founder and archetypal Cold War liberal Hubert Humphrey
unsuccessfully sponsored (in 1950) a Senate bill to establish detention centers
where those declared subversive by the President could be held without trial.
Nonetheless, liberals opposed McCarthyism and were central to McCarthy's
downfall. Truman's Fair Deal. Until he became president liberals generally did
not see Harry S. Truman as one of their own, viewing him as a Democratic Party
hack. However, liberal politicians and liberal organizations such as the unions
and Americans for Democratic Action (ADA) supported Truman's liberal Fair Deal
proposals to continue and expand the New Deal. Hamby argues that the Fair Deal
reflected the "vital center" approach to liberalism which rejected
totalitarianism, was suspicious of excessive concentrations of government
power, and honored the New Deal as an effort to achieve a progressive
capitalist system. Solidly based upon the New Deal tradition in its advocacy of
wide-ranging social legislation, the Fair Deal differed enough to claim a
separate identity. The depression did not return after the war and the Fair
Deal faced prosperity and an optimistic future. The Fair Dealers thought in
terms of abundance rather than depression scarcity. Economist Leon Keyserling
argued that the liberal task was to spread the benefits of abundance throughout
society by stimulating economic growth. Agriculture Secretary Charles F.
Brannan wanted to unleash the benefits of agricultural abundance and to
encourage the development of an urban-rural Democratic coalition. However the
"Brannan Plan" was defeated by strong conservative opposition in Congress and
by his unrealistic confidence in the possibility uniting urban labor and farm
owners who distrusted rural insurgency. The Korean War made military spending
the nation's priority and killed almost the whole Fair Deal but did encourage
the pursuit of economic growth. The Conservative Coalition of Southern
Democrats and Northern Republicans in Congress effectively blocked the Fair
Deal and nearly all liberal legislation from the late 1930s to 1960. A New Left
historian in the 1960s repudiated Truman for failing to carry forward the New
Deal agenda, and for excessive anti-Communism at home. 1950s. Combating
conservatism was not high on the liberal agenda, for by 1950 the liberal
ideology was so intellectually dominant that the literary critic Lionel
Trilling could note that "liberalism is not only the dominant but even the sole
intellectual tradition... there are no conservative or reactionary ideas in
circulation." Most historians see liberalism in the doldrums in the 1950s, with
the old spark of New Deal dreams overshadowed by the glitzy complacency and
conservatism of the Eisenhower years. Adlai Stevenson lost in two landslides,
and he presented few new liberal proposals apart from a suggestion for a
worldwide ban on nuclear tests. As Barry Karl notes, Stevenson "has suffered
more at hands of the admirers he failed than he ever did from the enemies who
defeated him." Many liberals bemoan the willingness of Democratic leaders in
Congress (Lyndon B. Johnson and Sam Rayburn) to collaborate with Eisenhower,
and the commitment of the AFL-CIO unions and most liberal spokesmen such as
Senators Hubert Humphrey and Paul Douglas to anti-Communism at home and abroad.
They decry the weak attention most liberals paid to the nascent Civil Rights
Movement. The liberal coalition. Politically, starting in the late 1940s there
was a powerful labor-liberal coalition with strong grassroots support,
energetic well-funded organizations, and a cadre of supporters in Congress. On
labor side was the American Federation of Labor (AFL) and the Congress of
Industrial Organizations (CIO), which merged into the AFL-CIO in 1955, the
United Auto Workers (UAW), union lobbyists, and the Committee on Political
Education's (COPE), which organized turnout campaigns and publicity at
elections. Walter Reuther of the UAW was the leader of liberalism in the labor
movement, and his autoworkers generously funded the cause The main liberal
organizations, out of hundreds, included the National Association for the
Advancement of Colored People (NAACP), the American Jewish Congress (AJC), the
American Civil Liberties Union (ACLU), the Leadership Conference on Civil
Rights (LCCR), the National Committee for an Effective Congress (NCEC), and the
Americans for Democratic Action (ADA). Key liberal leaders in Congress included
Hubert Humphrey of Minnesota, Paul Douglas of Illinois, Henry Jackson of
Washington, Walter Mondale of Minnesota, and Claude Pepper of Florida in the
Senate Leaders in the House included Representatives Frank Thompson of New
Jersey, Richard Bolling of Missouri, and other members of the Democratic Study
Group. Although for years they had largely been frustrated by the Conservative
Coalition, the liberal coalition suddenly came to power in 1963 and were ready
with proposals that became central to the Great Society. Intellectuals.
Intellectuals and writers were an important component of the coalition at this
point. Many writers‚Äîespecially historians‚Äîbecame prominent spokesmen for
liberalism and were frequently called upon for public lectures and for popular
essays on political topics by such magazines as "The New Republic," "Saturday
Review," "The Atlantic Monthly," and "Harpers." Also active in the arena of
ideas were literary critics such as Lionel Trilling and Alfred Kazin,
economists such as Alvin Hansen, John Kenneth Galbraith, James Tobin and Paul
Samuelson, as well as political scientists such as Robert A. Dahl and Seymour
Martin Lipset, and sociologists such as David Riesman and Daniel Patrick
Moynihan. Representative was the historian Henry Steele Commager, who felt a
duty to teach his fellow citizens how liberalism was the foundation of American
values. He believed that an educated public that understands American history
would support liberal programs, especially internationalism and the New Deal.
Commager was representative of a whole generation of like-minded historians who
were widely read by the general public, including Allan Nevins, Daniel
Boorstin, Richard Hofstadter, and C. Vann Woodward. Perhaps the most prominent
of all was Arthur Schlesinger Jr. whose books on Andrew Jackson and on
Roosevelt and the Kennedy brothers‚Äîand his many essays and his work with
liberal organizations and in the White House itself under Kennedy‚Äîemphasized
the ideological history of American liberalism, especially as made concrete by
a long tradition of powerful liberal presidents. Commager's biographer Neil
Jumonville has argued that this style of influential public history has been
lost in the 21st century because political correctness has rejected Commager's
open marketplace of tough ideas. Jumonville says history now comprises abstruse
deconstruction by experts, with statistics instead of stories, and is now
comprehensible only to the initiated, while ethnocentrism rules in place of
common identity. Other experts have traced the relative decline of
intellectuals to their concern race, ethnicity, and gender, and scholarly
antiquarianism. Great Society: 1964-68. Johnson was rewarded with an electoral
landslide in 1964 against conservative Barry Goldwater, which broke the
decades-long control of Congress by the Conservative coalition. But the
Republicans bounced back in 1966, and as the Democratic party splintered five
ways, Republicans elected Richard Nixon in 1968. Nixon largely continued the
New Deal and Great Society programs he inherited; conservative reaction would
come with the election of Ronald Reagan in 1980. Liberals and civil rights.
Cold War liberalism emerged at a time when most African Americans, especially
in the South, were politically and economically disenfranchised. Beginning with
"To Secure These Rights", an official report issued by the Truman White House
in 1947, self-proclaimed liberals increasingly embraced the civil rights
movement. In 1948, President Truman desegregated the armed forces and the
Democrats inserted a strong civil rights "plank" (provision) in the Democratic
party platform. Black activists, most prominently Martin Luther King, escalated
the bearer agitation throughout the South, especially in Birmingham, Alabama,
where brutal police tactics outraged national television audiences. The civil
rights movement climaxed in the "March on Washington" in August, 1963, where
King gave his dramatic "I Have a Dream" speech. The activism put civil rights
at the very top of the liberal political agenda and facilitated passage of the
decisive Civil Rights Act of 1964, which permanently ended segregation in the
United States, and the Voting Rights Act of 1965, which guaranteed blacks the
right to vote, with strong enforcement provisions throughout the South handled
by the federal Department of Justice. During the mid 1960s, relations between
white liberals and the civil rights movement became increasingly strained;
civil rights leaders accused liberal politicians of temporizing and
procrastinating. Although President Kennedy sent federal troops to compel the
University of Mississippi to admit African American James Meredith in 1962, and
civil rights leader Martin Luther King, Jr. toned down the March on Washington
(1963) at Kennedy's behest, the failure to seat the delegates of the
Mississippi Freedom Democratic Party at the 1964 Democratic National Convention
indicated a growing rift. President Johnson could not understand why the rather
impressive civil rights laws passed under his leadership had failed to immunize
Northern and Western cities from rioting. At the same time, the civil rights
movement itself was becoming fractured. By 1966, a Black Power movement had
emerged; Black Power advocates accused white liberals of trying to control the
civil rights agenda. Proponents of Black Power wanted African-Americans to
follow an "ethnic model" for obtaining power, not unlike that of Democratic
political machines in large cities. This put them on a collision course with
urban machine politicians. And, on its most extreme edges, the Black Power
movement contained racial separatists who wanted to give up on integration
altogether¬ ‚Äî a program that could not be endorsed by American liberals of
any race. The mere existence of such individuals (who always got more media
attention than their actual numbers might have warranted) contributed to "white
backlash" against liberals and civil rights activists. Paleoliberalism and
neoconservatives. According to Michael Lind, in the late 1960s and early 1970s
many "anti-Soviet, pro-Israel liberals and social democrats, especially those
around "Commentary" magazine as well as supporters of Senator Henry ("Scoop")
Jackson helped found the neoconservative movement. Many joined the
administrations of Ronald Reagan and George W. Bush, and attacked liberalism
vocally in the media and scholarly outlets. Under attack from the New Left.
Liberalism came under attack from both the New Left in the early 1960s and the
right in the late 1960s. Kazin (1998) says, "The liberals who anxiously turned
back the assault of the postwar Right were confronted in the 1960s by a very
different adversary: a radical movement led, in the main, by their own
children. The white New Left." This new element, says Kazin, worked to "topple
the corrupted liberal order." Indeed, as Maurice Isserman notes, the New Left"
"came to use the word 'liberal' as a political epithet." The attack was not
confined to the United States, as the New Left was a worldwide movement with
strength in parts of Western Europe as well as Japan. Massive demonstrations in
France, for example, denounced American imperialism and its "helpers" in
Western European governments. The main activity of the New Left became
Opposition to the U.S. involvement in the Vietnam War as conducted by liberal
President Lyndon Johnson. The anti-war movement escalated the rhetorical heat,
as violence broke out on both sides. The climax came in sustained protests at
the 1968 Democratic National Convention. Liberals fought back, with Zbigniew
Brzezinski, chief foreign policy advisor of the 1968 Humphrey campaign, saying
the New Left "threatened American liberalism" in a manner reminiscent of
McCarthyism. While the New Left considered Humphrey a war criminal, Nixon
attacked him as the New Left's enabler‚Äîa man with "a personal attitude of
indulgence and permissiveness toward the lawless." Beinart concludes that "with
the country divided against itself, contempt for Hubert Humphrey was the one
thing on which left and right could agree." After 1968, the New Left lost
strength and the more serious attacks on liberalism came from the right.
Nevertheless the liberal ideology lost its attractiveness. Liberal commentator
E. J. Dionne contends that, "If liberal ideology began to crumble
intellectually in the 1960s it did so in part because the New Left represented
a highly articulate and able wrecking crew." Liberals and Vietnam. While the
civil rights movement isolated liberals from their erstwhile allies, the
Vietnam War threw a wedge into the liberal ranks, dividing pro-war "hawks" such
as Senator Henry M. Jackson from "doves" such as 1972 Presidential candidate
Senator George McGovern. As the war became the leading political issue of the
day, agreement on domestic matters was not enough to hold the liberal consensus
together. In the 1960 presidential campaign, Kennedy was liberal in domestic
policy but conservative on foreign policy, calling for a more aggressive stance
against Communism than his opponent Richard Nixon. Opposition to the war first
emerged from the New Left and from black leaders such as Martin Luther King. By
1967, however, there was growing opposition from within liberal ranks, led in
1968 by Senators Eugene McCarthy and Robert Kennedy. After Democratic President
Lyndon Johnson announced, in March 1968, that he would not run for reelection,
Kennedy and McCarthy fought each other for the nomination, with Kennedy besting
McCarthy in a series of Democratic primaries. Then assassination removed
Kennedy from the race and Vice President Hubert Humphrey emerged from the
disastrous 1968 Democratic National Convention with the presidential nomination
of a deeply divided party. Meanwhile Alabama governor George Wallace announced
his third-party run, and he pulled in many working class whites in the rural
South and big city North, most of whom had been staunch Democrats. Liberals,
led by the labor unions, focused their attacks on Wallace, while Richard Nixon
led a unified Republican Party to victory. Nixon. The chaos of 1968, a bitterly
divided Democratic Party, and bad blood between the new Left and the liberals,
gave Nixon the presidency. Nixon rhetorically attacked liberals, but in
practice he enacted many liberal policies and represented the more liberal wing
of the GOP. Nixon established the Environmental Protection Agency by executive
order, expanded the national endowments for the arts and the humanities, began
affirmative action policies, opened diplomatic relations with Communist China,
starting the Strategic Arms Limitation Talks to reduce ballistic missile
availability, and turned the war over to South Vietnam. He withdrew all
American combat troops by 1972, signed a peace treaty in 1973, and ended the
draft. Regardless of his policies, liberals hated Nixon and rejoiced when the
Watergate scandal forced his resignation in 1974. While the differences between
Nixon and the liberals are obvious¬ ‚Äì the liberal wing of his own party
favored politicians such as Nelson Rockefeller and William Scranton, and Nixon
overtly placed an emphasis on "law and order" over civil liberties, and Nixon's
Enemies List was composed largely of liberals¬ ‚Äì in some ways the continuity
of many of Nixon's policies with those of the Kennedy-Johnson years is more
remarkable than the differences. Pointing at this continuity, New Left leader
Noam Chomsky (himself on Nixon's enemies list) has called Nixon, "in many
respects the last liberal president." The political dominance of the liberal
consensus even into the Nixon years can best be seen in policies such as the
successful establishment of the Environmental Protection Agency or his failed
proposal to replace the welfare system with a guaranteed annual income by way
of a negative income tax. Affirmative action in its most quota-oriented form
was a Nixon administration policy. Even the Nixon "War on Drugs" allocated two-
thirds of its funds for treatment, a far higher ratio than was to be the case
under any subsequent President, Republican or Democrat. Additionally, Nixon's
normalization of diplomatic relations with the People's Republic of China and
his policy of "d√©tente" with the Soviet Union were probably more popular with
liberals than with his conservative base. An opposing view, offered by Cass R.
Sunstein, in "The Second Bill of Rights" (Basic Books, 2004, ISBN 0-465-08332-
3) argues that Nixon, through his Supreme Court appointments, effectively ended
a decades-long expansion of economic rights along the lines of those put
forward in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, adopted in 1948 by the
United Nations General Assembly. Labor unions. Labor unions were central
components of liberalism, operating through the New Deal Coalition. The unions
gave strong support to the Vietnam War, thereby breaking with the blacks and
with the intellectual and student wings of liberalism. From time to time
dissident groups such as Progressive Alliance, the Citizen-Labor Energy
Coalition, and the National Labor Committee broke from the dominant AFL-CIO,
which they saw as too conservative. In 1995 the liberals managed to take
control of the AFL-CIO, under the leadership of John Sweeney of the Service
Employees International Union (SEIU). Union membership in the private sector
has fallen from 33% to 7%, with a resulting decline in political weight. In
2005 the SEIU, now led by Andy Stern broke away from the AFL-CIO to form its
own coalition, the Change to Win Federation, to support liberalism, including
the Obama agenda, especially health care reform. Stern retired in 2010.
Regardless of the loss of numbers, unions have a long tradition and deep
experience in organizing, and continue at the state and national level to
mobilize forces for a liberal agenda, especially regarding votes for Democrats,
taxes, spending, union representation, and the threat to American jobs from
foreign trade. Offsetting the decline in the private sector, is a growth of
unionization in the public sector. The membership of unions in the public
sector, such as teachers, police, and city workers, continues to rise, now
covering 42% of local government workers. The financial crisis that hit
American states during the recession of 2008-2011 focused increasing attention
on pension systems for government employees, with conservatives trying to
reduce the pensions. Environmentalism. A new, unexpected political discourse
emerged in the 1970s centered on the environment. The debates did not fall
neatly into a left-right dimension, for everyone proclaimed their support for
the environment. Environmentalism appealed to the well-educated middle class,
but aroused fears among lumbermen, farmers, ranchers, blue collar workers,
automobile companies and oil companies whose economic interests were threatened
by new regulations. Conservatives therefore tended to oppose environmentalism
while liberals endorsed new measures to protect the environment. Liberals
supported the Wilderness Society and the Sierra Club, and were sometimes
successful in blocking efforts by lumber companies and oil drillers to expand
operations. Environmental legislation limited the use of DDT, reduced acid
rain, and protected numerous animal and plant species. Within the environmental
movement, there was a small radical element that favored direct action rather
than legislation. By the 21st century debates over taking major action to
reverse global warming by and dealing with carbon emissions were high on the
agenda. The environmental movement in the United States has given little
support to third parties, unlike Europe, where Green parties play a growing
role in politics. End of the liberal consensus. During the Nixon years (and
through the 1970s), the liberal consensus began to come apart with the election
of Ronald Reagan marking the election of the first non-Keynsian administration
and the first application of supply-side economics. The alliance with white
Southern Democrats had been lost in the Civil Rights era. While the steady
enfranchisement of African Americans expanded the electorate to include many
new voters sympathetic to liberal views, it was not quite enough to make up for
the loss of some Southern Democrats. A tide of conservatism rose in response to
perceived failures of liberal policies. Organized labor, long a bulwark of the
liberal consensus, was past the peak of its power in the US and many unions had
remained in favor of the Vietnam War even as liberal politicians increasingly
turned against it. In 1980 the leading liberal was Senator Ted Kennedy; he
challenged incumbent President Jimmy Carter for the Democratic Party
presidential nomination because Carter's failures had disenchanted liberals.
Kennedy was decisively defeated, and in turn Carter was defeated by Ronald
Reagan. Historians often use 1979-80 to date a philosophical realignment within
the American electorate away from Democratic liberalism and toward Reagan Era
conservatism. However, some liberals hold a minority view that there was no
real shift and that Kennedy's defeat was merely by historical accident caused
by his poor campaign, international crises and Carter's use of the incumbency.
Abrams (2006) argues that the eclipse of liberalism was caused by a grass-roots
populist revolt, often with a Fundamentalist and anti-modern theme, abetted by
corporations eager to weaken labor unions and the regulatory regime of the New
Deal. The success of liberalism in the first place, he argues, came from
efforts of a liberal elite that had entrenched itself in key social, political,
and especially judicial positions. These elites, Abrams contends, imposed their
brand of liberalism from within some of the least democratic and most insulated
institutions, especially the universities, foundations, independent regulatory
agencies, and the Supreme Court. With only a weak popular base, liberalism was
vulnerable to a populist counterrevolution by the nation's democratic or
majoritarian forces. The Clinton Administration and the "Third Way". The term
Third Way refers to various political positions which try to reconcile right-
wing and left-wing politics by advocating a varying synthesis of right-wing
economic and left-wing social policies. Third Way was created as a serious re-
evaluation of political policies within various centre-left progressive
movements in response to the ramifications of the collapse of international
belief in the economic viability of the state economic interventionist policies
that had previously been popularized by Keynesianism; and the corresponding
rise of popularity for neoliberalism and the New Right. It supports the pursuit
of greater egalitarianism in society through action to increase the
distribution of skills, capacities, and productive endowments, while rejecting
income redistribution as the means to achieve this. It emphasizes commitment
to: balanced budgets, providing equal opportunity combined with an emphasis on
personal responsibility, decentralization of government power to the lowest
level possible, encouragement of public-private partnerships, improving labour
supply, investment in human development, protection of social capital, and
protection of the environment. In the United States, "Third Way" adherents
embrace fiscal conservatism to a greater extent than traditional social
liberals, and advocate some replacement of welfare with workfare, and sometimes
have a stronger preference for market solutions to traditional problems (as in
pollution markets), while rejecting pure laissez-faire economics and other
libertarian positions. The Third Way style of governing was firmly adopted and
partly redefined during the administration of President Bill Clinton. With
respect to U.S. presidents, the term "Third Way" was introduced by political
scientist Stephen Skowronek, who wrote "The Politics Presidents Make" (1993,
1997;ISBN 0-674-68937-2) "Third Way" presidents "undermine the opposition by
borrowing policies from it in an effort to seize the middle and with it to
achieve political dominance. Think of Nixon‚Äôs economic policies, which were a
continuation of Johnson‚Äôs ‚ÄúGreat Society‚Äù; Clinton‚Äôs welfare reform and
support of capital punishment; and Obama‚Äôs pragmatic centrism, reflected in
his embrace, albeit very recent, of entitlements reform. After Tony Blair came
to power in the UK, Clinton, Blair and other leading Third Way adherents
organized conferences to promote the Third Way philosophy in 1997 at Chequers
in England. The Third Way think tank and the Democratic Leadership Council are
adherents of Third Way politics. In 2004, several veteran U.S. Democrats
founded a new Washington, DC organization entitled Third Way, which bills
itself as a "strategy center for progressives." The third way has been
criticized by some conservatives and libertarians who advocate laissez-faire
capitalism, and has also been heavily criticized by many social democrats,
democratic socialists and communists in particular as a betrayal of left-wing
values. Specific definitions of third way policies may differ between Europe
and America. The return of protest politics. Republican and staunch
conservative George W. Bush won the 2000 United States president election in a
tightly contested race that included multiple recounts in the state of Florida.
The outcome was tied up in courts for a month until reaching the U.S. Supreme
Court. On December 9, in a controversial ruling the "Bush v. Gore" case the
Court reversed a Florida Supreme Court decision ordering a third recount,
essentially ending the dispute and resulting in Bush winning the presidency by
electoral vote even though he lost the popular vote to Democrat and incumbent
Vice President Al Gore. Bush's policies were deeply unpopular amongst American
liberals, particularly his launching of the Iraq War, which led to the return
of massive protest politics in the form of Opposition to the War in Iraq.
Bush's approval rating went below the 50% mark in AP-Ipsos polling in December
2004. Thereafter, his approval ratings and approval of his handling of domestic
and foreign policy issues steadily dropped. Bush received heavy criticism for
his handling of the Iraq War, his response to Hurricane Katrina and to the Abu
Ghraib prisoner abuse, NSA warrantless surveillance, the Plame affair, and
Guantanamo Bay detention camp controversies. Polls conducted in 2006 showed an
average of 37% approval ratings for Bush, which contributed to what Bush called
the "thumping" of the Republican Party in the 2006 mid-term elections. When the
financial system verged on total collapse during the 2008 financial crisis,
Bush pushed through large scale rescue packages for banks and auto companies
that some conservatives in Congress did not support and led some conservative
commentators to criticize Bush for enacting legislation they saw as "not
conservative" and more reminiscent of New Deal liberal ideology. In part due to
backlash against the Bush administration, Barack Obama, seen as a liberal and
progressive, was elected to the presidency, the first African-American to hold
the office. With a clear Democratic majority in both houses of Congress, Obama
managed to pass a $814 billion stimulus spending program, new regulations on
investment firms, and a program to require health insurance for all Americans.
However, led by the Tea Party movement, the Republicans won back control of one
of the two houses of Congress in the 2010 elections. In reaction to ongoing
financial crisis that began in 2008, protest politics continued into the Obama
administration, most notably in the form of Occupy Wall Street. The main issues
are social and economic inequality, greed, corruption and the undue influence
of corporations on government‚Äîparticularly from the financial services
sector. The OWS slogan, "We are the 99%", addresses the growing income
inequality and wealth distribution in the U.S. between the wealthiest 1% and
the rest of the population. Although some of these were cited by liberal
activists and Democrats, this information did not fully become a center of
national attention until it was used as one of the ideas behind the OWS
movement. A survey by Fordham University Department of Political Science found
the protester's political affiliations to be overwhelmingly left-leaning: 25%
Democrat, 2% Republican, 11% Socialist, 11% Green Party, 12% Other, and 39%
independent. While the survey also found that 80% of the protestors self-
identified as slightly to extremely liberal, Occupy Wall Street, and the
broader Occupy movement, has been variously classified as a "liberation from
liberalism" and even as having principles that "arise from scholarship on
anarchy." During an October 6 news conference, President Obama said, "I think
it expresses the frustrations the American people feel, that we had the biggest
financial crisis since the Great Depression, huge collateral damage all
throughout the country ... and yet you're still seeing some of the same folks
who acted irresponsibly trying to fight efforts to crack down on the abusive
practices that got us into this in the first place." Some of the protests were
seen as an attempt to address the Obama administration's "double standard" in
dealing with Wall Street. Academicians. Liberal and leftist viewpoints dominate
higher education faculties since the 1970s, according to many studies while
conservatives are well represented in policy-oriented Think tanks. Surveys
conducted in the last 10 years indicate that between 44%-62% faculty self-
identify as liberal, while 9%-18% self-identify as conservative. Conservative
self-identification is higher in two-year colleges than other categories of
higher education but has been declining overall. Those in natural sciences,
engineering, and business were less liberal than those in the social sciences
and humanities. A 2005 study found that liberal views had increased compared to
the older studies. 15% in the survey described themselves as right of center.
While the humanities and the social sciences are still the most left leaning,
67% of those in other fields combined described themselves as left of center.
In business and engineering, liberals outnumber conservatives by a 2:1 ratio.
The study also found that women, practicing Christians, and Republicans taught
at lower ranked schools than would be expected from objectively measured
professional accomplishments. "Liberal" as a derogatory epithet. A number of
politicians, activists, and media outlets in the years from 1950 to 2011 have
employed "liberal" as an epithet, giving it an ominous or sinister connotation,
while invoking phrases like "free enterprise", "individual rights",
"patriotic", and "the American way" to describe opponents of liberalism.
Historian John Lukacs noted in 2004 that then-President George W. Bush,
confident that many Americans regarded "liberal" as a pejorative term, used it
to label his political opponents during campaign speeches, while his opponents
subsequently avoided identifying themselves as liberal. Ronald Reagan's
ridicule of liberalism is credited with transforming "liberal" into a
derogatory epithet that any politician seeking national office would avoid. His
speechwriters repeatedly contrasted "liberals" and "real Americans". For
example, Reagan's then-Secretary of the Interior, James G. Watt said "I never
use the words Republicans and Democrats. It's liberals and Americans." Reagan
warned the United States of modern secularists who condoned abortion, excused
teenage sexuality, opposed school prayer, and attenuated traditional American
values. His conviction that there existed a single proper personal behavior,
religious worldview, economic system, and proper attitude toward nations and
peoples not supporting U.S. interests worldwide, is credited by comparative
literature scholar Betty Jean Craige with polarizing America. Reagan persuaded
a large portion of the public to dismiss any sincere analyses of his
administration's policies as politically motivated criticisms put forth by what
he labeled a "liberal" media. George H. W. Bush employed the word "liberal" as
a derogatory epithet during his 1988 presidential campaign. Bush described
himself as a patriot, and described his liberal opponents as unpatriotic. He
referred to liberalism as "the L-word" and sought to demonize opposing
presidential candidate Michael Dukakis by labeling Dukakis "the liberal
governor" and by pigeonholing him as part of what Bush called "the L-crowd."
Bush recognized that motivating voters to fear Dukakis as a risky, non-
mainstream candidate generated political support for his own campaign. Bush's
campaign also used issues of prayer to arouse suspicions that Dukakis was less
devout in his religious convictions. Bush's running mate, vice presidential
candidate Dan Quayle said to Christians at the 1988 Republican National
Convention "It's always good to be with people who are "real" Americans." Bill
Clinton avoided association with "liberal" as a political label during his 1992
presidential campaign against George H. W. Bush by moving closer to the
political center. Law professor and public policy researcher Patrick M. Garry
notes that Republicans who insulted Democrats for their liberal values in 1988
ignored their own history with liberalism, citing the 1980 campaign of
independent presidential candidate John B. Anderson as a visible example of
liberalism originating from within the Republican party. Some Republicans have
voiced disappointment over conservative attacks on liberalism. One example is
former governor of Minnesota and founder of the Liberal Republican Club Elmer
L. Andersen, who commented that it's "unfortunate today that 'liberal' is used
as a derogatory term." After the 1980s, fewer activists and politicians were
willing to characterize themselves as liberals. Historian Kevin Boyle explains
"There was a time when liberalism was, in Arthur Schlesinger's words 'a
fighting faith' ... Over the last three decades, though, liberalism has become
an object of ridicule, condemned for its misplaced idealism, vilified for its
tendency to equivocate and compromise, and mocked for its embrace of political
correctness. Now even the most ardent reformers run from the label, fearing the
damage it will inflict..." Republican political consultant Arthur J.
Finkelstein was recognized by Democratic political consultants for having
employed a formula of branding someone as a liberal and engaging in name-
calling by using the word "liberal" in negative television commercials as
frequently as possible, such as in a 1996 ad against U.S. Representative Jack
Reed: "That's liberal. That's Jack Reed. That's wrong. Call liberal Jack Reed
and tell him his record on welfare is just too liberal for you." Democratic
candidates and political liberals have hidden from the word "liberal," in some
cases identifying instead with terms such as "progressive" or "moderate."
George W. Bush and former Vice President Dick Cheney accused their opponents of
liberal elitism, softness, and pro-terrorism in attempts to frighten voters.
Conservative political commentators such as Rush Limbaugh consistently used
"liberal" as a pejorative label. When liberals shifted to the word
"progressive" to describe their beliefs, conservative radio host Glenn Beck
used "progressive" as an abusive label. Ann Coulter is recognized for espousing
radical conservative views and hatred of liberals; she outraged students
attending her talk at The College of New Jersey by calling white liberals "a
bunch of pussies" and condemning them as responsible for prolonging slavery in
America. Historian Godfrey Hodgson notes "The word liberal itself has fallen
into disrepute. Nothing is too bad for conservative bloggers and
columnists‚Äîlet alone radio hosts‚Äîto say about liberals. Democrats
themselves run a mile from the 'L word' for fear of being seen as dangerously
outside the mainstream. Conservative politicians and publicists, by dint of
associating liberals with all manner of absurdity so that many sensible people
hesitated to risk being tagged with the label of liberalism, succeeded in
persuading the country that it was more conservative than it actually was."
Historian Eric Alterman notes that barely 20% of Americans are willing to
accept "liberal" as a political label, but that supermajorities of Americans
actually favor "liberal" positions time and again. Alterman points out that
resistance to the label "liberal" is not surprising due to billions of dollars
worth of investment poured into the denigration of the term. A 2004 poll
conducted by the National Election Study found only 35% of respondents
questioned identifying as liberal compared to 55% identifying as conservative;
a 2004 Pew poll found 19% of respondents identifying as liberal, and 39%
identifying as conservative, with the balance identifying as moderate. A 2006
poll by Democracy Corp found that 19% identified as liberal, and 36%
conservative. In 2005, self-identifying moderates polled by Louis Harris &
Associates were found to share essentially the same political beliefs as self-
identifying liberals, but rejected the world "liberal" because of the
vilification heaped on the word itself by conservatives. Alterman acknowledges
political scientist Drew Westen's observation that for most Americans, the word
"liberal" now carries meanings such as "elite", "tax and spend", and "out of
touch". Philosophy of modern liberalism. Free speech. American liberals
describe themselves as open to change and receptive to new ideas. For example,
liberals typically accept scientific ideas that some conservatives reject, such
as evolution and global warming. Liberals tend to oppose the Supreme Court's
"Citizens United" ruling in 2010 that a corporation's first amendment right to
free speech encompasses freedom to donate to any political party, politician or
lobbyist as they see fit. President Obama called it "a major victory for big
oil, Wall Street banks, health insurance companies and the other powerful
interests that marshal their power every day in Washington to drown out the
voices of everyday Americans." Opposition to socialism. In general, liberalism
opposes socialism when socialism is understood to mean an alternative to
capitalism based on state ownership of the means of production. American
liberals doubt that bases for political opposition and freedom can survive when
all power is vested in the state, as it was under state-socialist regimes. In
line with the general pragmatic, empirical basis of liberalism, American
liberal philosophy embraces the idea that if substantial abundance and equality
of opportunity can be achieved through a system of mixed ownership, then there
is no need for a rigid and oppressive bureaucracy. Some liberal public
intellectuals have, since the 1950s, moved further toward the general position
that free markets, when appropriately regulated, can provide better solutions
than top-down economic planning. Economist Paul Krugman argued that, in
hitherto-state-dominated functions such as nation-scale energy distribution and
telecommunications, marketizations can improve efficiency dramatically. He also
defended a monetary policy -- inflation targeting‚Äîsaying that it "most nearly
approaches the usual goal of modern stabilization policy, which is to provide
adequate demand in a clean, unobtrusive way that does not distort the
allocation of resources." (These distortions are of a kind that war-time and
post-war Keynesian economists had accepted as an inevitable byproduct of fiscal
policies that selectively reduced certain consumer taxes and directed spending
toward government-managed stimulus projects‚Äîeven where these economists
theorized at a contentious distance from some of Keynes's own, more hands-off,
positions, which tended to emphasize stimulating of business investment.)
Thomas Friedman is a liberal journalist who, like Paul Krugman, generally
defends free trade as more likely to improve the lot of both rich and poor
countries. Role of state. There is a fundamental split among liberals as to the
role of the state. Historian H. W. Brands notes "the growth of the state is, by
perhaps the most common definition, the essence of modern American liberalism."
But according to Paul Starr, "Liberal constitutions impose constraints on the
power of any single public official or branch of government as well as the
state as a whole." Morality. According to cognitive linguist George Lakoff,
liberal philosophy is based on five basic categories of morality. The first,
the promotion of fairness, is generally described as an emphasis on empathy as
a desirable trait. With this social contract based on the Golden Rule comes the
rationale for many liberal positions. The second category is assistance to
those who cannot assist themselves. A nurturing spirit is one that is
considered good in liberal philosophy. This leads to the third category, the
desire to protect those who cannot defend themselves. The fourth category is
the importance of fulfilling one's life; allowing a person to experience all
that they can. The fifth and final category is the importance of caring for
oneself, since only thus can one act to help others. Modern liberal thinkers
and leaders in the United States. Politicians Intellectuals Jurists and the law
Writers, activists and commentators Religious leaders Blogs Magazines and
publications Think Tanks
