Modern portfolio theory Modern portfolio theory (MPT) is a theory of finance
which attempts to maximize portfolio expected return for a given amount of
portfolio risk, or equivalently minimize risk for a given level of expected
return, by carefully choosing the proportions of various assets. Although MPT
is widely used in practice in the financial industry and several of its
creators won a Nobel memorial prize for the theory, in recent years the basic
assumptions of MPT have been widely challenged by fields such as behavioral
economics. MPT is a mathematical formulation of the concept of diversification
in investing, with the aim of selecting a collection of investment assets that
has collectively lower risk than any individual asset. That this is possible
can be seen intuitively because different types of assets often change in value
in opposite ways. For example, to the extent prices in the stock market move
differently from prices in the bond market, a collection of both types of
assets can in theory face lower overall risk than either individually. But
diversification lowers risk even if assets' returns are not negatively
correlated—indeed, even if they are positively correlated. More technically,
MPT models an asset's return as a normally distributed function (or more
generally as an elliptically distributed random variable), defines risk as the
standard deviation of return, and models a portfolio as a weighted combination
of assets, so that the return of a portfolio is the weighted combination of the
assets' returns. By combining different assets whose returns are not perfectly
positively correlated, MPT seeks to reduce the total variance of the portfolio
return. MPT also assumes that investors are rational and markets are efficient.
MPT was developed in the 1950s through the early 1970s and was considered an
important advance in the mathematical modeling of finance. Since then, many
theoretical and practical criticisms have been leveled against it. These
include the fact that financial returns do not follow a Gaussian distribution
or indeed any symmetric distribution, and that correlations between asset
classes are not fixed but can vary depending on external events (especially in
crises). Further, there is growing evidence that investors are not rational and
markets are not efficient. Concept. The fundamental concept behind MPT is that
the assets in an investment portfolio should not be selected individually, each
on their own merits. Rather, it is important to consider how each asset changes
in price relative to how every other asset in the portfolio changes in price.
Investing is a tradeoff between risk and expected return. In general, assets
with higher expected returns are riskier. For a given amount of risk, MPT
describes how to select a portfolio with the highest possible expected return.
Or, for a given expected return, MPT explains how to select a portfolio with
the lowest possible risk (the targeted expected return cannot be more than the
highest-returning available security, of course, unless negative holdings of
assets are possible.) Therefore, MPT is a form of diversification. Under
certain assumptions and for specific quantitative definitions of risk and
return, MPT explains how to find the best possible diversification strategy.
History. Harry Markowitz introduced MPT in a 1952 article and a 1959 book.
Markowitz classifies it simply as "Portfolio Theory," because "There's nothing
modern about it." See also this survey of the history. Mathematical model. In
some sense the mathematical derivation below "is" MPT, although the basic
concepts behind the model have also been very influential. This section
develops the "classic" MPT model. There have been many extensions since. Risk
and expected return. MPT assumes that investors are risk averse, meaning that
given two portfolios that offer the same expected return, investors will prefer
the less risky one. Thus, an investor will take on increased risk only if
compensated by higher expected returns. Conversely, an investor who wants
higher expected returns must accept more risk. The exact trade-off will be the
same for all investors, but different investors will evaluate the trade-off
differently based on individual risk aversion characteristics. The implication
is that a rational investor will not invest in a portfolio if a second
portfolio exists with a more favorable risk-expected return profile – i.e.,
if for that level of risk an alternative portfolio exists which has better
expected returns. Note that the theory uses standard deviation of return as a
proxy for risk, which is valid if asset returns are jointly normally
distributed or otherwise elliptically distributed. There are problems with
this, however; see criticism. \operatorname{E}(R_p) = \sum_i w_i \operatorname
{E}(R_i) \quad  Diversification. An investor can reduce portfolio risk simply
by holding combinations of instruments which are not perfectly positively
correlated (correlation coefficient formula_14). In other words, investors can
reduce their exposure to individual asset risk by holding a diversified
portfolio of assets. Diversification may allow for the same portfolio expected
return with reduced risk. These ideas have been started with Markowitz and then
reinforced by other economists and mathematicians such as Andrew Brennan who
have expressed ideas in the limitation of variance through portfolio theory. If
all the asset pairs have correlations of 0—they are perfectly
uncorrelated—the portfolio's return variance is the sum over all assets of
the square of the fraction held in the asset times the asset's return variance
(and the portfolio standard deviation is the square root of this sum). The
efficient frontier with no risk-free asset. As shown in this graph, every
possible combination of the risky assets, without including any holdings of the
risk-free asset, can be plotted in risk-expected return space, and the
collection of all such possible portfolios defines a region in this space. The
left boundary of this region is a hyperbola, and the upper edge of this region
is the "efficient frontier" in the absence of a risk-free asset (sometimes
called "the Markowitz bullet"). Combinations along this upper edge represent
portfolios (including no holdings of the risk-free asset) for which there is
lowest risk for a given level of expected return. Equivalently, a portfolio
lying on the efficient frontier represents the combination offering the best
possible expected return for given risk level. where The above optimization
finds the point on the frontier at which the inverse of the slope of the
frontier would be "q" if portfolio return variance instead of standard
deviation were plotted horizontally. The frontier in its entirety is parametric
on "q". Many software packages, including MATLAB, Microsoft Excel, Mathematica
and R, provide optimization routines suitable for the above problem. An
alternative approach to specifying the efficient frontier is to do so
parametrically on the expected portfolio return formula_16 This version of the
problem requires that we minimize subject to for parameter formula_19. This
problem is easily solved using a Lagrange multiplier. Two mutual fund theorem.
One key result of the above analysis is the two mutual fund theorem. This
theorem states that any portfolio on the efficient frontier can be generated by
holding a combination of any two given portfolios on the frontier; the latter
two given portfolios are the "mutual funds" in the theorem's name. So in the
absence of a risk-free asset, an investor can achieve any desired efficient
portfolio even if all that is accessible is a pair of efficient mutual funds.
If the location of the desired portfolio on the frontier is between the
locations of the two mutual funds, both mutual funds will be held in positive
quantities. If the desired portfolio is outside the range spanned by the two
mutual funds, then one of the mutual funds must be sold short (held in negative
quantity) while the size of the investment in the other mutual fund must be
greater than the amount available for investment (the excess being funded by
the borrowing from the other fund). The risk-free asset and the capital
allocation line. The risk-free asset is the (hypothetical) asset which pays a
risk-free rate. In practice, short-term government securities (such as US
treasury bills) are used as a risk-free asset, because they pay a fixed rate of
interest and have exceptionally low default risk. The risk-free asset has zero
variance in returns (hence is risk-free); it is also uncorrelated with any
other asset (by definition, since its variance is zero). As a result, when it
is combined with any other asset or portfolio of assets, the change in return
is linearly related to the change in risk as the proportions in the combination
vary. When a risk-free asset is introduced, the half-line shown in the figure
is the new efficient frontier. It is tangent to the hyperbola at the pure risky
portfolio with the highest Sharpe ratio. Its horizontal intercept represents a
portfolio with 100% of holdings in the risk-free asset; the tangency with the
hyperbola represents a portfolio with no risk-free holdings and 100% of assets
held in the portfolio occurring at the tangency point; points between those
points are portfolios containing positive amounts of both the risky tangency
portfolio and the risk-free asset; and points on the half-line beyond the
tangency point are leveraged portfolios involving negative holdings of the
risk-free asset (the latter has been sold short—in other words, the investor
has borrowed at the risk-free rate) and an amount invested in the tangency
portfolio equal to more than 100% of the investor's initial capital. This
efficient half-line is called the capital allocation line (CAL), and its
formula can be shown to be In this formula "P" is the sub-portfolio of risky
assets at the tangency with the Markowitz bullet, "F" is the risk-free asset,
and "C" is a combination of portfolios "P" and "F". By the diagram, the
introduction of the risk-free asset as a possible component of the portfolio
has improved the range of risk-expected return combinations available, because
everywhere except at the tangency portfolio the half-line gives a higher
expected return than the hyperbola does at every possible risk level. The fact
that all points on the linear efficient locus can be achieved by a combination
of holdings of the risk-free asset and the tangency portfolio is known as the
one mutual fund theorem, where the mutual fund referred to is the tangency
portfolio. Asset pricing using MPT. The above analysis describes optimal
behavior of an individual investor. Asset pricing theory builds on this
analysis in the following way. Since everyone holds the risky assets in
identical proportions to each other—namely in the proportions given by the
tangency portfolio—in market equilibrium the risky assets' prices, and
therefore their expected returns, will adjust so that the ratios in the
tangency portfolio are the same as the ratios in which the risky assets are
supplied to the market. Thus relative supplies will equal relative demands. MPT
derives the required expected return for a correctly priced asset in this
context. Systematic risk and specific risk. Specific risk is the risk
associated with individual assets - within a portfolio these risks can be
reduced through diversification (specific risks "cancel out"). Specific risk is
also called diversifiable, unique, unsystematic, or idiosyncratic risk.
Systematic risk (a.k.a. portfolio risk or market risk) refers to the risk
common to all securities—except for selling short as noted below, systematic
risk cannot be diversified away (within one market). Within the market
portfolio, asset specific risk will be diversified away to the extent possible.
Systematic risk is therefore equated with the risk (standard deviation) of the
market portfolio. Since a security will be purchased only if it improves the
risk-expected return characteristics of the market portfolio, the relevant
measure of the risk of a security is the risk it adds to the market portfolio,
and not its risk in isolation. In this context, the volatility of the asset,
and its correlation with the market portfolio, are historically observed and
are therefore given. (There are several approaches to asset pricing that
attempt to price assets by modelling the stochastic properties of the moments
of assets' returns - these are broadly referred to as conditional asset pricing
models.) Systematic risks within one market can be managed through a strategy
of using both long and short positions within one portfolio, creating a "market
neutral" portfolio. Capital asset pricing model. where α"i" is called the
asset's alpha, β"i" is the asset's beta coefficient and SCL is the Security
Characteristic Line. Once an asset's expected return, formula_25, is calculated
using CAPM, the future cash flows of the asset can be discounted to their
present value using this rate to establish the correct price for the asset. A
riskier stock will have a higher beta and will be discounted at a higher rate;
less sensitive stocks will have lower betas and be discounted at a lower rate.
In theory, an asset is correctly priced when its observed price is the same as
its value calculated using the CAPM derived discount rate. If the observed
price is higher than the valuation, then the asset is overvalued; it is
undervalued for a too low price. (w_m^2 \sigma_m ^2 + [ w_a^2 \sigma_a^2 + 2
w_m w_a \rho_{am} \sigma_a \sigma_m] )  (2) If an asset, a, is correctly
priced, the improvement in its risk-to-expected return ratio achieved by adding
it to the market portfolio, m, will at least match the gains of spending that
money on an increased stake in the market portfolio. The assumption is that the
investor will purchase the asset with funds borrowed at the risk-free rate,
formula_31; this is rational if formula_32. Criticisms. Despite its theoretical
importance, critics of MPT question whether it is an ideal investing strategy,
because its model of financial markets does not match the real world in many
ways. Efforts to translate the theoretical foundation into a viable portfolio
construction algorithm have been plagued by technical difficulties stemming
from the instability of the original optimization problem with respect to the
available data. Recent research has shown that instabilities of this type
disappear when a regularizing constraint or penalty term is incorporated in the
optimization procedure. Assumptions. The framework of MPT makes many
assumptions about investors and markets. Some are explicit in the equations,
such as the use of Normal distributions to model returns. Others are implicit,
such as the neglect of taxes and transaction fees. None of these assumptions
are entirely true, and each of them compromises MPT to some degree. More
complex versions of MPT can take into account a more sophisticated model of the
world (such as one with non-normal distributions and taxes) but all
mathematical models of finance still rely on many unrealistic premises. MPT
does not really model the market. The risk, return, and correlation measures
used by MPT are based on expected values, which means that they are
mathematical statements about the future (the expected value of returns is
explicit in the above equations, and implicit in the definitions of variance
and covariance). In practice, investors must substitute predictions based on
historical measurements of asset return and volatility for these values in the
equations. Very often such expected values fail to take account of new
circumstances which did not exist when the historical data were generated. More
fundamentally, investors are stuck with estimating key parameters from past
market data because MPT attempts to model risk in terms of the likelihood of
losses, but says nothing about why those losses might occur. The risk
measurements used are probabilistic in nature, not structural. This is a major
difference as compared to many engineering approaches to risk management.
Essentially, the mathematics of MPT view the markets as a collection of dice.
By examining past market data we can develop hypotheses about how the dice are
weighted, but this isn't helpful if the markets are actually dependent upon a
much bigger and more complicated chaotic system—the world. For this reason,
accurate structural models of real financial markets are unlikely to be
forthcoming because they would essentially be structural models of the entire
world. Nonetheless there is growing awareness of the concept of systemic risk
in financial markets, which should lead to more sophisticated market models.
Mathematical risk measurements are also useful only to the degree that they
reflect investors' true concerns—there is no point minimizing a variable that
nobody cares about in practice. MPT uses the mathematical concept of variance
to quantify risk, and this might be justified under the assumption of
elliptically distributed returns such as normally distributed returns, but for
general return distributions other risk measures (like coherent risk measures)
might better reflect investors' true preferences. In particular, variance is a
symmetric measure that counts abnormally high returns as just as risky as
abnormally low returns. Some would argue that, in reality, investors are only
concerned about losses, and do not care about the dispersion or tightness of
above-average returns. According to this view, our intuitive concept of risk is
fundamentally asymmetric in nature. MPT does not account for the personal,
environmental, strategic, or social dimensions of investment decisions. It only
attempts to maximize risk-adjusted returns, without regard to other
consequences. In a narrow sense, its complete reliance on asset prices makes it
vulnerable to all the standard market failures such as those arising from
information asymmetry, externalities, and public goods. It also rewards
corporate fraud and dishonest accounting. More broadly, a firm may have
strategic or social goals that shape its investment decisions, and an
individual investor might have personal goals. In either case, information
other than historical returns is relevant. The MPT does not take its own effect
on asset prices into account. Diversification eliminates non-systematic risk.
As unsystematic risk is not associated with increased expected return, this is
considered one of the few "free lunches" available. Following MPT means
portfolio managers can invest in assets without analyzing their fundamentals,
specially weighting each asset by the markets weight in the asset. Because the
investor purchases assets in proportion to their market weights, there is no
relative increase in demand for one asset versus another, and thus no impact on
the expected returns of the portfolio. Extensions. Since MPT's introduction in
1952, many attempts have been made to improve the model, especially by using
more realistic assumptions. Post-modern portfolio theory extends MPT by
adopting non-normally distributed, asymmetric measures of risk. This helps with
some of these problems, but not others. Black-Litterman model optimization is
an extension of unconstrained Markowitz optimization which incorporates
relative and absolute `views' on inputs of risk and returns. Other
Applications. Applications to project portfolios and other "non-financial"
assets. Some experts apply MPT to portfolios of projects and other assets
besides financial instruments. When MPT is applied outside of traditional
financial portfolios, some differences between the different types of
portfolios must be considered. Neither of these necessarily eliminate the
possibility of using MPT and such portfolios. They simply indicate the need to
run the optimization with an additional set of mathematically-expressed
constraints that would not normally apply to financial portfolios. Furthermore,
some of the simplest elements of Modern Portfolio Theory are applicable to
virtually any kind of portfolio. The concept of capturing the risk tolerance of
an investor by documenting how much risk is acceptable for a given return may
be applied to a variety of decision analysis problems. MPT uses historical
variance as a measure of risk, but portfolios of assets like major projects
don't have a well-defined "historical variance". In this case, the MPT
investment boundary can be expressed in more general terms like "chance of an
ROI less than cost of capital" or "chance of losing more than half of the
investment". When risk is put in terms of uncertainty about forecasts and
possible losses then the concept is transferable to various types of
investment. Application to other disciplines. In the 1970s, concepts from
Modern Portfolio Theory found their way into the field of regional science. In
a series of seminal works, Michael Conroy modeled the labor force in the
economy using portfolio-theoretic methods to examine growth and variability in
the labor force. This was followed by a long literature on the relationship
between economic growth and volatility. More recently, modern portfolio theory
has been used to model the self-concept in social psychology. When the self
attributes comprising the self-concept constitute a well-diversified portfolio,
then psychological outcomes at the level of the individual such as mood and
self-esteem should be more stable than when the self-concept is undiversified.
This prediction has been confirmed in studies involving human subjects.
Recently, modern portfolio theory has been applied to modelling the uncertainty
and correlation between documents in information retrieval. Given a query, the
aim is to maximize the overall relevance of a ranked list of documents and at
the same time minimize the overall uncertainty of the ranked list. Comparison
with arbitrage pricing theory. The SML and CAPM are often contrasted with the
arbitrage pricing theory (APT), which holds that the expected return of a
financial asset can be modeled as a linear function of various macro-economic
factors, where sensitivity to changes in each factor is represented by a factor
specific beta coefficient. The APT is less restrictive in its assumptions: it
allows for a statistical model of asset returns, and assumes that each investor
will hold a unique portfolio with its own particular array of betas, as opposed
to the identical "market portfolio". Unlike the CAPM, the APT, however, does
not itself reveal the identity of its priced factors - the number and nature of
these factors is likely to change over time and between economies.
