Modigliani–Miller theorem The Modigliani–Miller theorem (of Franco
Modigliani, Merton Miller) forms the basis for modern thinking on capital
structure. The basic theorem states that, under a certain market price process
(the classical random walk), in the absence of taxes, bankruptcy costs, agency
costs, and asymmetric information, and in an efficient market, the value of a
firm is unaffected by how that firm is financed. It does not matter if the
firm's capital is raised by issuing stock or selling debt. It does not matter
what the firm's dividend policy is. Therefore, the Modigliani–Miller theorem
is also often called the capital structure irrelevance principle. Modigliani
was awarded the 1985 Nobel Prize in Economics for this and other contributions.
Miller was a professor at the University of Chicago when he was awarded the
1990 Nobel Prize in Economics, along with Harry Markowitz and William Sharpe,
for their "work in the theory of financial economics," with Miller specifically
cited for "fundamental contributions to the theory of corporate finance."
Historical background. Miller and Modigliani derived the theorem and wrote
their groundbreaking article when they were both professors at the Graduate
School of Industrial Administration (GSIA) of Carnegie Mellon University. The
story goes that Miller and Modigliani were set to teach corporate finance for
business students despite the fact that they had no prior experience in
corporate finance. When they read the material that existed they found it
inconsistent so they sat down together to try to figure it out. The result of
this was the article in the "American Economic Review" and what has later been
known as the M&M theorem. Consider two firms which are identical except for
their financial structures. The first (Firm U) is unlevered: that is, it is
financed by equity only. The other (Firm L) is levered: it is financed partly
by equity, and partly by debt. The Modigliani–Miller theorem states that the
value of the two firms is the same. Without taxes. Proposition I: formula_1
where formula_2 "is the value of an unlevered firm" = price of buying a firm
composed only of equity, and formula_3 "is the value of a levered firm" = price
of buying a firm that is composed of some mix of debt and equity. Another word
for levered is "geared", which has the same meaning. To see why this should be
true, suppose an investor is considering buying one of the two firms U or L.
Instead of purchasing the shares of the levered firm L, he could purchase the
shares of firm U and borrow the same amount of money B that firm L does. The
eventual returns to either of these investments would be the same. Therefore
the price of L must be the same as the price of U minus the money borrowed B,
which is the value of L's debt. This discussion also clarifies the role of some
of the theorem's assumptions. We have implicitly assumed that the investor's
cost of borrowing money is the same as that of the firm, which need not be true
in the presence of asymmetric information, in the absence of efficient markets,
or if the investor has a different risk profile to the firm. Proposition II:.
formula_4 A higher debt-to-equity ratio leads to a higher required return on
equity, because of the higher risk involved for equity-holders in a company
with debt. The formula is derived from the theory of weighted average cost of
capital (WACC). These results might seem irrelevant (after all, none of the
conditions are met in the real world), but the theorem is still taught and
studied because it tells something very important. That is, capital structure
matters precisely because one or more of these assumptions is violated. It
tells where to look for determinants of optimal capital structure and how those
factors might affect optimal capital structure. With taxes. where This means
that there are advantages for firms to be levered, since corporations can
deduct interest payments. Therefore leverage lowers tax payments. Dividend
payments are non-deductible. where The same relationship as earlier described
stating that the cost of equity rises with leverage, because the risk to equity
rises, still holds. The formula however has implications for the difference
with the WACC. Their second attempt on capital structure included taxes has
identified that as the level of gearing increases by replacing equity with
cheap debt the level of the WACC drops and an optimal capital structure does
indeed exist at a point where debt is 100% Miller and Modigliani published a
number of follow-up papers discussing some of these issues. The theorem was
first proposed by F. Modigliani and M. Miller in 1958.
