Monarchy A monarchy is a form of government in which sovereignty is actually or
nominally embodied in a single individual (the monarch). Forms of monarchy
differ widely based on the level of legal autonomy the monarch holds in
governance, the method of selection of the monarch, and any predetermined
limits on the length of their tenure. When the monarch has no or few legal
restraints in state and political matters, it is called an "absolute monarchy"
and is a form of autocracy. Cases in which the monarch's discretion is formally
limited (most common today) are called "constitutional monarchies". In
"hereditary monarchies", the office is passed through inheritance within a
family group, whereas "elective monarchies" are selected by some system of
voting. Historically these systems are most commonly combined, either formally
or informally, in some manner. (For instance, in some elected monarchies only
those of certain pedigrees are considered eligible, whereas many hereditary
monarchies have legal requirements regarding the religion, age, gender, mental
capacity, and other factors that act both as "de facto" elections and to create
situations of rival claimants whose legitimacy is subject to effective
election.) Finally, there are situations in which the expiration of a
monarch’s reign is set based either on the calendar or on the achievement of
certain goals (repulse of invasion, for instance.) The effect of historical and
geographic difference along each of these three axes is to create widely
divergent structures and traditions defining “monarchy.” Monarchy was the
most common form of government into the 19th century, but it is no longer
prevalent, at least at the national level. Where it exists, it now often takes
the form of constitutional monarchy, in which the monarch retains a unique
legal and ceremonial role, but exercises limited or no political power pursuant
to a constitution or tradition which allocates governing authority elsewhere.
Currently, 44 sovereign nations in the world have monarchs acting as heads of
state, 16 of which are Commonwealth realms that recognize Queen Elizabeth II as
their head of state. All European monarchies are constitutional ones, with the
exception of the Vatican City, but sovereigns in the smaller states exercise
greater political influence than in the larger. The monarchs of Cambodia,
Japan, Jordan, Malaysia and Morocco "reign, but do not rule" although there is
considerable variation in the amount of authority they wield. Although they
reign under constitutions, the monarchs of Brunei, Oman, Qatar, Saudi Arabia
and Swaziland appear to continue to exercise more political influence than any
other single source of authority in their nations, either by constitutional
mandate or by tradition. Etymology. The word "monarch" () comes from the Greek
words μονάρχης, "monárkhēs" (from "monos", μόνος, "one/
singular," and ἄρχω, "árkhō", "to rule" (confer "archon", ἄρχων,
"leader/ruler/chief")) which referred to a single, at least nominally absolute
ruler. In current usage the word "monarchy" generally refers to a traditional
system of hereditary rule, as elective monarchies are rare in the modern
period. History. Tribal kingship is often connected to sacral functions, so
that the king acts as a priest, or is considered of Divine ancestry. The sacral
function of kingship was transformed into the notion of "Divine right of kings"
in the Christian Middle Ages, while the Chinese, Japanese and Nepalese monarchs
continued to be considered living Gods into the modern period. The system of
monarchy since antiquity has contrasted with forms of democracy, where
executive power is wielded by assemblies of free citizens. In antiquity,
monarchies were abolished in favour of such assemblies in Ancient Rome (Roman
Republic, 509 BC), Ancient Athens (Athenian democracy, 500 BC). In Germanic
antiquity, kingship was primarily a sacral function, and the king was elected
from among eligible members of royal families by the thing. Such ancient
"parliamentarism" declined during the European Middle Ages, but it survived in
forms of regional assemblies, such as the Icelandic Commonwealth, the Swiss
Landsgemeinde and later Tagsatzung, and the High Medieval communal movement
linked to the rise of medieval town privileges. The modern resurgence of
parliamentarism and anti-monarchism began with the overthrow of the English
monarchy by the Parliament of England in 1649, followed by the American
Revolution of 1776 and the French Revolution of 1792. Much of 19th century
politics was characterized by the division between anti-monarchist Radicalism
and monarchist Conservativism. Many countries abolished the monarchy in the
20th century and became republics, especially in the wake of either World War I
or World War II. Advocacy of republics is called republicanism, while advocacy
of monarchies is called monarchism. Characteristics and role. Monarchies are
associated with political or sociocultural hereditary rule, in which monarchs
rule for life (although some monarchs do not hold lifetime positions, such as
the Yang di-Pertuan Agong of Malaysia, who serves a five-year term) and pass
the responsibilities and power of the position to their children or family when
they die. Most monarchs, both historically and in the modern day, have been
born and brought up within a royal family, the center of the royal household
and court. Growing up in a royal family (when present for several generations
it may be called a dynasty), and future monarchs were often trained for the
responsibilities of expected future rule. Different systems of succession have
been used, such as proximity of blood, primogeniture, and agnatic seniority
(Salic law). While traditionally most modern monarchs have been male, many
female monarchs also have ruled in history; the term queen regnant may refer to
a ruling monarch, while a queen consort may refer to the wife of a reigning
king. Form of governments may be hereditary without being considered
monarchies, such as that of family dictatorships or political families in many
democracies. The principal advantage of hereditary monarchy is the immediate
continuity of leadership, usually with a short interregnum (as seen in the
classic phrase "The King is dead. Long live the King!"). Some monarchies are
non-hereditary. In an elective monarchy, monarchs are elected, or appointed by
some body (an electoral college) for life or a defined period, but otherwise
serve as any other monarch. Three elective monarchies exist today, Malaysia and
the United Arab Emirates are twentieth-century creations, while one (the
papacy) is ancient. A self-proclaimed monarchy is established when a person
claims the monarchy without any historical ties to a previous dynasty. Napoleon
I of France declared himself Emperor of the French and ruled the First French
Empire after previously calling himself First Consul following his seizure of
power in the coup of 18 Brumaire. Jean-Bédel Bokassa of the Central African
Republic declared himself "Emperor" of the Central African Empire. Yuan Shikai
crowned himself Emperor of the short-lived "Empire of China" a few years after
the Republic of China was founded. Person of monarch. Most states only have a
single person acting as monarch at any given time, although two monarchs have
ruled simultaneously in some countries, a situation known as diarchy.
Historically this was the case in the ancient Greek city-state of Sparta or
17th-century Russia, and there are examples of joint sovereignty of spouses or
relatives (such as William and Mary in the Kingdoms of England and Scotland).
Other examples of joint sovereignty include Tsars Peter I and Ivan V of Russia
and Charles V, Holy Roman Emperor and Joanna of Castile of the Crown of
Castile. Andorra currently is the world's sole constitutional diarchy or co-
principality. Located in the Pyrenees between Spain and France, it has two co-
princes: the Bishop of Urgell (a prince-bishop) in Spain and the President of
France. It is the only situation in which an independent country's monarch is
democratically elected by the citizens of another country. In a personal union,
separate independent states share the same crown with one person as the
monarch. The sixteen separate Commonwealth realms are sometimes described as
being in a personal union with Queen Elizabeth II as monarch, however, legally
each Commonwealth Realm has its own crown or monarchy, so they can also be
described as being in a "Shared Monarchy". A regent may rule when the monarch
is a minor, absent, or debilitated. A pretender is a claimant to an abolished
throne or to a throne already occupied by somebody else. Abdication is when a
monarch resigns. Monarchs often take part in certain ceremonies, such as a
coronation. Role of religion. Monarchy, especially absolute monarchy, sometimes
is linked to religious aspects; many monarchs once claimed the right to rule by
the will of a deity (Divine Right of Kings, Mandate of Heaven), a special
connection to a deity (sacred king) or even purported to be divine kings, or
incarnations of deities themselves (imperial cult). Many European monarchs have
been styled "Fidei defensor" (Defender of the Faith); some hold official
positions relating to the state religion or established church. In the Western
political tradition, a morally-based, "balanced" monarchy is stressed as the
ideal form of government, and little reverence is paid to modern-day ideals of
egalitarian democracy: e.g. Saint Thomas Aquinas unapologetically declares:
"Tyranny is wont to occur not less but more frequently on the basis of
polyarchy by many, i.e. oligarchy or democracy than on the basis of monarchy."
("On Kingship"). However, Thomas Aquinas also stated that the ideal monarchical
system would also have at lower levels of government both an aristocracy and
elements of democracy in order to created a balance of power. The monarch would
also be subject to both natural and divine law, as well, and also be subject to
the Church in matters of religion. In Dante Alighieri's "De Monarchia", a
spiritualized, imperial Catholic monarchy is strongly promoted according to a
Ghibelline world-view in which the "royal religion of Melchizedek" is
emphasized against the sacerdotal claims of the rival papal ideology. In the
Muslim World, the King of Saudi Arabia is a head of state who is both the
absolute monarch of the country and the Custodian of the Two Holy Mosques of
Islam (خادم الحرمين الشريفين). Titles of monarchs. Monarchs
have various titles, including king or queen, prince or princess (Sovereign
Prince of Monaco), emperor or empress (Emperor of Japan, Emperor of India), or
even duke or grand duke (Grand Duke of Luxembourg) or duchess. Many monarchs
also are distinguished by styles, such as "Majesty", "Royal Highness" or "By
the Grace of God". Islamic monarchs use titles such as Caliph, Sultan, Emir and
Sheikh. In Mongolian or Turkic lands, the monarch may use the title Khan or
Khagan. Sometimes titles are used to express claims to territories that are not
held in fact (for example, English claims to the French throne) or titles not
recognized (antipopes). Dependent monarchies. In some cases monarchs are
dependent on other powers (see vassals, suzerainty, puppet state, hegemony). In
the British colonial era indirect rule under a paramount power existed, such as
the princely states under the British Raj. In Botswana, South Africa, Ghana and
Uganda, the ancient kingdoms and chiefdoms that were met by the colonialists
when they first arrived on the continent are now constitutionally protected as
regional and/or sectional entities. Furthermore, in Nigeria, though the
hundreds of sub-regional polities that exist there are not provided for in the
current constitution, they are nevertheless legally recognised aspects of the
structure of governance that operates in the nation. In addition to these five
countries, peculiar monarchies of varied sizes and complexities exist in
various other parts of Africa. Succession. The rules for selection of monarchs
varies from country to country. In constitutional monarchies the rule of
succession generally is embodied in a law passed by a representative body, such
as a parliament. Hereditary monarchies. In a hereditary monarchy, the position
of monarch is inherited according to a statutory or customary order of
succession, usually within one royal family tracing its origin through a
historical dynasty or bloodline. This usually means that the heir to the throne
is known well in advance of becoming monarch to ensure a smooth succession.
Primogeniture, in which the eldest child of the monarch is first in line to
become monarch, is the most common system in hereditary monarchy. The order of
succession is usually affected by rules on gender. Historically "agnatic
primogeniture" or "patrilineal primogeniture" was favoured, that is inheritance
according to seniority of birth among the sons of a monarch or head of family,
with sons and their male issue inheriting before brothers and their issue, and
male-line males inheriting before females of the male line. This is the same as
semi-Salic primogeniture. Complete exclusion of females from dynastic
succession is commonly referred to as application of the Salic law (see "Terra
salica"). Before primogeniture was enshrined in European law and tradition,
kings would often secure the succession by having their successor (usually
their eldest son) crowned during their own lifetime, so for a time there would
be two kings in coregency – a senior king and a junior king. Examples include
Henry the Young King of England and the early Direct Capetians in France.
Sometimes, however, primogeniture can operate through the female line. In some
systems a female may rule as monarch only when the male line dating back to a
common ancestor is exhausted. In 1980, Sweden became the first European
monarchy to declare equal (full cognatic) primogeniture, meaning that the
eldest child of the monarch, whether female or male, ascends to the throne.
Other kingdoms (such as the Netherlands in 1983, Norway in 1990, Belgium in
1991) have since followed suit. Similar reforms were proposed in 2011 for the
United Kingdom and the Commonwealth Realms, but have yet to pass into law,
pending approval by all of the affected nations. Sometimes religion is
affected; under the Act of Settlement 1701 all Roman Catholics and all persons
who have married Roman Catholics are ineligible to be the British monarch and
are skipped in the order of succession. In the case of the absence of children,
the next most senior member of the collateral line (for example, a younger
sibling of the previous monarch) becomes monarch. In complex cases, this can
mean that there are closer blood relatives to the deceased monarch than the
next in line according to primogeniture. This has often led, especially in
Europe in the Middle Ages, to conflict between the principle of primogeniture
and the principle of proximity of blood, with outcomes that were idiosyncratic.
Other hereditary systems of succession included tanistry, which is semi-
elective and gives weight to merit and Agnatic seniority. In some monarchies,
such as Saudi Arabia, succession to the throne usually first passes to the
monarch's next eldest brother, and only after that to the monarch's children
(agnatic seniority). Elective monarchies. In an elective monarchy, monarchs are
elected, or appointed by some body (an electoral college) for life or a defined
period, but otherwise serve as any other monarch. There is no popular vote
involved in elective monarchies, as the elective body usually consists of a
small number of eligible people. Historical examples of elective monarchy
include the Holy Roman Emperors (chosen by prince-electors, but often coming
from the same dynasty), and the free election of kings of the
Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth. For example, Pepin the Short (father of
Charlemagne) was elected King of the Franks by an assembly of Frankish leading
men; Stanisław August Poniatowski of Poland was an elected king, as was
Frederick I of Denmark. Germanic peoples had elective monarchies. Three
elective monarchies exist today. The pope of the Roman Catholic Church (who
rules as Sovereign of the Vatican City State) is elected to a life term by the
College of Cardinals. In Malaysia, the federal king, called the Yang di-Pertuan
Agong ("Paramount Ruler") is elected for a five-year term from and by the
hereditary rulers (mostly sultans) of nine of the federation's constitutive
states, all on the Malay peninsula. The United Arab Emirates also has a
procedure for electing its monarch. Appointment by the current monarch is
another system, used in Jordan. In this system, the monarch chooses the
successor, who is always his relative.
