Money Money is any object or record that is generally accepted as payment for
goods and services and repayment of debts in a given socio-economic context or
country. The main functions of money are distinguished as: a medium of
exchange; a unit of account; a store of value; and, occasionally in the past, a
standard of deferred payment. Any kind of object or secure verifiable record
that fulfills these functions can serve as money. Money is historically an
emergent market phenomena establishing a commodity money, but nearly all
contemporary money systems are based on fiat money. Fiat money is without
intrinsic use value as a physical commodity, and derives its value by being
declared by a government to be legal tender; that is, it must be accepted as a
form of payment within the boundaries of the country, for "all debts, public
and private". The money supply of a country consists of currency (banknotes and
coins) and bank money (the balance held in checking accounts and savings
accounts). Bank money usually forms by far the largest part of the money
supply. History. The use of barter-like methods may date back to at least
100,000 years ago, though there is no evidence of a society or economy that
relied primarily on barter. Instead, non-monetary societies operated largely
along the principles of gift economics and debt. When barter did in fact occur,
it was usually between either complete strangers or potential enemies. Many
cultures around the world eventually developed the use of commodity money. The
shekel was originally a unit of weight, and referred to a specific weight of
barley, which was used as currency. The first usage of the term came from
Mesopotamia circa 3000 BC. Societies in the Americas, Asia, Africa and
Australia used shell money – often, the shells of the money cowry ("Cypraea
moneta L." or "C. annulus L."). According to Herodotus, the Lydians were the
first people to introduce the use of gold and silver coins. It is thought by
modern scholars that these first stamped coins were minted around 650–600 BC.
The system of commodity money eventually evolved into a system of
representative money. This occurred because gold and silver merchants or banks
would issue receipts to their depositors – redeemable for the commodity money
deposited. Eventually, these receipts became generally accepted as a means of
payment and were used as money. Paper money or banknotes were first used in
China during the Song Dynasty. These banknotes, known as "jiaozi", evolved from
promissory notes that had been used since the 7th century. However, they did
not displace commodity money, and were used alongside coins. Banknotes were
first issued in Europe by Stockholms Banco in 1661, and were again also used
alongside coins. The gold standard, a monetary system where the medium of
exchange are paper notes that are convertible into pre-set, fixed quantities of
gold, replaced the use of gold coins as currency in the 17th-19th centuries in
Europe. These gold standard notes were made legal tender, and redemption into
gold coins was discouraged. By the beginning of the 20th century almost all
countries had adopted the gold standard, backing their legal tender notes with
fixed amounts of gold. After World War II, at the Bretton Woods Conference,
most countries adopted fiat currencies that were fixed to the US dollar. The US
dollar was in turn fixed to gold. In 1971 the US government suspended the
convertibility of the US dollar to gold. After this many countries de-pegged
their currencies from the US dollar, and most of the world's currencies became
unbacked by anything except the governments' fiat of legal tender and the
ability to convert the money into goods via payment. Etymology. The word
"money" is believed to originate from a temple of Hera, located on Capitoline,
one of Rome's seven hills. In the ancient world Hera was often associated with
money. The temple of Juno Moneta at Rome was the place where the mint of
Ancient Rome was located. The name "Juno" may derive from the Etruscan goddess
Uni (which means "the one", "unique", "unit", "union", "united") and "Moneta"
either from the Latin word "monere" (remind, warn, or instruct) or the Greek
word "moneres" (alone, unique). In the Western world, a prevalent term for
coin-money has been "", stemming from Latin "in specie", meaning 'in kind'.
Functions. In the past, money was generally considered to have the following
four main functions, which are summed up in a rhyme found in older economics
textbooks: "Money is a matter of functions four, a medium, a measure, a
standard, a store." That is, money functions as a medium of exchange, a unit of
account, a standard of deferred payment, and a store of value. However, modern
textbooks now list only three functions, that of medium of exchange, unit of
account, and store of value, not considering a standard of deferred payment as
a distinguished function, but rather subsuming it in the others. There have
been many historical disputes regarding the combination of money's functions,
some arguing that they need more separation and that a single unit is
insufficient to deal with them all. One of these arguments is that the role of
money as a medium of exchange is in conflict with its role as a store of value:
its role as a store of value requires holding it without spending, whereas its
role as a medium of exchange requires it to circulate. Others argue that
storing of value is just deferral of the exchange, but does not diminish the
fact that money is a medium of exchange that can be transported both across
space and time. The term 'financial capital' is a more general and inclusive
term for all liquid instruments, whether or not they are a uniformly recognized
tender. Medium of exchange. When money is used to intermediate the exchange of
goods and services, it is performing a function as a "medium of exchange". It
thereby avoids the inefficiencies of a barter system, such as the 'double
coincidence of wants' problem. Store of value. To act as a "store of value", a
money must be able to be reliably saved, stored, and retrieved – and be
predictably usable as a medium of exchange when it is retrieved. The value of
the money must also remain stable over time. Some have argued that inflation,
by reducing the value of money, diminishes the ability of the money to function
as a store of value. Standard of deferred payment. While "standard of deferred
payment" is distinguished by some texts, particularly older ones, other texts
subsume this under other functions. A "standard of deferred payment" is an
accepted way to settle a debt – a unit in which debts are denominated, and
the status of money as legal tender, in those jurisdictions which have this
concept, states that it may function for the discharge of debts. When debts are
denominated in money, the real value of debts may change due to inflation and
deflation, and for sovereign and international debts via debasement and
devaluation. Measure of value. Money acts as a standard measure and common
denomination of trade. It is thus a basis for quoting and bargaining of prices.
It is necessary for developing efficient accounting systems. But its most
important usage is as a method for comparing the values of dissimilar objects.
Money supply. In economics, money is a broad term that refers to any financial
instrument that can fulfill the functions of money (detailed above). These
financial instruments together are collectively referred to as the money supply
of an economy. In other words, the money supply is the amount of financial
instruments within a specific economy available for purchasing goods or
services. Since the money supply consists of various financial instruments
(usually currency, demand deposits and various other types of deposits), the
amount of money in an economy is measured by adding together these financial
instruments creating a "monetary aggregate". Modern monetary theory
distinguishes among different ways to measure the money supply, reflected in
different types of monetary aggregates, using a categorization system that
focuses on the liquidity of the financial instrument used as money. The most
commonly used monetary aggregates (or types of money) are conventionally
designated M1, M2 and M3. These are successively larger aggregate categories:
M1 is currency (coins and bills) plus demand deposits (such as checking
accounts); M2 is M1 plus savings accounts and time deposits under $100,000; and
M3 is M2 plus larger time deposits and similar institutional accounts. M1
includes only the most liquid financial instruments, and M3 relatively illiquid
instruments. Another measure of money, M0, is also used; unlike the other
measures, it does not represent actual purchasing power by firms and households
in the economy. M0 is base money, or the amount of money actually issued by the
central bank of a country. It is measured as currency plus deposits of banks
and other institutions at the central bank. M0 is also the only money that can
satisfy the reserve requirements of commercial banks. Market liquidity. "Market
liquidity" describes how easily an item can be traded for another item, or into
the common currency within an economy. Money is the most liquid asset because
it is universally recognised and accepted as the common currency. In this way,
money gives consumers the freedom to trade goods and services easily without
having to barter. Liquid financial instruments are easily tradable and have low
transaction costs. There should be no (or minimal) spread between the prices to
buy and sell the instrument being used as money. Types of money. Currently,
most modern monetary systems are based on fiat money. However, for most of
history, almost all money was commodity money, such as gold and silver coins.
As economies developed, commodity money was eventually replaced by
representative money, such as the gold standard, as traders found the physical
transportation of gold and silver burdensome. Fiat currencies gradually took
over in the last hundred years, especially since the breakup of the Bretton
Woods system in the early 1970s. Commodity money. Many items have been used as
commodity money such as naturally scarce precious metals, conch shells, barley,
beads etc., as well as many other things that are thought of as having value.
Commodity money value comes from the commodity out of which it is made. The
commodity itself constitutes the money, and the money is the commodity.
Examples of commodities that have been used as mediums of exchange include
gold, silver, copper, rice, salt, peppercorns, large stones, decorated belts,
shells, alcohol, cigarettes, cannabis, candy, etc. These items were sometimes
used in a metric of perceived value in conjunction to one another, in various
commodity valuation or Price System economies. Use of commodity money is
similar to barter, but a commodity money provides a simple and automatic unit
of account for the commodity which is being used as money. Although some gold
coins such as the Krugerrand are considered legal tender, there is no record of
their face value on either side of the coin. The rationale for this is that
emphasis is laid on their direct link to the prevailing value of their fine
gold content. American Eagles are imprinted with their gold content and legal
tender face value. Representative money. In 1875 economist William Stanley
Jevons described what he called "representative money," i.e., money that
consists of token coins, or other physical tokens such as certificates, that
can be reliably exchanged for a fixed quantity of a commodity such as gold or
silver. The value of representative money stands in direct and fixed relation
to the commodity that backs it, while not itself being composed of that
commodity. Fiat money. Fiat money or fiat currency is money whose value is not
derived from any intrinsic value or guarantee that it can be converted into a
valuable commodity (such as gold). Instead, it has value only by government
order (fiat). Usually, the government declares the fiat currency (typically
notes and coins from a central bank, such as the Federal Reserve System in the
U.S.) to be legal tender, making it unlawful to not accept the fiat currency as
a means of repayment for all debts, public and private. Some bullion coins such
as the Australian Gold Nugget and American Eagle are legal tender, however,
they trade based on the market price of the metal content as a commodity,
rather than their legal tender face value (which is usually only a small
fraction of their bullion value). Fiat money, if physically represented in the
form of currency (paper or coins) can be accidentally damaged or destroyed.
However, fiat money has an advantage over representative or commodity money, in
that the same laws that created the money can also define rules for its
replacement in case of damage or destruction. For example, the U.S. government
will replace mutilated Federal Reserve notes (U.S. fiat money) if at least half
of the physical note can be reconstructed, or if it can be otherwise proven to
have been destroyed. By contrast, commodity money which has been lost or
destroyed cannot be recovered. Currency. Currency refers to physical objects
generally accepted as a medium of exchange. These are usually the coins and
banknotes of a particular government, which comprise the physical aspects of a
nation's money supply. The other part of a nation's money supply consists of
bank deposits (sometimes called deposit money), ownership of which can be
transferred by means of cheques, debit cards, or other forms of money transfer.
Deposit money and currency are money in the sense that both are acceptable as a
means of payment. Money in the form of currency has predominated throughout
most of history. Usually (gold or silver) coins of intrinsic value (commodity
money) have been the norm. However, nearly all contemporary money systems are
based on fiat money – modern currency has value only by government order
(fiat). Usually, the government declares the fiat currency (typically notes and
coins issued by the central bank) to be legal tender, making it unlawful to not
accept the fiat currency as a means of repayment for all debts, public and
private. Commercial bank money. Commercial bank money or demand deposits are
claims against financial institutions that can be used for the purchase of
goods and services. A demand deposit account is an account from which funds can
be withdrawn at any time by check or cash withdrawal without giving the bank or
financial institution any prior notice. Banks have the legal obligation to
return funds held in demand deposits immediately upon demand (or 'at call').
Demand deposit withdrawals can be performed in person, via checks or bank
drafts, using automatic teller machines (ATMs), or through online banking.
Commercial bank money is created through fractional-reserve banking, the
banking practice where banks keep only a "fraction" of their deposits in
reserve (as cash and other highly liquid assets) and lend out the remainder,
while maintaining the simultaneous obligation to redeem all these deposits upon
demand. Commercial bank money differs from commodity and fiat money in two
ways, firstly it is non-physical, as its existence is only reflected in the
account ledgers of banks and other financial institutions, and secondly, there
is some element of risk that the claim will not be fulfilled if the financial
institution becomes insolvent. The process of fractional-reserve banking has a
cumulative effect of money creation by commercial banks, as it expands money
supply (cash and demand deposits) beyond what it would otherwise be. Because of
the prevalence of fractional reserve banking, the broad money supply of most
countries is a multiple larger than the amount of base money created by the
country's central bank. That multiple (called the money multiplier) is
determined by the reserve requirement or other financial ratio requirements
imposed by financial regulators. The money supply of a country is usually held
to be the total amount of currency in circulation plus the total amount of
checking and savings deposits in the commercial banks in the country. In modern
economies, relatively little of the money supply is in physical currency. For
example, in December 2010 in the U.S., of the $8853.4 billion in broad money
supply (M2), only $915.7 billion (about 10%) consisted of physical coins and
paper money. Digital money. Digital currencies gained momentum in before the
2000 tech bubble. Flooz and Beenz were particularly advertised as an
alternative form of money. While the tech bubble caused them to be short lived,
many new digital currencies have reached some, albeit generally small
userbases. Most digital currencies are simply fiat currencies parleyed across a
digital medium. However, protocols like Bitcoin allow money to only exist in
cyberspace which allows for some classic limitations to be lifted. Never before
has the sending of money across a geographical divide not required the trust of
a third party which of course then is susceptible to regulatory capture. New
forms of currency coming to fruition this very day allow for the free exchange
of wealth across distances. Monetary policy. When gold and silver are used as
money, the money supply can grow only if the supply of these metals is
increased by mining. This rate of increase will accelerate during periods of
gold rushes and discoveries, such as when Columbus discovered the New World and
brought back gold and silver to Spain, or when gold was discovered in
California in 1848. This causes inflation, as the value of gold goes down.
However, if the rate of gold mining cannot keep up with the growth of the
economy, gold becomes relatively more valuable, and prices (denominated in
gold) will drop, causing deflation. Deflation was the more typical situation
for over a century when gold and paper money backed by gold were used as money
in the 18th and 19th centuries. Modern day monetary systems are based on fiat
money and are no longer tied to the value of gold. The control of the amount of
money in the economy is known as monetary policy. Monetary policy is the
process by which a government, central bank, or monetary authority manages the
money supply to achieve specific goals. Usually the goal of monetary policy is
to accommodate economic growth in an environment of stable prices. For example,
it is clearly stated in the Federal Reserve Act that the Board of Governors and
the Federal Open Market Committee should seek “to promote effectively the
goals of maximum employment, stable prices, and moderate long-term interest
rates.” A failed monetary policy can have significant detrimental effects on
an economy and the society that depends on it. These include hyperinflation,
stagflation, recession, high unemployment, shortages of imported goods,
inability to export goods, and even total monetary collapse and the adoption of
a much less efficient barter economy. This happened in Russia, for instance,
after the fall of the Soviet Union. In the US, the Federal Reserve is
responsible for controlling the money supply, while in the Euro area the
respective institution is the European Central Bank. Other central banks with
significant impact on global finances are the Bank of Japan, People's Bank of
China and the Bank of England. For many years much of monetary policy was
influenced by an economic theory known as monetarism. Monetarism is an economic
theory which argues that management of the money supply should be the primary
means of regulating economic activity. The stability of the demand for money
prior to the 1980s was a key finding of Milton Friedman and Anna Schwartz
supported by the work of David Laidler, and many others. The nature of the
demand for money changed during the 1980s owing to technical, institutional,
and legal factors and the influence of monetarism has since decreased.
