Monetary reform Monetary reform describes any movement or theory that proposes
a different system of supplying money and financing the economy from the
current system. Common targets for reform. Fractional Reserve Banking.
Fractional-reserve banking describes systems in which banks lend money while at
the same time guaranteeing that depositors will all be able to make withdrawals
of their money on demand. It is alleged by some economists (such as those of
the Austrian School) that this is inherently inflationary, causes business
cycles and is inherently volatile. Several major historical examples of
financial regulatory reform occurred in the 20th century relating to
fractional-reserve banking, made in response to the Great Depression and the
many bank runs following the crash of 1929. These reforms included the creation
of deposit insurance (such as the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation) to
mitigate against the danger of bank runs. Countries have also implemented legal
reserve requirements which impose minimum reserve requirements on banks.
Mainstream economists believe that these monetary reforms have made sudden
disruptions in the banking system less frequent. However, some critics of
fractional reserve banking argue that the practice inherently amounts to a kind
of "fraud" perpetrated against depositors/savers as it, in their view,
artificially lowers real interest rates, destabilizes the money supply and
contributes to volatile and wasteful business cycles (or "credit cycles").
Other critics, such as Michael Rowbotham, equate the practice with
counterfeiting, where government-protected privileged private entities (the
banks) are granted the legal right to create money "out of the nothing" while
also being granted the right to charge interest on their creation. Michael
Rowbotham argues that this concentrates wealth in the banking sector (which has
a "cannibalizing" effect on the rest of the economy), causes the rest of the
populace to slowly sink into debt slavery, creates volatile hyperinflation in
the housing market and deflation in the consumer goods market, squeezes real
wages, destroys farming and agriculture and de-industrializes heavily indebted
economies. Fiat money. Banks create new money as loans through fractional-
reserve banking, resultant money is no longer backed by a tangible asset. Money
does not represent anything other than the debt of another; the only "tangible"
aspect of the system is the borrower’s promise to pay back the interest and
principal on the loan. Debt and the ability of borrowers to service that debt
then becomes the underlying currency. Money creation by the central bank. Many
people criticise the fact that governments pay interest for the use of their
own money which the central bank creates "out of nothing". This leaves the
state of a nation's economy susceptible to the interests of private bankers who
create the money solely for the purpose of creating ongoing profits for their
employees and shareholders, without any other binding social or legal
obligations to the broader community (or future generations) that are normally
expected from government entities. Either private individuals or corporations
borrow to fund themselves and their businesses, or government "borrows" money
from the central bank to fund deficit spending. International organizations and
developing nations. Some monetary reformers criticise existing global financial
institutions like the World Bank and International Monetary Fund and their
policies regarding money supply, banks and debt in developing nations, in that
they appear to these writers to be "forcing" a regime of extortionate or
unpayable debt on weak Third World governments that do not have the capacity to
pay the interest on these loans without severely affecting the well-being or
even the viability of the local population. The attempt by weak Third World
governments to service external debt with the sale of valuable hard and soft
commodities on world markets is seen by some to be destructive of local
cultures, destroying local communities and their environment. Alternative money
systems. Central Bank Independence. In an attempt to control the volatile,
exponential growth of the money supply, some countries have created a currency
board, or granted independence to their central bank. The Reserve Bank of New
Zealand, the Reserve Bank of Australia, the Federal Reserve, and the Bank of
England are examples where the central bank is explicitly given the power to
set interest rates and conduct monetary policy independent of any direct
political interference or direction from the central government. This may
enable the setting of interest rates to be less susceptible to political
interference and thereby assist in combating inflation (or debasement of the
currency) by allowing the central bank to more effectively restrict the growth
of M3. However, given that these policies do not address the more fundamental
issues inherent in fractional reserve banking, many suggest that only more
radical monetary reform can promote positive economic or social change.
Although central banks may appear to control inflation, through periodic bank
rescues and other means, they may inadvertently be forced to increase the money
supply (and thereby debase the currency) to save the banking system from
bankruptcy or collapse during periodic bank runs, thereby inducing moral hazard
in the financial system, making the system susceptible to economic bubbles.
International Monetary Reform. Theorists such as Robert Mundell (and more
radical thinkers such as James Robertson) see a role for global monetary reform
as part of a system of global institutions alongside the United Nations to
provide global ecological management and move towards world peace, with Robert
Mundell in particular advocating the revived use of gold as a stabilising
factor in the international financial system. Henry Liu of the "Asia Times
Online" argues that monetary reform is an important part of a move towards
post-autistic economics. While some mainstream economists favour monetary
reforms to reduce inflation and currency risk and to increase efficiency in the
allocation of financial capital, the idea of all-encompassing reform for green
or peace objectives is typically espoused by those on the left-wing of the
subject and those associated with the anti-globalization movement. Social
Credit and the provision of debt-free money directly from government. Still
other radical reform proposals emphasise monetary, tax and capital budget
reform which empowers government to direct the economy toward sustainable
solutions which are not possible if government spending can only be financed
with more government debt from the private banking system. In particular a
number of monetary reformers, such as Michael Rowbotham, Stephen Zarlenga and
Ellen Brown, support the restriction or banning of fractional-reserve banking
(characterizing it as an illegitimate banking practice akin to embezzlement)
and advocate the replacement of fractional-reserve banking with government-
issued debt-free fiat currency issued directly from the Treasury rather than
from the quasi-government Federal Reserve. Austrian commentator Gary North has
sharply criticized these views in his writings. Alternatively, some monetary
reformers such as those in the Social Credit movement, support the issuance of
repayable interest-free credit from a government-owned central bank to fund
infrastructure and sustainable social projects. This Social Credit movement
flourished briefly in the early 20th century, but then became marginalized and
died out in the post-World War II era. Both these groups (those who advocate
the replacement of fractional-reserve banking with debt-free government-issued
fiat, and those who support the issuance of repayable interest-free credit from
a government-owned central bank) see the provision of interest-free money as a
way of freeing the working populace from the bonds of "debt slavery" and
facilitating a transformation of the economy away from environmentally damaging
consumerism and towards sustainable economic policies and environment-friendly
business practices. Examples of government issued debt-free money. Some
governments have experimented in the past with debt-free government-created
money independent of a bank. The American Colonies used the "Colonial Scrip"
system prior to the Revolution, much to the praise of Benjamin Franklin. He
believed it was the efforts of English bankers to revoke this government-issued
money that caused the Revolution. Abraham Lincoln used interest-free money
created by the government to help the Union win the American Civil War. He
called these 'Greenbacks' "the greatest blessing the people of this republic
ever had." The islands of Guernsey and Jersey in the Channel Islands create
their own money, the Guernsey pound and Jersey pound, to supplement the British
Pound and the Scottish pound. Local barter, local currency. Some go further and
suggest that wholesale reform of money and currency, based on ideas from green
economics or Natural Capitalism, would be beneficial. These include the ideas
of soft currency, barter and the local service economy. Local currency systems
can operate within small communities, outside of government systems, and use
specially printed notes or tokens called scrips for exchange. Barter takes this
further by swapping goods and services directly; a compromise being the Local
Exchange Trading Systems (LETS) scheme: a formalised system of Community-based
economics that records members’ mutual credit in a central location. Micro
credit. Banks offering small loans on simple interest, not compound interest,
can make a difference to small-scale business people trying to make a start
without collateral. The Grameen Bank instituted this technique and remains
popular and influential. Return to the gold standard. A move away from fiat
money towards a hard currency or asset-backed currency does not necessarily
mean using commodity money such as gold, silver or both in daily transactions.
The vast majority of the gold supposedly in reserve is held by the Federal
Reserve as collateral for the national debt. The currency could be tied to the
good faith and credit of the United States Government, which already issues
bonds on the open market, which in turn could be redeemable in gold or silver.
Digital means are also now possible to allow trading in hard currencies such as
gold, and some believe a new free market will emerge in money production and
distribution, as the internet allows renewed decentralisation and competition
in this area, eroding the central government's and bankers' old monopoly
control of the means of exchange. Some monetary reformers believe that in a
genuine free market, where government did not impose a monopoly currency on the
populace, a gold standard or silver standard monetary system would arise
spontaneously out of the free market because of their unique properties: their
extraordinary malleability, their strong resistance to forgery, their character
as stable and impervious to decay, and their inherently limited supply.
