Money supply In economics, the money supply or money stock, is the total amount
of monetary assets available in an economy at a specific time. There are
several ways to define "money," but standard measures usually include currency
in circulation and demand deposits (depositors' easily accessed assets on the
books of financial institutions). Money supply data are recorded and published,
usually by the government or the central bank of the country. Public and
private sector analysts have long monitored changes in money supply because of
its possible effects on the price level, inflation, the exchange rate and the
business cycle. That relation between money and prices is historically
associated with the quantity theory of money. There is strong empirical
evidence of a direct relation between long-term price inflation and money-
supply growth, at least for rapid increases in the amount of money in the
economy. That is, a country such as Zimbabwe which saw rapid increases in its
money supply also saw rapid increases in prices (hyperinflation). This is one
reason for the reliance on monetary policy as a means of controlling inflation.
The nature of this causal chain is the subject of contention. Some heterodox
economists argue that the money supply is endogenous (determined by the
workings of the economy, not by the central bank) and that the sources of
inflation must be found in the distributional structure of the economy. In
addition, those economists seeing the central bank's control over the money
supply as feeble say that there are two weak links between the growth of the
money supply and the inflation rate. First, an increase in the money supply,
unless trapped in the financial system as excess reserves, can cause a
sustained increase in real production instead of inflation in the aftermath of
a recession, when many resources are underutilized. Second, if the velocity of
money, i.e., the ratio between nominal GDP and money supply, changes, an
increase in the money supply could have either no effect, an exaggerated
effect, or an unpredictable effect on the growth of nominal GDP. Empirical
measures in the United States Federal Reserve System. Money is used as a medium
of exchange, in final settlement of a debt, and as a ready store of value. Its
different functions are associated with different empirical measures of the
money supply. There is no single "correct" measure of the money supply.
Instead, there are several measures, classified along a spectrum or continuum
between narrow and broad "monetary aggregates". Narrow measures include only
the most liquid assets, the ones most easily used to spend (currency, checkable
deposits). Broader measures add less liquid types of assets (certificates of
deposit, etc.). This continuum corresponds to the way that different types of
money are more or less controlled by monetary policy. Narrow measures include
those more directly affected and controlled by monetary policy, whereas broader
measures are less closely related to monetary-policy actions. It is a matter of
perennial debate as to whether narrower or broader versions of the money supply
have a more predictable link to nominal GDP. The ratio of a pair of these
measures, most often M2/M0, is called an (actual, empirical) money multiplier.
Fractional-reserve banking. In the money supply statistics, central bank money
is MB while the commercial bank money is divided up into the M1-M3 components.
Generally, the types of commercial bank money that tend to be valued at lower
amounts are classified in the narrow category of M1 while the types of
commercial bank money that tend to exist in larger amounts are categorized in
M2 and M3, with M3 having the largest. In the US, reserves consist of money in
Federal Reserve accounts and US currency held by banks (also known as "vault
cash"). Currency and money in Fed accounts are interchangeable (both are
obligations of the Fed.) Reserves may come from any source, including the
federal funds market, deposits by the public, and borrowing from the Fed
itself. A reserve requirement is a ratio a bank must maintain between deposits
and reserves. Reserve requirements do not apply to the amount of money a bank
may lend out. The ratio that applies to bank lending is its capital
requirement. Example. Note: The examples apply when read in sequential order.
M0 M1 M2 Foreign Exchange Money supplies around the world. United States. It
should be noted that while the treasury can and does hold cash and a special
deposit account at the Fed (fed funds), these assets do not count in any of the
aggregates. So in essence paying taxes destroys the money supply. To counter
this, the government created the TT&L program in which any receipts above a
certain threshold are redeposited in private banks. The idea is that tax
receipts won't decrease the amount of reserves in the banking system. The TT&L
accounts, while demand deposits, do not count toward M1 or any other aggregate
as well. When the Federal Reserve announced in 2005 that they would cease
publishing M3 statistics in March 2006, they explained that M3 did not convey
any additional information about economic activity compared to M2, and thus,
"has not played a role in the monetary policy process for many years."
Therefore, the costs to collect M3 data outweighed the benefits the data
provided. Some politicians have spoken out against the Federal Reserve's
decision to cease publishing M3 statistics and have urged the U.S. Congress to
take steps requiring the Federal Reserve to do so. Congressman Ron Paul (R-TX)
claimed that "M3 is the best description of how quickly the Fed is creating new
money and credit. Common sense tells us that a government central bank creating
new money out of thin air depreciates the value of each dollar in circulation."
Modern Monetary Theory disagrees. It holds that money creation in a free-
floating fiat currency regime such as the U.S. will not lead to significant
inflation unless the economy is approaching full employment and full capacity.
Current alternate sources of M3 data are available from the private sector. As
of November 17, 2011 the Federal Reserve reported that the U.S. dollar monetary
base is $2,150,000,000,000. This is an increase of 28% in 2 years. The monetary
base is only one component of money supply, however. M2, the broadest measure
of money supply, has increased from approximately $8.48 trillion to $9.61
trillion from November 2009 to October 2011, the latest month-data available.
This is a 2-year increase in U.S. M2 of approximately 12.9%. United Kingdom.
There are just two official UK measures. M0 is referred to as the "wide
monetary base" or "narrow money" and M4 is referred to as "broad money" or
simply "the money supply". There are several different definitions of money
supply to reflect the differing stores of money. Due to the nature of bank
deposits, especially time-restricted savings account deposits, the M4
represents the most illiquid measure of money. M0, by contrast, is the most
liquid measure of the money supply. Link with inflation. Monetary exchange
equation. Money supply is important because it is linked to inflation by the
equation of exchange in an equation proposed by Irving Fisher in 1911 formula_1
In mathematical terms, this equation is really an identity which is true by
definition rather than describing economic behavior. That is, each term is
defined by the values of the other three. Unlike the other terms, the velocity
of money has no independent measure and can only be estimated by dividing PQ by
M. Some adherents of the quantity theory of money assume that the velocity of
money is stable and predictable, being determined mostly by financial
institutions. If that assumption is valid, then changes in M can be used to
predict changes in PQ. If not, then the equation of exchange is useless to
macroeconomics. Most macroeconomists replace the equation of exchange with
equations for the demand for money which describe more regular and predictable
economic behavior. However, predictability (or the lack thereof) of the
velocity of money is equivalent to predictability (or the lack thereof) of the
demand for money (since in equilibrium real money demand is simply "Q"/"V").
Either way, this unpredictability made policy-makers at the Federal Reserve
rely less on the money supply in steering the U.S.economy. Instead, the policy
focus has shifted to interest rates such as the fed funds rate. In practice,
macroeconomists almost always use real GDP to measure Q, omitting the role of
all transactions except for those involving newly produced goods and services
(i.e., consumption goods, investment goods, government-purchased goods, and
exports). That is, the only assets counted as part of Q are newly produced
investment goods. But the original quantity theory of money did not follow this
practice: PQ was the monetary value of all new transactions, whether of real
goods and services or of paper assets. The monetary value of assets, goods, and
service sold during the year could be grossly estimated using nominal GDP back
in the 1960s. This is not the case anymore because of the dramatic rise of the
number of financial transactions relative to that of real transactions up until
2008. That is, the total value of transactions (including purchases of paper
assets) rose relative to nominal GDP (which excludes those purchases). Ignoring
the effects of monetary growth on real purchases and velocity, this suggests
that the growth of the money supply may cause different kinds of inflation at
different times. For example, rises in the U.S. money supplies between the
1970s and the present encouraged first a rise in the inflation rate for newly
produced goods and services ("inflation" as usually defined) in the seventies
and then asset-price inflation in later decades: it may have encouraged a stock
market boom in the '80s and '90s and then, after 2001, a rise in home prices,
i.e., the famous housing bubble. This story, of course, assumes that the
amounts of money were the causes of these different types of inflation rather
than being endogenous results of the economy's dynamics. When home prices went
down, the Federal Reserve kept its loose monetary policy and lowered interest
rates; the attempt to slow price declines in one asset class, e.g. real estate,
may well have caused prices in other asset classes to rise, e.g. commodities.
Rates of growth. Inflation (%ΔP) is equal to the rate of money growth (%ΔM),
plus the change in velocity (%ΔV), minus the rate of output growth (%ΔQ). As
before, this equation is only useful if %ΔV follows regular behavior. It also
loses usefulness if the central bank lacks control over %ΔM. Bank reserves at
central bank. When a central bank is "easing", it triggers an increase in money
supply by purchasing government securities on the open market thus increasing
available funds for private banks to loan through fractional-reserve banking
(the issue of new money through loans) and thus the amount of bank reserves and
the monetary base rise. By purchasing government bonds (especially Treasury
Bills), this bids up their prices, so that interest rates fall at the same time
that the monetary base increases. With "easy money," the central bank creates
new bank reserves (in the US known as "federal funds"), which allow the banks
lend more. These loans get spent, and the proceeds get deposited at other
banks. Whatever is not required to be held as reserves is then lent out again,
and through the "multiplying" effect of the fractional-reserve system, loans
and bank deposits go up by many times the initial injection of reserves. In
contrast, when the central bank is "tightening", it slows the process of
private bank issue by selling securities on the open market and pulling money
(that could be loaned) out of the private banking sector. By increasing the
supply of bonds, this lowers their prices and raises interest rates at the same
time that the money supply is reduced. This kind of policy reduces or increases
the supply of short term government debt in the hands of banks and the non-bank
public, lowering or raising interest rates. In parallel, it increases or
reduces the supply of loanable funds (money) and thereby the ability of private
banks to issue new money through issuing debt. The simple connection between
monetary policy and monetary aggregates such as M1 and M2 changed in the 1970s
as the reserve requirements on deposits started to fall with the emergence of
money funds, which require no reserves. Then in the early 1990s, reserve
requirements were dropped to zeroin what countries? on savings deposits, CDs,
and Eurodollar deposit. At present, reserve requirements apply only to
"transactions deposits" – essentially checking accounts. The vast majority of
funding sources used by private banks to create loans are not limited by bank
reserves. Most commercial and industrial loans are financed by issuing large
denomination CDs. Money market deposits are largely used to lend to
corporations who issue commercial paper. Consumer loans are also made using
savings deposits, which are not subject to reserve requirements. This means
that instead of the amount of loans supplied responding passively to monetary
policy, we often see it rising and falling with the demand for funds and the
willingness of banks to lend. Some academics argue that the money multiplier is
a meaningless concept, because its relevance would require that the money
supply be exogenous, i.e. determined by the monetary authorities via open
market operations. If central banks usually target the shortest-term interest
rate (as their policy instrument) then this leads to the money supply being
endogenous. Neither commercial nor consumer loans are any longer limited by
bank reserves. Nor are they directly linked proportional to reserves. Between
1995 and 2008, the amount of consumer loans has steadily increased out of
proportion to bank reserves. Then, as part of the financial crisis, bank
reserves rose dramatically as new loans shrank. In recent years, some academic
economists renowned for their work on the implications of rational expectations
have argued that open market operations are irrelevant. These include Robert
Lucas, Jr., Thomas Sargent, Neil Wallace, Finn E. Kydland, Edward C. Prescott
and Scott Freeman. The Keynesian side points to a major example of
ineffectiveness of open market operations encountered in 2008 in the United
States, when short-term interest rates went as low as they could go in nominal
terms, so that no more monetary stimulus could occur. This zero bound problem
has been called the liquidity trap or "pushing on a string" (the pusher being
the central bank and the string being the real economy). Arguments. The main
functions of the central bank are to maintain low inflation and a low level of
unemployment, although these goals are sometimes in conflict (according to
Phillips curve). A central bank may attempt to do this by artificially
influencing the demand for goods by increasing or decreasing the nation's money
supply (relative to trend), which lowers or raises interest rates, which
stimulates or restrains spending on goods and services. An important debate
among economists in the second half of the twentieth century concerned the
central bank's ability to predict how much money should be in circulation,
given current employment rates and inflation rates. Economists such as Milton
Friedman believed that the central bank would always get it wrong, leading to
wider swings in the economy than if it were just left alone. This is why they
advocated a non-interventionist approach—one of targeting a pre-specified
path for the money supply independent of current economic conditions— even
though in practice this might involve regular intervention with open market
operations (or other monetary-policy tools) to keep the money supply on target.
The Chairman of the U.S. Federal Reserve, Ben Bernanke, has suggested that over
the last 10 to 15 years, many modern central banks have become relatively adept
at manipulation of the money supply, leading to a smoother business cycle, with
recessions tending to be smaller and less frequent than in earlier decades, a
phenomenon termed "The Great Moderation" This theory encountered criticism
during the global financial crisis of 2008–2009. Furthermore, it may be that
the functions of the central bank may need to encompass more than the shifting
up or down of interest rates or bank reserves: these tools, although valuable,
may not in fact moderate the volatility of money supply (or its velocity).
