Monetary policy Monetary policy is the process by which the monetary authority
of a country controls the supply of money, often targeting a rate of interest
for the purpose of promoting economic growth and stability. The official goals
usually include relatively stable prices and low unemployment. Monetary theory
provides insight into how to craft optimal monetary policy. It is referred to
as either being expansionary or contractionary, where an expansionary policy
increases the total supply of money in the economy more rapidly than usual, and
contractionary policy expands the money supply more slowly than usual or even
shrinks it. Expansionary policy is traditionally used to try to combat
unemployment in a recession by lowering interest rates in the hope that easy
credit will entice businesses into expanding. Contractionary policy is intended
to slow inflation in hopes of avoiding the resulting distortions and
deterioration of asset values. Monetary policy differs from fiscal policy,
which refers to taxation, government spending, and associated borrowing.
Overview. Monetary policy rests on the relationship between the rates of
interest in an economy, that is, the price at which money can be borrowed, and
the total supply of money. Monetary policy uses a variety of tools to control
one or both of these, to influence outcomes like economic growth, inflation,
exchange rates with other currencies and unemployment. Where currency is under
a monopoly of issuance, or where there is a regulated system of issuing
currency through banks which are tied to a central bank, the monetary authority
has the ability to alter the money supply and thus influence the interest rate
(to achieve policy goals). The beginning of monetary policy as such comes from
the late 19th century, where it was used to maintain the gold standard. A
policy is referred to as contractionary if it reduces the size of the money
supply or increases it only slowly, or if it raises the interest rate. An
expansionary policy increases the size of the money supply more rapidly, or
decreases the interest rate. Furthermore, monetary policies are described as
follows: accommodative, if the interest rate set by the central monetary
authority is intended to create economic growth; neutral, if it is intended
neither to create growth nor combat inflation; or tight if intended to reduce
inflation. There are several monetary policy tools available to achieve these
ends: increasing interest rates by fiat; reducing the monetary base; and
increasing reserve requirements. All have the effect of contracting the money
supply; and, if reversed, expand the money supply. Since the 1970s, monetary
policy has generally been formed separately from fiscal policy. Even prior to
the 1970s, the Bretton Woods system still ensured that most nations would form
the two policies separately. Within almost all modern nations, special
institutions (such as the Federal Reserve System in the United States, the Bank
of England, the European Central Bank, the People's Bank of China, and the Bank
of Japan) exist which have the task of executing the monetary policy and often
independently of the executive. In general, these institutions are called
central banks and often have other responsibilities such as supervising the
smooth operation of the financial system. The primary tool of monetary policy
is open market operations. This entails managing the quantity of money in
circulation through the buying and selling of various financial instruments,
such as treasury bills, company bonds, or foreign currencies. All of these
purchases or sales result in more or less base currency entering or leaving
market circulation. Usually, the short term goal of open market operations is
to achieve a specific short term interest rate target. In other instances,
monetary policy might instead entail the targeting of a specific exchange rate
relative to some foreign currency or else relative to gold. For example, in the
case of the USA the Federal Reserve targets the federal funds rate, the rate at
which member banks lend to one another overnight; however, the monetary policy
of China is to target the exchange rate between the Chinese renminbi and a
basket of foreign currencies. The other primary means of conducting monetary
policy include: (i) Discount window lending (lender of last resort); (ii)
Fractional deposit lending (changes in the reserve requirement); (iii) Moral
suasion (cajoling certain market players to achieve specified outcomes); (iv)
"Open mouth operations" (talking monetary policy with the market). Theory.
Monetary policy is the process by which the government, central bank, or
monetary authority of a country controls (i) the supply of money, (ii)
availability of money, and (iii) cost of money or rate of interest to attain a
set of objectives oriented towards the growth and stability of the economy.
Monetary theory provides insight into how to craft optimal monetary policy.
Monetary policy rests on the relationship between the rates of interest in an
economy, that is the price at which money can be borrowed, and the total supply
of money. Monetary policy uses a variety of tools to control one or both of
these, to influence outcomes like economic growth, inflation, exchange rates
with other currencies and unemployment. Where currency is under a monopoly of
issuance, or where there is a regulated system of issuing currency through
banks which are tied to a central bank, the monetary authority has the ability
to alter the money supply and thus influence the interest rate (to achieve
policy goals). It is important for policymakers to make credible announcements.
If private agents (consumers and firms) believe that policymakers are committed
to lowering inflation, they will anticipate future prices to be lower than
otherwise (how those expectations are formed is an entirely different matter;
compare for instance rational expectations with adaptive expectations). If an
employee expects prices to be high in the future, he or she will draw up a wage
contract with a high wage to match these prices. Hence, the expectation of
lower wages is reflected in wage-setting behavior between employees and
employers (lower wages since prices are expected to be lower) and since wages
are in fact lower there is no demand pull inflation because employees are
receiving a smaller wage and there is no cost push inflation because employers
are paying out less in wages. To achieve this low level of inflation,
policymakers must have "credible" announcements; that is, private agents must
believe that these announcements will reflect actual future policy. If an
announcement about low-level inflation targets is made but not believed by
private agents, wage-setting will anticipate high-level inflation and so wages
will be higher and inflation will rise. A high wage will increase a consumer's
demand (demand pull inflation) and a firm's costs (cost push inflation), so
inflation rises. Hence, if a policymaker's announcements regarding monetary
policy are not credible, policy will not have the desired effect. If
policymakers believe that private agents anticipate low inflation, they have an
incentive to adopt an expansionist monetary policy (where the marginal benefit
of increasing economic output outweighs the marginal cost of inflation);
however, assuming private agents have rational expectations, they know that
policymakers have this incentive. Hence, private agents know that if they
anticipate low inflation, an expansionist policy will be adopted that causes a
rise in inflation. Consequently, (unless policymakers can make their
announcement of low inflation "credible"), private agents expect high
inflation. This anticipation is fulfilled through adaptive expectation (wage-
setting behavior);so, there is higher inflation (without the benefit of
increased output). Hence, unless credible announcements can be made,
expansionary monetary policy will fail. Announcements can be made credible in
various ways. One is to establish an independent central bank with low
inflation targets (but no output targets). Hence, private agents know that
inflation will be low because it is set by an independent body. Central banks
can be given incentives to meet targets (for example, larger budgets, a wage
bonus for the head of the bank) to increase their reputation and signal a
strong commitment to a policy goal. Reputation is an important element in
monetary policy implementation. But the idea of reputation should not be
confused with commitment. While a central bank might have a favorable
reputation due to good performance in conducting monetary policy, the same
central bank might not have chosen any particular form of commitment (such as
targeting a certain range for inflation). Reputation plays a crucial role in
determining how much markets would believe the announcement of a particular
commitment to a policy goal but both concepts should not be assimilated. Also,
note that under rational expectations, it is not necessary for the policymaker
to have established its reputation through past policy actions; as an example,
the reputation of the head of the central bank might be derived entirely from
his or her ideology, professional background, public statements, etc. In fact
it has been argued that to prevent some pathologies related to the time
inconsistency of monetary policy implementation (in particular excessive
inflation), the head of a central bank should have a larger distaste for
inflation than the rest of the economy on average. Hence the reputation of a
particular central bank is not necessarily tied to past performance, but rather
to particular institutional arrangements that the markets can use to form
inflation expectations. Despite the frequent discussion of credibility as it
relates to monetary policy, the exact meaning of credibility is rarely defined.
Such lack of clarity can serve to lead policy away from what is believed to be
the most beneficial. For example, capability to serve the public interest is
one definition of credibility often associated with central banks. The
reliability with which a central bank keeps its promises is also a common
definition. While everyone most likely agrees a central bank should not lie to
the public, wide disagreement exists on how a central bank can best serve the
public interest. Therefore, lack of definition can lead people to believe they
are supporting one particular policy of credibility when they are really
supporting another. History of monetary policy. Monetary policy is associated
with interest rates and availabilility of credit. Instruments of monetary
policy have included short-term interest rates and bank reserves through the
monetary base. For many centuries there were only two forms of monetary policy:
(i) Decisions about coinage; (ii) Decisions to print paper money to create
credit. Interest rates, while now thought of as part of monetary authority,
were not generally coordinated with the other forms of monetary policy during
this time. Monetary policy was seen as an executive decision, and was generally
in the hands of the authority with seigniorage, or the power to coin. With the
advent of larger trading networks came the ability to set the price between
gold and silver, and the price of the local currency to foreign currencies.
This official price could be enforced by law, even if it varied from the market
price. Paper money called "jiaozi" originated from promissory notes in 7th
century China. Jiaozi did not replace metallic currency, and were used
alongside the copper coins. The successive Yuan Dynasty was the first
government to use paper currency as the predominant circulating medium. In the
later course of the dynasty, facing massive shortages of specie to fund war and
their rule in China, they began printing paper money without restrictions,
resulting in hyperinflation. With the creation of the Bank of England in 1694,
which acquired the responsibility to print notes and back them with gold, the
idea of monetary policy as independent of executive action began to be
established. The goal of monetary policy was to maintain the value of the
coinage, print notes which would trade at par to specie, and prevent coins from
leaving circulation. The establishment of central banks by industrializing
nations was associated then with the desire to maintain the nation's peg to the
gold standard, and to trade in a narrow band with other gold-backed currencies.
To accomplish this end, central banks as part of the gold standard began
setting the interest rates that they charged, both their own borrowers, and
other banks who required liquidity. The maintenance of a gold standard required
almost monthly adjustments of interest rates. During the 1870–1920 period,
the industrialized nations set up central banking systems, with one of the last
being the Federal Reserve in 1913. By this point the role of the central bank
as the "lender of last resort" was understood. It was also increasingly
understood that interest rates had an effect on the entire economy, in no small
part because of the marginal revolution in economics, which demonstrated how
people would change a decision based on a change in the economic trade-offs. A
small but vocal group of people, primarily libertarians and Constitutionalists,
advocate for a return to the gold standard (the elimination of the dollar's
fiat currency status and even of the Federal Reserve Bank). Their argument is
basically that monetary policy is fraught with risk and these risks will result
in drastic harm to the populace should monetary policy fail. Others see another
problem with our current monetary policy. The problem for them is not that our
money has nothing physical to define its value, but that fractional reserve
lending of that money as a debt to the recipient, rather than a credit, causes
all but a small proportion of society (including all governments) to be
perpetually in debt. In fact, many economists disagree with returning to a gold
standard. They argue that doing so would drastically limit the money supply,
and throw away 100 years of advancement in monetary policy. The sometimes
complex financial transactions that make big business (especially international
business) easier and safer would be much more difficult if not impossible.
Moreover, shifting risk to different people/companies that specialize in
monitoring and using risk can turn any financial risk into a known dollar
amount and therefore make business predictable and more profitable for everyone
involved. Some have claimed that these arguments lost credibility in the global
financial crisis of 2008–2009. Trends in central banking. The central bank
influences interest rates by expanding or contracting the monetary base, which
consists of currency in circulation and banks' reserves on deposit at the
central bank. The primary way that the central bank can affect the monetary
base is by open market operations or sales and purchases of second hand
government debt, or by changing the reserve requirements. If the central bank
wishes to lower interest rates, it purchases government debt, thereby
increasing the amount of cash in circulation or crediting banks' reserve
accounts. Alternatively, it can lower the interest rate on discounts or
overdrafts (loans to banks secured by suitable collateral, specified by the
central bank). If the interest rate on such transactions is sufficiently low,
commercial banks can borrow from the central bank to meet reserve requirements
and use the additional liquidity to expand their balance sheets, increasing the
credit available to the economy. Lowering reserve requirements has a similar
effect, freeing up funds for banks to increase loans or buy other profitable
assets. A central bank can only operate a truly independent monetary policy
when the exchange rate is floating. If the exchange rate is pegged or managed
in any way, the central bank will have to purchase or sell foreign exchange.
These transactions in foreign exchange will have an effect on the monetary base
analogous to open market purchases and sales of government debt; if the central
bank buys foreign exchange, the monetary base expands, and vice versa. But even
in the case of a pure floating exchange rate, central banks and monetary
authorities can at best "lean against the wind" in a world where capital is
mobile. Accordingly, the management of the exchange rate will influence
domestic monetary conditions. To maintain its monetary policy target, the
central bank will have to sterilize or offset its foreign exchange operations.
For example, if a central bank buys foreign exchange (to counteract
appreciation of the exchange rate), base money will increase. Therefore, to
sterilize that increase, the central bank must also sell government debt to
contract the monetary base by an equal amount. It follows that turbulent
activity in foreign exchange markets can cause a central bank to lose control
of domestic monetary policy when it is also managing the exchange rate. In the
1980s, many economists began to believe that making a nation's central bank
independent of the rest of executive government is the best way to ensure an
optimal monetary policy, and those central banks which did not have
independence began to gain it. This is to avoid overt manipulation of the tools
of monetary policies to effect political goals, such as re-electing the current
government. Independence typically means that the members of the committee
which conducts monetary policy have long, fixed terms. Obviously, this is a
somewhat limited independence. In the 1990s, central banks began adopting
formal, public inflation targets with the goal of making the outcomes, if not
the process, of monetary policy more transparent. In other words, a central
bank may have an inflation target of 2% for a given year, and if inflation
turns out to be 5%, then the central bank will typically have to submit an
explanation. The Bank of England exemplifies both these trends. It became
independent of government through the Bank of England Act 1998 and adopted an
inflation target of 2.5% RPI (now 2% of CPI). The debate rages on about whether
monetary policy can smooth business cycles or not. A central conjecture of
Keynesian economics is that the central bank can stimulate aggregate demand in
the short run, because a significant number of prices in the economy are fixed
in the short run and firms will produce as many goods and services as are
demanded (in the long run, however, money is neutral, as in the neoclassical
model). There is also the Austrian school of economics, which includes
Friedrich von Hayek and Ludwig von Mises's arguments, which argues that central
bank monetary policy aggravates the business cycle, creating malinvestment and
maladjustments in the economy which then cause downcycle corrections, but most
economists fall into either the Keynesian or neoclassical camps on this issue.
Developing countries. Developing countries may have problems establishing an
effective operating monetary policy. The primary difficulty is that few
developing countries have deep markets in government debt. The matter is
further complicated by the difficulties in forecasting money demand and fiscal
pressure to levy the inflation tax by expanding the monetary base rapidly. In
general, the central banks in many developing countries have poor records in
managing monetary policy. This is often because the monetary authority in a
developing country is not independent of government, so good monetary policy
takes a backseat to the political desires of the government or are used to
pursue other non-monetary goals. For this and other reasons, developing
countries that want to establish credible monetary policy may institute a
currency board or adopt dollarization. Such forms of monetary institutions thus
essentially tie the hands of the government from interference and, it is hoped,
that such policies will import the monetary policy of the anchor nation. Recent
attempts at liberalizing and reforming financial markets (particularly the
recapitalization of banks and other financial institutions in Nigeria and
elsewhere) are gradually providing the latitude required to implement monetary
policy frameworks by the relevant central banks. Types of monetary policy. In
practice, to implement any type of monetary policy the main tool used is
modifying the amount of base money in circulation. The monetary authority does
this by buying or selling financial assets (usually government obligations).
These open market operations change either the amount of money or its liquidity
(if less liquid forms of money are bought or sold). The multiplier effect of
fractional reserve banking amplifies the effects of these actions. Constant
market transactions by the monetary authority modify the supply of currency and
this impacts other market variables such as short term interest rates and the
exchange rate. The distinction between the various types of monetary policy
lies primarily with the set of instruments and target variables that are used
by the monetary authority to achieve their goals.  The inflation targeting
approach to monetary policy approach was pioneered in New Zealand. It is
currently used in Australia, Brazil, Canada, Chile, Colombia, the Czech
Republic, Hungary, New Zealand, Norway, Iceland, India, Philippines, Poland,
Sweden, South Africa, Turkey, and the United Kingdom. Price level targeting.
Price level targeting is similar to inflation targeting except that CPI growth
in one year over or under the long term price level target is offset in
subsequent years such that a targeted price-level is reached over time, e.g.
five years, giving more certainty about future price increases to consumers.
Under inflation targeting what happened in the immediate past years is not
taken into account or adjusted for in the current and future years. Uncertainty
in price levels can create uncertainty around price and wage setting activity
for firms and workers, and undermines any information that can be gained from
relative prices, as it is more difficult for firms to determine if a change in
the price of a good or service is because of inflation or other factors, such
as an increase in the efficiency of factors of production, if inflation is high
and volatile. An increase in inflation also leads to a decrease in the demand
for money, as it reduces the incentive to hold money and increases transaction
costs and shoe leather costs. Monetary aggregates. In the 1980s, several
countries used an approach based on a constant growth in the money supply. This
approach was refined to include different classes of money and credit (M0, M1
etc.). In the USA this approach to monetary policy was discontinued with the
selection of Alan Greenspan as Fed Chairman. This approach is also sometimes
called monetarism. While most monetary policy focuses on a price signal of one
form or another, this approach is focused on monetary quantities. Fixed
exchange rate. This policy is based on maintaining a fixed exchange rate with a
foreign currency. There are varying degrees of fixed exchange rates, which can
be ranked in relation to how rigid the fixed exchange rate is with the anchor
nation. Under a system of fiat fixed rates, the local government or monetary
authority declares a fixed exchange rate but does not actively buy or sell
currency to maintain the rate. Instead, the rate is enforced by non-
convertibility measures (e.g. capital controls, import/export licenses, etc.).
In this case there is a black market exchange rate where the currency trades at
its market/unofficial rate. Under a system of fixed-convertibility, currency is
bought and sold by the central bank or monetary authority on a daily basis to
achieve the target exchange rate. This target rate may be a fixed level or a
fixed band within which the exchange rate may fluctuate until the monetary
authority intervenes to buy or sell as necessary to maintain the exchange rate
within the band. (In this case, the fixed exchange rate with a fixed level can
be seen as a special case of the fixed exchange rate with bands where the bands
are set to zero.) Under a system of fixed exchange rates maintained by a
currency board every unit of local currency must be backed by a unit of foreign
currency (correcting for the exchange rate). This ensures that the local
monetary base does not inflate without being backed by hard currency and
eliminates any worries about a run on the local currency by those wishing to
convert the local currency to the hard (anchor) currency. Under dollarization,
foreign currency (usually the US dollar, hence the term "dollarization") is
used freely as the medium of exchange either exclusively or in parallel with
local currency. This outcome can come about because the local population has
lost all faith in the local currency, or it may also be a policy of the
government (usually to rein in inflation and import credible monetary policy).
These policies often abdicate monetary policy to the foreign monetary authority
or government as monetary policy in the pegging nation must align with monetary
policy in the anchor nation to maintain the exchange rate. The degree to which
local monetary policy becomes dependent on the anchor nation depends on factors
such as capital mobility, openness, credit channels and other economic factors.
Gold standard. The gold standard is a system under which the price of the
national currency is measured in units of gold bars and is kept constant by the
government's promise to buy or sell gold at a fixed price in terms of the base
currency. The gold standard might be regarded as a special case of "fixed
exchange rate" policy, or as a special type of commodity price level targeting.
The minimal gold standard would be a long-term commitment to tighten monetary
policy enough to prevent the price of gold from permanently rising above
parity. A full gold standard would be a commitment to sell unlimited amounts of
gold at parity and maintain a reserve of gold sufficient to redeem the entire
monetary base. Today this type of monetary policy is no longer used by any
country, although the gold standard was widely used across the world between
the mid-19th century through 1971. Its major advantages were simplicity and
transparency. The gold standard was abandoned during the Great Depression, as
countries sought to reinvigorate their economies by increasing their money
supply. The Bretton Woods system, which was a modified gold standard, replaced
it in the aftermath of World War II. However, this system too broke down during
the Nixon shock of 1971. The gold standard induces deflation, as the economy
usually grows faster than the supply of gold. When an economy grows faster than
its money supply, the same amount of money is used to execute a larger number
of transactions. The only way to make this possible is to lower the nominal
cost of each transaction, which means that prices of goods and services fall,
and each unit of money increases in value. Absent precautionary measures,
deflation would tend to increase the ratio of the real value of nominal debts
to physical assets over time. For example, during deflation, nominal debt and
the monthly nominal cost of a fixed-rate home mortgage stays the same, even
while the dollar value of the house falls, and the value of the dollars
required to pay the mortgage goes up. Mainstream economics considers such
deflation to be a major disadvantage of the gold standard. Unsustainable (i.e.
excessive) deflation can cause problems during recessions and financial crisis
lengthening the amount of time an economy spends in recession. William Jennings
Bryan rose to national prominence when he built his historic (though
unsuccessful) 1896 presidential campaign around the argument that deflation
caused by the gold standard made it harder for everyday citizens to start new
businesses, expand their farms, or build new homes. Monetary policy tools.
Monetary base. Monetary policy can be implemented by changing the size of the
monetary base. Central banks use open market operations to change the monetary
base. The central bank buys or sells reserve assets (usually financial
instruments such as bonds) in exchange for money on deposit at the central
bank. Those deposits are convertible to currency. Together such currency and
deposits constitute the monetary base which is the general liabilities of the
central bank in its own monetary unit. Usually other banks can use base money
as a fractional reserve and expand the circulating money supply by a larger
amount. Reserve requirements. The monetary authority exerts regulatory control
over banks. Monetary policy can be implemented by changing the proportion of
total assets that banks must hold in reserve with the central bank. Banks only
maintain a small portion of their assets as cash available for immediate
withdrawal; the rest is invested in illiquid assets like mortgages and loans.
By changing the proportion of total assets to be held as liquid cash, the
Federal Reserve changes the availability of loanable funds. This acts as a
change in the money supply. Central banks typically do not change the reserve
requirements often because it creates very volatile changes in the money supply
due to the lending multiplier. Discount window lending. Discount window lending
is where the commercial banks, and other depository institutions, are able to
borrow reserves from the Central Bank at a discount rate. This rate is usually
set below short term market rates (T-bills). This enables the institutions to
vary credit conditions (i.e., the amount of money they have to loan out),
thereby affecting the money supply. It is of note that the Discount Window is
the only instrument which the Central Banks do not have total control over. By
affecting the money supply, it is theorized, that monetary policy can establish
ranges for inflation, unemployment, interest rates, and economic growth. A
stable financial environment is created in which savings and investment can
occur, allowing for the growth of the economy as a whole. Interest rates. The
contraction of the monetary supply can be achieved "indirectly" by increasing
the nominal interest rates. Monetary authorities in different nations have
differing levels of control of economy-wide interest rates. In the United
States, the Federal Reserve can set the discount rate, as well as achieve the
desired Federal funds rate by open market operations. This rate has significant
effect on other market interest rates, but there is no perfect relationship. In
the United States open market operations are a relatively small part of the
total volume in the bond market. One cannot set independent targets for both
the monetary base and the interest rate because they are both modified by a
single tool — open market operations; one must choose which one to control.
In other nations, the monetary authority may be able to mandate specific
interest rates on loans, savings accounts or other financial assets. By raising
the interest rate(s) under its control, a monetary authority can contract the
money supply, because higher interest rates encourage savings and discourage
borrowing. Both of these effects reduce the size of the money supply. Currency
board. In theory, it is possible that a country may peg the local currency to
more than one foreign currency; although, in practice this has never happened
(and it would be a more complicated to run than a simple single-currency
currency board). A gold standard is a special case of a currency board where
the value of the national currency is linked to the value of gold instead of a
foreign currency. The currency board in question will no longer issue fiat
money but instead will only issue a set number of units of local currency for
each unit of foreign currency it has in its vault. The surplus on the balance
of payments of that country is reflected by higher deposits local banks hold at
the central bank as well as (initially) higher deposits of the (net) exporting
firms at their local banks. The growth of the domestic money supply can now be
coupled to the additional deposits of the banks at the central bank that equals
additional hard foreign exchange reserves in the hands of the central bank. The
virtue of this system is that questions of currency stability no longer apply.
The drawbacks are that the country no longer has the ability to set monetary
policy according to other domestic considerations, and that the fixed exchange
rate will, to a large extent, also fix a country's terms of trade, irrespective
of economic differences between it and its trading partners. Hong Kong operates
a currency board, as does Bulgaria. Estonia established a currency board pegged
to the Deutschmark in 1992 after gaining independence, and this policy is seen
as a mainstay of that country's subsequent economic success (see Economy of
Estonia for a detailed description of the Estonian currency board). Argentina
abandoned its currency board in January 2002 after a severe recession. This
emphasized the fact that currency boards are not irrevocable, and hence may be
abandoned in the face of speculation by foreign exchange traders. Following the
signing of the Dayton Peace Agreement in 1995, Bosnia and Herzegovina
established a currency board pegged to the Deutschmark (since 2002 replaced by
the Euro). Currency boards have advantages for "small", "open" economies that
would find independent monetary policy difficult to sustain. They can also form
a credible commitment to low inflation. Unconventional monetary policy at the
zero bound. Other forms of monetary policy, particularly used when interest
rates are at or near 0% and there are concerns about deflation or deflation is
occurring, are referred to as unconventional monetary policy. These include
credit easing, quantitative easing, and signaling. In credit easing, a central
bank purchases private sector assets, in order to improve liquidity and improve
access to credit. Signaling can be used to lower market expectations for future
interest rates. For example, during the credit crisis of 2008, the US Federal
Reserve indicated rates would be low for an “extended period”, and the Bank
of Canada made a “conditional commitment” to keep rates at the lower bound
of 25 basis points (0.25%) until the end of the second quarter of 2010.
