Money bill In the Westminster system (and, colloquially, in the United States),
a money bill or supply bill is a bill that solely concerns taxation or
government spending (also known as appropriation of money), as opposed to
changes in public law. Conventions. It is often a constitutional convention
that the upper house may not block supply. There is often another requirement
that non-money bill type clauses may not be attached to a money bill. Loss of
supply in the lower house is conventionally considered to be an expression of
the house's loss of confidence in the government resulting in the government's
fall. Bangladesh. A money bill is specifically defined by Article 81 of the
Constitution of Bangladesh. The President of Bangladesh can send back all bills
passed by the Parliament for a review except a money bill. However, a money
bill can be introduced to the Parliament only at the President's
recommendation. Additionally, tax can only be levied by the Parliament.
Republic of Ireland. In the Republic of Ireland, the Senate may not delay a
money bill more than 21 days. The President of Ireland may not refuse to sign a
money bill and may not refer such a bill to the Supreme Court to test its
constitutionality. United Kingdom. http://www.legislation.gov.uk/ukpga/Geo5/1-
2/13/section/1 The reference to the National Loans Fund was inserted on 1 April
1968 by section 1(5) of the National Loans Act 1968. For this purpose, the
expression "Public Bill" does not include any Bill for confirming a Provisional
Order. Bradley and Ewing said that the statutory definition of Money Bill is
"strictly interpreted". Most annual Finance Bills have not been certified to be
Money Bills. Similar Requirements in Non-Westminster Systems. United States.
While the United States of America is not a parliamentary democracy, of the
U.S. Constitution requires that all bills raising revenue originate in the
House of Representatives, consistent with British constitutional practice; by
convention, appropriation bills (bills that "spend" money) also originate in
the House. Unlike in most Westminster systems, there are no limits on the
Senate's ability to amend revenue bills or any requirement for the Senate to
approve such bills within a certain timeframe. Both appropriations and revenue
bills are often referred to as money bills to contrast them with authorization
bills.
