Money creation In economics, money creation is the process by which the money
supply of a country or a monetary region (such as the Eurozone) is changed. A
central bank may introduce new money into the economy (termed 'expansionary
monetary policy') by purchasing financial assets or lending money to financial
institutions. Also, in a broader sense, it could be said that commercial banks
introduce new money by multiplying base money created by the central bank
through fractional reserve banking; this expands the amount of broad money
(i.e. cash plus demand deposits) in the economy. Central banks monitor the
amount of money in the economy by measuring monetary aggregates such as M2. The
effect of monetary policy on the money supply is indicated by comparing these
measurements on various dates. For example, in the United States, money supply
measured as M2 grew from $6407.3bn in January 2005, to $8318.9bn in January
2009. Money creation by the central bank. Within almost all modern nations,
special institutions exist (such as the Federal Reserve System in the United
States, the European Central Bank (ECB), and the People's Bank of China) which
have the task of executing the monetary policy and often acting independently
of the executive. In general, these institutions are called central banks and
often have other responsibilities such as supervising the smooth operation of
the financial system. There are several monetary policy tools available to a
central bank to expand the money supply of a country: decreasing interest rates
by fiat; increasing the monetary base; and decreasing reserve requirements. All
have the effect of expanding the money supply. The primary tool of monetary
policy is open market operations. This entails managing the quantity of money
in circulation through the buying and selling of various financial assets, such
as treasury bills, government bonds, or foreign currencies. Purchases of these
assets result in currency entering market circulation (while sales of these
assets remove money from circulation). Usually, the short term goal of open
market operations is to achieve a specific short term interest rate target. In
other instances, monetary policy might instead entail the targeting of a
specific exchange rate relative to some foreign currency, the price of gold, or
indices such as Consumer Price Index. For example, in the case of the USA the
Federal Reserve targets the federal funds rate, the rate at which member banks
lend to one another overnight. The other primary means of conducting monetary
policy include: (i) Discount window lending (as lender of last resort); (ii)
Fractional deposit lending (changes in the reserve requirement); (iii) Moral
suasion (cajoling certain market players to achieve specified outcomes); (iv)
"Open mouth operations" (talking monetary policy with the market). The conduct
and effects of monetary policy and the regulation of the banking system are of
central concern to monetary economics. Quantitative easing. Quantitative easing
involves the creation of a significant amount of new base money by a central
bank by the buying of assets that it usually does not buy. Usually, a central
bank will conduct open market operations by buying short-term government bonds
or foreign currency. However, during a financial crisis, the central bank may
buy other types of financial assets as well. The central bank may buy long-term
government bonds, company bonds, asset backed securities, stocks, or even
extend commercial loans. The intent is to stimulate the economy by increasing
liquidity and promoting bank lending, even when interest rates cannot be pushed
any lower. Quantitative easing increases reserves in the banking system (i.e.
deposits of commercial banks at the central bank), giving depository
institutions the ability to make new loans. Quantitative easing is usually used
when lowering the discount rate is no longer effective because interest rates
are already close to or at zero. In such a case, normal monetary policy cannot
further lower interest rates, and the economy is in a liquidity trap. Physical
currency. In modern economies, relatively little of the supply of broad money
is in physical currency. For example, in December 2010 in the U.S., of the
$8853.4 billion in broad money supply (M2), only $915.7 billion (about 10%)
consisted of physical coins and paper money. The manufacturing of new physical
money is usually the responsibility of the central bank, or sometimes, the
government's treasury. Contrary to popular belief, money creation in a modern
economy does not directly involve the manufacturing of new physical money, such
as paper currency or metal coins. Instead, when the central bank expands the
money supply through open market operations (e.g. by purchasing government
bonds), it credits the accounts that commercial banks hold at the central bank
(termed high powered money). Commercial banks may draw on these accounts to
withdraw physical money from the central bank. Commercial banks may also return
soiled or spoiled currency to the central bank in exchange for new currency.
Money creation through the fractional reserve system. When a commercial bank
loan is extended, new commercial bank money is created. As a loan is paid back,
more commercial bank money disappears from existence. Since loans are
continually being issued in a normally functioning economy, the amount of broad
money in the economy remains relatively stable. Because of this money creation
process by the commercial banks, the money supply of a country is usually a
multiple larger than the money issued by the central bank; that multiple is
determined by the reserve ratio or other financial ratios (primarily the
capital adequacy ratio that limits the overall credit creation of a bank) set
by the relevant banking regulators in the jurisdiction. Re-lending. An early
table, featuring reinvestment from one period to the next and a geometric
series, is found in the tableau économique of the Physiocrats, which is
credited as the "first precise formulation" of such interdependent systems and
the origin of multiplier theory. Money multiplier. The most common mechanism
used to measure this increase in the money supply is typically called the money
multiplier. It calculates the "maximum" amount of money that an initial deposit
can be expanded to with a given reserve ratio – such a factor is called a
"multiplier." As a formula, if the reserve ratio is "R," then the money
multiplier "m" is the reciprocal, formula_1 and is the maximum amount of money
commercial banks can legally create for a given quantity of reserves. In the
re-lending model, this is alternatively calculated as a geometric series under
repeated lending of a geometrically decreasing quantity of money: reserves lead
loans. In endogenous money models, loans lead reserves, and it is not
interpreted as a geometric series. In practice, because banks often have access
to lines of credit, and the money market, and can use day time loans from
central banks, there is often no requirement for a pre-existing deposit for the
bank to create a loan and have it paid to another bank. The money multiplier is
of fundamental importance in monetary policy: if banks lend out close to the
maximum allowed, then the broad money supply is approximately central bank
money times the multiplier, and central banks may finely control broad money
supply by controlling central bank money, the money multiplier linking these
quantities; this was the case in the United States from 1959 through September
2008. If, conversely, banks accumulate excess reserves, as occurred in such
financial crises as the Great Depression and the Financial crisis of
2007–2010 – in the United States since October 2008, then this equality
breaks down, and central bank money creation may not result in commercial bank
money creation, instead remaining as unlent (excess) reserves. However, the
central bank may shrink commercial bank money by shrinking central bank money,
since reserves are required – thus fractional-reserve money creation is
likened to a string, since the central bank can always "pull" money out by
restricting central bank money, hence reserves, but cannot always "push" money
out by expanding central bank money, since this may result in excess reserves,
a situation referred to as "pushing on a string". Alternative theories. The
above gives the mainstream economics theory of money creation. There are also a
number of alternative heterodox theories of how money is created. Most notably
post-Keynesian economics emphasizes endogenous money – that money is created
by the internal workings of the financial system, rather than by external
forces, such as policy actions of the central bank.
