Monopoly A monopoly (from Greek "monos" μόνος (alone or single) + "polein"
πωλεῖν (to sell)) exists when a specific person or enterprise is the
only supplier of a particular commodity (this contrasts with a monopsony which
relates to a single entity's control of a market to purchase a good or service,
and with oligopoly which consists of a few entities dominating an industry).
Monopolies are thus characterized by a lack of economic competition to produce
the good or service and a lack of viable substitute goods. The verb
"monopolize" refers to the "process" by which a company gains the ability to
raise prices or exclude competitors. In economics, a monopoly is a single
seller. In law, a monopoly is a business entity that has significant market
power, that is, the power, to charge high prices. Although monopolies may be
big businesses, size is not a characteristic of a monopoly. A small business
may still have the power to raise prices in a small industry (or market). A
monopoly is distinguished from a monopsony, in which there is only one "buyer"
of a product or service ; a monopoly may also have monopsony control of a
sector of a market. Likewise, a monopoly should be distinguished from a cartel
(a form of oligopoly), in which several providers act together to coordinate
services, prices or sale of goods. Monopolies, monopsonies and oligopolies are
all situations such that one or a few of the entities have market power and
therefore interact with their customers (monopoly), suppliers (monopsony) and
the other companies (oligopoly) in a game theoretic manner – meaning that
expectations about their behavior affects other players' choice of strategy and
vice versa. This is to be contrasted with the model of perfect competition in
which companies are "price takers" and do not have market power. When not
coerced legally to do otherwise, monopolies typically maximize their profit by
producing fewer goods and selling them at higher prices than would be the case
for perfect competition. Sometimes governments decide legally that a given
company is a monopoly that doesn't serve the best interests of the market and/
or consumers. Governments may force such companies to divide into smaller
independent corporations as was the case of United States v. AT&T, or alter its
behavior as was the case of United States v. Microsoft, to protect consumers.
Monopolies can be established by a government, form naturally, or form by
mergers. A monopoly is said to be coercive when the monopoly actively prohibits
competitors by using practices (such as underselling) that derive from its
market or political influence. There is often debate of whether market
restrictions are in the best long-term interest of present and future
consumers. In many jurisdictions, competition laws restrict monopolies. Holding
a dominant position or a monopoly of a market is not illegal in itself, however
certain categories of behavior can, when a business is dominant, be considered
abusive and therefore incur legal sanctions. A government-granted monopoly or
"legal monopoly", by contrast, is sanctioned by the state, often to provide an
incentive to invest in a risky venture or enrich a domestic interest group.
Patents, copyright, and trademarks are sometimes used as examples of government
granted monopolies, but they rarely provide market power. The government may
also reserve the venture for itself, thus forming a government monopoly. Market
structures. In economics, the idea of monopoly is important for the study of
market structures, which directly concerns normative aspects of economic
competition, and provides the basis for topics such as industrial organization
and economics of regulation. There are four basic types of market structures by
traditional economic analysis: perfect competition, monopolistic competition,
oligopoly and monopoly. A monopoly is a market structure in which a single
supplier produces and sells a given product. If there is a single seller in a
certain industry and there are not any close substitutes for the product, then
the market structure is that of a "pure monopoly". Sometimes, there are many
sellers in an industry and/or there exist many close substitutes for the goods
being produced, but nevertheless companies retain some market power. This is
termed monopolistic competition, whereas by oligopoly the companies interact
strategically. In general, the main results from this theory compare price-
fixing methods across market structures, analyze the effect of a certain
structure on welfare, and vary technological/demand assumptions in order to
assess the consequences for an abstract model of society. Most economic
textbooks follow the practice of carefully explaining the "perfect competition"
model, only because of its usefulness to understand "departures" from it (the
so-called "imperfect competition" models). The boundaries of what constitutes a
market and what doesn't are relevant distinctions to make in economic analysis.
In a general equilibrium context, a good is a specific concept entangling
geographical and time-related characteristics ("grapes sold during October 2009
in Moscow" is a different good from "grapes sold during October 2009 in New
York"). Most studies of market structure relax a little their definition of a
good, allowing for more flexibility at the identification of substitute-goods.
Therefore, one can find an economic analysis of the market of "grapes in
Russia", for example, which is not a market in the strict sense of general
equilibrium theory monopoly. Sources of monopoly power. Monopolies derive their
market power from barriers to entry – circumstances that prevent or greatly
impede a potential competitor's ability to compete in a market. There are three
major types of barriers to entry; economic, legal and deliberate. In addition
to barriers to entry and competition, barriers to exit may be a source of
market power. Barriers to exit are market conditions that make it difficult or
expensive for a company to end its involvement with a market. Great liquidation
costs are a primary barrier for exiting. Market exit and shutdown are separate
events. The decision whether to shut down or operate is not affected by exit
barriers. A company will shut down if price falls below minimum average
variable costs. Monopoly versus competitive markets. The most significant
distinction between a PC company and a monopoly is that the monopoly has a
downward-sloping demand curve rather than the "perceived" perfectly elastic
curve of the PC company. Practically all the variations above mentioned relate
to this fact. If there is a downward-sloping demand curve then by necessity
there is a distinct marginal revenue curve. The implications of this fact are
best made manifest with a linear demand curve. Assume that the inverse demand
curve is of the form x = a − by. Then the total revenue curve is TR = ay −
by2 and the marginal revenue curve is thus MR = a − 2by. From this several
things are evident. First the marginal revenue curve has the same y intercept
as the inverse demand curve. Second the slope of the marginal revenue curve is
twice that of the inverse demand curve. Third the x intercept of the marginal
revenue curve is half that of the inverse demand curve. What is not quite so
evident is that the marginal revenue curve is below the inverse demand curve at
all points. Since all companies maximise profits by equating MR and MC it must
be the case that at the profit-maximizing quantity MR and MC are less than
price, which further implies that a monopoly produces less quantity at a higher
price than if the market were perfectly competitive. The fact that a monopoly
has a downward-sloping demand curve means that the relationship between total
revenue and output for a monopoly is much different than that of competitive
companies. Total revenue equals price times quantity. A competitive company has
a perfectly elastic demand curve meaning that total revenue is proportional to
output. Thus the total revenue curve for a competitive company is a ray with a
slope equal to the market price. A competitive company can sell all the output
it desires at the market price. For a monopoly to increase sales it must reduce
price. Thus the total revenue curve for a monopoly is a parabola that begins at
the origin and reaches a maximum value then continuously decreases until total
revenue is again zero. Total revenue has its maximum value when the slope of
the total revenue function is zero. The slope of the total revenue function is
marginal revenue. So the revenue maximizing quantity and price occur when MR =
0. For example assume that the monopoly’s demand function is P = 50 − 2Q.
The total revenue function would be TR = 50Q − 2Q2 and marginal revenue would
be 50 − 4Q. Setting marginal revenue equal to zero we have So the revenue
maximizing quantity for the monopoly is 12.5 units and the revenue maximizing
price is 25. A company with a monopoly does not experience price pressure from
competitors, although it may experience pricing pressure from potential
competition. If a company increases prices too much, then others may enter the
market if they are able to provide the same good, or a substitute, at a lesser
price. The idea that monopolies in markets with easy entry need not be
regulated against is known as the "revolution in monopoly theory". A monopolist
can extract only one premium, and getting into complementary markets does not
pay. That is, the total profits a monopolist could earn if it sought to
leverage its monopoly in one market by monopolizing a complementary market are
equal to the extra profits it could earn anyway by charging more for the
monopoly product itself. However, the one monopoly profit theorem is not true
if customers in the monopoly good are stranded or poorly informed, or if the
tied good has high fixed costs. A pure monopoly has the same economic
rationality of perfectly competitive companies, i.e. to optimise a profit
function given some constraints. By the assumptions of increasing marginal
costs, exogenous inputs' prices, and control concentrated on a single agent or
entrepreneur, the optimal decision is to equate the marginal cost and marginal
revenue of production. Nonetheless, a pure monopoly can – unlike a
competitive company – alter the market price for its own convenience: a
decrease of production results in a higher price. In the economics' jargon, it
is said that pure monopolies have "a downward-sloping demand". An important
consequence of such behaviour is worth noticing: typically a monopoly selects a
higher price and lesser quantity of output than a price-taking company; again,
less is available at a higher price. The inverse elasticity rule. A monopoly
chooses that price that maximizes the difference between total revenue and
total cost. The basic markup rule can be expressed as (P − MC)/P = 1/PED. The
markup rules indicate that the ratio between profit margin and the price is
inversely proportional to the price elasticity of demand. The implication of
the rule is that the more elastic the demand for the product the less pricing
power the monopoly has. Market power. Market power is the ability to increase
the product's price above marginal cost without losing all customers. Perfectly
competitive (PC) companies have zero market power when it comes to setting
prices. All companies of a PC market are price takers. The price is set by the
interaction of demand and supply at the market or aggregate level. Individual
companies simply take the price determined by the market and produce that
quantity of output that maximizes the company's profits. If a PC company
attempted to increase prices above the market level all its customers would
abandon the company and purchase at the market price from other companies. A
monopoly has considerable although not unlimited market power. A monopoly has
the power to set prices or quantities although not both. A monopoly is a price
maker. The monopoly is the market and prices are set by the monopolist based on
his circumstances and not the interaction of demand and supply. The two primary
factors determining monopoly market power are the company's demand curve and
its cost structure. Market power is the ability to affect the terms and
conditions of exchange so that the price of a product is set by a single
company (price is not imposed by the market as in perfect competition).
Although a monopoly's market power is great it is still limited by the demand
side of the market. A monopoly has a negatively sloped demand curve, not a
perfectly inelastic curve. Consequently, any price increase will result in the
loss of some customers. Price discrimination. Improved price discrimination
allows a monopolist to gain more profit by charging more to those who want or
need the product more or who have a greater ability to pay. For example, most
economic textbooks cost more in the United States than in "Third world
countries" like Ethiopia. In this case, the publisher is using their government
granted copyright monopoly to price discriminate between (presumed) wealthier
economics students and (presumed) poor economics students. Similarly, most
patented medications cost more in the U.S. than in other countries with a
(presumed) poorer customer base. Perfect price discrimination would allow the
monopolist to a unique price to each customer based on his or her individual
demand. This would allow the monopolist to extract all the consumer surplus of
the market. Note that while such perfect price discrimination is still a
theoretical construct, it is becoming increasingly real with advances of
information technology and micromarketing. Typically, a high general price is
listed, and various market segments get varying discounts. This is an example
of framing to make the process of charging some people higher prices more
socially acceptable. It is important to realize that partial price
discrimination can cause some customers who are inappropriately pooled with
high price customers to be excluded from the market. For example, a poor
student in the U.S. might be excluded from purchasing an economics textbook at
the U.S. price, which the student might have been able to purchase at the
"China price". Similarly, a wealthy student in China might have been willing to
pay more (although naturally it is against their interests to signal this to
the monopolist). These are deadweight losses and decrease a monopolist's
profits. As such, monopolists have substantial economic interest in improving
their market information and "market segmenting". There is important
information for one to remember when considering the monopoly model diagram
(and its associated conclusions) displayed here. The result that monopoly
prices are higher, and production output lesser, than a competitive company
follow from a requirement that the monopoly not charge different prices for
different customers. That is, the monopoly is restricted from engaging in price
discrimination (this is termed first degree price discrimination, such that all
customers are charged the same amount). If the monopoly were permitted to
charge individualised prices (this is termed third degree price
discrimination), the quantity produced, and the price charged to the "marginal"
customer, would be identical to that of a competitive company, thus eliminating
the deadweight loss; however, all gains from trade (social welfare) would
accrue to the monopolist and none to the consumer. In essence, every consumer
would be indifferent between (1) going completely without the product or
service and (2) being able to purchase it from the monopolist. As long as the
price elasticity of demand for most customers is less than one in absolute
value, it is advantageous for a company to increase its prices: it then
receives more money for fewer goods. With a price increase, price elasticity
tends to increase, and in the optimum case above it will be greater than one
for most customers. Price discrimination is charging different consumers
different prices for the same product when the cost of servicing the customer
is identical. A company maximizes profit by selling where marginal revenue
equals marginal cost. A company that does not engage in price discrimination
will charge the profit maximizing price, P*, to all its customers. In such
circumstances there are customers who would be willing to pay a higher price
than P* and those who will not pay P* but would buy at a lower price. A price
discrimination strategy is to charge less price sensitive buyers a higher price
and the more price sensitive buyers a lower price. Thus additional revenue is
generated from two sources. The basic problem is to identify customers by their
willingness to pay. The purpose of price discrimination is to transfer consumer
surplus to the producer. Consumer surplus is the difference between the value
of a good to a consumer and the price the consumer must pay in the market to
purchase it. Price discrimination is not limited to monopolies. Market power is
a company’s ability to increase prices without losing all its customers. Any
company that has market power can engage in price discrimination. Perfect
competition is the only market form in which price discrimination would be
impossible (a perfectly competitive company has a perfectly elastic demand
curve and has zero market power). There are three forms of price
discrimination. First degree price discrimination charges each consumer the
maximum price the consumer is willing to pay. Second degree price
discrimination involves quantity discounts. Third degree price discrimination
involves grouping consumers according to willingness to pay as measured by
their price elasticities of demand and charging each group a different price.
Third degree price discrimination is the most prevalent type. There are three
conditions that must be present for a company to engage in successful price
discrimination. First, the company must have market power. Second, the company
must be able to sort customers according to their willingness to pay for the
good. Third, the firm must be able to prevent resell. A company must have some
degree of market power to practice price discrimination. Without market power a
company cannot charge more than the market price. Any market structure
characterized by a downward sloping demand curve has market power – monopoly,
monopolistic competition and oligopoly. The only market structure that has no
market power is perfect competition. A company wishing to practice price
discrimination must be able to prevent middlemen or brokers from acquiring the
consumer surplus for themselves. The company accomplishes this by preventing or
limiting resale. Many methods are used to prevent resale. For example persons
are required to show photographic identification and a boarding pass before
boarding an airplane. Most travelers assume that this practice is strictly a
matter of security. However, a primary purpose in requesting photographic
identification is to confirm that the ticket purchaser is the person about to
board the airplane and not someone who has repurchased the ticket from a
discount buyer. The inability to prevent resale is the largest obstacle to
successful price discrimination. Companies have however developed numerous
methods to prevent resale. For example, universities require that students show
identification before entering sporting events. Governments may make it illegal
to resale tickets or products. In Boston Red Sox tickets can only be resold
legally to the team. The three basic forms of price discrimination are first,
second and third degree price discrimination. In first degree price
discrimination the company charges the maximum price each customer is willing
to pay. The maximum price a consumer is willing to pay for a unit of the good
is the reservation price. Thus for each unit the seller tries to set the price
equal to the consumer’s reservation price. Direct information about a
consumer’s willingness to pay is rarely available. Sellers tend to rely on
secondary information such as where a person lives (postal codes); for example,
catalog retailers can use mail high-priced catalogs to high-income postal
codes. First degree price discrimination most frequently occurs in regard to
professional services or in transactions involving direct buyer/seller
negotiations. For example, an accountant who has prepared a consumer's tax
return has information that can be used to charge customers based on an
estimate of their ability to pay. In second degree price discrimination or
quantity discrimination customers are charged different prices based on how
much they buy. There is a single price schedule for all consumers but the
prices vary depending on the quantity of the good bought. The theory of second
degree price discrimination is a consumer is willing to buy only a certain
quantity of a good at a given price. Companies know that consumer’s
willingness to buy decreases as more units are purchased. The task for the
seller is to identify these price points and to reduce the price once one is
reached in the hope that a reduced price will trigger additional purchases from
the consumer. For example, sell in unit blocks rather than individual units. In
third degree price discrimination or multi-market price discrimination the
seller divides the consumers into different groups according to their
willingness to pay as measured by their price elasticity of demand. Each group
of consumers effectively becomes a separate market with its own demand curve
and marginal revenue curve. The firm then attempts to maximize profits in each
segment by equating MR and MC, Generally the company charges a higher price to
the group with a more price inelastic demand and a relatively lesser price to
the group with a more elastic demand. Examples of third degree price
discrimination abound. Airlines charge higher prices to business travelers than
to vacation travelers. The reasoning is that the demand curve for a vacation
traveler is relatively elastic while the demand curve for a business traveler
is relatively inelastic. Any determinant of price elasticity of demand can be
used to segment markets. For example, seniors have a more elastic demand for
movies than do young adults because they generally have more free time. Thus
theaters will offer discount tickets to seniors. Example. Assume that by a
uniform pricing system the monopolist would sell five units at a price of $10
per unit. Assume that his marginal cost is $5 per unit. Total revenue would be
$50, total costs would be $25 and profits would be $25. If the monopolist
practiced price discrimination he would sell the first unit for $50 the second
unit for $40 and so on. Total revenue would be $150, his total cost would be
$25 and his profit would be $125.00. Several things are worth noting. The
monopolist acquires all the consumer surplus and eliminates practically all the
deadweight loss because he is willing to sell to anyone who is willing to pay
at least the marginal cost. Thus the price discrimination promotes efficiency.
Secondly, by the pricing scheme price = average revenue and equals marginal
revenue. That is the monopolist behaving like a perfectly competitive company.
Thirdly, the discriminating monopolist produces a larger quantity than the
monopolist operating by a uniform pricing scheme. American Express has enjoyed
the monopoly for maximum years for their express mail service. Classifying
customers. Successful price discrimination requires that companies separate
consumers according to their willingness to buy. Determining a customer's
willingness to buy a good is difficult. Asking consumers directly is fruitless:
consumers don't know, and to the extent they do they are reluctant to share
that information with marketers. The two main methods for determining
willingness to buy are observation of personal characteristics and consumer
actions. As noted information about where a person lives (postal codes), how
the person dresses, what kind of car he or she drives, occupation, and income
and spending patterns can be helpful in classifying. Monopoly and efficiency.
According to the standard model, in which a monopolist sets a single price for
all consumers, the monopolist will sell a lesser quantity of goods at a higher
price than would companies by perfect competition. Because the monopolist
ultimately forgoes transactions with consumers who value the product or service
more than its cost, monopoly pricing creates a deadweight loss referring to
potential gains that went neither to the monopolist nor to consumers. Given the
presence of this deadweight loss, the combined surplus (or wealth) for the
monopolist and consumers is necessarily less than the total surplus obtained by
consumers by perfect competition. Where efficiency is defined by the total
gains from trade, the monopoly setting is less efficient than perfect
competition. It is often argued that monopolies tend to become less efficient
and less innovative over time, becoming "complacent", because they do not have
to be efficient or innovative to compete in the marketplace. Sometimes this
very loss of psychological efficiency can increase a potential competitor's
value enough to overcome market entry barriers, or provide incentive for
research and investment into new alternatives. The theory of contestable
markets argues that in some circumstances (private) monopolies are forced to
behave "as if" there were competition because of the risk of losing their
monopoly to new entrants. This is likely to happen when a market's barriers to
entry are low. It might also be because of the availability in the longer term
of substitutes in other markets. For example, a canal monopoly, while worth a
great deal during the late 18th century United Kingdom, was worth much less
during the late 19th century because of the introduction of railways as a
substitute. Natural monopoly. A natural monopoly is a company that experiences
increasing returns to scale over the relevant range of output and relatively
high fixed costs. A natural monopoly occurs where the average cost of
production "declines throughout the relevant range of product demand". The
relevant range of product demand is where the average cost curve is below the
demand curve. When this situation occurs, it is always cheaper for one large
company to supply the market than multiple smaller companies; in fact, absent
government intervention in such markets, will naturally evolve into a monopoly.
An early market entrant that takes advantage of the cost structure and can
expand rapidly can exclude smaller companies from entering and can drive or buy
out other companies. A natural monopoly suffers from the same inefficiencies as
any other monopoly. Left to its own devices, a profit-seeking natural monopoly
will produce where marginal revenue equals marginal costs. Regulation of
natural monopolies is problematic. Fragmenting such monopolies is by definition
inefficient. The most frequently used methods dealing with natural monopolies
are government regulations and public ownership. Government regulation
generally consists of regulatory commissions charged with the principal duty of
setting prices. To reduce prices and increase output, regulators often use
average cost pricing. By average cost pricing, the price and quantity are
determined by the intersection of the average cost curve and the demand curve.
This pricing scheme eliminates any positive economic profits since price equals
average cost. Average-cost pricing is not perfect. Regulators must estimate
average costs. Companies have a reduced incentive to lower costs. Regulation of
this type has not been limited to natural monopolies. Average-cost pricing does
also have some disadvantages. By setting price equal to the intersection of the
demand curve and the average total cost curve, the firm's output is
allocatively inefficient as the price exceeds the marginal cost (which is the
output quantity for a perfectly competitive and allocatively efficient market).
Government-granted monopoly. A government-granted monopoly (also called a "de
jure monopoly") is a form of coercive monopoly by which a government grants
exclusive privilege to a private individual or company to be the sole provider
of a commodity; potential competitors are excluded from the market by law,
regulation, or other mechanisms of government enforcement. Monopolist shutdown
rule. A monopolist should shut down when price is less than average variable
cost for every output level. – in other words where the demand curve is
entirely below the average variable cost curve. Under these circumstances at
the profit maximum level of output (MR = MC) average revenue would be less than
average variable costs and the monopolists would be better off shutting down in
the short term. Breaking up monopolies. When monopolies are not ended by the
open market, sometimes a government will either regulate the monopoly, convert
it into a publicly owned monopoly environment, or forcibly fragment it (see
Antitrust law and trust busting). Public utilities, often being naturally
efficient with only one operator and therefore less susceptible to efficient
breakup, are often strongly regulated or publicly owned. American Telephone &
Telegraph (AT&T) and Standard Oil are debatable examples of the breakup of a
private monopoly by government: When AT&T, a monopoly previously protected by
force of law, was broken up into various components in 1984, MCI, Sprint, and
other companies were able to compete effectively in the long distance phone
market. Law. The existence of a very high market share does not always mean
consumers are paying excessive prices since the threat of new entrants to the
market can restrain a high-market-share company's price increases. Competition
law does not make merely having a monopoly illegal, but rather abusing the
power a monopoly may confer, for instance through exclusionary practices. First
it is necessary to determine whether a company is dominant, or whether it
behaves "to an appreciable extent independently of its competitors, customers
and ultimately of its consumer". As with collusive conduct, market shares are
determined with reference to the particular market in which the company and
product in question is sold. The Herfindahl-Hirschman Index (HHI) is sometimes
used to assess how competitive an industry is. In the US, the merger guidelines
state that a post-merger HHI below 1000 is viewed as unconcentrated while HHI's
above that provoke further review. By European Union law, very large market
shares raise a presumption that a company is dominant, which may be rebuttable.
If a company has a dominant position, then there is "a special responsibility
not to allow its conduct to impair competition on the common market". Despite
wide agreement that the above constitute abusive practices, there is some
debate about whether there needs to be a causal connection between the dominant
position of a company and its actual abusive conduct. Furthermore, there has
been some consideration of what happens when a company merely attempts to abuse
its dominant position. Historical monopolies. The term "monopoly" first appears
in Aristotle's "Politics", wherein Aristotle describes Thales of Miletus'
cornering of the market in olive presses as a monopoly (μονοπωλίαν).
Vending of common salt (sodium chloride) was historically a natural monopoly.
Until recently, a combination of strong sunshine and low humidity or an
extension of peat marshes was necessary for producing salt from the sea, the
most plentiful source. Changing sea levels periodically caused salt "famines"
and communities were forced to depend upon those who controlled the scarce
inland mines and salt springs, which were often in hostile areas (e.g. the
Sahara desert) requiring well-organised security for transport, storage, and
distribution. The "Gabelle", a notoriously high tax levied upon salt, had a
role in the beginning of the French Revolution, when strict legal controls
specified who was allowed to sell and distribute salt. Robin Gollan argues in
"The Coalminers of New South Wales" that anti-competitive practices developed
in the coal industry of Australia's Newcastle as a result of the business
cycle. The monopoly was generated by formal meetings of the local management of
coal companies agreeing to fix a minimum price for sale at dock. This collusion
was known as "The Vend". The Vend ended and was reformed repeatedly during the
late 19th century, ending by recession in the business cycle. "The Vend" was
able to maintain its monopoly due to trade union assistance, and material
advantages (primarily coal geography). During the early 20th century, as a
result of comparable monopolistic practices in the Australian coastal shipping
business, the Vend developed as an informal and illegal collusion between the
steamship owners and the coal industry, eventually resulting in the High Court
case Adelaide Steamship Co. Ltd v. R. & AG. Countering monopolies. According to
professor Milton Friedman, laws against monopolies cause more harm than good,
but unnecessary monopolies should be countered by removing tariffs and other
regulation that upholds monopolies. "A monopoly can seldom be established
within a country without overt and covert government assistance in the form of
a tariff or some other device. It is close to impossible to do so on a world
scale. The De Beers diamond monopoly is the only one we know of that appears to
have succeeded (and even De Beers are protected by various laws against so
called "illicit" diamond trade). – In a world of free trade, international
cartels would disappear even more quickly." However, professor Steve H. Hanke
believes that although private monopolies are more efficient than public ones,
often by a factor of two, sometimes private natural monopolies, such as local
water distribution, should be regulated (not prohibited) by, e.g., price
auctions. Thomas DiLorenzo asserts, however, that during the early days of
utility companies where there was little regulation, there were no natural
monopolies and there was competition. Only when companies realized that they
could gain power through government did monopolies begin to form.
