Monopsony In economics, a monopsony (from Ancient Greek μόνος ("mónos")
"single" + ὀψωνία ("opsōnía") "purchase") is a market form in which
only one buyer faces many sellers. It is an example of imperfect competition,
similar to a monopoly, in which only one seller faces many buyers. As the only
purchaser of a good or service, the monopsonist may dictate terms to its
suppliers in the same manner that a monopolist controls the market for its
buyers. Etymology. The term was first introduced by Joan Robinson in her
influential book, "The Economics of Imperfect Competition". Robinson credits
classics scholar Bertrand Hallward at the University of Cambridge with coining
the term. Examples. A single-payer universal health care system, in which the
government is the only "buyer" of health care services, is an example of a
monopsony. During the Cold War, the defense industry in the United States had a
monopsonistic element in respect to major defense projects; strategic
considerations limited the sole buyer (the United States Department of Defense)
to procuring its needs from domestic suppliers, while there were virtually no
other parties other than DoD with the interest or resources to purchase many of
the suppliers' products. In the post-Cold War world, this has weakened, as more
states have the need and ability to purchase sophisticated military equipment,
and DoD is freer to purchase from foreign (particularly European) suppliers. An
interesting example of a situation where both a monopoly and a monopsony exist
(a bilateral monopoly) involves the market for nuclear-powered aircraft
carriers: the monopsony being with only one purchaser (the United States Navy)
and the monopoly being with only one producer (Huntington Ingalls Industries,
as their Newport News Shipbuilding division is the only place with the capacity
to manufacture, overhaul, and decommission them). It has also been argued that
Wal-Mart, in the United States, functions as a monopsony in certain market
segments, as its buying power for a given item may dwarf the remaining market.
Another possible monopsony could develop in the exchange between the food
industry and farmers. Texas is said to have almost total control over the K-12
textbooks in the US due to its market dominance. Unlike most other states,
Texas operates as a single unified school district, with all students being
taught the same curriculum from the same books statewide. Combined with Texas'
large size, Texas' textbook purchases far outweigh those of other buyers.
Overview. The term "monopsony power", in a manner similar to "monopoly power",
is used by economists as a short hand reference to buyers who face an upwardly
sloping supply curve but that are not the only consumer; alternative terms are
oligopsony or monopsonistic competition. Static monopsony in a labor market.
The left-hand side of this expression is the "marginal revenue product" of
labor (roughly, the extra revenue produced by an extra worker) and is
represented by the red "MRP" curve in the diagram. The right-hand side is the
"marginal cost" of labor (roughly, the extra cost due to an extra worker) and
is represented by the green "MC" curve in the diagram. It should be noticed
that this marginal cost is "higher" than the wage formula_3 paid to the new
worker by the amount This is because the firm has to increase the wage paid to
all the workers it already employs whenever it hires an extra worker. In the
diagram, this leads to an "MC" curve that is "above" the supply curve "S". The
first-order condition for maximum profit is then satisfied at point "A" of the
diagram, where the "MC" and "MRP" curves intersect. This determines the profit-
maximising employment as "L" on the horizontal axis. The corresponding wage "w"
is then obtained from the supply curve, through point "M". The monopsonistic
equilibrium at "M" should now be contrasted with the equilibrium that would
obtain under competitive conditions. Suppose a competitor employer entered the
market and offered a wage higher than that at "M". Then every employee of the
first employer would choose instead to work for the competitor. Moreover, the
competitor would gain all the former profits of the first employer, minus a
less-than-offsetting amount from the wage increase of the first employer's
employees, plus profits arising from additional employees who decided to work
in the market because of the wage increase. But the first employer would
respond by offering an even higher wage, poaching the new rival's employees,
and so forth. In other words, a group of perfectly competitive firms would be
forced, through competition, to intersection "C" rather than "M". Just as a
monopoly is thwarted by the competition to win sales, minimizing prices and
maximizing output, competition for employees between the employers in this case
would maximize both wages and employment, as shown in the graph. Welfare
implications. The lower employment and wage caused by monopsony power has two
distinct effects on the economic welfare of the people involved. First, it
redistributes welfare away from workers and to their employer(s). Secondly, it
reduces the aggregate (or social) welfare enjoyed by both groups taken
together, as the employers' net gain is smaller than the loss inflicted on
workers. The diagram on the right illustrates both effects, using the standard
approach based on the notion of economic surplus. According to this notion, the
workers' economic surplus (or net gain from the exchange) is given by the area
between the "S" curve and the horizontal line corresponding to the wage, up to
the employment level. Similarly, the employers' surplus is the area between the
horizontal line corresponding to the wage and the "MRP" curve, up to the
employment level. The "social" surplus is then the sum of these two areas.
Following such definitions, the grey rectangle in the diagram is the part of
the competitive social surplus that has been redistributed from the workers to
their employer(s) under monopsony. By contrast, the yellow triangle is the part
of the competitive social surplus that has been lost by "both" parties, as a
result of the monopsonistic restriction of employment. This is a net social
loss and is called "deadweight loss". It is a measure of the market failure
caused by monopsony power, through a wasteful misallocation of resources. The
ratio formula_14 has been called the rate of exploitation, and it can be easily
shown that it equals the reciprocal of the elasticity of the labour supply
curve faced by the firm. Thus the rate of exploitation is zero under
competitive conditions, when this elasticity tends to infinity. Empirical
estimates of formula_14 by various means are a common feature of the applied
literature devoted to the measurement of observed monopsony power. Finally, it
is important to notice that, while the gray-area redistribution effect could be
reversed by fiscal policy (i.e., taxing employers and transferring the tax
revenue to the workers), this is not so for the yellow-area deadweight loss.
The market failure can only be addressed in one of two ways: either by breaking
up the monopsony through anti-trust intervention, or by regulating the wage
policy of firms. The most common kind of regulation is a binding minimum wage
higher than the monopsonistic wage. Minimum wage. A binding minimum wage can be
introduced either by law or through collective bargaining, and its possible
effects in a special case are shown in the diagram on the right. Here the
minimum wage is "w"", higher than the monopsonistic "w". At this given wage the
firm can now hire all the workers it wants, up to the supply curve, so that in
the relevant employment range its marginal cost of labor becomes effectively
constant and equal to "w"", as shown by the new black horizontal line "MC'".
Hence the firm maximizes profits at the new intersection point "A", choosing
the employment level "L"", which is higher than the monopsonistic level "L". As
the reader can check, the rate of exploitation has been reduced to zero. where
formula_3 is the original supply curve and formula_18 is the minimum wage. The
new curve has thus a horizontal first branch and a kink at the point As it is
now seen, the example illustrated by the diagram belongs to the third regime.
As a result, there is an excess supply of labor – i.e. "involuntary
unemployment" – equal to the segment "AB". So, although the exploitation rate
has vanished, there is still a deadweight loss to society. This illustrates the
problems that may arise when the proper level of the binding minimum wage is
not exactly known, or cannot be enforced for political reasons. Yet, even when
it is sub-optimal, a minimum wage higher than the market rate raises the level
of employment anyway. This is a highly remarkable result, because it only
follows under monopsony. Indeed, under competitive conditions any minimum wage
higher than the market rate would actually "reduce" employment, according to
classical economic models. Thus, spotting the effects on employment of newly
introduced minimum wage regulations is among the indirect ways economists use
to pin down monopsony power in selected labor markets. Wage discrimination.
Just like a monopolist, a monopsonistic employer may find that its profits are
maximized if it "discriminates" prices. In this case this means paying
different wages to different groups of workers even if their MRP is the same,
with lower wages paid to the workers who have a lower elasticity of supply of
their labor to the firm. Some researchers have tried to use this fact to
explain at least part of the observed wage differentials whereby women often
earn less than men, even after controlling for observed productivity
differentials. However, all such attempts have had to contend with the
statistical fact that in most cases women actually display a "higher" labor
supply elasticity than men. Some authors have argued informally that, while
this is so for "market" supply, the reverse may somehow be true of the supply
to individual firms. In particular, Manning and others have shown that, in the
case of the UK Equal Pay Act, implementation has led to higher employment of
women. Since the Act was effectively minimum wage legislation for women, this
might perhaps be interpreted as a symptom of monopsonistic discrimination.
Dynamic problems. In many real-world situations a monopsonist firm will have to
maximise its profits "through time", rather than instantaneously as in the
previous static model. In all such cases, any short-run outcomes will have to
be balanced against longer-run ones, and the resulting equilibrium may differ.
with The exploitation rate is thus a weighted average of the short- and long-
run inverse supply elasticities, where the weight of the long-run one is much
bigger, because formula_24 is much smaller than unity even when the discounting
period is one year. It follows that, as the long-run (direct) supply elasticity
of labour tends to be much higher than the short-run one, this very simple
dynamic model predicts an exploitation rate which is much smaller than the one
produced by static analysis. However, less simplified dynamic models tell less
simple stories. Even the employment effect of minimum wages is not as clear cut
as static models would have. Empirical problems. The results of these empirical
works are rarely unambiguous. However, even in cases such as coal miners or
nurses, most US studies suggest rates of exploitation probably lower than
marginal tax rates on workers' incomes, or union relative wage effects. The
better documented instances of significant exploitation are found in the
probably rare cases of explicit collusion, such as US baseball before the
reserve clause. Sources of labour monopsony power. The simpler explanation of
monopsony power in labour markets is barriers to entry on the "demand" side. In
all such cases, oligopsony would result from oligopoly in the product markets
of the industries that use that type of labour as input. If the hypothesis was
generally true, one would then find a positive statistical correlation between
exploitation, on one side, and industry concentration and firm size on the
other. However, numerous statistical studies document significant positive
correlations between firm or establishment size and "wages". These results, by
themselves inconsistent with the oligopoly-oligopsony hypothesis, may be due to
the prevalence of other factors, such as efficiency wages. However, monopsony
power might also be due to circumstances affecting entry of workers on the
"supply" side, directly reducing the elasticity of labour supply to firms.
Paramount among these are moving costs for workers, which are also a cause of
differentiation among potential employees, possibly leading to discrimination
(see above). But a similar effect might also be produced by all the
institutional factors that limit labour mobility between firms, including job
protection legislation. The requirement that employees in the government or the
defense sector is another source of monopsonistic competition, as are
requirements for professional certification, for example, a medical degree.
Finally, as already noticed, a significant reduction in the short-run
elasticity of supply may come from information costs and search behaviour. An
alternative that has been suggested as a source of monopsony power is worker
preferences over job characteristics (Bhaskar and To, 1999; Bhaskar, Manning
and To, 2002). Such job characteristics can include distance from work, type of
work, location, the social environment at work, etc. If different workers have
different preferences, employers have local monopsony power over workers that
strongly prefer working for them. Finally, monopsony power will occur when the
average revenue product of labor increases with the amount of labor employed,
due to economies of scale. In this case, the perfectly competitive solution
(workers are paid their marginal revenue product) is not stable. In the long
run, the firm may set wages equal to the average revenue product of labor, or
engage in wage discrimination, paying wages closer to marginal product to
markets (or workers) with higher elasticity of supply. Public administration
and product markets. A related issue is the role of monopsony power from the
point of view of anti-trust policy affecting vertical integrations. It has been
argued that vertical integration by a monopsony – whereby the production of
the previously bought input becomes an in-house operation – may reduce or
eliminate the inefficiencies due to monopsonistic restriction of purchases. In
Australia, the Pharmaceutical Industry can be viewed as a kind of monopsony, as
the Commonwealth government is the principal buyer of products through the
Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS) In the US, journalists, including
"Harper's" and the PBS program "Frontline", have made the case that Wal-Mart is
a monopsonist, dictating terms to suppliers, whilst at the same time a
monopolist dictating terms to consumers - at least in certain market segments.
It has been argued that Apple has in some ways become a monopsonist in that it
can dictate terms to suppliers of electronic components.
