Morality Morality (from the Latin "" "manner, character, proper behavior") is
the differentiation of intentions, decisions, and actions between those that
are "good" (or right) and those that are "bad" (or wrong). The philosophy of
morality is ethics. A "moral code" is a system of morality (according to a
particular philosophy, religion, culture, etc.) and a "moral" is any one
practice or teaching within a moral code. "Morality" may also be specifically
synonymous with "goodness" or "rightness." "Immorality" is the active
opposition to morality (i.e. opposition to that which is good or right), while
"amorality" is variously defined as an unawareness of, indifference toward, or
disbelief in any set of moral standards or principles. An example of a moral
code is the Golden Rule which states that, "One should treat others as one
would like others to treat oneself." Philosophy. Morality and ethics. "Ethics"
(also known as "moral philosophy") is that branch of philosophy which addresses
questions about morality. The word 'ethics' is "commonly used interchangeably
with 'morality'¬ ... and sometimes it is used more narrowly to mean the moral
principles of a particular tradition, group, or individual." Likewise, certain
types of ethical theories, especially deontological ethics, sometimes
distinguish between 'ethics' and 'morals': "Although the morality of people and
their ethics amounts to the same thing, there is a usage that restricts
morality to systems such as that of Kant, based on notions such as duty,
obligation, and principles of conduct, reserving ethics for the more
Aristotelian approach to practical reasoning, based on the notion of a virtue,
and generally avoiding the separation of 'moral' considerations from other
practical considerations." Realism and anti-realism. Theories which claim that
morality is derived from reasoning about implied imperatives (universal
prescriptivism), the edicts of a god (divine command theory), or the
hypothetical decrees of a perfectly rational being (ideal observer theory), are
considered anti-realist in the robust sense used here, but are considered
realist in the sense synonymous with moral universalism. Anthropology. Tribal
and territorial. Celia Green made a distinction between tribal and territorial
morality. She characterizes the latter as predominantly negative and
proscriptive: it defines a person‚Äôs territory, including his or her property
and dependents, which is not to be damaged or interfered with. Apart from these
proscriptions, territorial morality is permissive, allowing the individual
whatever behaviour does not interfere with the territory of another. By
contrast, tribal morality is prescriptive, imposing the norms of the collective
on the individual. These norms will be arbitrary, culturally dependent and
‚Äòflexible‚Äô, whereas territorial morality aims at rules which are universal
and absolute, such as Kant‚Äôs ‚Äòcategorical imperative‚Äô and Geisler's
graded absolutism. Green relates the development of territorial morality to the
rise of the concept of private property, and the ascendancy of contract over
status. In-group and out-group. Some observers hold that individuals apply
distinct sets of moral rules to people depending on their membership of an "in-
group" (the individual and those they believe to be of the same culture or
race) or an "out-group" (people not entitled to be treated according to the
same rules). Some biologists, anthropologists and evolutionary psychologists
believe this in-group/out-group discrimination has evolved because it enhances
group survival. This belief has been confirmed by simple computational models
of evolution. Gary R. Johnson and V.S. Falger have argued that nationalism and
patriotism are forms of this in-group/out-group boundary. Jonathan Haidt has
noted that experimental observation indicates an in-group criterion provides
one moral foundation substantially used by conservatives, but far less so by
liberals. Comparing cultures. Peterson and Seligman approach the
anthropological view looking across cultures, geo-cultural areas and across
millennia. They conclude that certain virtues have prevailed in all cultures
they examined. The major virtues they identified include "wisdom / knowledge;
courage; humanity; justice; temperance; and transcendence". Each of these
includes several divisions. For instance "humanity" includes "love",
"kindness", and "social intelligence". Fons Trompenaars, author of "Did the
Pedestrian Die?", tested members of different cultures with various moral
dilemmas. One of these was whether the driver of a car would have his friend, a
passenger riding in the car, lie in order to protect the driver from the
consequences of driving too fast and hitting a pedestrian. Trompenaars found
that different cultures had quite different expectations (from none to almost
certain). John Newton, author of "Complete Conduct Principles for the 21st
Century" compared the Eastern and the Western cultures about morality. As
stated in "Complete Conduct Principles for the 21st Century", ‚ÄúOne of the
important objectives of this book is to blend harmoniously the fine souls
regarding conduct in the Eastern and the Western cultures, to take the result
as the source and then to create newer and better conduct principles to suit
the human society of the new century, and to introduce a lot of Chinese fine
conduct spirits to the Western world. It is hoped that this helps solve lots of
problems the human society of the 21st century faces, including (but not
limited to the Eastern and the Western cultures) what a single culture
cannot.‚Äù Evolution. The development of modern morality is a process closely
tied to the Sociocultural evolution of different peoples of humanity. Some
evolutionary biologists, particularly sociobiologists, believe that morality is
a product of evolutionary forces acting at an individual level and also at the
group level through group selection (though to what degree this actually occurs
is a controversial topic in evolutionary theory). Some sociobiologists contend
that the set of behaviors that constitute morality evolved largely because they
provided possible survival and/or reproductive benefits (i.e. increased
evolutionary success). Humans consequently evolved "pro-social" emotions, such
as feelings of empathy or guilt, in response to these moral behaviors. On this
understanding, moralities are sets of self-perpetuating and ideologically-
driven behaviors which encourage human cooperation. Biologists contend that all
social animals, from ants to elephants, have modified their behaviors, by
restraining immediate selfishness in order to improve their evolutionary
fitness. Human morality, though sophisticated and complex relative to other
animals, is essentially a natural phenomenon that evolved to restrict excessive
individualism that could undermine a group's cohesion and thereby reducing the
individuals' fitness. On this view, moral codes are ultimately founded on
emotional instincts and intuitions that were selected for in the past because
they aided survival and reproduction (inclusive fitness). Examples: the
maternal bond is selected for because it improves the survival of offspring;
the Westermarck effect, where close proximity during early years reduces mutual
sexual attraction, underpins taboos against incest because it decreases the
likelihood of genetically risky behaviour such as inbreeding. The phenomenon of
'reciprocity' in nature is seen by evolutionary biologists as one way to begin
to understand human morality. Its function is typically to ensure a reliable
supply of essential resources, especially for animals living in a habitat where
food quantity or quality fluctuates unpredictably. For example, some vampire
bats fail to feed on prey some nights while others manage to consume a surplus.
Bats that did eat will then regurgitate part of their blood meal to save a
conspecific from starvation. Since these animals live in close-knit groups over
many years, an individual can count on other group members to return the favor
on nights when it goes hungry (Wilkinson, 1984) Marc Bekoff and Jessica Pierce
(2009) have argued that morality is a suite of behavioral capacities likely
shared by all mammals living in complex social groups (e.g., wolves, coyotes,
elephants, dolphins, rats, chimpanzees). They define morality as "a suite of
interrelated other-regarding behaviors that cultivate and regulate complex
interactions within social groups." This suite of behaviors includes empathy,
reciprocity, altruism, cooperation, and a sense of fairness. In related work,
it has been convincingly demonstrated that chimpanzees show empathy for each
other in a wide variety of contexts. They also possess the ability to engage in
deception, and a level of social 'politics' prototypical of our own tendencies
for gossip and reputation management. Christopher Boehm (1982) has hypothesized
that the incremental development of moral complexity throughout hominid
evolution was due to the increasing need to avoid disputes and injuries in
moving to open savanna and developing stone weapons. Other theories are that
increasing complexity was simply a correlate of increasing group size and brain
size, and in particular the development of theory of mind abilities. Richard
Dawkins in "The God Delusion" suggested that our morality is a result of our
biological evolutionary history and that the Moral Zeitgeist helps describe how
morality evolves from biological and cultural origins and evolves with time
within a culture. A British poll found that the most important moral points
among young people were looking after ones family and putting others before
yourself. Neuroscience. The brain areas that are consistently involved when
humans reason about moral issues have been investigated by a quantitative
large-scale meta-analysis of the brain activity changes reported in the moral
neuroscience literature. In fact, the neural network underlying moral decisions
overlapped with the network pertaining to representing others' intentions
(i.e., theory of mind) and the network pertaining to representing others'
(vicariously experienced) emotional states (i.e., empathy). This supports the
notion that moral reasoning is related to both seeing things from other
persons‚Äô points of view and to grasping others‚Äô feelings. These results
provide evidence that the neural network underlying moral decisions is probably
domain-global (i.e., there might be no such things as a "moral module" in the
human brain) and might be dissociable into cognitive and affective sub-systems.
Brain areas. The explicit making of moral right and wrong judgments coincides
with activation in the ventromedial prefrontal cortex (VMPC) while intuitive
reactions to situations containing implicit moral issues activates the
temporoparietal junction area. Stimulation of the VMPC by transcranial magnetic
stimulation has been shown to inhibit the ability of human subjects to take
into account intent when forming a moral judgment. Similarly VMPC-impaired
persons will judge an action purely on its outcome and are unable to take into
account the intent of that action. Mirror neurons. Mirror neurons are neurons
in the brain that fire when another person is observed doing a certain action.
The neurons fire in imitation of the action being observed, causing the same
muscles to act minutely in the observer as are acting grossly in the person
actually performing the action. Research on mirror neurons, since their
discovery in 1996, suggests that they may have a role to play not only in
action understanding, but also in emotion sharing empathy. Cognitive neuro-
scientist Jean Decety thinks that the ability to recognize and vicariously
experience what another individual is undergoing was a key step forward in the
evolution of social behavior, and ultimately, morality. The inability to feel
empathy is one of the defining characteristics of psychopathy, and this would
appear to lend support to Decety's view. Psychology. In modern moral
psychology, morality is considered to change through personal development. A
number of psychologists have produced theories on the development of morals,
usually going through stages of different morals. Lawrence Kohlberg, Jean
Piaget, and Elliot Turiel have cognitive-developmental approaches to moral
development; to these theorists morality forms in a series of constructive
stages or domains. Social psychologists such as Martin Hoffman and Jonathan
Haidt emphasize social and emotional development based on biology, such as
empathy. Moral identity theorists, such as William Damon and Mordechai Nisan,
see moral commitment as arising from the development of a self-identity that is
defined by moral purposes: this moral self-identity leads to a sense of
responsibility to pursue such purposes. Of historical interest in psychology
are the theories of psychoanalysts such as Sigmund Freud, who believe that
moral development is the product of aspects of the super-ego as guilt-shame
avoidance. Even though we have a sense of responsibility to pursue moral
purposes, we still, at least occasionally, engage in immoral behaviour. Such
behaviours jeopardize our moral self-image; however, when we engage in immoral
behaviours we still feel as though we are moral individuals. "Moral self-
licensing" attempts to explain this phenomenon and proposes that self-image
security increases our likelihood to engage in immoral behaviour. When our
moral self-image is threatened, we can gain confidence from our past moral
behaviour. The more confident we are, the less we will worry about our future
behaviour which actually increases the likelihood that we will engage in
immoral behaviours. Monin and Miller (2001) examined the "moral self-licensing"
effect and found that when participants established credentials as non-
prejudiced persons, they were more willing to express politically incorrect
opinions despite the fact that the audience was unaware of their credentials.
Morality and wealth. Socioeconomic factors can have a significant impact on
moral issues. For example, a study conducted in the US in 2008 measured the
correlation between wealth and divorce rates, and found that people with an
income above $75.000 and a college education only have 22% divorce rate
compared to 39% in the group with income below $20.000 per annum. Further
benefits of wealth can be derived from crime statistics indicating that crime
rates are inversely correlated with GDP albeit others find a positive
correlation. More comprehensive analysis shows that the crime rates increase
with inequality of wealth distribution. Comparing List of countries by income
equality and List of countries by intentional homicide rate gives a visual
indication of the importance of wealth distribution. Because of this
correlation, some advocate the Redistribution of wealth, possibly to be
achieved via taxation. However, the justification of wealth distribution is a
matter of debate between philopsophers, social scientists and politicians
Aritstotle in his Nicomachean Ethics talks about generosity as a virtue and
claims that is better to be wasteful than stingy with regards to dealing with
money. Morality and politics. If morality is the answer to the question 'how
ought we to live' at the individual level, politics can be seen as addressing
the same question at the social level. It is therefore unsurprising that
evidence has been found of a relationship between attitudes in morality and
politics. Jonathan Haidt and Jesse Graham have studied the differences between
liberals and conservatives, in this regard. Haidt found that Americans who
identified as liberals tended to value care and fairness higher than loyalty,
respect and purity. Self-identified conservative Americans valued care and
fairness less and the remaining three values more. Both groups gave care the
highest over-all weighting, but conservatives valued fairness the lowest,
whereas liberals valued purity the lowest. Haidt also hypothesizes that the
origin of this division in the United States can be traced to geohistorical
factors, with conservatism strongest in closely knit, ethnically homogenous
communities, in contrast to port-cities, where the cultural mix is greater,
thus requiring more liberalism. Group morality develops from shared concepts
and beliefs and is often codified to regulate behavior within a culture or
community. Various defined actions come to be called moral or immoral.
Individuals who choose moral action are popularly held to possess "moral
fiber", whereas those who indulge in immoral behavior may be labeled as
socially degenerate. The continued existence of a group may depend on
widespread conformity to codes of morality; an inability to adjust moral codes
in response to new challenges is sometimes credited with the demise of a
community (a positive example would be the function of Cistercian reform in
reviving monasticism; a negative example would be the role of the Dowager
Empress in the subjugation of China to European interests). Within nationalist
movements, there has been some tendency to feel that a nation will not survive
or prosper without acknowledging one common morality, regardless of its
content. Political Morality is also relevant to the behaviour internationally
of national governments, and to the support they receive from their host
population. Noam Chomsky states that Morality and religion. Positions. Within
the wide range of moral traditions, religious moral traditions co-exist with
contemporary secular moral frameworks such as consequentialism, freethought,
humanism, utilitarianism, and others. There are many types of religious morals.
Modern monotheistic religions, such as Islam, Judaism, Christianity, and to a
certain degree others such as Sikhism and Zoroastrianism, define right and
wrong by the laws and rules set forth by their respective scriptures and as
interpreted by religious leaders within the respective faith. Polytheistic
religious traditions tend to be less absolute. For example, within Buddhism,
the intention of the individual and the circumstances should be accounted for
to determine if an action is right or wrong. A further disparity between the
morals of religious traditions is pointed out by Barbara Stoler Miller, who
states that, in Hinduism, "practically, right and wrong are decided according
to the categories of social rank, kinship, and stages of life. For modern
Westerners, who have been raised on ideals of universality and egalitarianism,
this relativity of values and obligations is the aspect of Hinduism most
difficult to understand". Religions provide different ways of dealing with
moral dilemmas. For example, there is no absolute prohibition on killing in
Hinduism, which recognizes that it "may be inevitable and indeed necessary" in
certain circumstances. In monotheistic traditions, certain acts are viewed in
more absolute terms, such as abortion or divorce. Religion is not always
positively associated with morality. Philosopher David Hume stated that, "the
greatest crimes have been found, in many instances, to be compatible with a
superstitious piety and devotion; Hence it is justly regarded as unsafe to draw
any inference in favor of a man's morals, from the fervor or strictness of his
religious exercises, even though he himself believe them sincere." Religious
morals can diverge from commonly-held contemporary moral positions, such as
those on murder, mass atrocities, and slavery. For example, Simon Blackburn
states that "apologists for Hinduism defend or explain away its involvement
with the caste system, and apologists for Islam defend or explain away its
harsh penal code or its attitude to women and infidels". In regard to
Christianity, he states that the "Bible can be read as giving us a carte
blanche for harsh attitudes to children, the mentally handicapped, animals, the
environment, the divorced, unbelievers, people with various sexual habits, and
elderly women", and notes morally suspect themes in the Bible's New Testament
as well. Christian apologists address Blackburn's viewpoints and explain that
Jewish laws in the bible show the evolution of moral standards towards
protecting the vulnerable, imposing a death penalty on those pursuing slavery
and treating slaves as persons and not property. Elizabeth Anderson, a
Professor of Philosophy and Women's Studies at the University of Michigan, Ann
Arbor, states that "the Bible contains both good and evil teachings", and it is
"morally inconsistent". Empirical analyses. A number of studies have been
conducted on the empirics of morality in various countries, and the overall
relationship between faith and crime is unclear. A 2001 review of studies on
this topic found "The existing evidence surrounding the effect of religion on
crime is varied, contested, and inconclusive, and currently no persuasive
answer exists as to the empirical relationship between religion and crime."
Phil Zuckerman's 2008 book, "Society without God", notes that Denmark and
Sweden, "which are probably the least religious countries in the world, and
possibly in the history of the world", enjoy "among the lowest violent crime
rates in the world the lowest levels of corruption in the world". Dozens of
studies have been conducted on this topic since the twentieth century. A 2005
study by Gregory S. Paul published in the "Journal of Religion and Society"
stated that, "In general, higher rates of belief in and worship of a creator
correlate with higher rates of homicide, juvenile and early adult mortality,
STD infection rates, teen pregnancy, and abortion in the prosperous
democracies," and "In all secular developing democracies a centuries long-term
trend has seen homicide rates drop to historical lows" with the exceptions
being the United States (with a high religiosity level) and "theistic"
Portugal. In a response, Gary Jensen builds on and refines Paul's study. His
conclusion is that a "complex relationship" exists between religiosity and
homicide "with some dimensions of religiosity encouraging homicide and other
dimensions discouraging it". On April 26, 2012, the results of a study which
tested their subjects' pro-social sentiments were published in the Social
Psychological and Personality Science journal in which non-religious people had
higher scores showing that they were more inclined to show generosity in random
acts of kindness, such as lending their possessions and offering a seat on a
crowded bus or train. Religious people also had lower scores when it came to
seeing how much compassion motivated participants to be charitable in other
ways, such as in giving money or food to a homeless person and to non-
believers. Moral codes. Codified morality is generally distinguished from
custom, another way for a community to define appropriate activity, by the
former's derivation from natural or universal principles. Some religious
communities see the Divine as providing these principles through revelation,
sometimes in great detail. Such codes may be called laws, as in the Law of
Moses, or community morality may be defined through commentary on the texts of
revelation, as in Islamic law. Such codes are distinguished from legal or
judicial right, including civil rights, which are based on the accumulated
traditions, decrees and legislation of a political authority, though these
latter often invoke the authority of the moral law. Morality can also be seen
as the collection of beliefs as to what constitutes a good life. Since
throughout most of human history, religions have provided both visions and
regulations for an ideal life, morality is often confused with religious
precepts. In secular communities, lifestyle choices, which represent an
individual's conception of the good life, are often discussed in terms of
morality. Individuals sometimes feel that making an appropriate lifestyle
choice invokes a true morality, and that accepted codes of conduct within their
chosen community are fundamentally moral, even when such codes deviate from
more general social principles. Moral codes are often complex definitions of
moral and immoral that are based upon well-defined value systems. Although some
people might think that a moral code is simple, rarely is there anything simple
about one's values, ethics, etc. or, for that matter, the judgment of those of
others. The difficulty lies in the fact that morals are often part of a
religion and more often than not about culture codes. Sometimes, moral codes
give way to legal codes, which couple penalties or corrective actions with
particular practices. Note that while many legal codes are merely built on a
foundation of religious and/or cultural moral codes, often they are one and the
same. Examples of moral codes include The Golden Rule (or "ethic of
reciprocity"); the Five Precepts and the Noble Eightfold Path of Buddhism
("see" ≈öƒ´la); the ancient Egyptian code of Ma'at; the Ten Commandments of
Judaism and Christianity; the Quran of Islam; Judaism's Noahide Law; and the
yamas and niyama of the Hindu scriptures. Another related concept is the "moral
core" of an individual, which is assumed to be innate. This, in some religious
systems and beliefs (e.g. Gnosticism), is assumed to be the basis of all
aesthetics and thus moral choice. Moral codes as such are therefore seen as
coercive‚Äîpart of human politics.
