Moral Politics (book) Moral Politics: How Liberals and Conservatives Think is a
1996 book by cognitive linguist George Lakoff. It argues that conservatives and
liberals hold two different conceptual models of morality. Conservatives have a
"Strict Father morality" in which people are made good through self-discipline
and hard work, everyone is taken care of by taking care of themselves. Liberals
have a "Nurturant Parent morality" in which people are made good by being
helped by those who are better off, everyone is taken care of by helping each
other. The book. "Moral Politics" has two different purposes. Lakoff uses the
techniques of cognitive linguistics to attempt to better understand the mental
frameworks that lie behind contemporary American politics, describing which
mental concepts make up a "liberal", and which a "conservative". (What Lakoff
means by these two terms is considered below.) And, in the last few chapters,
he argues that "liberal" morals and politics are superior to "conservative"
morals and politics. The book is intended as an objective study of the
conceptual metaphors underlying conservative and liberal politics although the
closing section is devoted to the author's personal views. Lakoff makes it
clear however, that there is no such thing as an "Objective" study of politics,
as politics is based in subjective morality. Lakoff wrote "Moral Politics" soon
after the Republican Party's "Contract With America" takeover of Congress under
the Clinton presidency, and his usage of the terms "liberal" and "conservative"
is strongly resembles how those labels might have been used in the 1994
elections, the former having much to do with the Democratic party and the
latter with the Republican party; indeed, chapter 9, "Moral Categories in
Politics", presents Hillary Clinton as a prototypical "liberal" and Newt
Gingrich as a prototypical "conservative". (Lakoff actually puts this somewhat
differently, suggesting that Clinton is the prototypical arch-nemesis of
conservatives, while Gingrich is the prototypical arch-nemesis of liberals.)
The proposed solution: a metaphorical model. Lakoff tries to resolve these
difficulties through a model in which liberals and conservatives are shown to
have different and contradictory worldviews. These worldviews are thought to
conflict in a number of ways relevant to the understanding of politics.
Nonetheless, Lakoff claims that all of these differences center around the two
sides' respective understandings of a single concept - the ideal nuclear
family. The family is central to Lakoff because he views the family as
Americans most common model for understanding the country; that is Americans
often metaphorically understand their country as a family, with the government
corresponding to the parent(s) of the family and the individual citizens
corresponding to the children. Thus, one's understanding of how a family is
best organized will have direct implications for how the country should be
governed. Liberals' ideal conceptualization follows the model of the "nurturant
parent" family, while Conservatives' follow the model of the "strict father"
family. Given the importance of these concepts in "Moral Politics", it is
important to consider their meaning along with how each view suggests and is
justified by a corresponding view of the nature of child rearing, morality, and
justice. Lakoff uses this model to answer the central questions framed above -
why is there such clear grouping on issues that separate liberals and
conservatives, and, conversely, why don't we find more issue-by-issue voters?
Lakoff claims that one's take on any given political issue is largely
determined by which model one adopts. Thus, in Part IV, "The Hard Issues", he
tries to demonstrate how the liberal and conservative worldviews outlined above
lead to typical liberal and conservative positions on a wide range of issues,
including taxes, the death penalty, environmental regulations, affirmative
action, education, and abortion. As to why liberals and conservatives view each
other as incomprehensible on an issue-by-issue basis, Lakoff claims that this
is due to each side failing to grasp the other side's worldview as well as not
appreciating how different the other worldview is from its own. Failure to see
or appreciate this gap results in both sides thinking the other is hopelessly
irrational and immoral. Lakoff also uses this model to show how and why
liberals and conservatives use different semantics, often even using the same
words in very different ways. Liberals and conservatives have different
worldviews and semantics are very much influenced by the worldview of the
speaker. As Lakoff puts it, Here, Lakoff is specifically referring to liberals'
challenges in understanding conservatives. However, he obviously views the
reverse situation as equally problematic. In addressing why conservatives and
liberals choose different issues as the focus of their campaigns, Lakoff claims
that this too finds explanation in the context of his model. In the 1994
elections, the Republican focus on "family values", while the Democrats largely
ignored this framing, is key to Lakoff. He views this discrepancy as a sign
that conservatives understand the "Country is a Family" metaphor that lies
behind people's views of politics much better than liberals do. And, by
extension, this has been key to the success of the Republican Party.
Clarifications of the model. There are several things Lakoff does not intend to
mean with his model. Perhaps most importantly, Lakoff does not believe that all
conservatives are the same or that all liberals are the same. Chapter 17,
"Varieties of Liberals and Conservatives", is entirely devoted to showing a
number of dimensions along which one can slide and still be a member of either
camp. Among other things, he says that one might have one way to conceptualize
a real nuclear family and a separate, even opposite way of conceptualizing a
metaphorical country-family. Lakoff is certainly not trying to establish
necessary and sufficient conditions for being liberal or conservative. In the
terminology of cognitive linguistics, Lakoff views both liberal and
conservative as "radial category" labels. Another thing Lakoff does not mean is
that people consciously believe in the family concepts that he has described.
As a cognitive scientist, Lakoff believes he is describing mental structures
that may well be mostly below the level of conscious thought. This does not
mean, however, that they have little or no effect on one's opinions and
consequent actions. Arguments against shallow stereotypes. Lakoff says he is
opposed to superficial, stereotypical, and patently false characterizing of
both liberals and conservatives. The book addresses common oversimplifications
about both political positions. In chapter 7, "Why We Need a New Understanding
of American Politics", Lakoff tries to refute several conceptions of
"Conservatism" that he views as much too simplistic to be true. First, he
claims that any liberal or conservative thinking that "Conservatives just
believe in less government" is incorrect. Common misconceptions that liberals
hold include that "Conservatism is 'the ethos of selfishness'" and that
"Conservatism is no more than a conspiracy of the ultrarich to protect their
money and power and to make themselves even richer and more powerful." Common
misunderstandings of conservatives by conservatives are that "Conservatism
nothing else is for traditional values", and that "Conservatism is just what
the Bible tells us." In chapter 18, "Pathologies, Stereotypes, and
Distortions", he tries to refute certain stereotyped views of liberals,
including the viewing of them "as lovers of bureaucracy", "as defenders of
special interests" and "as advocating only rights and no responsibilities"
(p.Â 317, 1996 edition). The importance of metaphors. Lakoff argues that people
tend to think metaphorically, reasoning through analogy rather than logic.
Metaphors are prevalent in communication and we do not just use them in
language; we actually perceive and act in accordance with metaphors. Conceptual
metaphors shape not just our communication, but also the way we think and act.
As a cognitive scientists Lakoff emphasizes that what conservatives know that
liberals don't is how to use metaphors to motivate people. Liberals try to
persuade through reason and facts while conservatives used metaphorical stories
and that is why, Lakoff argues, conservative politicians are more successful at
motivating voters than liberals are. Second edition. The subtitle of the book
changed between the first edition and the current edition. Once titled "Moral
Politics: What Conservatives Know That Liberals Don't", it has been
rechristened as "Moral Politics: How Liberals and Conservatives Think". The
original subtitle reflected Lakoff's idea that conservatives, at least 1994
conservatives, understood the nature of American politics better than liberals.
In particular, conservatives were thought to better understand the metaphorical
connection between the family, morality, and politics, and, especially around
1994, were able to get quite a number of votes through using persuasive
metaphors while liberals tried to use logic and reason. In this framework, the
original subtitle can be seen as a call-to-arms to liberals, for liberals to
get a better understanding of how people really think about politics, or never
get back in office again. The bulk of the text in the second edition is
identical to the first. Other than the new sub-title, all that is added is, a
preface to the second edition and a 37-page afterword relating the book's
content to the 2000 US presidential election. Application. Howard Dean.
Presidential candidate Howard Dean is a fan of the book, citing it as support
for his activist strategy. "What you do is crank the heck out of your base, get
them really excited and crank up the base turnout and you'll win the middle-of-
the-roaders," Dean told "US News and World Report". Dean reasoned that since
swing voters share the mental model of both parties they will eventually go
with whatever party excites them the most. "Democrats appeal to them on their
softer side--the safety net--but the Republicans appeal to them on the harder
side--the discipline, the responsibility, and so forth. So the question is
which side appears to be energetic, deeply believing in its message, deeply
committed to bringing a vision of hope to America. That side is the side that
gets the swing voters and wins." While Dean lost the 2004 Presidential
Democratic primary, he's been successful in other political and activist
arenas. First, he was the governor of Vermont, and later the front-runner in a
crowded primary race although his campaign was staffed mostly by students and
non-professional political staff. Dean later formed the activist organization
Democracy for America and later was elected chairman of the Democratic National
Committee (leader of the Democratic party) in February 2005. Dean's activism is
widely credited with reviving the activist base of the Democratic Party. Dean
later wrote the introduction to a related but shorter book by Lakoff, "Don't
Think of an Elephant: Know Your Values and Frame the Debate." (2004).
