Alexander J. Motyl Alexander J. Motyl (1953- ) is an American historian, poet
and artist-painter. Biography. Alexander J Motyl (born October 21, 1953 in New
York City) is a writer, professor, and fine artist living in New York City. He
studied at Columbia University, graduating with his BA in History in 1975 and
his Ph.D. Political Science in 1984. Motyl has held academic positions at
Columbia University and Harvard University and currently a professor of
Political Science at Rutgers University. Career. In 2001 his book on
imperialism, "Imperial Ends", posited a theoretical framework for examining the
structure of empires as a political structure. He makes use of the standard
model that geographic and political areas are constituted by a core and a . The
empire's structure relates the core elite to the peripheral elite in a mutually
beneficial fashion that can be established through any number of means:
aggressive, coercive, or consensual. And while there is a vertical relationship
between the core and periphery, there is a lack of substantive relations
between periphery and periphery. This relationship he describes as an
incomplete wheel: there are hubs and spokes, but no rim. Empires, in this
theoretical concept, depend on this relative absence of relationships in the
periphery, the core's power partly dependent on its role as a neuralgic center.
Motyl describes three types of imperial structures: "continuous",
"discontinuous", and "hybrid". In a continuous empire, all the territories are
adjacent to one another on land. The Mongol Empire, Russian Empire, Aztec
Empire, and Akkadian Empire are examples of such continuous empires. A
discontinuous empire is one in which the ruled territories are overseas or are
exclaves far from the imperial core. Maritime empires, such as the European
colonial empires, are examples of discontinuous empire. A hybrid empire had
both adjacent ruled territories and far-flung ruled territories. An example
might be the German Reich, which had imperial possessions in Europe as well as
overseas in Africa. He discussed the Russian example also in his earlier book,
"The Post Soviet Nations". Motyl also posits varying degrees of empire:
"formal", "informal", and "hegemonic". In a formal imperial relationship, the
core can appoint and dismiss peripheral elites, obviate any external agenda or
policies, and directly control the internal agenda and policies. In an informal
imperial relationship, the core has influence but not control over appointing
and dismissing peripheral elites, direct control over the external agenda and
policies, and influence over the internal agenda and policies. Finally, in a
hegemonic relationship, the core has no control over appointing or dismissing
peripheral elites, control over the external agenda, influence over external
policies, and no control over the internal agenda or policies. Empire ends when
significant peripheral interaction begins, not necessarily when the core ceases
its domination of the peripheries. The core-periphery relationship can be as
strong or weak as possible and remain an empire as long as there is only
insignificant interaction between periphery and periphery. Many empire
observers make the distinction that most of them end through some policies or
strategies based on arrogance or national hubris, accounting for a popular
opinion that empires implode on themselves as opposed to suffering defeat from
an outside enemy. Finally, Motyl warns that no theory of empire explains both
rise and fall equally. Even if the rise and fall mirror each other, it does not
follow that the introduction of elements that lead to the rise also lead to the
fall upon their removal. Other activities. Motyl is also active as a poet, a
writer of fiction, and a visual artist.
