Mount Holyoke College Mount Holyoke College is a liberal arts college for women
in South Hadley, Massachusetts, United States. It was the first member of the
Seven Sisters colleges, and served as a model for some of the others. Mount
Holyoke is part of the Pioneer Valley's Five College Consortium, along with
Amherst College, Smith College, Hampshire College, and the University of
Massachusetts Amherst. The school was originally founded in 1837 by Mary Lyon
as Mount Holyoke Female Seminary. It received its collegiate charter in 1888 as
Mount Holyoke Seminary and College and became Mount Holyoke College in 1893.
Mount Holyoke's chapter of Phi Beta Kappa was established in 1905. Mount
Holyoke's buildings were designed between 1896 and 1960. It has a Donald Ross-
designed 18-hole golf course, "The Orchards", which served as host to the U.S.
Women's Open in 2004. U.S. News & World Report lists Mount Holyoke as the 29th
best liberal arts college in the United States in its 2011 rankings. Mount
Holyoke was also ranked #1 in the nation for Best Classroom Experience in the
Princeton Review 2010–2011 rankings. In 2011–2012, Mount Holyoke is one of
the nation's top producers of Fulbright Scholars, ranking fourth among
bachelor's institutions according to the "Chronicle of Higher Education".
History. Mount Holyoke's founder, Mary Lyon, is considered by many scholars to
be an innovator in the area of women's education. Her establishment of "Mount
Holyoke Female Seminary" was part of a larger movement to create institutions
of higher education for young women during the early half of the 19th century.
Lyon's contemporaries include Sarah Pierce (Litchfield Female Academy, 1792);
Catharine Beecher (Hartford Female Seminary, 1823); Zilpah P. Grant Banister
(Ipswich Female Seminary, 1828); George Washington Doane (St. Mary's Hall, 1837
now called Doane Academy). Prior to founding Mount Holyoke, Lyon contributed to
the development of both Hartford Female Seminary and Ipswich Female Seminary.
She was also involved in the creation of "Wheaton Female Seminary" (now Wheaton
College, Massachusetts) in 1834. "Mount Holyoke Female Seminary" was originally
chartered as a teaching seminary in 1836 and opened its doors to students on 8
November 1837. Both Vassar College and Wellesley College were patterned after
Mount Holyoke. From its founding in 1837, Mount Holyoke Female Seminary "had no
religious affiliation". However, "students were required to attend church
services, chapel talks, prayer meetings, and Bible study groups. Twice a day
teachers and students spent time in private devotions. Every dorm room had two
large lighted closets to give roommates privacy during their devotions". Mount
Holyoke Female Seminary was the sister school to Andover Seminary. Some Andover
graduates looked to marry students from the Mount Holyoke Female Seminary
before becoming missionaries because the American Board of Commissioners for
Foreign Missions (ABCFM) required its missionaries to be married before
starting their missions. By 1859 there were more than 60 missionary alumnae; by
1887 the school's alumnae comprised one-fifth of all female American
missionaries for the ABCFM; and by the end of the century, 248 of its alumnae
had entered the mission field. Mount Holyoke Female Seminary received its
collegiate charter in 1888, becoming Mount Holyoke Seminary and College. In
1893 it became Mount Holyoke College. Mount Holyoke's chapter of Phi Beta Kappa
was established in 1905. It has been a sister school to Women's Christian
College in Chennai, Tamil Nadu, India since 1920. In the early 1970s Mount
Holyoke had a long debate under the presidency of David Truman over the issue
of coeducation. On 6 November 1971 the board of trustees voted to remain a
women's college. On February 28, 1987, the United States Postal Service's Great
Americans Series issued a postage stamp featuring Mary Lyon, in honor of Mount
Holyoke's "Sesquicentennial" (Mount Holyoke's 150th anniversary). Academics.
Majors, minors, and degrees. Mount Holyoke offers 50 departmental and
interdepartmental majors, including the option to design a special major. The
primary degree conferred is the bachelor of arts (BA) degree, for which
students complete 128 semester credits (one standard course equals 4 credits).
At least 68 credits must be earned from course work outside the major
department, across the three curricular divisions: humanities, science and
mathematics, and social sciences. Study of a foreign language and completion of
a multicultural perspectives course are also required. In addition to the BA,
Mount Holyoke offers two master’s degrees: a coed master of arts in teaching
Other programs include dual-degree programs in engineering with the California
Institute of Technology, the Thayer School of Engineering at Dartmouth College,
and the University of Massachusetts Amherst; the Frances Perkins Program, for
women over the age of 24 who wish to complete the requirements for a bachelor
of arts degree; and the Postbaccalaureate Studies Program, for students who
have already earned an undergraduate degree and wish to complete additional
course work in preparation for graduate work in medicine, nursing, veterinary
medicine, dentistry, or physical therapy science. Mount Holyoke’s membership
in the Five College Consortium allows students to enroll in courses at Amherst
College, Smith College, Hampshire College, and the University of Massachusetts
Amherst. They may also complete one of 12 Five College Certificates—among
them African studies, Buddhist studies, coastal and marine sciences, cognitive
neuroscience, international relations, and Middle Eastern studies—in lieu of
a minor. Academic centers. Four academic centers—the Weissman Center for
Leadership and the Liberal Arts, the McCulloch Center for Global Initiatives,
the Center for the Environment, and the Science Center—support the academic
program through public lectures by visiting scholars, conferences on issues of
pressing concern, mentoring and internship opportunities, and hands-on learning
experiences. The Weissman Center’s Speaking, Arguing, and Writing Program
provides opportunities for developing leadership and communication skills,
including the ability to effectively frame, articulate, and advocate positions.
The Community-Based Learning Program links students with community-based
organizations in courses that combine analysis and action. Study abroad. Mount
Holyoke has study abroad programs and exchanges for full-year or semester study
in France, Senegal, Costa Rica, Chile, Hong Kong, Japan, Korea, Germany, Spain,
and the UK, as well as a summer program in China and January Term programs in
the Republic of Georgia and South Africa. Each year more than 200 Mount Holyoke
students, representing approximately 40 percent of the junior class, study for
a semester or academic year at universities and programs abroad. Library. Mount
Holyoke’s library includes more than 740,000 print volumes, 1,600
periodicals, and more than 140,000 electronic resources. Through the Five
College Consortium, students have access to more than 8 million volumes.
Computer support is provided. The MEWS (Mediated Educational Work Space)
supports collaborative multimedia learning with group project rooms, wall-
mounted plasma displays, a digitization center, and a faculty development area.
Faculty. A number of faculty are nationally and internationally recognized for
their research and writing achievements, including Joseph Ellis (historian),
Susan Barry (neurobiologist), Mark McMenamin (geologist and paleontologist) and
Becky Wai-Ling Packard (psychologist). Student research projects, undertaken in
collaboration with faculty, have made significant contributions to the sciences
and other fields of study. Campus. The campus was designed and landscaped
between 1896 and 1922 by the landscape architecture firm of Olmsted and Sons.
The campus includes a botanic garden, two lakes, several waterfalls, tennis
courts, stables and woodland riding trails. it is also home to the Mount
Holyoke College Art Museum which is part of the Five College Museums/Historic
Deerfield and the Museums10. An independent bookstore, The Odyssey Bookshop, is
located directly across from the campus in the college-owned "Village Commons".
Mount Holyoke has instituted “The Big Turn Off” energy conservation
campaign. It also focuses on "green" building with five LEED certified
buildings on campus. It has reduced its environmental impact by recycling 40%
of waste and composting as well as using produce grown in the student-run
organic garden in dining halls. The home of Benjamin Ruggles Woodbridge, known
as "The Sycamores", served as a dormitory for the college from 1915–1970. The
mansion, built in 1788 by Colonel Woodbridge, is on the National Register of
Historic Places. Mount Holyoke is also close to the cities of Amherst and
Northampton as well as to two malls: Hampshire Mall and Holyoke Mall. The Mount
Holyoke Range State Park is also close to the campus. The college is named
after the westernmost mountain of the range Mount Holyoke which was named by
colonial surveyors in the 1600s. Organization. Mount Holyoke is a member of the
Pioneer Valley's Five College Consortium, the Consortium of Liberal Arts
Colleges, the Annapolis Group, and the Oberlin Group. It was a part of The New
College Plan. It is currently a part of The Consortium on Financing Higher
Education and "The Knowledge Corridor". WMHC (91.5 FM) is a radio station
licensed to serve South Hadley, Massachusetts. The station is owned by Mount
Holyoke College and licensed to the Trustees of Mount Holyoke. Students. Mount
Holyoke has a student population of 2,200. Students come from "48 states and
nearly 70 countries. Two-thirds of the student body is white; one-third is an
international student or African American, Asian American, Latina, Native
American, or multiracial. Thirty-six percent of incoming first-year students
were in the top five percent of their high school classes". Mount Holyoke also
attracts a large international population. Although Mount Holyoke only
considers female applicants for admission, it will award diplomas to
transgendered students who become male or identify themselves as male by the
time they complete their studies. To reflect this fact, in 2005 Mount Holyoke's
Student Government Association amended its constitution so that the word "she"
was replaced with "student." Additionally, male students may enroll in classes
through the Five College Consortium. Student groups. Mount Holyoke offers a
number of student groups and organizations. Themes include Art, Academics, Club
Sports, Entertainment & the Performing Arts, Politics & Activism, Governing
Organizations and Religious organizations. Traditions. The Kathryn Irene
Glascock Awards, grants "The Glascock Prize" to the winner of this annual event
(which has been held at Mount Holyoke since 1924). The Faculty Show takes place
once every four years, around 1 April faculty members create a show which
parodies themselves and their students. The Junior Show (also known as "J-
Show") refers to a show created by Juniors (and a few professors) who parody
life at Mount Holyoke. A common feature is a sketch mocking the president and
dean of the college, along with well-known professors. Mountain Day begins with
the sound of ringing bells from Abbey Chapel on a beautiful autumn morning
secretly chosen by the President of the College and all classes are canceled
for the day and many students hike to the summit of nearby Mount Holyoke.
M&C's, originally called Milk & Crackers, is now referred to as Milk & Cookies.
M&Cs are a nightly snack provided by dormitory dining halls, but also refer to
a popular student "a cappella" group, "M&Cs (Milk and Cookies)" The following
traditions are organized by the Class Boards of each year. Big/Little Sister is
a reference to the pairing of juniors and firsties (or first-years) who are
paired up to take part in organized events together. Coordinated by the Junior
Class board Founder's Day is held on the Sunday closest to 8 November (the date
of the opening of Mount Holyoke in 1837). It was begun by Elizabeth Storrs Mead
in 1891. The current version of the tradition includes ice cream being served
early in the morning near Mary Lyon's grave. The current President of the
College and select faculty are invited to scoop ice cream for the Senior Class
who dons their gowns. Seniors dress in traditional cap and gown as well as
accessories in their class color. Convocation marks the beginning of the
academic year. Canoe Sing is an event which takes place prior to commencement
in which canoes are decorated with lanterns and paddled by seniors singing
Mount Holyoke songs. They are joined by fellow graduating seniors on shore.
Baccalaureate is held in Abbey Chapel; the medieval German ode to Academe,
"Gaudeamus Igitur" is sung by berobed Seniors and Faculty during the
procession. Following convocation, Faculty line the path to Mary Lyon's grave.
Seniors walk through this throng, to the grave (to place a wreath). The Laurel
Parade takes place the day before commencement. Graduating seniors wear white
and carry laurel garlands, in a parade to Mary Lyon's grave. They are escorted
by approximately 3,000 alumnae, also in white, who thereby welcome them into
the Alumnae Association. Once at Mary Lyon's grave, the garland is wound around
the cast-iron fence, and the Mimi Farina song "Bread and Roses" is sung by all
in attendance. White is a tribute to those who fought for women's suffrage. In
1970 students voted to replace the laurel with signs protesting the Vietnam
War. Athletics. Mount Holyoke offers 14 varsity sports programs and seven
competitive club sports teams. The College is a member of the National
Collegiate Athletic Association (NCAA) Division III and the New England Women's
and Men's Athletic Conference (NEWMAC) as well as the NERC (the New England
Rowing Conference). Facilities include a lighted synthetic multipurpose turf
field surrounded by an eight-lane track with a nine-lane straightaway; Kendall
Sports and Dance Complex housing a swimming pool and separate diving well;
gymnasium with basketball, volleyball, and badminton courts; weight room;
cardiovascular area; field house with indoor track and tennis courts; squash
courts; racquetball courts; and three studios for dance, aerobics, yoga, and
other activities; The Orchards, an 18-hole golf course designed by Donald Ross
(home to the 2004 U.S. Women's Open); and a 60-stall Equestrian Center with two
indoor arenas (100' x 256' and 70' x 130'), an outdoor show ring, permanent
fibar dressage arena, outdoor cross-country courses, and a boathouse finished
for Spring 2010. Noted people. The main article provides a list of individuals
associated with Mount Holyoke through attending as a student, or serving as a
member of the faculty or staff. In art and media. Mount Holyoke is referenced
in works of theater, film, and popular culture. Wendy Wasserstein's 1977 play,
"Uncommon Women and Others", is based upon Wasserstein's experiences at Mount
Holyoke of the early 1970s. The play explores the lives of the fictional
characters Carter, Holly, Kate, Leilah, Rita, Muffet, Samantha, and Susie. Two
feature films reference Mount Holyoke of the 1960s. The first is the 1987 film
"Dirty Dancing" which is set at a summer resort in the Catskills in the summer
of 1963. The protagonist Frances "Baby" Houseman (named after Mount Holyoke
graduate Frances Perkins) plans to attend Mount Holyoke in the fall to study
economics of underdeveloped countries and then to later enter the Peace Corps.
The second is the 1978 film "National Lampoon's Animal House" which is set in
1962. It satirizes a common practice up until the mid-1970s, when women
attending Seven Sister colleges were connected with or to students at Ivy
League schools. In the film, fraternity brothers from Delta house of the
fictional Faber College (based on Dartmouth College) take a road trip to the
fictional Emily Dickinson College (Mount Holyoke College)--in real life, Mount
Holyoke and Dartmouth are unofficial brother-sister schools. Mount Holyoke was
mentioned more recently in the 2002 film National Lampoon's Van Wilder, when
the title character gives a half-time pep talk to his school basketball team,
offering them a party with Mount Holyoke students should the team win. The
Mount Holyoke amphitheater was also featured in an episode of the Comedy
Central sitcom "Stella" during a graduation ceremony in the episode "Paper
Route". Mount Holyoke also featured in "I'm Spelling as Fast as I Can", an
episode of "The Simpsons": "The Seven Sisters were immortalized in popular
culture in a 2003 episode of "The Simpsons." Having won local and state
spelling bees, Lisa Simpson advances to the national finals. However, the
moderator, concerned about the contest’s low television ratings, offers Lisa
free tuition ('and a hot plate') at the Seven Sisters college of her choice if
she will allow a more popular contestant (who happens to be a boy) to win. Lisa
refuses, but has a dream in which students from each of the Seven Sisters
appear to her." The Mount Holyoke student in Lisa's dream invites Lisa to "Come
party with me!" before passing out drunk. Additional characters in popular
culture include "Emily" from the television series "Empty Nest", "Donna," from
the television series "Judging Amy," "Judy Maxwell," from the film, "What's Up,
Doc?," "Brooke," from "The L Word," Season 4, "Catherine," the serial bride in
the film noir release, "Black Widow" and "Helen Bishop", the divorcee neighbor
from "Mad Men". In the episode of "Law and Order: Criminal Intent" "Consumed",
the husband of suspect Beth Landau (Karen Sillas) states in reference to the 3
murders she was accused of, "How could she do that? She went to Holyoke for
Gods sake!" In the first episode of season 4, the television show the L Word
referenced Mount Holyoke as the college the daughter of Max/Moira's boss
attends. References to Mount Holyoke also occur in other works. Mount Holyoke
was mentioned in television series, "House", in the second episode from Season
4, "The Right Stuff." In David Liss's 2006 novel, "The Ethical Assassin",
Chitra—the love interest of the protagonist Lem Altick—is saving money so
that she may attend Mount Holyoke. Alan Arkin, the father of the bride in the
1979 film "The In-Laws", mutters when he sees the squalor-filled office of
Peter Falk (the father of the groom), "Four years at Mount Holyoke so she could
marry into this." Mount Holyoke is mentioned frequently in Neil Simon's play,
"Broadway Bound". Recently, Mt. Holyoke was mentioned as one of Julie Taylor's
college options on the TV show "Friday Night Lights". In the film "The
Whisperer in Darkness", Mount Holyoke was used to represent H. P. Lovecraft's
fictional Miskatonic University.
