Movement for a New Society The Movement for a New Society (MNS) was a U.S.-
based network of social activists, committed to the principles of nonviolence,
who played a key role in social movements of the 1970s and 80s. The precursor
to the MNS was A Quaker Action Group(AQAG), founded by Lawrence Scott in 1966.
Dissatisfied with the response of the mainstream Quaker church to the United
States involvement in the Vietnam War, Scott founded AQAG with the intention of
sparking a renewed commitment to the Quaker Peace Testimony. Frustrated by
their failure to achieve this end, AQAG members including Scott and
“convinced” Quaker George Willoughby, refashioned the group as the Movement
for A New Society in 1971. Other founding members included Bill Moyer and
George Lakey. The early members of MNS consciously sought to develop tools and
strategies that could be employed to bring about revolutionary change through
nonviolent means. Through the Life Center Association (Philadelphia, PA), an
organization which survives to this day, MNS members also experimented with co-
operative living arrangements, in accordance with their radical feminist and
nonviolent beliefs. Unlike other radical organizations of the time, the MNS did
not focus its energies exclusively on one issue or injustice. Its members were
involved in working for social change on many fronts, most notably in the
movement to end US involvement in the Vietnam war, and during the citizen-led
opposition to the expansion of the US nuclear industry in the mid to late
‘70s. According to a description from the MNS publication, "Building Social
Change Communities" (1979), Through the co-operatively owned and managed New
Society Publishers, MNS members published numerous pamphlets and books
providing practical advice on working for social change. The publications of
NSP, most notably the co-operatively authored "Resource Manual for a Living
Revolution" (known affectionately within movement circles as the “monster
manual”) were a primary source of inspiration and guidance for citizens
across the United States as opposition to nuclear expansion grew, and
influenced movements as far afield as the Tasmanian Wilderness Society’s
campaign to prevent the damming of the Franklin River. In 1988, MNS was
dissolved by its members due to various factors, including its inability to
achieve its objective of becoming multi-cultural, as well as difficulty
adapting as an organization due to the self-imposed strictures of consensus
decision-making. Other issues included conflicting ideas of the importance of
leadership, as well as an excessive amount of time spent on internal anti-
oppression work, leading to less time for world transformation work. It could
also be argued that it had achieved its primary goal of making Gandhian style
non-violent action a primary method that American social change activists use
to effect change. New Society Publishers, now based in British Columbia,
continues to publish social-change related titles, with an increased emphasis
on the practical aspects of environmental sustainability. In 1995, members of
the New Society Publishers Philadelphia office started a website,
Nonviolence.org, which continues to publish resources, inspiration and
analysis. Until his death in October, 2002, Bill Moyer continued to teach his
influential eight-stage model for social change movements, the Movement Action
Plan, to activists around the US and around the world. George Lakey, as
director of the Philadelphia based Training for Change organisation, still
works to promote nonviolence as a powerful technique for resisting injustice.
Douglas & McIntyre bought New Society Publishers in 2008. Further reading.
Cornell, Andrew (2011). "Oppose and Propose: Lessons from Movement for a New
Society": AK Press. ISBN 978-1-84935-066-2 Coover, Virginia ... al. (1985).
"Resource Manual for a Living Revolution". Philadelphia, PA : New Society
Publishers. ISBN 0-86571-015-5
