Multi-party system A multi-party system is a system in which multiple political
parties have the capacity to gain control of government offices, separately or
in coalition. An example of such a coalition being the one in existence between
the Christian-Democratic Union of Germany and Christian Social Union in Bavaria
(CDU/CSU) and the Free Democratic Party (FDP) set up after the 2009 federal
elections. The effective number of parties in a multi-party system is normally
larger than two but lower than ten. In the vast majority of multi-party
systems, numerous major and minor political parties hold a serious chance of
receiving office, and because they all compete, a majority may not come to be,
forcing the creation of a coalition. In fact, in some countries, every
government ever formed since its independence has been by means of a coalition.
Multi-party systems tend to be more common in parliamentary systems than
presidential systems and far more common in countries that utilize proportional
representation compared to countries that utilize first past the post
elections. Examples. Brazil, Canada, Denmark, Finland, Germany, India,
Indonesia, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Mexico, the Netherlands, New Zealand,
Norway, Pakistan, Portugal, Serbia, Spain, Sweden,Taiwan and Philippines
(source:Politics of the Philippines) are examples of nations that have used a
multi-party system effectively in their democracies. In these countries,
usually no single party has a parliamentary majority by itself. Instead,
multiple political parties form coalitions for the purpose of developing power
blocks for governing. In some multi-party systems only two or three parties
have a substantial chance of forming a government, with or without forming a
coalition. An example of this being the United Kingdom, where only the
Conservative Party, the Labour Party, and the Liberal Democrats have a serious
chance to win enough seats to be a part of the government. Though the Liberal
Democrats since their formation have never had near enough amount to form a
Government though have a substantial enough amount of seats to be able to be
members of a government in a Coalition. To date the Liberal Democrats have only
been in power once in a coalition, which is in the only coalition in recent
history, which is the incumbent Conservative-Liberal Democrat Coalition.
Comparisons with other party systems. Single-party system and Two-party system.
A system where only two parties have the possibility of winning an election is
called two-party system. A system where only 3 parties have a "realistic
possibility" of winning an election or forming a coalition is sometimes called
a "Third-party system", however in some cases the system is called a "Stalled
Third-Party System" when there are 3 parties in the system, and all 3 parties
win a large number of votes, however only 2 have a chance of winning a general
election; this is usually because the electoral system penalises the third
party e.g. UK politics, the Liberal Democrats gained 23% of the vote in 2010
elections but won less than 10% of the seats due to the First-Past-The-Post
electoral system, however despite this they still have enough seats (and enough
public support) for the other major 2 parties to form coalitions with them or
make deals with the third party so to gain their support e.g. Conservative-
Liberal Democrat coalition formed after the 2010 general election and the Lib-
Lab pact during Prime Minister James Callaghan's Minority Labour Government
when Labour lost its 3 seat majority in 1977, the pact fell short of a full
coalition. Unlike a single-party system (or a two-party system), a multi-party
system encourages the general constituency to form multiple distinct,
officially recognized groups, generally called political parties. Each party
competes for votes from the enfranchised constituents (those allowed to vote).
A multi-party system prevents the leadership of a single party from controlling
a single legislative chamber without challenge. If the government includes an
elected Congress or Parliament the parties may share power according to
proportional representation or the first-past-the-post system. In proportional
representation, each party wins a number of seats proportional to the number of
votes it receives. In first-past-the-post, the electorate is divided into a
number of districts, each of which selects one person to fill one seat by a
plurality of the vote. First-past-the-post is not conducive to a proliferation
of parties, and naturally gravitates toward a two-party system, in which only
two parties have a real chance of electing their candidates to office. This
gravitation is known as Duverger's law. Proportional representation, on the
other hand, does not have this tendency, and allows multiple major parties to
arise. A two-party system requires voters to align themselves in large blocs,
sometimes so large that they cannot agree on any overarching principles. Along
this line of thought, some theories argue that this allows centrists to gain
control. On the other hand, if there are multiple major parties, each with less
than a majority of the vote, the parties are strongly motivated to work
together to form working governments. This also promotes centrism, as well as
promoting coalition-building skills while discouraging polarization. The two
party system is caused by a political science theory called Duverger's law. As
such, recent collation governments, such as that in the U.K. are two-party
systems not multi-party systems. This is regardless of the number of parties in
government.
