Multiculturalism Multiculturalism relates to communities containing multiple
cultures. The term is used in two broad ways, either descriptively or
normatively. As a descriptive term, it usually refers to the simple fact of
cultural diversity: it is generally applied to the demographic make-up of a
specific place, sometime at the organizational level, e.g. schools, businesses,
neighbourhoods, cities, or nations. As a normative term, it refers to
ideologies or policies that promote this diversity or its institutionalisation;
in this sense, multiculturalism is a society “at ease with the rich tapestry
of human life and the desire amongst people to express their own identity in
the manner they see fit.” Such ideologies or policies vary widely, including
country to country, ranging from the advocacy of equal respect to the various
cultures in a society, to a policy of promoting the maintenance of cultural
diversity, to policies in which people of various ethnic and religious groups
are addressed by the authorities as defined by the group they belong to.
However, two main different and seemingly inconsistent strategies have
developed through different Government policies and strategies: The first
focuses on interaction and communication between different cultures.
Interactions of cultures provide opportunities for the cultural differences to
communicate and interact to create multiculturalism. (Such approaches are also
often known as interculturalism.) The second centers on diversity and cultural
uniqueness. Cultural isolation can protect the uniqueness of the local culture
of a nation or area and also contribute to global cultural diversity. A common
aspect of many policies following the second approach is that they avoid
presenting any specific ethnic, religious, or cultural community values as
central. Multiculturalism is often contrasted with the concepts of
assimilationism and has been described as a "salad bowl" or "cultural mosaic"
rather than a "melting pot". Multiculturalism in different national contexts.
The term multiculturalism is most often used in reference to Western nation-
states, which had seemingly achieved a de facto single national identity during
the 18th and/or 19th centuries. Multiculturalism has been official policy in
several Western nations since the 1970s, for reasons that varied from country
to country, including the fact that many of the great cities of the Western
world are increasingly made of a mosaic of cultures. The Canadian government
has often been described as the instigator of multicultural ideology because of
its public emphasis on the social importance of immigration. The Canadian Royal
Commission on Bilingualism and Biculturalism is often refereed to as the
origins of modern political awareness of multiculturalism. In the Western
English-speaking countries, multiculturalism as an official national policy
started in Canada in 1971, followed by Australia, where it has since been
displaced by assimilation, in 1973. It was quickly adopted as official policy
by most member-states of the European Union. Recently, right-of-center
governments in several European states—notably the Netherlands and Denmark—
have reversed the national policy and returned to an official monoculturalism.
A similar reversal is the subject of debate in the United Kingdom, among
others, due to evidence of incipient segregation and anxieties over "home-
grown" terrorism. Several heads-of-state have expressed doubts about the
success of multicultural policies: The United Kingdom's Prime Minister David
Cameron, German Chancellor Angela Merkel, Australia's ex-prime minister John
Howard, Spanish ex-president Jose Maria Aznar and French President Nicolas
Sarkozy have voiced concerns about the effectiveness of their multicultural
policies for integrating immigrants. Many nation-states in Africa, Asia, and
the Americas are culturally diverse, and are 'multicultural' in a descriptive
sense. In some, communalism is a major political issue. The policies adopted by
these states often have parallels with multicultural-ist policies in the
Western world, but the historical background is different, and the goal may be
a mono-cultural or mono-ethnic nation-building - for instance in the Malaysian
government's attempt to create a 'Malaysian race' by 2020. Australia. The next
country to adopt an official policy of multiculturalism after Canada was
Australia, a country with similar immigration situations and similar policies,
for example the formation of the Special Broadcasting Service. The White
Australia Policy was quietly dismantled after World War II by various changes
to immigration policy, the full political introduction of official policies of
multiculturalism was not until 1972. The election of John Howard's Liberal-
National Coalition government in 1996 was a major watershed for Australian
multiculturalism. Howard had long been a critic of multiculturalism, releasing
his One Australia policy in the late 1980s. A Practical Reference to Religious
Diversity for Operational Police and Emergency Services was a publication of
the Australasian Police Multicultural Advisory Bureau designed to offer
guidance to police and emergency services personnel on how religious
affiliation can affect their contact with the public. The first edition was
published in 1999. The first edition covered Buddhist, Hindu, Islamic, Jewish
and Sikh faiths with participation of representatives of the various religions.
The second edition added Christian, Australian Aboriginal and Torres Strait
Islander religions and the Bahá'í Faith to the list of religions was
published in 2002. However, rifts within Australian society, right through
history, whether by denial of rights to the indigenous people or, on the
contrary, by way of feelings of victimisation by the settling communities, and
in recent times, the effects of cultural identity and assimilation taken to the
extreme in the form of riots, street violence and ethnic gangs on both, the
settled and the migrant communities, pose major challenges to multiculturalism
in the country. Argentina. Though not called "Multiculturalism" as such, the
preamble of Argentina's constitution explicitly promotes immigration, and
recognizes the individual's multiple citizenship from other countries. Though
97% of Argentina's population self-identify as of European descent to this day
a high level of multiculturalism remains a feature of Argentina's culture,
allowing foreign festivals and holidays (e.g. Saint Patrick's Day), supporting
all kinds of art or cultural expression from ethnic groups, as well as their
diffusion through an important multicultural presence in the media; for
instance it is not uncommon to find newspapers or radio programs in English,
German, Italian or French in Argentina. Canada. Canadian society is often
depicted as being "very progressive, diverse, and multicultural".
Multiculturalism (a Just Society) was adopted as the official policy of the
Canadian government during the premiership of Pierre Elliott Trudeau in the
1970s and 1980s. Multiculturalism is reflected in the law through the Canadian
Multiculturalism Act and section 27 of the Canadian Charter of Rights and
Freedoms. The Broadcasting Act of 1991 asserts the Canadian broadcasting system
should reflect the diversity of cultures in the country. In a 2002 interview
with the "Globe and Mail", Karīm al-Hussainī the 49th Aga Khan of the Ismaili
Muslims described Canada as "the most successful pluralist society on the face
of our globe", citing it as "a model for the world". He explained that the
experience of Canadian governance - its commitment to pluralism and its support
for the rich multicultural diversity of its peoples - is something that must be
shared and would be of benefit to all societies in other parts of the world.
Mexico. Mexico has historically always been a multicultural country, with
people of ethnic groups including those of indigenous background, various
European backgrounds, Africans, and a small Asian community. Mexico City has
recently been integrating rapidly, doing much better than many cities in a
sample conducted by the Intercultural Cities Index (being the only non-European
city, alongside Montreal, on the index). United States. In the United States,
multiculturalism is not clearly established in policy at the federal level, but
ethnic diversity is common in both rural and urban areas; see Race and
ethnicity in the United States. John Jay, "First American Supreme Court Chief
Justice", Federalist Paper No. 2'" As a philosophy, multiculturalism began as
part of the pragmatism movement at the end of the nineteenth century in Europe
and the United States, then as political and cultural pluralism at the turn of
the twentieth. It was partly in response to a new wave of European imperialism
in sub-Saharan Africa and the massive immigration of Southern and Eastern
Europeans to the United States and Latin America. Philosophers, psychologists
and historians and early sociologists such as Charles Sanders Peirce, William
James, George Santayana, Horace Kallen, John Dewey, W. E. B. Du Bois and Alain
Locke developed concepts of cultural pluralism, from which emerged what we
understand today as multiculturalism. In "Pluralistic Universe" (1909), William
James espoused the idea of a "plural society." James saw pluralism as "crucial
to the formation of philosophical and social humanism to help build a better,
more egalitarian society. The educational approach to multiculturalism has
since spread to the grade school system, as school systems try to rework their
curricula to introduce students to diversity earlier—often on the grounds
that it is important for minority students to see themselves represented in the
classroom. Studies estimated 46.3 million Americans ages 14 to 24 to be the
most diverse generation in American society. In 2009 and 2010, controversy
erupted in Texas as the state's curriculum committee made several changes to
the state's requirements, often at the expense of minorities. They chose to
juxtapose Abraham Lincoln's inaugural address with that of Confederate
president Jefferson Davis; they debated removing Supreme Court Justice Thurgood
Marshall and labor-leader César Chávez and rejected calls to include more
Hispanic figures, in spite of the high Hispanic population in the state. United
Kingdom. Modest multicultural policies were adopted by local administrations
from the 1970s and 1980s onwards, initially during the Labour government of
Harold Wilson. In 1997 the New Labour government committed to a
multiculturalist approach at a national level, but after 2001 there was
something of a backlash, led by centre-left commentators such as David Goodhart
and Trevor Phillips. The government then embraced a policy of community
cohesion instead. In 2011 Prime Minister and Conservative Party leader David
Cameron said in a speech that "state multiculturalism has failed". Continental
Europe. Historically, Europe has always been a mixture of Latin, Slavic,
Germanic, Uralic, Celtic, Hellenic, Illyrian, Thracian and other cultures
influenced by the importation of Hebraic, Christian, Muslim and other belief
systems; although the continent was supposedly unified by the super-position of
Imperial Roman Christianity, it is accepted that geographic and cultural
differences continued from antiquity into the modern age. In the 19th century,
the ideology of nationalism transformed the way Europeans thought about the
state. Existing states were broken up and new ones created; the new nation-
states were founded on the principle that each nation is entitled to its own
sovereignty and to engender, protect, and preserve its own unique culture and
history. Unity, under this ideology, is seen as an essential feature of the
nation and the nation-state—unity of descent, unity of culture, unity of
language, and often unity of religion. The nation-state constitutes a
culturally society, although some national movements recognized regional
differences. Where cultural unity was insufficient, it was encouraged and
enforced by the state. The 19th-century nation-states developed an array of
policies—the most important was compulsory primary education in the national
language. The language itself was often standardized by a linguistic academy,
and regional languages were ignored or suppressed. Some nation-states pursued
violent policies of cultural assimilation and even ethnic cleansing. Other
countries have instituted policies which encourage cultural separation. The
concept of “Cultural exception” proposed by France in the General Agreement
on Tariffs and Trade (GATT) negotiations in 1993 was an example of a measure
aimed at protecting local cultures. Bulgaria. During its thousand years of
history Bulgaria has hosted many religions, ethnic groups and nations. The
capital Sofia is the only European city that has peacefully functioning, within
less than 100 meters, four Place of worship of the major religions: 1) Eastern
Orthodox - St Nedelya Church, 2) Islam - Banya Bashi Mosque, 3) Roman
Catholicism - Cathedral of St Joseph, Sofia and 4) Orthodox Judaism - Sofia
Synagogue, the third largest synagogue in Europe. This unique arrangement has
been called by historians a "multicultural cliche". It has also become known as
"The Triangle of Religious Tolerance" and has initiated the construction of a
100 square meters scale model of the site that is to become a symbol of the
capital. Furthermore unlike some other Nazi Germany allies or German-occupied
countries excluding Denmark, Bulgaria managed to save its entire 48,000-strong
Jewish population during World War II from deportation to concentration camps.
According to Dr. Marinova-Christidi the main reason for the efforts of
Bulgarian people to save the Bulgarian Jews during WWII is Bulgaria's history
of “co-existed for centuries with other religions” - giving it a unique
multi-cultural and multi-ethnic history. Consequently, Bulgaria has become a
Balkan region's example of multiculturalism - not only in religious but also in
artistic terms and ethnic means. As a consequence, an official national policy
of multiculturalism was adopted in the early 1980s. This policy subsequently
gave way to more assimilationist policies in the 1990s. Following the murders
of Pim Fortuyn (in 2002) and Theo van Gogh (in 2004) the political debate on
the role of multiculturalism in the Netherlands reached new heights. Lord
Sacks, Chief Rabbi of the United Hebrew Congregations of the Commonwealth,
distinguishes between tolerance and multiculturalism, and says that the
Netherlands is a tolerant, rather than multicultural, society. The right-wing
cabinet recently said the Netherlands is going to take distance of
Multicultural ideas about a multicultural society. "Dutch culture, norms and
values must be dominant" Minister Donner said. Germany. In October 2010, Angela
Merkel told a meeting of younger members of her conservative Christian
Democratic Union (CDU) party at Potsdam, near Berlin, that attempts to build a
multicultural society in Germany had "utterly failed", stating: "The concept
that we are now living side by side and are happy about it does not work"., She
continued to say that immigrants should integrate and adopt Germany's culture
and values. This has added to a growing debate within Germany on the levels of
immigration, its effect on Germany and the degree to which Muslim immigrants
have integrated into German society. Philippines. The Philippines is the 8th
most multiethnic nation in the world. It has 10 distinct major indigenous
ethnic groups mainly the Bicolano, Ibanag, Ilocano, Ivatan, Kapampangan, Moro,
Pangasinense, Sambal, Tagalog and Visayan. The Philippines also has several
aboriginal races such as the Badjao, Igorot, Lumad, Mangyan and Negritos. The
country also has considerable communities of American, Arabic, Chinese, Indian,
and Hispanic descent, and other ethnicities from other countries. The
Philippine government has various programs supporting and preserving the
nation's ethnic diversity. India. India is culturally, linguistically,
religiously and to a certain extent, ethnically, the most diverse country in
the world. As per the 1961 Census of India, the country is home to 1652 mother
tongues. The culture of India has been shaped by its long history, unique
geography and diverse demography. India's languages, religions, dance, music,
architecture and customs differ from place to place within the country, but
nevertheless possess a commonality. The culture of India is an amalgamation of
these diverse sub-cultures spread all over the Indian subcontinent and
traditions that are several millennia old. The Indian caste system describes
the social stratification and social restrictions in the Indian subcontinent,
in which social classes are defined by thousands of endogamous hereditary
groups, often termed as "jātis" or castes. The term "multiculturalism" is not
much used in India. Within Indian culture, the term "unity in diversity" is
more commonly used. Religiously, the Hindus form the majority, followed by the
Muslims. The statistics are: Hindu (80.5%), Muslim (13.4%), Christian (2.3%),
Sikh (2.1%), Buddhist, Bahá'í, Jain, Jew and Parsi populations.
Linguistically, the two main language families in India are Indo-Aryan (a
branch of Indo-European) and Dravidian. In India's northeast, people speaking
Sino-Tibetan group of languages such as Manipuri (Meitei-lon) recognized by the
Indian constitution and Austro-Asiatic languages are commonly found. India
officially)follows a three-language policy. Hindi (spoken in the form of Hindi-
Urdu) is the federal official language, English has the federal status of
associate/subsidiary official language and each state has its own state
official language (in the Hindi "sprachraum", this reduces to bilingualism).
The Republic of India's state boundaries are largely drawn based on linguistic
groups; this decision led to the preservation and continuation of local ethno-
linguistic sub-cultures, except for the Hindi "sprachraum" which is itself
divided into many states. Thus, most states differ from one another in
language, culture, cuisine, clothing, literary style, architecture, music and
festivities. See Culture of India for more information. Occasionally, however,
India has encountered religiously motivated violence, such as the Moplah Riots,
the Bombay riots, the 1984 anti-Sikh riots,the 2002 Gujarat riots,and most
recently the 2012 Assam violence . This has resulted from, and in increased
ghettoisation, low representation of minorities and traditionally disadvantaged
communities in public employment (eg: policing of the same locality),
prejudices creeping in history textbooks in schools, apprehension of owners in
giving houses on rent and of society in accepting inter-marriages. On the other
hand, perennial suspicion by communal and linguistic minorities of their
constitutional guarantees (eg: minority institutions and personal law) being
tinkered with, doesn't help matters either. Indonesia. There are more than 700
living languages spoken in Indonesia and although predominantly Muslim the
country also has large Christian and Hindu populations. Indonesia's national
motto, "Bhinneka tunggal ika" ("Unity in Diversity" lit. "many, yet one"),
articulates the diversity that shapes the country. Due to migration within
Indonesia (as part of government transmigration programs or otherwise), there
are significant populations of ethnic groups who reside outside of their
traditional regions. Soon after the fourth Indonesian President, Abdurrahman
Wahid came into power in 1999, he quickly abolished some of the discriminatory
laws in efforts to improve race relationships. Japan. Japanese society, with
its ideology of homogeneity, has traditionally rejected any need to recognize
ethnic differences in Japan, even as such claims have been rejected by such
ethnic minorities as the Ainu and Ryukyuan people. Former Japanese Minister
Taro Aso has called Japan a “one race” nation. However, there are
"International Society" NPOs funded by local governments throughout Japan.
Malaysia. The Malaysian New Economic Policy or NEP serves as a form of
affirmative action (see Bumiputera). It promotes structural changes in various
aspects of life from education to economic to social integration. Established
after the May 13 racial riots of 1969, it sought to address the significant
imbalance in the economic sphere where the minority Chinese population had
substantial control over commercial activity in the country. The Malay
Peninsula has a long history of international trade contacts, influencing its
ethnic and religious composition. Predominantly Malays before the 18th century,
the ethnic composition changed dramatically when the British introduced new
industries, and imported Chinese and Indian labor. Several regions in the then
British Malaya such as Penang, Malacca and Singapore became Chinese dominated.
Until the riots 1969, co-existence between the three ethnicities (and other
minor groups) was largely peaceful, although the three main racial groups for
the most part lived in separate communities - the Malays in the villages, the
Chinese in the urban areas, and the Indians in the towns and plantation. More
Malays however have moved into the cities since the 1970s, and the proportion
of the non-Malays have been decreasing continually, especially the Chinese, due
in large part to lower birth-rate and emigration as a result of
institutionalized discrimination. Preceding independence of the Federation of
Malaya, a social contract was negotiated as the basis of a new society. The
contract as reflected in the 1957 Malayan Constitution and the 1963 Malaysian
Constitution states that the immigrant groups are granted citizenship, and
Malays' special rights are guaranteed. This is often referred to the Bumiputra
policy. These pluralist policies have come under pressure from racialist Malay
parties, who oppose perceived subversion of Malay rights. The issue is
sometimes related to the controversial status of religious freedom in Malaysia.
Mauritius. Multiculturalism has been a characteristic feature of the island of
Mauritius. Mauritian society includes people from many different ethnic and
religious groups: Hindu, Muslim and Indo-Mauritians, Mauritian Creoles (of
African and Malagasy descent), Buddhist and Roman Catholic Sino-Mauritians and
Franco-Mauritians (descendants of the original French colonists). Singapore.
Besides English, Singapore recognizes three other languages, namely, Mandarin
Chinese, Tamil and Malay as its official languages, with Malay being the
national language. Besides being a multilingual country, Singapore also
acknowledges festivals celebrated by these three ethnic communities. During the
British colonial rule, there are areas which are enclaves containing a large
population of certain ethnic groups exist in areas such as Chinatown, Geylang
and Little India in Singapore. Presently (2010), remnants of the colonial
ethnic concentration still exists but housing in Singapore is governed by the
Ethnic Integration Policy. The current Indian/Others ethnic limits are 10% and
13%, the limits for Malays are 22% and 25%, the limits for Chinese are 84% and
87% for the maximum ethnic limits for a neighborhood and a block respectively.
South Korea. South Korea is among the world's most ethnically homogeneous
nations. Those who do not share such features are often rejected by the Korean
society or face discrimination. However, the word "multiculturalism" is
increasingly heard in South Korea. In 2007, Han Geon-Soo, Professor of Cultural
Anthropology at Kangwon National University, published an article entitled
"Multicultural Korea: Celebration or Challenge of Multiethnic Shift in
Contemporary Korea?", noting: "As the increase of foreign migrants in Korea
transforms a single-ethnic homogenous Korean society into multiethnic and
multicultural one, Korean government and the civil society pay close attention
to multiculturalism as an alternative value to their policy and social
movement." He argued, however, that "the current discourses and concerns on
multiculturalism in Korea" lacked "the constructive and analytical concepts for
transforming a society". Although many debates still take place in discussing
whether Korea really is a muticultural society or not, it is a mutual agreement
that Korea has probably entered a stage of multiculturalism and has moved away
from its homogenous identity. It is a notified fact that around 35~40% of
Korean man in the rural area outside Seoul are engaged with wives from
different countries. According to the Dongponews, an online media that connects
migrants and immigrants of Korea, the number of foreigners residing in Korea
have reached 1.43 million by 2012, and is likely to increase more and more,
reaching to the scale that cannot be undermined. More than that, Korea is going
through a serious stage of low birthrate, leading to an aging society in
shortage of labor forces. Another big changing factor is that Korea already has
multi-ethnic, multi-cultural families appearing in great numbers, as one in
every ten marriage is between a Korean and a foreigner, and in the rural side
this portion is greater. As such change takes place in such short period of
time, it can be understood that many conflicts arise among different groups of
people; the immigrants, government, and the rest of the members in Korean
society. Recently a lot of media attention is given to these people;
documentaries on the lives of wives and their children are often shown, as well
as talk shows that portrays struggles and conflicts these people go through
such as Love in Asia; a talk show hosting foreign wives, sharing their
experience of marriage and family life, broadcased by the national broadcasting
channel, KBS. Although whether these channels of media provide the right source
of direction to the public is debatable, it is factually true that many Koreans
nowadays do recognize the change that the society is going through due to these
media attention. Government policies have also changed very recently; a lot of
welfare programs and extracurricular activities are launched under the name of
"multicultural policy." The policy is quite recent phenomenon and therefore its
effects and counter effects need to be assessed in many different ways. Further
studies and development in this area is obviously required, as this is a very
rapid social change to Koreans and their society. United Arab Emirates.
Although Arabic is the official language of the country, English, Urdu, Hindi,
Tagalog, Persian and many other languages are widely spoken and understood. The
UAE host expatriate workers from over 150 countries with majority coming from
India, Philippines, Iran, England, France, Germany, Pakistan and China.
Regardless of being an Islamic state, the UAE has widely accepted and respect
all other religions with permission to have their temples or church. Dubai and
Abu Dhabi are an emerging multi cultural and touristic cities that also hosts
most of the country's multi-cultural population. The local population make up
less than 20%. Support for multiculturalism. Multiculturalism is seen by its
supporters as a fairer system that allows people to truly express who they are
within a society, that is more tolerant and that adapts better to social
issues. They argue that culture is not one definable thing based on one race or
religion, but rather the result of multiple factors that change as the world
changes. Historically, support for modern multiculturalism stems from the
changes in Western societies after World War II, in what Susanne Wessendorf
calls the "human rights revolution", in which the horrors of institutionalized
racism and ethnic cleansing became almost impossible to ignore in the wake of
the Holocaust; with the collapse of the European colonial system, as colonized
nations in Africa and Asia successfully fought for their independence and
pointed out the racist underpinnings of the colonial system; and, in the United
States in particular, with the rise of the Civil Rights Movement, which
criticized ideals of assimilation that often led to prejudices against those
who did not act according to Anglo-American standards and which led to the
development of academic ethnic studies programs as a way to counteract the
neglect of contributions by racial minorities in classrooms. As this history
shows, multiculturalism in Western countries was seen as a useful set of
strategies to combat racism, to protect minority communities of all types, and
to undo policies that had prevented minorities from having full access to the
opportunities for freedom and equality promised by the liberalism that has been
the hallmark of Western societies since the Age of Enlightenment. C. James
Trotman argues that multiculturalism is valuable because it "uses several
disciplines to highlight neglected aspects of our social history, particularly
the histories of women and minorities [...and] promotes respect for the dignity
of the lives and voices of the forgotten. By closing gaps, by raising
consciousness about the past, multiculturalism tries to restore a sense of
wholeness in a postmodern era that fragments human life and thought." Tariq
Modood argues that in the early years of the 21st Century, multiculturalism "is
most timely and necessary, and [...] we need more not less", since it is "the
form of integration" that (1) best fits the ideal of egalitarianism, (2) has
"the best chance of succeeding" in the "post-9/11, post 7/7" world, and (3) has
remained "moderate pragmatic". Bhikhu Parekh counters what he sees as the
tendencies to equate multiculturalism with racial minorities "demanding special
rights" and to see it as promoting a "thinly veiled racis". Instead, he argues
that multiculturalism is in fact "not about minorities" but "is about the
proper terms of relationship between different cultural communities", which
means that the standards by which the communities resolve their differences,
e.g., "the principles of justice" must not come from only one of the cultures
but must come "through an open and equal dialogue between them." Opposition to
multiculturalism. Critics of multiculturalism often debate whether the
multicultural ideal of benignly co-existing cultures that interrelate and
influence one another, and yet remain distinct, is sustainable, paradoxical, or
even desirable. It is argued that Nation states, who would previously have been
synonymous with a distinctive cultural identity of their own, lose out to
enforced multiculturalism and that this ultimately erodes the host nations'
distinct culture. Harvard professor of political science Robert D. Putnam
conducted a nearly decade long study how multiculturalism affects social trust.
He surveyed 26,200 people in 40 American communities, finding that when the
data were adjusted for class, income and other factors, the more racially
diverse a community is, the greater the loss of trust. People in diverse
communities "don’t trust the local mayor, they don’t trust the local paper,
they don’t trust other people and they don’t trust institutions," writes
Putnam. In the presence of such ethnic diversity, Putnam maintains that e
hunker down. We act like turtles. The effect of diversity is worse than had
been imagined. And it’s not just that we don’t trust people who are not
like us. In diverse communities, we don’t trust people who do look like us.
Salter, Frank, "On Genetic Interests", pg.146. In New Zealand (Aotearoa), which
is officially bi-cultural, multiculturalism has been seen as a threat to Maori,
and possibly an attempt by the New Zealand Government to undermine Maori
demands for self determination. http://alt.sagepub.com/content/33/1/29.abstract
