Municipal services Municipal services or city services refer to basic services
that residents of a city expect the city government to provide in exchange for
the taxes which citizens pay. Basic city services may include sanitation (both
sewer and refuse), water, streets, schools, food inspection, fire department,
police, ambulance, and other health department issues and transportation. City
governments often operate or contract for additional utilities like
electricity, gas and cable television. Mumbai even provides a lighthouse
service. The available municipal services for any individual municipality will
depend on location, history, geography, statutes and tradition. Provided
services may vary from country to country or even within a country. Services
may be run directly by a department of the municipality or be sub-contracted to
a third party. Funding. Funding for the services provided varies with the
municipality in question. Funding can include tax revenue (property tax, income
tax, municipal sales tax), fees (such as building permits), fines such as
speeding or parking violations, usage fees for optional services, or other
sources such as profits from municipally owned or operated utilities. Probably
the greatest influence is the country in which the municipality is located. In
the UK, a combination of local taxation based on property value and central
government grants is the main means of funding core services. This is
supplemented by nominal fees for services provided (e.g. leisure facilities).
For some services, a competitive fee is charged compared to commercial concerns
that which allows a profit to be made. For other services, full commercial
rates may be charged with municipally owned utilities or commercial property,
for example. For the most part, services will be part subsidized by the
municipality or fully subsidized by the municipality. In recent years, UK
councils have been given some leeway in finding alternative funding which can
be the simple sponsorship of flower baskets to the trading of surplus buildings
and land for services from private firms. In certain notorious cases, local
councils have used council funds to speculate on the money markets.
Municipalities in other countries may have other methods of funding (e.g. local
income taxes or even from the profits of utilities or industrial concerns fully
owned by the municipality). United Kingdom. In the United Kingdom, until their
abolishment, Municipal Corporations were powerful organizations. In their
Victorian heyday, with the growth of urbanization and industrialization, they
could be responsible for the promotion, organization, funding, building and
management of everything from housing to water supplies, power in the form of
both gas and electricity, to the introduction of electric trams; almost any
activity that the city fathers thought was necessary to promote the economic,
social and environmental well-being of their municipality. However, special
powers needed to be granted through Local Acts in Parliament (for example, the
Manchester Corporation Waterworks Act needed for the construction of
Manchester's reservoirs). As times changed, the Municipal Corporations
continued to try to advance the cause of their municipalities. For example, in
the 1930s aviation was the new technological frontier and municipalities worked
to promote themselves with the development of municipal airports. For the most
part, UK municipalities lost their in-house utilities to the nationalisation
and centralisation of public utilities. One notable exception is Kingston upon
Hull, which still has a municipally-owned telephone company known as Kingston
Communications. One trend in the UK, (in the name of efficiency) has been the
privatisation of departments, the transfer of staff and assets to the new
organisation. The contracting with the new organization for services to the
council. This model has been used for services from road cleaning to social
housing, to leisure facilities. Though no council yet seems to dare to do so
for more high profile services such as schools and social services. In the UK,
fire and police services are not under direct municipal control, even when a
force can be closely identified with a specific municipal area such as Greater
London. However, fire and police services are in part paid for by a surcharge
to local taxation, and although they have no say in operational matters, local
government appoints members to a committee to oversee the running of each
force. Geography. Where there is a substantial industrial urban population
isolated from other conurbations, or when and where the growth in demand is so
great that it becomes uneconomic or unpractical for commercial concerns to
provide, the municipalities concerned may assume functions necessary for the
growth and functioning of the city. This was the case in Victorian England also
today in Mumbai, for example, the Municipal Corporation of Greater Mumbai and
Brihanmumbai Electric Supply and Transport are the major municipal
organizations which are needed to allow the city to function. The Los Angeles
Department of Water and Power is a legacy of Los Angeles, which found itself in
a similar position of rapid growth at the beginning of the last century. The
similarly isolated Johannesburg has chosen to run its services as standalone
and self-funding, corporate entities.
