Music and politics The connection between music and politics, particularly
political expression in music, has been seen in many cultures. Although music
influences political movements and rituals, it is not clear how or even if,
general audiences relate music on a political level. Time has shown how music
can be used in anti-establishment or protest themes, including anti-war songs,
although pro-establishment ideas are also used, for example in national
anthems, patriotic songs, and political campaigns. Many of these types of songs
could be described as topical songs. Unlike many other types of music,
political music is not usually ambiguous, and is used to portray a specific
political message. Even in the case of overtly political pop acts like U2, the
Clash, or Rage Against the Machine, while political message in their music is
apparent, it is usually in the political context of the time it was made. This
makes understanding the historical events and time that inspired the music
essential to fully understanding the message in the music. Since political
music is meant to be heard by the people, it is often meant to be popular.
Furthermore it is extremely difficult to predict how audiences will respond
this kind of music, sounds, or even visual cues. For example, Bleich and
Zillmann found that “counter expectations, highly rebellious students did not
enjoy defiant rock videos more than did their less rebellious peers, nor did
they consume more defiant rock music than did their peers." The difficulty in
predicting and understanding an audience is partly due to the fact that there
is an extremely diverse range of styles, and structure involved in musical
production, and marketing. Art music. Beethoven's third symphony was originally
called "Bonaparte". In 1804 Napoleon crowned himself emperor, whereupon
Beethoven rescinded the dedication. The symphony was renamed "Heroic Symphony
composed to Celebrate the Memory of a Great Man". Verdi's chorus of Hebrew
slaves in the opera "Nabucco" is sometimes considered to be a kind of rallying-
cry for Italians to throw off the yoke of Austrian domination (in the north)
and French domination (near Rome) - the "Risorgimento". Following unification,
Verdi was awarded a seat in the national parliament. RAPM (The Russian
Association of Proletarian Musicians) was formed in the early 1920s. In 1929
Stalin gave them his backing. Shostakovich had dedicated his first symphony to
Mikhail Kvardi. In 1929 Kvardi was arrested and executed. In an article in "The
Worker and the Theatre", Shostakovich's "The Tahitit Trot" (from the ballet
"The Golden Age") was criticised. "Can one actually dance to such music", said
Ivan Yershov. the article claimed it was part of "ideology harmful to the
proletariat"". Shostakovich's response was to write his third symphony, "The
First of May" (1929) to express "the festive mood of peaceful construction".
Prokofiev wrote music to order for the Soviet Union, but managed to keep his
musical standard high. "Cantata for the 20th Anniversary of the October
Revolution" (1937) is far from banal. Khachaturian's ballet "Spartacus" (1954/
6) concerns gladiator slaves who rebel against their former Roman masters. It
was seen as a metaphor for the overthrow of the Czar. Similarly Prokofiev's
music for the film "Alexander Nevsky" concerns the attack of Teutonic knights
into the Baltic states. It was seen as a metaphor for the Nazi invasion of the
USSR. In general Soviet music was neo-romantic while Fascist music was neo-
classical. "I don't believe anyone venerates Mussolini more than I" said
Stravinsky in 1930 to a Rome newspaper. By 1943 Stravinsky was banned in Nazi
Germany because he had chosen to live in the USA. Beginning in 1940, Orff's
cantata "Carmina Burana" was performed at Nazi Party functions, and acquired
the status of a quasi-official anthem. In 1933 Berlin Radio issued a formal ban
on the broadcasting of jazz. However, it was still possible to hear swing music
played by German bands. This was because of the moderating influence of
Goebbels, who knew the value of entertaining the troops. In the period 1933-45
the music of Mahler, a Jewish Austrian, virtually disappeared from the concert
performances of the Berlin Philharmonic. Richard Strauss's opera "Die
Schweigsame Frau" was banned from 1935–1945 because the librettist, Stefan
Zweig, was a Jew. In the Trblinka death camp, new arrivals were presented with
a deceptive scene. A ten-piece orchestra played jazz and Jewish folk tunes
Shloyme Klezmer stood by the entrance of the gas chambers and played with the
orchestra as the bodies were gassed. He saw his son being led in and pulled him
out of the line. As SS officer saw this and laughed. Shloyme smashed his violin
over the SS officer's head and marched with his only child into the gas chamber
Contemporary classical music. Benjamin Britten's "War Requiem" (1962)
emphasised the futility of war, by quoting poems by Wilfred Owen. He had
previously written a "Pacifist March" in 1937. He had been a conscientious
objector during the Second World War. Adams' opera "The Death of Klinghoffer"
(1991) concerns the killing of an American Jew by Palestinian terrorists. The
audience had expected to see the demonisation of the terrorists, but instead
saw an even-handed treatment of the Palestine Liberation Front. Richard
Taruskin of the University of California accused Adams of "romanticizing
terrorists." A range of contemporary classical composers of socialist or
Marxist sympathies have attempted in often quite radically different ways to
relate their politics to their work. Primary amongst those from the earlier
20th century are Kurt Weill and Hanns Eisler, both of whom moved away from
atonal idioms that had become prominent in their time, feeling these to
alienate audiences, towards music and music-theatre that had roots in popular
musics (for example cabaret songs), though with sophisticated harmonies that
reflected their musical background. Of post-war composers, the most significant
of the earlier generations were Luigi Nono and Hans Werner Henze, both of who
wrote a wide range of works that combined music with texts, theatre, and
electronics relating to political issues viewed from a Marxist perspective (for
example to do with events in Cuba, Vietnam and Chile in Nono's work). Nono
brought this subject matter into a dialogue with a relatively abstract music
derived from his own earlier serial compositions, from his pioneering work "Il
canto sospeso" (1956) onwards, whilst Henze relaxed his earlier formalism in
favour of a more eclectic approach to musical style, as for example in his
large scale cabaret-like work "Voices" (1973). A range of slightly later
composers in West Germany, including Helmut Lachenmann, Nicolaus A. Huber (both
of whom were students of Nono), and Mathias Spahlinger responded to political
concerns in a more abstract fashion, reflecting to some extent the ideas of
Theodor Adorno and writing in opposition to the perceived demands made upon
music (in terms of passive listening, audience pleasing, and so on) made by the
culture industry. Lachenmann and Spahlinger explored a musical vocabulary
derived in large measure from unusual techniques upon instruments, to offer
expressive possibilities outside of the boundaries of what Lachenmann called
the 'philharmonic tradition'. Huber for a while in the 1970s withdraw from the
contemporary concert circuit, instead writing Politische Revuen. Other German
composers whose works relate to this tradition, though with a more eclectic use
of idiom, include Dieter Schnebel, Konrad Boehmer and Gerhard Stabler. Marxist
ideas on aesthetic matters could be found in the writings on music by Hans G.
Helms and Heinz-Klaus Metzger. A thoroughly different approach characterised
the late work of the British composer Cornelius Cardew who, influenced by the
writings of Christopher Caudwell (also alluded to by Lachenmann in his work for
two guitars "Salut für Caudwell" (1977)) and Mao Tse-Tung, famously denounced
the work of the post-war avant-garde with which he had previously been
associated, in his book "Stockhausen Serves Imperialism" (in which he attacked
not just Karlheinz Stockhausen but also the music of John Cage and others).
Cardew argued that the atonal music of the avant-garde served to exacerbate the
fragmentation of society rather than bringing the masses together; with this in
mind he turned to the composition of didactic settings of revolutionary songs
from Ireland, China, and elsewhere. Other composers influenced by Maoism
include the Americans Christian Wolff and Frederic Rzewski and the Japanese
composer-pianist Yuji Takahashi, all of whom also incorporated political song
material into their compositions, though without wholly surrendering the other
more abstract musical concerns of their earlier work, whilst the British
composer Dave Smith continued to some extent in the tradition established by
Cardew, as well as frequently making use of the medium of the nineteenth-
century melodrama for speaker and piano, with a wide variety of texts relating
to issues in Ireland, Palestine, and elsewhere. The British composer Richard
Barrett stands apart from other tendencies in that country, working within a
radical atonal avant-garde idiom a little in the manner of the German composers
mentioned earlier, but equally influenced by other figures including
Stockhausen, Hans-Joachim Hespos, Xenakis, Kagel, Michael Finnissy and others.
Barrett is concerned to marry together sophistication of musical content with a
degree of surface immediacy, thus developing a musical language from
fundamental parameters of register, density, dynamics, texture and timbre so as
to facilitate the music's surface accessibility to the uninitiated listener.
Finnissy himself has alluded to politicised topics in various works, especially
in his "English Country-Tunes", a ravaged musical landscape tinged with moments
of nostalgia (not unlike the films of Derek Jarman), intended as a comment on
the hypocrisy and falseness of English pastoralism. The British composer Gordon
Downie writes in a highly abstract modernist idiom and in writings links this
type of modernism with Marxist concerns. The British arts journal EONTA, under
the editorship of Steven Holt, featured a range of writings on music and other
arts from various Marxist perspectives. Melissa Dunphy's best-known works take
American politics as a theme: the "Gonzales Cantata", while not partisan, sets
the words of the dismissal of U.S. attorneys controversy hearings to neo-
Baroque music, and "What do you think I fought for at Omaha Beach?" is a choral
setting of testimony in support of same-sex marriage in Maine. Other composers
identify with a non-Marxist left, which may embrace non- or anti-authoritarian,
left-liberal, Green, or even Anarchist politics. John Cage, for example, was
influenced by ideas of Henry David Thoreau and other anarchist writers. Cage's
concept of an "anarchic harmony" has been taken up by younger composers,
including Andrew Culver and Daniel James Wolf. Many composers are engaged with
environmental issues and may be usefully identified with Green politics. Folk
music. The song "We Shall Overcome" is perhaps the best-known example of
political folk music, in this case a rallying-cry for the Civil Rights
Movement. Pete Seeger was involved in the popularization of the song, as was
Joan Baez. During the early part of 20th century, poor working conditions and
class struggles lead to the growth of the Labour movement and numerous songs
advocating social and political reform. The most famous songwriter of the early
20th century "Wobblies" was Joe Hill. In the 1940s through the 1960s, The
Weavers as well as Woody Guthrie were influential in this type of social and
political music. Woody Guthrie's "This Land Is Your Land" is one of the U.S.
most famous folk songs and the lyrics describe his sympathetic views of
communism. Pete Seeger's "Where Have All the Flowers Gone?", was a popular
anti-war protest song. Many of these types of songs became popular during the
Vietnam War era. Blowin' in the Wind, by Bob Dylan, was a hit for Peter, Paul
and Mary, and suggested that a younger generation was becoming more aware of
global problems than many of the older generation. In 1964, Joan Baez had a
top-ten hit in the UK with "There but for Fortune" (by Phil Ochs). It was a
plea for the innocent victim of prejudice or inhumane policies. Many topical
songwriters with social and political messages emerged out of the folk music
revival of the 1960s, including Bob Dylan, Joan Baez, Phil Ochs, Tom Paxton,
Buffy Sainte-Marie, Judy Collins, Arlo Guthrie, and many others. The folk music
revival during the Cold War era produced a number of political folk tunes
within the United States and elsewhere. The Revival in the United States began
in the 1930s after the Great Depression as a response to the new wave of
modernization that triggered the post-industrial era. Folk songs of this time
gained popularity by using old hymns and songs but adapting the lyrics to fit
the current social and political conditions. Artists such as Alan Lomax, Lead
Belly and Woody Guthrie were crucial in popularizing folk music, and they soon
began to be known as the Lomax singers. This began an era of folk music in
which artists and their songs expressed clear political messages with the of
swaying public opinion and recruiting support. An example of this is Lead
Belly’s “Bourgeois Blues”. As the fear of communism began to dominate the
United States population and government, it was more difficult for folk artists
to travel and perform since folk was pushed out of mainstream music.
Nevertheless, folk music began a resurgence in the 1960s as an underground
movement. During the revival, folk music became popular mostly with college
students since universities provided the organization necessary for sustaining
music trends and an impressionable audience looking to rebel against the older
generation. It was at this time that folk artists, such as Bob Dylan, began
writing their own songs to fit current times, as opposed to only adapting
existing folk songs. Nevertheless, the rhetoric of the United States government
during the Cold War era was very powerful and in some ways overpowered the
message of folk artists, such as in regard to public opinion about communism.
Various Gallup Polls that were conducted during this time suggest that
Americans consistently saw communism as a threat. For example, a 1954 poll
shows that at the time 51% of Americans said that admitted communists should be
arrested, and in relation to music 64% of respondents said that if a radio
singer is an admitted communist he should be fired. Folk music was used outside
the United States during this time as well. Hungary, for instance, experimented
with a form of liberal communism in the late Cold War era, which was reflected
in much of their folk music. During the late twentieth century folk music was
crucial in Hungary, Romania, and the once existing Czechoslovakia and
Yugoslavia by allowing ethnicities to express their national identity in a time
of political uncertainty and chaos. These folk protest traditions are still
being carried on today by many old and new topical songwriters and musicians of
all types and varieties. Today's socially conscious musicians not only sing at
rallies, demonstrations and on picket lines, but typically have professional
web sites and post videos on YouTube and other popular internet sites. Examples
of such activist musicians include Ray Korona (environmental, labor, peace,
social justice), Charlie King (labor, social justice) and Anne Feeney (labor,
protest), among many others. Although these musicians each have their own
followings and performance circuits, good sources for finding many of them
include the Peoples Music Network for Songs of Freedom and Struggle and the
Labor Heritage Foundation. Blues songs tend to be resigned to fate rather than
fighting against misfortune, but there are a few exceptions. Josh White
recorded "When Am I going to be Called a Man" in 1936. At this time it was
common for white men to address black men as "boy". He also wrote "Silicosis is
Killing Me" in 1936. Billie Holiday recorded "Strange Fruit" in 1939. With
great sophistication, it draws a comparison between fruit on the trees and the
rotting corpses of lynched black men. It also exposed American racism,
particularly the lynching of African Americans, and was performed as a protest
song in New York venues, including MSG. Paul Robeson, singer, actor, athlete,
and civil rights activist, was investigated by the FBI and was called before
the House Un-American Activities Committee (HUAC) for his outspoken political
views. The State Department denied Robeson a passport and issued a "stop
notice" at all ports, effectively confining him to the United States. In a
symbolic act of defiance against the travel ban, labor unions in the U.S. and
Canada organized a concert at the International Peace Arch on the border
between Washington state and the Canadian province of British Columbia on May
18, 1952. Paul Robeson stood on the back of a flat bed truck on the American
side of the U.S.-Canada border and performed a concert for a crowd on the
Canadian side, variously estimated at between 20,000 and 40,000 people. Robeson
returned to perform a second concert at the Peace Arch in 1953, and over the
next two years two further concerts were scheduled. In Communist China,
exclusively national music was promoted. A flautist named Zhao Songtime, a
member of the Zhejiang Song-and-Dance Troupe, attended an Arts festival in 1957
in Mexico. He was punished for his international outlook by being expelled from
the Troupe. From 1966 to 1970 he underwent "re-education". In 1973 he returned
to the Troupe but was expelled again following accusations. Soul music. A good
example of a political soul song was: "Everyday People" Rock music. Rock the
Vote is a 501(c)(3) non-profit, non-partisan organization founded in Los
Angeles in 1990 by Jeff Ayeroff for the purposes of political advocacy. Rock
the Vote works to engage youth in the political process by incorporating the
entertainment community and youth culture into its activities. Rock the Vote's
stated mission is to "build the political clout and engagement of young people
in order to achieve progressive change in our country." Some rock groups, such
as Crosby, Stills, Nash & Young, Bruce Springsteen and the E Street Band,
Living Colour, Rage Against the Machine, Manic Street Preachers, Marilyn
Manson, Megadeth, Scars on Broadway, Enter Shikari, and System of a Down have
openly political messages in their music. Detroit, Michigan's MC5 (Motor City
5) came out of the underground rock music scene of the late 1960s, and
displayed an aggressive evolution of garage rock which was often fused with
sociopolitical and countercultural lyrics of the era, such as in the songs
"Motor City Is Burning" (a John Lee Hooker cover adapting the story of the
Detroit Race Riot (1943) to the Detroit Insurrection of 1967), and "The
American Ruse" (which discusses U.S. police brutality as well as pollution,
prison, materialism and rebellion). They had ties to radical leftist
organizations such as Up Against the Wall Motherfuckers and John Sinclair's
White Panther Party (composed of white American socialists seeking to assist
African Americans in the fight for racial equality - it was "not", as the title
may suggest, a white supremacist group). MC5 performed a set before the 1968
Democratic Convention held at International Amphitheatre in Chicago, Illinois
where an infamous riot subsequently broke out between police and students
protesting the recent assassination of The Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.
and the Vietnam War. During the counterculture era, acts like John Lennon
commonly protested in his music, with latter devoting an entire album to
politics and the song Imagine, widely considered to be a peace anthem.
Imagine's lyrics talk about "giving peace a chance" and Imagine also deals with
imagining a world without countries or religion. 1965, Bob Dylan sang to his
fans about the evils of war and the emptiness of consumerism when he released
his trade mark album “The Times They are A-Changin’” which became one of
his number one albums containing one of his number one songs. This song was
articulating the movement of social change and that history will always repeat
itself. When he sang the lyrics “Come writers and critics who prophesize with
your pen and keep your eyes wide, the chance won’t come again. And don’t
speak too soon, for the wheel’s still in spin.” He achieved the attention
of the civil rights movement which helped in the transformation of the American
political landscape. Like any other musical artist, Dylan was influenced by
other radical groups such as the Wobblies- the popular group of the thirties
and forties, the Beat Anarchists of the fifties, and above all, by the
political beliefs of young people during the civil rights movement. In his
songs, he included the terror of the nuclear arms race, poverty, racism,
prison, jingoism, and war. With his songs, he helped with the political
revolution of America in the 1960s. Punk rock. Since the late 1970s, punk rock
has been associated with various left-wing or anti-establishment ideologies,
including anarchism and socialism: punk's culture of DIY and disregard for
musical virtuosity held an obvious attraction for those on the left - mirroring
as it does workers' control of the means of production, and empowerment of the
powerless (though some leftists, it can be argued, may see the DIY ethic as
just another form of private enterprise) - and the genre as a whole came,
largely through the Sex Pistols to be associated with anarchism. The sincerity
of many of these bands has been questioned - many saw the use of anarchism in
early punk as a joke or fashion statement more than an ideology (indeed, some
lefist critics of punk saw it as "just another rock'n'roll pose") - but over
time bands such as Crass in the UK and Dead Kennedys in America emerged who
held strong anarchist views, and over time this association strengthened. New
Wave, however, and many punk bands who were a major influence on its
development, such as Blondie, Television, and XTC eschewed this political
aspect of punk. Notable punk rock artists such as The Clash, Crass, Discharge,
Dead Kennedys, Millions of Dead Cops, Aus-Rotten, Green Day, Anti-Flag, and
Leftover Crack have been known to use political and sometimes controversial
lyrics that attack the establishment, sexism, capitalism, racism, colonialism,
and other social conflicts they see as problems in society. The Sex Pistols
song "God Save the Queen" was banned from broadcast by the BBC due to
perceptions that it was anti-monarchy. This song was highly controversial,
firstly for it equation of the queen with a " Fascist regime" and secondly for
its claim that England had "no future". The Crass album "The Feeding Of the
5000" almost was not released because workers in the plants refused to release
it due to sacrilegious lyrical content (the band were Anti-Christian), and
later Crass albums were banned. Crass eventually even ended up in court on
charges of obscenity, similar to what later happened in the USA to the Dead
Kennedys over their "Frankenchrist" album artwork. Dead Kennedys singer Jello
Biafra, as well as T.S.O.L. frontman Jack Grisham, have even ran as candidates
for public office under left-wing platforms. Also, several musicians such as
Joey Ramone, Fat Mike, Ted Leo, Crashdog, Hoxton Tom McCourt, Tim McIlrath, Bad
Religion, and the Dropkick Murphys were politically center-left and liberal. An
extremely small minority of punk rock bands, exemplified by Skrewdriver and
Skullhead, held right-wing and anti-communist stances, and were often dismissed
or reviled in the broader, largely leftist punk subculture. Many of the bands
credited with starting the punk movement were decidedly apolitical, including
The Dictators, Ramones (which featured staunch conservative Johnny Ramone
alongside left-wing activist Joey Ramone), New York Dolls, Television, Johnny
Thunders & The Heartbreakers, and Richard Hell & The Voidoids. Punk subgenres
that are generally apolitical include: glam punk, psychobilly, horror punk,
punk pathetique, deathrock and pop punk. Racist music. Racist music is music
associated with and promoting neo-Nazism and white supremacy ideologies.
Although musicologists point out that many, if not most early cultures had
songs to promote themselves and denigrate any perceived enemies, the origins of
Racist music is tied to the early 1970s. By 2001 there were many music genres
with 'white power rock' the most commonly represented band type, followed by
National Socialist black metal. 'Racist country music' is mainly an American
phenomena while Germany, Great Britain, and Sweden have higher concentration of
white power bands. Other music genres include 'fascist experimental music' and
'racist folk music'. Contemporary white-supremisist groups include "subcultural
factions that are largely organized around the promotion and distribution of
racist music." According to the Human Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission
"racist music is principally derived from the far-right skinhead movement and,
through the Internet, this music has become perhaps the most important tool of
the international neo-Nazi movement to gain revenue and new recruits." The news
documentary "VH1 News Special: Inside Hate Rock" (2002) noted that Racist music
(also called 'Hate music' and 'Skinhead rock') is "a breeding ground for home-
grown terrorists." In 2004 a neo-Nazi record company launched "Project
Schoolyard" to distribute free CDs of the music into the hands of up to 100,000
teenagers throughout the U.S., their website stated, "We just don't entertain
racist kids … We create them." Brian Houghton, of the National Memorial
Institute for the Prevention of Terrorism, said that Racist music was a great
recruiting tool, "Through music ... to grab these kids, teach them to be
racists and hook them for life." Hip hop. Racism and inequality are common
themes in hip hop music. Sub-genres of hip hop centered around political
messages have emerged, including political and conscious hip hop. Rap artist
Sean "P Diddy" Combs led "Vote or Die", a not-for-profit organization, arose
the 2004 elections that was geared to draw more youthful voters into the polls.
The "Vote or Die" campaign may have helped directly contribute to increased
youth vote demographic (age 18-29) which saw an increase in participation to
20.9 million votes - up from 16.2 million in 2000. The overall turnout for the
age group increased as well. 51 percent of citizens ages 18 to 29 voted in
2004. 42.3 percent voted in 2000. Public Enemy was known for their politically
charged lyrics, especially for their album, "It Takes a Nation of Millions to
Hold Us Back", and the song "Fight the Power". Frontman Chuck D is the main
advocate for political awareness in the group. Female rappers who write about
experiences specific to their lives expand the dominant ideas of rap music and
dominant notions of what it means to be an authentic rapper. Because their
voices are considered a minority. They also bring to the forefront images of
women with agency over their own bodies, sexuality, and lives, without
constructing themselves as in opposition to male rappers, a stance that would
alienate them from the hip hop community. There are more male than female
performers and listeners; women also identify with these male rappers on a
number of different levels. Brand Nubian, Immortal Technique, Dead Prez, and
The Coup are all noted for their political views and lyrics. To a certain
extent, the emphasis of making money and the right to bear arms can be
considered right-leaning stances, which are prevalent throughout hip hop,
especially in gangsta rap, although these subjects are probably not meant to be
political, but rather the artist bragging about his or her street credibility.
Tupac Shakur's debut album "2Pacalypse Now" generated significant controversy
stemming from then Vice President Dan Quayle's public criticism after a youth
in Texas shot a state trooper and his defense attorney claimed he was
influenced by the album and its strong theme of police brutality. Quayle made
the statement, "There's no reason for a record like this to be released. It has
no place in our society." Country music. American country music contains
numerous images of "traditional" life, family life, religious life, as well as
patriotic themes. Songs such as Merle Haggard's "The Fightin' Side of Me", and
"Okie from Muskogee" have been perceived as patriotic songs which contain an
"us versus them" mentality directed at the counterculture "hippies" and the
anti-war crowd, though these were actually misconceptions by listeners who
failed to understand their satirical nature. In more recent years, Haggard has
become more openly critical of "the establishment", and even disagreed with the
Iraq War. Other country musicians, such as Charlie Daniels, openly supported
George W. Bush, the Iraq War, and conservative politics in general. When
Natalie Maines, lead singer of the Dixie Chicks, made negative comments about
George W. Bush and publicly spoke out against the decision to invade Iraq in
2003, boycotts by country music radio stations and death threats hindered the
band's continued success. In 2006, with Maines still acting as lead singer, the
Dixie Chicks released a "comeback" album, "Taking the Long Way". The album
subsequently won five Grammys. Comedy music. Through the years, there have been
numerous songs that have made fun of politicians and/or politics in general.
One such group in the modern era primarily dedicated to political music and
satire is the Capitol Steps. Tenacious D also features several songs with
political themes. New musicology. New musicology is the cultural study,
analysis, and criticism of music. It is often based on the work of Theodor
Adorno (and Walter Benjamin) and feminist, gender studies, or postcolonial
hypotheses. As Susan McClary says, "musicology fastidiously declares issues of
musical signification off-limits to those engaged in legitimate scholarship",
including politics.
