Music for America Music for America was a political organization which used
concert events and the social networks which surround bands and musical
"scenes" as a way to promote progressive political values and participation
among Millennial Generation Americans. Foundation. Music for America was
founded as a Political Action Committee (PAC) in February 2003 to support the
nomination of Howard Dean as Democratic Candidate for President against George
W. Bush in the 2004 election. The organization was started in February 2003 by
Michael Connery, Dan Droller, and Franz Hartl. They were quickly joined by
Kevin Collinsworth, Josh Koenig, Rachel Postman, Nica Lorber, Taya Mueller and
Molly Neitzel, who comprised the organizations founding staff during the 2004
election cycle. In October 2003, the organization re-formed as a 527 after
securing major funding from the Rappaports. After the 2004 elections, the
organization re-grouped as a 501c(4). In December 2007 the organization merged
with the League of Young Voters and closed its doors due to a lack of funding.
Partisan background. In contrast to many other culturally-centered youth
politics organizations (e.g. Rock the Vote), Music for America was founded and
continues to run on the principle that partisanship is an essential element to
true political participation, and that an organization which failed to assume
the responsibility of having a point of view would fail to make headway in
galvanizing a new generation of citizens. The organization was formed in the
aftermath of the February 15, 2003 anti-war protests, which proved ineffective
in deterring George W. Bush from launching an invasion of Iraq, a decision the
founders of Music for America opposed from the outset. With traditional
activism falling on deaf ears, the founders decided to try utilizing electoral
politics as a means for achieving their ends. Theory of change. Music for
America was the first in a series of organizations to offer a departure from
the traditional, celebrity-oriented model of youth engagement. The organization
made on the ground, peer-to-peer outreach, rather than PSAs, the centerpiece of
its organizing strategy. To accomplish this, the organization partnered with
musicians and focused its efforts on small concerts attended by 100 - 1000
fans. At these events, volunteers from the local community (and the musician's
fan base) would set up a table within a venue. From that table they would
register voters and hand out information on current political issues.
Volunteers were coordinated online using the Drupal open source content
management system made popular that year through the campaign of Howard Dean.
Music for America partnered with over 300 artists at over 2,400 such events
during the 2004 election cycle, reaching over 2 million young voters
traditionally ignored by political campaigns. Quotes. Franz Hartl, Music For
America co-founder and an ex-Metallica roadie Kevin Collinsworth, National
Event Coordinator 2004 Election cycle. Music for America organized several
thousand individual concert events in the 2004 Presidential election cycle,
leading both to increased turnout among Millennials, and also to increased
partisan identification. According to exit polling, in swing states where Music
for America (and other organizations) were most active, voters under the age of
30 preferred Democratic candidate John Kerry to Republican incumbent George W.
Bush by a 3-to-2 margin.
