Muslim Public Affairs Council The Muslim Public Affairs Council (MPAC) is a
national American Muslim advocacy and public policy organization headquartered
in Los Angeles and with offices in Washington D.C. MPAC was founded in 1986.
MPAC has participated in a number of coalitions and networks, and worked with
Japanese-American organizations. History. MPAC was founded in 1986 as the
"Political Action Committee of the Islamic Center of Southern California". It
was later renamed in 1988 to the "Muslim Public Affairs Council." In its
history, it has condemned the death fatwa against Salman Rushdie and the
attacks on the World Trade Center, and denounced the Taliban and Osama bin
Laden. Statement by President Salam al-Marayati, regarding the September 11,
2001 terror attacks: “If we’re going to look at suspects, we should look to
the groups that benefit the most from these kinds of incidents, and I think we
should put the state of Israel on the suspect list because I think this diverts
attention from what’s happening in the Palestinian territories so that they
can go on with their aggression and occupation and apartheid policies.” Mahdi
Bray formerly was political director of MPAC. Envisioning Peace: Israeli-
Palestinian Conflict. Calling it the "most complicated and intractable (issue)
of our time" MPAC recommends a peaceful solution which will lead to coexistence
and mutual respect. "The Muslim Public Affairs Council believes that this
dialogue will lead to a strategy to end this conflict that has taken too many
lives and has destabilized an entire region of global significance." Their
position paper states:. Actions against terrorism. MPAC started "The National
Grassroots Campaign to Fight Terrorism" by providing guidelines to American
Muslim community leaders to ensure that Mosques are not used by potential
terrorists and to monitor activities inside Mosques. This program is instituted
in cooperation with Mosques across this great country to regulate what kind of
groups may assemble in a Mosque and inform the United States Department of
Homeland Security if any suspicious activity takes place. Large publications
have taken a note of MPAC's activities to prevent terrorism on American soil.
The Wall Street Journal praised American Muslims for being "part of the
solution". The Philadelphia Inquirer said to "credit Muslims who speak out"
against terrorism. Response to the 2006 transatlantic aircraft plot. On August
10, 2006 the London Metropolitan Police announced that it had arrested key
suspects in a terrorist plot to detonate bombs on a number of flights from the
UK to cities in the U.S. and that the plot had been disrupted as it was
"getting close to the execution phase", with a dry run planned within two days
of the arrests according to U.S. intelligence officials. High security measures
were put in place at all UK airports, including a banning of all non-essential
hand luggage. Security was also increased at many airports around the world,
with a large number of flights into the UK being cancelled. A few hours later
U.S. President George W. Bush said the plot was "a stark reminder that this
nation is at war with Islamic fascists who will use any means to destroy those
of us who love freedom, to hurt our nation." Both the MPAC and the Council on
American Islamic Relations criticized the use of the term 'Islamic fascism.'
Edina Lekovic, spokeswoman for the Muslim Public Affairs Council in Los
Angeles, said, "The problem with the phrase is it attaches the religion of
Islam to tyranny and fascism, rather than isolating the threat to a specific
group of individuals." Coordination. MPC is also a member of the American
Muslim Political Coordination Council (AMPCC), along with the American Muslim
Alliance (AMA), American Muslim Council (AMC), and Council on American-Islamic
Relations (CAIR). AMPCC's primary concern is to coordinate the member
organizations on activism and lobbying.
