Muslim Public Affairs Committee UK The Muslim Public Affairs Committee UK
(MPACUK) is a non-profit British Muslim organisation founded to address what it
perceived as the under-representation of Muslims in British politics. The
organisation is active primarily in electoral campaigns and media appearances.
Aims and policies. MPACUK encourages Muslims to participate in tactical voting
against MPs who support policies which it considers not to be in Muslims'
interest. This can extend both to national issues such as civil liberties,
Islamophobia and anti-terror legislation; and to foreign policy, including the
2003 invasion of Iraq, Israel-Palestine conflict and the 2006 Lebanon war. The
group describes its activities as guided by four overarching principles:
Reviving the fard (obligation) of Jihad, Anti-Zionism, institutional revival,
and accountability. Campaigns. Stop Islamophobia Week. In July 2011, MPACUK
launched the Stop Islamophobia Week campaign due to the rise in anti-muslim
hate crimes. This was a campaign aimed at raising awareness of Islamophobia and
encouraging Muslims to do something constructive in response. Particular focus
was given to the Srebrenica massacre which was commemorated by a vigil outside
the embassy of Bosnia and Herzegovina. In July 2012 with MPACUK continued Stop
Islamophobia Week. Involvement in Elections. 2011. In 2011 a campaign to
encourage Muslims in Britain to vote YES in the UK was launched in response to
the Alternative Vote referendum. 2010. MPACUK was involved in campaigning to
unseat 6 MPs in England. This included campaigning against Phil Woolas for
alleged anti-Muslim bias. The campaign resulted in Phil Woolas winning a
majority by 103 votes. However, after an eventual court-case resulted in
suspension as an MP and ban from holding public office for three years for
"knowingly making false statements about his Liberal Democrat opponent" Elwyn
Watkins, by alleging in his campaign literature that Watkins attempted to get
support from Muslim extremists who advocated violence against Woolas. MPACUK
was active in the Oldham campaign, and according to the BBC, "urged Muslim
voters to help unseat Phil Woolas, and targeted several other Labour MPs, who
MPAC judged to have pro-Israeli positions and who supported the war in Iraq."
Woolas stated "There was vehement anti-semitism going on in the area,
canvassing amongst the Asian population in the area saying: don't vote for the
Jew. As it happens, I'm not Jewish but the fact my son's Christian name is a
Jewish name was used against me." MPACUK denied responsibility for the rumours.
The same year MPACUK campaigned to remove Andrew Dismore from office, stating
he was someone "who backed the Iraq war and has a long record of Islamophobia",
and claimed responsibility for his defeat. 2005. Labour MP Lorna Fitzsimons
became the target of an MPACUK campaign when she stood for re-election at the
2005 General Election in the constituency of Rochdale, which has a significant
Muslim population. The All-Party Parliamentary Report noted with concern
MPACUK's campaign against Lorna Fitzsimons and that leaflets had been printed
by MPACUK, which claimed that Fitzsimons had done nothing to help the
Palestinians because she was a Jewish member of the Labour Friends of Israel.
Fitzsimons, who was a member of the Labour Friends of Israel, is not in fact
Jewish. MPACUK later apologised for the inaccurate description. MPACUK was
described by Jack Straw as "most egregious" after it actively campaigned for
Muslims in his Blackburn constituency to vote tactically against him in the
2005 general election. Allegations of antisemitism. In 2004, MPACUK was the
subject of a no-platform order by the National Union of Students, because of
its alleged publication of antisemitic conspiracy theories and inciteful racist
material, and further material on its website encouraging activists to break
the law. After Lorna Fitzsimons's defeat, in 2006, CST accused MPACUK of
antisemitism. An All Party Parliamentary Inquiry into Anti-semitism observed
that MPACUK was criticised by the CST for promoting the idea of a worldwide
Zionist conspiracy and using material taken from neo-Nazi, white nationalist,
and Holocaust denial websites. The report also noted CST's assertion that "use
of ‘Zionist’ as a replacement for ‘Jewish’ is common on the MPACUK
website" and that MPACUK has articulated antisemitic conspiracy theories
through the language of anti-Zionism. MPACUK denies being anti-semitic and
stated that "it is worth noting that the labels of anti-Semitism and holocaust
denial are being placed upon anyone that is critical of Israel by some
Zionists". Lobbying. 2006. MPACUK and others sent an open letter with
Birmingham Civic Society (2006) in protest to the renowned racist MP Enoch
Powell being honoured in a memorial plaque. A response was received from the
Chairman of the society, Dr Freddie Gick, who replied with “I would be
grateful if you could reassure members of the community that...as long as I
remain Chairman of this Society, no such suggestion (Enoch Powell) would ever
be given any serious consideration.” . 2005. MPACUK launched a campaign
against Oxfam for collaborating and trading with Starbucks who were accused of
supporting Israel. The campaign came to an end when Oxfam announced they would
be ceasing trade with Starbucks. MPACUK launched a campaign against Satellite
Graphics Ltd who printed the British National Party magazine (BNP), “The
Voice of Freedom”.
