Muslim Association of Britain The Muslim Association of Britain (MAB) is an
Islamic organisation in the United Kingdom established in 1997. Anti-war
activities. Along with Stop the War Coalition (StWC) and Campaign for Nuclear
Disarmament, it has co-sponsored various demonstrations against the 2003
invasion and occupation of Iraq. MAB first started working with the StWC in
2002 when they agreed to join together a demonstration they had planned to mark
the anniversary of the Second Palestinian Intifada with a demonstration StWC
had planned against the looming Iraq war at the opening of the Labour party.
The march took place under the dual slogans 'Don't attack Iraq' and 'Freedom
for Palestine'. According to Altikriti, MAB ‘spoke to Stop the War and we
said to them, we will join you; however we will not become part of your
coalition, we will be a separate and independent entity but we will work
together with you on a national basis as part of the anti-war movement’. This
reassured MAB that it would not ‘melt into that big coalition’ that was
known to be led by the Left. They would remain a distinct and autonomous bloc,
able to shape the agenda. Altikriti and others in the MAB leadership were
working to persuade members that collaboration with non-Muslim anti-war
activists was halal (religiously permissible) and that this was within the
remit of their organisation. Their argument was that, if gender-segregated
spaces and halal food could be provided at meetings, demonstrations and other
events, then Muslims could participate in the anti-war movements without being
assimilated. Moreover, they defined limits to joint action: making it clear
that, while they could overcome misgivings about sharing platforms with some
groups (such as socialists and atheists), they could never do so with others
(Zionists and Israelis in particular). In the end, the fatal blow to MAB’s
partnership with StW did not come from a fear that political or religious
identity would be diluted. Rather, some within MAB felt that the
organisation’s anti-war activities had pitted it too publicly and forcefully
against the British establishment, taking it away from what they considered its
primary purposes – religious and cultural. Political endorsements. It
encourages its members to vote certain ways in elections – it supported
Labour's Ken Livingstone for Mayor of London, Respect in London and the Green
Party of England and Wales in South East England. In 2004, its president Anas
al-Tikriti stood down to become a European election candidate for Respect in
the Yorkshire and the Humber region. He was not elected. Since Muslims
currently make up more than 10% of the local population in 40 political seats,
the Muslim Association of Britain believes Muslim voters can influence the
results in 40 seats. Political Views. Though British Muslims have increasingly
politicised their religious identities, there remain many different ways to be
a political Muslim. Some prefer to keep their religion private, others to work
primarily through other identities and/or organisations – approaching
politics as socialists, Asians or Bangladeshis, for instance, and/or as British
citizens, Welsh or Scottish nationals, Londoners or Liverpudlians. The MAB
expresses its deep concerns about the proposed shift in counter terrorism
policy as revealed by Vikram Dodd in the Guardian on Tuesday The Contest 2
proposals seem to herald a shift in the definition of extremists away from
those who are intent on breaking the law of this land to those who hold views
that clash with ideas of ‘shared British values’. We categorically denounce
any attempt to bully or to stigmatise the Muslim community in Britain or any
attempt at alienating British Muslims who have not breached the law of the
land". Said Ferjani – Head of Policy & PR Reaction to 2005 London bombings.
MAB condemned the 7 July 2005 London bombings and joined the StWC in holding a
vigil for the victims at the Peace Garden in Euston, London on Saturday 9 July
2005 and a further solidarity gathering at Russell Square, close to one of the
Underground stations targeted, on Sunday 17 July 2005. Other. In 2003 Louise
Ellman, MP for Liverpool Riverside, mentioned in Britain's Parliament the
relationship between Anwar Al-Awlaqi and the Muslim Association of Britain.
Also, in 2005 the MAB took control of Finsbury Park Mosque and expelled
followers of the extremist cleric Abu Hamza al-Masri who they accused of
"promoting hatred". The MAB opposes the US extradition request for Babar Ahmad,
a UK IT specialist who has been accused of setting up websites which urged
Muslims to "kill the Americans and their allies-civilians". Footnotes. MAB
Responds To Vile Attack, Islamic Human Rights Commission, 13 August 2004
