Māori protest movement The Māori protest movement is a broad indigenous
rights movement in New Zealand. While this movement has existed since Europeans
first colonised New Zealand, its modern form emerged in the early 1970s and has
focused on issues such as the Treaty of Waitangi, Māori land rights, the
Māori language and culture, and racism. It has generally been allied with the
left wing although it differs from the mainstream left in a number of ways.
Most members of the movement have been Māori but it has attracted some support
from Pākehā New Zealanders and internationally, particularly from other
indigenous peoples. Notable successes of the movement include establishment of
the Waitangi Tribunal, the return of some Māori land, and the Māori language
being made an official language of New Zealand. The movement is part of a
broader Māori Renaissance. Background. There is a long history of Māori
resistance to Pākehā (New Zealand European)and their culture.From 1805 to
1843 Maori tribes fought amongst themselves. From the 1840s to the 1870s
various Māori chief and later parts of iwi (tribes) fought against Pākehā
settlers and later soldiers, in the New Zealand Land Wars. They also used
petitions, court cases, deputations to the British monarch and New Zealand and
British governments, passive resistance and boycotts to achieve their goal of a
separate Maori political system . Some of this resistance was based around
religious cults such as Pai Marire and Ringatu. Prophets such as Rua Kenana and
Te Whiti are sometimes seen as early Māori activists. The Māori King movement
was also an important focus of resistance, especially in the Taranaki and
Waikato regions. Some Māori also worked within Pākehā systems such as the
Parliament of New Zealand in order to resist land loss and cultural
imperialism. Ngata was one of the most important and influencial Maori MP's who
tried to combine the benefits of both cultures for Maori. He was forced to
resign when he became involved in one of the biggest cases of mismanagement and
maladministration which amounted to half a million pounds,ever seen in New
Zealand. From World War II, but especially from the 1950s, Māori moved from
rural areas to the cities in large numbers. Most Pākehā believed that New
Zealand had ideal race relations and although relations were good compared to
many other countries, the harmony existed mostly because the mostly urban
Pākehā and mostly rural Māori rarely came into contact. Māori urbanisation
brought the differences between the cultures and the economic gaps between
Māori and Pākehā into the open. In addition, many Māori had difficulty
coping with modern urban society away from the stabilizing influence of their
whanau and hapu. Some turned to alcohol or crime, and many felt lost and alone.
Several new groups, most prominently the Māori Women's Welfare League and the
New Zealand Māori Council emerged to help urban Māori and provide a unified
voice for Māori. These groups were conservative by later standards but did
criticise the government on numerous occasions. The first significant Māori
involvement in conventional protest came during controversy over the exclusion
of Māori players from the 1960 All Blacks rugby tour of South Africa. However
the protests tended to be organised by Pākehā. The Māori Affairs Amendment
Act. In the mid 1960s the National government proposed to make Maori land more
‘economic’ by encouraging its transfer to a Pākehā system of land
ownership. The Maori Affairs Amendment Act 1967, as it became, generally
allowed greater interference in Māori landholding, and was widely seen amongst
Maori as yet another Pākehā land grab. The plans were strongly opposed by
virtually every Maori group and organisation. Despite this, the Act was passed
with only minor modifications. The Act is generally seen as the catalyst for
the Maori protest movement, and the evidence certainly points to this. However
the movement can also be seen as part of a wider civil rights movement which
emerged across the world in the 1960s. Sporting contact with South Africa. New
Zealand has a long history of sporting contact with South Africa, especially
through rugby union. Until the 1970s this resulted in discrimination against
Māori players, since the apartheid political system in South Africa for most
of the twentieth century did not allow people of different races to play sport
together, and therefore South African officials requested that Māori players
not be included in sides which toured their country. Despite some of New
Zealand's best players being Māori, this was agreed to, and Māori were
excluded from tours of South Africa. Some Māori always objected to this, but
it did not become a major issue until 1960, when there were several public
protests at Māori exclusion from that year's tour. The protest group Halt All
Racist Tours was formed in 1969. Although this was an issue in which Māori
were central, and Māori were involved in the protests, the anti-tour movement
was dominated by Pākehā. In 1973 a proposed Springbok (South African rugby
team) tour of New Zealand was cancelled. In 1976 the South African government
relented and allowed a mixed-race All Black team to tour South Africa. However
by this time international opinion had turned against any sporting contact with
South Africa, and New Zealand faced significant international pressure to cut
ties. Despite this, in 1981 the Springboks toured New Zealand, sparking mass
protests and civil disobedience. Although Pākehā continued to dominate the
movement, Māori were prominent within it, and in Auckland formed the patu
squad in order to remain autonomous within the wider movement. During and after
the Tour, many Māori protesters questioned Pākehā protesters' commitment to
racial equality, accusing them of focussing on racism in other countries while
ignoring it within New Zealand. The majority of Pākehā protesters were not
heavily involved in protest after the Tour ended, but a significant minority,
including several anti-Tour groups, turned their attention to New Zealand race
issues, particularly Pākehā prejudice and the Treaty of Waitangi. Waitangi
Day protests. The first act of the Māori protest movement was arguably the
boycott of Waitangi Day by a handful of Māori elders in 1968 in protest over
the Māori Affairs Amendment Act. A small protest was also held at parliament,
and was received by Labour MP Whetu Tirikatene-Sullivan. Although both were
reported in the newspapers they made little impact. In 1971 the ceremonies were
disrupted by the protest group Ngā Tamatoa (The Young Warriors) who chanted
and performed haka during speeches, and attempted to destroy the flag. Protest
has been a feature of Waitangi Day ever since. Māori language and culture
activism. One of the early goals of the Māori protest movement was the
promotion of Māori language (te reo Māori) and culture. Both of these had
been generally ignored by the education system and New Zealand society in
general, and schoolchildren were actively discouraged from speaking Māori in
school (the 1867 Native Schools Act decreed that English should be the only
language used in the education of Māori children- this policy was later
rigorously enforced ).This movement was led by Maori Mps who saw the advantages
of Maori becoming fluent in a dominant world language. Until Māori became
largely urbanised after World War II, this did not seriously damage the
language since most Māori spoke it in their rural communities. Urbanisation
produced a generation of Māori who mostly grew up in non-Māori environments
and were therefore less exposed to the language. In addition, many parents felt
that it was much more important for their children to be fluent in English and
made no attempts to pass on the language. As a result, many leaders of Māori
protest were not fluent in Māori and felt that this was a major cultural loss.
In the face of official indifference and sometimes hostility, Nga Tamatoa and
other groups initiated a number of schemes for the promotion of the language.
These included Māori Language Day, which later became Māori Language Week; a
programme which trained fluent speakers as teachers; and kohanga reo: Māori
language pre-schools and later Maori kura or separate immersion schools at
primary and secondary level. Later there were campaigns for a Māori share of
the airwaves. These eventually resulted in the iwi radio stations and a Māori
Television channel, all of which actively promote the language. In 1987 Te Reo
was made an official language of New Zealand, with the passing of the Māori
Language Act. Activists also campaigned to change the names of landmarks such
as mountains back to their original Māori names, and to end the
mispronunciation of Māori words, especially by newsreaders and other
broadcasters.Many Māori cultural forms, such as carving, weaving and
performing arts such as haka had gone into decline in the nineteenth century.
From the early twentieth century Apirana Ngata and others had made efforts to
revive them, for example setting up inter-tribal kapa haka competitions and
getting state funding for meeting houses. Māori activists continued this
tradition, but their primary focus was on stopping the abuse of Māori cultural
forms. The best known example of this was the 'haka party' incident. A group of
University of Auckland engineering students had for many years performed a
parody haka and paddled an imaginary waka around central Auckland as a capping
stunt. Repeated requests to end the performance were ignored and eventually a
group of Māori assaulted the students. Although the activists' actions were
widely condemned by Pākehā, they were defended in court by Māori elders and
were convicted but the students' stunt was not performed again. Most recent
Māori protest in this sphere has been directed against non-New Zealand groups
and businesses who use the Māori language and cultural forms - sometimes
copyrighting them - without permission or understanding. Since it is
internationally known, the haka of the All Blacks is particularly vulnerable to
this treatment. The Treaty of Waitangi. The Treaty of Waitangi has always been
a major focus of Māori protest. It is often used to argue for particular aims,
such as return of unjustly taken land, and the promotion of the Māori
language. The Treaty to the mid 20th century. The Treaty of Waitangi was an
agreement, made in 1840, between the British Crown and various Māori chiefs.
Although major differences between the Māori and English language versions of
the Treaty make it difficult to ascertain exactly what was promised to who, the
Treaty essentially gave the British the right to establish a governor in New
Zealand, stated the rights of the chiefs to ownership of their lands and other
properties, and gave Māori the rights of British citizens. Although the Treaty
is generally seen as marking the beginning of the New Zealand nation, it was
largely ignored for more than a century after its signing, and various legal
judgements ruled it irrelevant to New Zealand law and government. Despite this,
Māori frequently used it to argue that their rights were being denied.
Campaign for ratification. From about the mid nineteenth century, Māori
campaigned for proper recognition of the Treaty, generally asking that it be
ratified or otherwise made a part of New Zealand law. In the 1960s and the
1970s, Māori activists continued this campaign, sometimes making it a focus of
their Waitangi Day protests. In 1975 the Treaty was given some recognition with
the Treaty of Waitangi Act. This established the Waitangi Tribunal, which was
given the task to investigating contemporary breaches of the Treaty.However
since it was not able to investigate historical breaches, was underfunded, and
generally unsympathetic to claimants, most Māori were disappointed by the
Tribunal. "The Treaty is a Fraud". Possibly as a result to the failure of the
Waitangi Tribunal to achieve much, many Māori activists in the early 1980s
stopped asking for the Treaty to be honoured and instead argued that it was a
fraudulent document. They argued that Māori had been tricked in 1840, that
either they had never agreed to sign away their sovereignty or that Pākehā
breaches of the Treaty had rendered it invalid. Since the Treaty was invalid,
it was argued, the New Zealand government had no right to sovereignty over the
country. This argument was broadly expressed in Donna Awatere's book "Māori
Sovereignty". Activism and the Tribunal. In 1985 the Treaty of Waitangi Act was
amended to allow the Tribunal to investigate historic breaches of the Treaty.
It was also given more funding and its membership increased. In addition, the
Treaty was mentioned in several pieces of legislation, and a number of court
cases increased its importance. As a result, most Māori activists began to
call once again for the Treaty to be honoured. Many protesters put their
energies into Treaty claims and the management of settlements, but many also
argued that the Tribunal was too underfunded and slow, and pointed out that
because its recommendations were not binding the government could (and did)
ignore it when it suited them. Some protesters continued to argue for Māori
sovereignty, arguing that by negotiating with the Tribunal Māori were only
perpetuating the illegal occupying government. Land. The longest-standing
Māori grievances generally involve land. In the century after 1840 Māori lost
possession of most of their land, although the amount lost varied significantly
between iwi. In some cases the land was purchased legitimately from willing
Māori sellers, but in many cases the transfer was legally and/or morally
dubious. The best known cause of Māori land loss is the confiscation in the
Waikato and Taranaki regions following the New Zealand Land Wars. Other causes
included owners selling land without fully understanding the implications of
the sale (especially in the early years of colonisation); groups selling land
which did not belong to them; Pākehā traders enticing land owners into debt
and then claiming the land as payment; the conducting of unrequested surveys
which were then charged to the owners, and the unpaid bills from this used to
justify taking the land; levying of unreasonable rates and confiscation
following non-payment; the taking of land for public works; and simple fraud.
Upon losing land, most iwi quickly embarked on campaigns to regain it but these
were largely unsuccessful. Some iwi received token payments from the government
but continued to agitate for the return of the land or, failing that, adequate
compensation. Bastion Point. Bastion Point in Auckland was originally part of a
large area of land owned by Ngati Whatua. Between 1840 and 1960 nearly all of
this was lost, leaving Ngati Whatua with only the Point. In the 1970s the third
National government proposed taking the land and developing it. Bastion Point
was subsequently occupied in a protest which lasted from January 1977 to May
1978. The protesters were removed by the army and police, but there continued
to be conflict over the land. When the Waitangi Tribunal was given the power to
investigate historical grievances, this the Orakei claim covering the Bastion
Point area was one of the first cases for investigation. The Tribunal found
that Ngati Whatua had been unjustly deprived of their ancestral land hence
Bastion Point was returned to their ownership with compensation paid to the
tribe by the Crown. Raglan Golf Course. During the Second World War, land in
the Raglan area was taken from its Māori owners for use as an airstrip.
Following the end of the war, the land was not returned but instead leased to
the Raglan Golf Club, who turned it into a golf course. This was particularly
painful for the original owners as it contained burial grounds, one of which
was turned into a bunker. A group of protesters led by Eva Rickard and assisted
by Angeline Greensill occupied the land and also used legal means to have the
land returned, a goal which was eventually achieved. 1975 Land March. In 1975 a
large group (around 5000) of Māori and other New Zealanders, led by then 79-
year-old Whina Cooper, walked the length of the North Island to Wellington to
protest against Māori land loss. Although the government at the time, the
third Labour government, had done more to address Māori grievances than nearly
any prior government, protesters felt that much more needed to be done.
Following the march, the protesters were divided over what to do next. Some,
including Tame Iti, remained in Wellington to occupy parliament grounds. A 1975
documentary from director Geoff Steven includes interviews with many of those
on the march: Eva Rickard, Tama Poata and Whina Cooper. Resurgence of protest
on land and Treaty issues in the 1990s. A series of protests in the mid-1990s
marked a new phase of activism on land and Treaty issues with action focussed
not only on the Government but also Maori conservatives who were seen as being
complicit with the Government agenda. Symbolic acts included attacking
Victorian statuary, the America's Cup and the lone pine on One Tree Hill and
removing a Colin McCahon painting (subsequently returned) from the Lake
Waikaremoana Visitor Centre. Rising protests at the Waitangi Day celebrations
led the government to move the official observance to Government House in
Wellington. Many protests were generated in response to the government's
proposal to limit the monetary value of Treaty settlements to one billion
dollars over 10 years, the so-called fiscal envelope. A series of hui
(meetings) graphically illustrated the breadth and depth of Maori rejection of
such a limitation in advance of the extent of claims being fully known. As a
result, much of the policy package, especially the fiscal cap, was dropped.
These protests included occupations of Whanganui's Moutoa Gardens and the
Takahue school in Northland (leading to its destruction by fire). Fiscal
Envelope. The government unveils the fiscal envelope — its answer to settling
Treaty of Waitangi grievances limiting the total amount that will be spent to
one billion dollars. While early Tribunal recommendations mainly concerned a
contemporary issue that could be revised or rectified by the government at the
time, historical settlements raised more complex issues. The Office of Treaty
Settlements was established in the Ministry of Justice to develop government
policy on historical claims. In 1995, the government developed the "Crown
Proposals for the Settlement of Treaty of Waitangi Claims" to attempt to
address the issues. A key element of the proposals was the creation of a
"fiscal envelope" of $1 billion for the settlement of all historical claims, an
effective limit on what the Crown would pay out in settlements. The Crown held
a series of consultation hui around the country, at which Māori vehemently
rejected such a limitation in advance of the extent of claims being fully
known. The concept of the fiscal envelope was subsequently dropped after the
1996 general election. Opposition to the policy was coordinated by Te Kawau
Maro an Auckland group who organised protests at the Government consultation
Hui. Rising protests to the Fiscal Envelope at the Waitangi Day celebrations
led the government to move the official observance to Government House in
Wellington. Despite universal rejection of the 'Fiscal Envelope', Waikato-
Tainui negotiators, accepted the Government Deal which became known as the
Waikato Tainui Raupatu Settlement. Notable opposition to this deal was led by
Maori leader Eva Rickard. Pākaitore. For 79 days in 1995, people of the
Whanganui tribes occupied historic Pākaitore (Moutoa Gardens), beside the
river and within the city of Whanganui. This protest was resolved peaceably,
and a tripartite agreement with government and local government has since been
signed. At the heart of all this is the Whanganui tribes’ claim to the river,
which is still seen as both an ancestor and a source of material and spiritual
sustenance. "We were forced to leave, and it shouldn't be lost on anybody that
we upheld our dignity," protest leader Ken Mair told a press conference in
Whanganui 18 May 1995 following the end of the occupation." In no way were we
going to allow the state the opportunity to put the handcuffs on us and lock us
away." The police were reported to have up to 1,000 reinforcements ready to
evict the land occupants. Whanganuí Kaitoke prison had been gazetted as a
"police jail" to enable its use as holding cells. The police eviction
preparations were code-named "Operation Exodus". A week earlier, on 10 May, up
to 70 police in riot gear had raided the land occupation in the middle of the
night, claiming the protest had become a haven for "criminals and stolen
property" and "drug users." Ten people were arrested on minor charges including
"breach of the peace" and "assault." Throughout the occupation there has been a
strict policy of no drugs or alcohol on the site. Protest leaders denounced the
raid as a dress rehearsal for their forced eviction and an attempt to provoke,
intimidate, and discredit the land occupants. Throughout the 79-day occupation,
the land protesters faced almost nightly harassment and racist abuse by the
police. The decision to end the Maori occupation of Moutoa Gardens was debated
by participants at a three-hour meeting 17 May 1995. At 3:45 the next morning
the occupants gathered and began dismantling tents and buildings and the
surrounding fence. Bonfires burned across the site. At 4:50 a.m., the same time
they had entered the gardens 79 days earlier, the protesters began their march
to a meeting place several miles away. Over the next few days, a team continued
to dismantle the meeting house and other buildings that had been erected during
the occupation. "Every step of the way has been worthwhile as far as we are
concerned," Niko Tangaroa told the 18 May press conference in Wanganui.
"Pakaitore is our land. It will remain our land, and we will continue to assert
that right irrespective of the courts." The protest leaders vowed to continue
their fight, including through further land occupations. "As long as the Crown
buries its head in the sand and pretends that issues of sovereignty and our
land grievances are going to go away- we are going to stand up and fight for
what is rightfully ours," Ken Mair declared. Takahue. The Whanganui occupation
of Pakaitore inspired a group of Maori from Takahue a small Northland
settlement to occupy the local schoolhouse. The several dozen protesters who
have occupied the school since then are demanded that title to the land on
which the school stands be returned to them. The they claimed were part of
purchased by the government in 1875, in a transaction the protesters,
descendants of the original owners, regard as invalid. The school has been
closed since the mid 1980s and used as an army training camp and for community
activities since then. Bill Perry, a spokesperson for the protesters, explained
to reporters who visited the occupation 22 April in 1995 that the land they are
claiming has been set aside in a government controlled Landbank together with
other property in the region. This Landbank allegedly protects lands currently
subject to claims under the Waitangi Tribunal from sale pending settlement of
the claims. The occupation ended with mass arrests and the burning of the
school. Huntly. Another occupation inspired by Pakaitore began on 26 April 1995
in Huntly a coal mining town south of Auckland. The block of land sits atop a
hill overlooking the town, in full view of the mine entrance with its coal
conveyor leading to a power station. Protesters told reporters who visited the
occupation 29 April that the land is part of confiscated by the government 132
years ago from the Tainui tribe. It is now owned by Solid Energy, previously
Coalcorp, a state-owned enterprise. Those occupying the land are demanding its
return to Ngati Whawhakia, the local Maori sub-tribe. The claim includes coal
and mineral rights. Robert Tukiri, chairman of Ngati Whawhakia Trust and
spokesperson for the occupation said, "We have got our backs to the wall. There
is a housing shortage. We need to have houses." Tukiri opposed a NZ$170 million
(NZ$1=US$0.67) deal between the government and the Tainui Maori Trust Board due
to be signed 22 May as final settlement for the government's land seizures last
century. The agreement will turn over of state-owned land to the trust board
and NZ$65 million for further purchases of private land. "The Tainui Maori
Trust Board stands to become the biggest landlord around, while 80 percent of
our tribe rents their homes," Tukiri commented. Foreshore and Seabed. In 2003
the Court of Appeal ruled that Māori could seek customary title to areas of
the New Zealand foreshore and seabed, overturning assumptions that such land
automatically belonged to the Crown. The ruling alarmed many Pākehā, and the
Labour government proposed legislation removing the right to seek ownership of
the foreshore and seabed. This angered many Māori who saw it as confiscation
of land. Labour Party MP Tariana Turia was so incensed by the legislation that
she eventually left the party and formed the Māori Party. In May 2004 a hikoi
(march) from Northland to Wellington, modelled on the 1975 land march but in
vehicles, was held, attracting thousands of participants. Despite this, the
legislation was passed later that year. Te Mana Motuhake o Tuhoe. Te Mana
Motuhake o Tuhoe is a group which includes popular Tuhoe leader Tame Iti. The
group has held numerous campaigns highlighting the rights of the Tuhoe people.
The ideology of the group is based on self-government as a base principle of
democracy and that Tuhoe has the democratic right to self-government. Tuhoe
were not signatories of the Treaty of Waitangi, and have always maintained a
right to uphold uniquely Tuhoe values, culture, language and identity within
Tuhoe homelands. Te Urupatu. On 16 January 2005 during a powhiri (or greeting
ceremony) which formed part of a Waitangi Tribunal hearing, Tāme Iti fired a
shotgun into a New Zealand flag in close proximity to a large number of people,
which he explained was an attempt to recreate the 1860s East Cape War: "We
wanted them to feel the heat and smoke, and Tūhoe outrage and disgust at the
way we have been treated for 200 years". The incident was filmed by television
crews but initially ignored by police. The matter was however raised in
parliament, one opposition MP asking "why Tāme Iti can brandish a firearm and
gloat about how he got away with threatening judges on the Waitangi Tribunal,
without immediate arrest and prosecution". New Zealand Police subsequently
charged Iti with discharging a firearm in a public place. His trial occurred in
June 2006. Tāme Iti elected to give evidence in Māori (his native language),
stating that he was following the Tūhoe custom of making noise with totara
poles. Tūhoe Rangatira stated Iti had been disciplined by the tribe and
protocol clarified to say discharge of a weapon in anger was always
inappropriate (but stated that it was appropriate when honouring dead warriors,
(in a manner culturally equivalent to the firing of a volley over a grave
within Western cultures)). Judge Chris McGuire said "It was designed to
intimidate unnecessarily and shock. It was a stunt, it was unlawful". Judge
McGuire convicted Iti on both charges and fined him. Iti attempted to sell the
flag he shot on the TradeMe auction site to pay the fine and his legal costs,
but the sale - a violation of proceeds of crime legislation - was withdrawn.
Iti lodged an appeal, in which his lawyer, Annette Sykes, argued that Crown Law
did not stretch to the ceremonial area in front of a Marae's Wharenui. On 4
April 2007, the Court of Appeal of New Zealand overturned his convictions for
unlawfully possessing a firearm. While recognising that events occurred in "a
unique setting", the court did not agree with Sykes' submission about Crown
law. However Justices Hammond, O'Regan and Wilson found that his prosecutors
failed to prove beyond reasonable doubt that Iti's actions caused "requisite
harm", under Section 51 of the Arms Act. The Court of Appeal described Iti's
protest as "a foolhardy enterprise" and warned him not to attempt anything
similar again. Anti-terror raids. On Monday, 15 October 2007, several police
raids were conducted across New Zealand in relation to the discovery of an
alleged paramilitary training camp deep in the Urewera mountain range near the
town of Ruatoki in the eastern Bay of Plenty. About 300 police, including
members of the Armed Offenders and anti-terror squads, were involved in the
raids in which four guns and 230 rounds of ammunition were seized and 17 people
arrested, all but one of them charged with firearms offences. According to
police, the raids were a culmination of more than a year of surveillance that
uncovered and monitored the training camps. Search warrants were executed under
the Summary Proceedings Act to search for evidence relating to potential
breaches of the Terrorism Suppression Act and the Arms Act. On 29 October,
police referred evidence gathered during the raids to the Solicitor-General to
consider whether charges should be laid under the Terrorism Suppression Act.
Authorisation for prosecutions under the Act is given by the Attorney-General
though he has delegated this responsibility to Solicitor-General David Collins.
On 8 November the Solicitor-General declined to press charges under the
Terrorism Suppression Act, because of inadequacies of the legislation.
According to Prime Minister Helen Clark, one of the reasons police tried to lay
charges under anti-terror legislation was because they could not use telephone
interception evidence in prosecutions under the Arms Act. Activists that were
arrested and raided are known supporters of Te Mana Motuhake o Tuhoe and came
from diverse networks of environmental, anarchist and Maori activism. Arrests
and following court cases. A number of people were arrested in the raids,
including Maori activist Tame Iti, his nephews Rawiri Iti and Maraki Teepa,
Maori anarchist Emily Bailey from Parihaka along with her twin brothers Ira and
Rongomai, Rangi Kemara of Ngāti Maniapoto, Vietnam war veterans Tuhoe Francis
Lambert and Moana Hemi Winitana also of Ngai Tuhoe, Radical youth anarchist
Omar Hamed. Others included Marama Mayrick, who faces five firearms charges;
Other defendants include Trudi Paraha, Phillip Purewa, Valerie Morse, Urs Peter
Signer and Tekaumarua Wharepouri Of the people arrested, at least 16 are facing
firearms charges. Police also attempted to lay charges against 12 people under
the Terrorism Suppression act but the Solicitor General declined to prosecute
for charges under the act. All charges against Rongomai Bailey were dropped in
October 2008 Campaign to fly the Tino Rangatiratanga Flag. The official
recognition of the Tino Rangatiratanga Flag was a campaign of indigenous rights
advocacy group Te Ata Tino Toa. The group applied for the Tino Rangatiratanga
Flag to fly on the Auckland Harbour Bridge on Waitangi Day. After considerable
debate in the public arena the group adopted a diversity of tactics to raise
awareness around the issues including lobbying Transit and Parliament,
submissions to the Human Rights Commission and holding an annual 'Fly the Flag'
competition, to more direct protest actions including bungee jumping off the
Harbour Bridge, traffic jamming the Harbour Bridge, and flying the largest Tino
Rangatiratanga flag ever made over the Harbour Bridge, Key organisers of the
campaign included Tia Taurere, Gareth Seymour and Teanau Tuiono. Sanctioned
uses of the Tino Rangatiratanga Flag. On 14 December 2009 Prime Minister John
Key and Māori Affairs Minister Pita Sharples announced that the Maori Tino
Rangatiratanga flag has been chosen to fly from the Auckland Harbour Bridge and
other official buildings (such as Premier House) on Waitangi Day. The
announcement followed a Māori Party led promotion and series of hikoi on which
Māori flag should fly from the bridge and 1,200 submissions, with 80 per cent
of participants in favour of Tino Rangatiratanga flag as the preferred Māori
flag. Although Ngai Tahu reject the flag saying the "flag has been nothing but
trouble". Key said the Māori flag would not replace the New Zealand flag but
would fly alongside it to recognise the partnership the Crown and Māori
entered into when signing the Treaty of Waitangi. "No changes are being made to
the status of the New Zealand flag," Mr Key said. Sharples said the Maori flag
was a simple way to recognise the status of Māori as tangata whenua. "However,
the New Zealand flag remains the symbol of our nation, and there is no
intention to change this, nor to diminish the status of our national flag." The
Ministry of Culture and Heritage published guidelines describing the
appropriate way to fly the Maori flag in relation to the New Zealand flag.
