NAIRU In monetarist economics, particularly the work of Milton Friedman, NAIRU
is an acronym for non-accelerating inflation rate of unemployment, and refers
to a level of unemployment below which inflation rises. It is widely used in
mainstream economics. It was also introduced as NIRU (non-inflationary rate of
unemployment) in ModiglianiPapademos (1975). Origins. An early form of NAIRU is
found in the work of Abba P. Lerner , who referred to it as "low full
employment" attained via the expansion of aggregate demand, in contrast with
the "high full employment" which adds incomes policies (wage and price
controls) to demand stimulation. The concept arose in the wake of the
popularity of the Phillips curve which summarized the observed negative
correlation between the rate of unemployment and the rate of inflation
(measured as annual nominal wage growth of employees) for a number of
industrialised countries with more or less mixed economies. This correlation
(previously seen for the U.S. by Irving Fisher) persuaded some analysts that it
was impossible for governments simultaneously to target both arbitrarily low
unemployment and price stability, and that, therefore, it was government's role
to seek a point on the trade-off between unemployment and inflation which
matched a domestic social consensus. During the 1970s in the United States and
several other industrialized countries, Phillips curve analysis became less
popular, because inflation rose at the same time that unemployment rose (see
stagflation). Worse as far as many economists were concerned, the Phillips
curve had little or no theoretical basis. Critics of this analysis (such as
Milton Friedman and Edmund Phelps) argued that the Phillips curve could not be
a fundamental characteristic of economic general equilibrium because it showed
a correlation between a real economic variable (the unemployment rate) and a
nominal economic variable (the inflation rate). Their counter-analysis was that
government macroeconomic policy (primarily monetary policy) was being driven by
a low unemployment target and that this caused expectations of inflation to
change, so that steadily accelerating inflation rather than reduced
unemployment was the result. The resulting prescription was that government
economic policy (or at least monetary policy) should not be influenced by any
level of unemployment below a critical level - the "natural rate" or NAIRU. The
natural rate hypothesis and the NAIRU. The idea behind the natural rate
hypothesis put forward by Friedman was that any given labor market structure
must involve a certain amount of unemployment, including frictional
unemployment associated with individuals changing jobs and possibly classical
unemployment arising from real wages being held above the market-clearing level
by minimum wage laws, trade unions or other labour market institutions.
Unexpected inflation might allow unemployment to fall below the natural rate by
temporarily depressing real wages, but this effect would dissipate once
expectations about inflation were corrected. Only with continuously
accelerating inflation could rates of unemployment below the natural rate be
maintained. The analysis supporting the natural rate hypothesis was
controversial, and empirical evidence suggested that the natural rate varied
over time in ways that could not easily be explained by changes in labor market
structures. As a result the "natural rate" terminology was largely supplanted
by that of the NAIRU, which referred to a rate of unemployment below which
inflation would accelerate, but did not imply a commitment to any particular
theoretical explanation, or a prediction that the rate would be stable over
time. Properties. If formula_1 is the NAIRU and formula_2 is the actual
unemployment rate, the theory says that: Okun's law can be stated as saying
that for every one percentage point by which the actual unemployment rate
exceeds the so-called "natural" rate of unemployment, real gross domestic
product is reduced by 2% to 3%. Criticism. The NAIRU analysis assumes that if
inflation increases, workers and employers can create contracts that take into
account expectations of higher inflation and agree on a level of wage inflation
that matches the expected level of price inflation to maintain constant real
wages. Therefore, the analysis requires inflation to accelerate to maintain low
unemployment. However, this argument implicitly assumes that workers and
employers cannot contract to incorporate accelerating inflation into wage
expectations, but there is no clear justification for assuming that
expectations or contract structures are limited in this way aside from the fact
that such wage arrangements are not commonly observed. The NAIRU analysis is
especially problematic if the Phillips curve displays hysteresis, that is, if
episodes of high unemployment raise the NAIRU. This could happen, for example,
if unemployed workers lose skills so that employers prefer to bid up of the
wages of existing workers when demand increases, rather than hiring the
unemployed. Others, such as Abba Lerner (1951, 1967) and Hyman Minsky (1965)
have argued that a similar effect can be achieved without the human costs of
unemployment via a job guarantee, where rather than being unemployed, those who
cannot find work in the private sector should be employed by the government.
This theory replaces the NAIRU with the NAIBER (non-accelerating-inflation-
buffer employment ratio). Relationship to other economic theories. Most
economists do not see the NAIRU theory as explaining all inflation. Instead, it
is possible to move along a "short run" Phillips Curve (even though the NAIRU
theory says that this curve shifts in the "longer run") so that unemployment
can rise or fall due to changes in inflation. Exogenous supply-shock inflation
is also possible, as with the "energy crises" of the 1970s or the credit crunch
of the early 21st century. The NAIRU theory was mainly intended as an argument
against active Keynesian demand management and in favor of free markets (at
least on the macroeconomic level). There is, for instance, no theoretical basis
for predicting the NAIRU. Monetarists instead support the generalized assertion
that the correct approach to unemployment is through microeconomic measures (to
lower the NAIRU whatever its exact level), rather than macroeconomic activity
based on an estimate of the NAIRU in relation to the actual level of
unemployment. Monetary policy, they maintain, should aim instead at stabilizing
the inflation rate.
