Nasserism Nasserism is a leftist Arab nationalist political ideology based on
the thinking of Gamal Abdel Nasser, one of the two principal leaders of the
Egyptian Revolution of 1952, and Egypt's second President. Spanning the
domestic and international spheres, it combines elements of Arab socialism,
republicanism, nationalism, anti-imperialism, and international non-alignment.
In the 1950s and 1960s, Nasserism was amongst the most potent political
ideologies in the Arab World. This was especially true following the Suez
Crisis of 1956 (known in Egypt as the "Tripartite Aggression"), the political
outcome of which was seen as a validation of Nasserism, and a tremendous defeat
for Western imperial powers. During the Cold War, its influence was also felt
in other parts of Africa, and the Developing World, particularly with regard to
anti-imperialism, and non-alignment. The scale of the Arab defeat in the Six
Day War of 1967 severely damaged the standing of Nasser, and the ideology
associated with him. Though it survived Nasser's death in 1970, certain
important tenets of Nasserism were revised or abandoned totally by his
successor as Egyptian President, Anwar El-Sadat, during what he termed the
'Corrective Revolution', and later his "Infitah" economic policies. Under the
three decade rule of Sadat's successor, Hosni Mubarak, most of the remaining
socialist infrastructure of Egypt was replaced by neo-liberal policies strongly
at odds with Nasserist principles. In the international arena, Mubarak departed
almost entirely from traditional Egyptian policy, becoming a steadfast ally of
both the U.S. government, and Israel, the latter still viewed by most Egyptians
with enmity and distrust, derived largely from the five wars that Egypt fought
against Israel between 1948 and 1973. During Nasser's lifetime, Nasserist
groups were encouraged and often supported financially by Egypt, to the extent
that many became seen as willing agents of the Egyptian government in its
efforts to spread revolutionary nationalism in the Arab World. In the 1970s, as
a younger generation of Arab revolutionaries came to the fore, Nasserism
outside of Egypt metamorphosed into other Arab nationalist, and pan-Arabist
movements, including component groups of the Lebanese National Movement during
the Lebanese Civil War. Nasserism continues to have significant resonance
throughout the Arab World to this day, and informs much of the public dialogue
on politics in Egypt, and the wider region. Prominent Nasserist Hamdeen Sabahi
competed in the first round of the 2012 Egyptian Presidential election, and
only narrowly avoided securing a position in the run-off against eventual
winner Mohammed Morsi. Ideology. Nasserism is an Arab nationalist and pan-Arab
ideology, combined with a vaguely defined socialism, often distinguished from
Eastern bloc or Western socialist thought by the label 'Arab socialism'. Though
opposed ideologically to Western capitalism, Arab socialism also developed as a
rejection of communism, which was seen as incompatible with Arab traditions,
and the religious underpinnings of Arab society. As a consequence, Nasserists
from the 1950s to the 1980s sought to prevent the rise of communism in the Arab
World, and advocated harsh penalties for individuals and organizations
identified as attempting to spread communism within the region. Though mindful
of the Islamic and Christian heritage of the Arab World, as with Ba'athism,
Nasserism is largely a secular ideology. Just as with other manifestations of
Arab nationalism, this led to direct conflict with Islamic orientated Arab
political movements from the 1950s onwards, particularly the Muslim
Brotherhood. Nasserists espouse an end to Western interference in Arab affairs,
Developing World solidarity, international non-alignment, modernisation, and
industrialisation. Nasser himself was opposed vehemently to Western
imperialism, sharing the commonly held Arab view that Zionism was an extension
of European colonialism on Arab soil. In world politics, Nasser's Egypt, along
with Yugoslavia under Josip Broz Tito, and India under Jawaharlal Nehru, was a
major proponent of the Non-Aligned Movement, which advocated developing
countries remaining outside of the influence of the superpower blocs. However,
notwithstanding this policy, and government suppression of communist
organisations within Egypt, Egypt's deteriorating relations with Western
powers, particularly following the Tripartite Aggression of 1956, made Egypt
heavily dependent on military and civil assistance from the Soviet Union. The
same was true for other revolutionary Arab governments which, although
repressive of communism within Arab borders, entered into strong longstanding
relationships with communist states outside of the Arab World. The Egyptian-
Soviet alliance continued well into the presidency of Nasser's successor as
president, Anwar El Sadat, especially with regard to the Arab-Israeli Conflict.
Today. Nasserism remains a political force throughout the Arab World, but in a
markedly different manner than in its heyday. Whereas in the 1950s and 60s
Nasserism existed as a revolutionary and dynamic movement with definite
political and social goals, by the 1980s it had become a much less pronounced
and distinct ideology. Today, many more Arabs are informed by Nasserism in a
general sense than actually espouse its specific ideals and objectives. In
terms of political organisations within Egypt itself, during the presidency of
former Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak, Nasserism's scope was confined
generally to writers, intellectuals, and minor opposition parties. Nasserist
movements were largely overshadowed by Islamic political organisations,
especially the Muslim Brotherhood. This was a part of an overall trend within
Egypt and the Arab World of Arab nationalism being overshadowed, and even
eclipsed, by political Islam. In Egypt, the Nasserist Party styles itself as
the successor to Nasser and his Arab Socialist Union, as does its offshoot, the
Karama Party of Hamdeen Sabahi. However, as with all opposition parties in
Egypt, their activities was severely limited by the Mubarak regime prior to the
Egyptian Revolution of 2011. Whilst Nasser governed Egypt through a strictly
authoritarian one-party system, with extreme limits on any form of political
dissent, present-day Nasserists stress their support for democracy, explaining
Nasser's autocratic excesses as necessary to implement his revolutionary
policies. Influence outside of the Arab World. Despite being a quintessentially
Arab ideology, Nasserism influenced, to a degree, left-wing movements in other
parts of the Developing World, particularly Sub-Saharan Africa, and Latin
America. Under Nasser, the Egyptian government gave support, both moral and
material, to Sub-Saharan liberation movements fighting European imperialism.
Nelson Mandela, the former South African President, and Leader of the African
National Congress, remarked that this support was crucial in helping sustain
the morale of such movements, including in South Africa. Similar sentiments
have been expressed by Fidel Castro, the former Cuban President, with regard to
the Cuban Revolution, and Cuba's later adversities with the U.S. Government.
Both men stated that Egypt's resistance under Nasser against the joint British,
French, and Israeli invasion of Egypt in 1956 proved to be inspirational for
their own movements. In the present day, Hugo Chavez, President of Venezuela,
and leader of the self-styled 'Bolivarian Revolution', has cited Nasserism as a
direct influence on his own political thinking, stating: "Someone talked to me
about his pessimism regarding the future of Arab nationalism. I told him that I
was optimistic, because the ideas of Nasser are still alive. Nasser was one of
the greatest people of Arab history. To say the least, I am a Nasserist, ever
since I was a young soldier." Left-wing British politician George Galloway has
referred to Gamal Abdel Nasser as "one of the greatest men of the 20th
Century", and has called repeatedly for Arab governments to embrace the tenets
of Nasserism in the 21st Century.
