National Association of Railroad Passengers The National Association of
Railroad Passengers (NARP) "is the largest national membership advocacy
organization for train and rail transit passengers" according to the
association's website. Early history. The organization was originally founded
by Anthony Haswell on May 18, 1967 to lobby for the continuation of passenger
trains in the United States. Its lobbying efforts were hampered somewhat by
Democratic Party political opposition to any sort of subsidies to the privately
owned railroads, and Republican Party political opposition to nationalization
of the railroad industry. The proponents were aided by the fact that few in the
federal government wanted to be held responsible for the seemingly inevitable
extinction of the passenger train, which most regarded as tantamount to
political suicide. Activities. NARP's small paid staff in Washington, D.C.,
spends most of its time educating members of Congress and their staffs about
the value of passenger rail. Each month, NARP publishes a monthly newsletter
detailing news in the passenger rail world. It often includes stories about
related legislation in Congress, Traveler's Advisories, and Travel Tips, with a
particular focus on Amtrak. Paid circulation, corresponding to membership as of
December 2007, was about 23,500. NARP also conducts interviews with media on
passenger rail related issues, and encourages its members to lobby their
legislators for funding for Amtrak and other improvements to the rail
infrastructure. The organization's website includes action alerts and news
releases. Travel discounts are a member benefit. Organization. NARP is divided
into twelve membership regions for the purposes of electing members to the
board of directors. The various regions and their elected representatives
usually meet annually. The regions are grouped into four districts, each of
which elects a vice-president. In addition to the above, the members elect a
president, a secretary, and a treasurer. In addition to the elected leadership,
there is a small paid staff in Washington, D.C., that includes an executive
director, an assistant, a director of finance and administration, and an office
manager. As of May 2009, the president was Ross B. Capon and the chairman was
George Chilson.
