National League of Cities The National League of Cities (NLC) is an American
advocacy organization representing 19,000 cities, towns, and villages, and
encompassing 49 state municipal leagues. NLC provides training to municipal
officials, holds conferences, lobbies and provides assistance to cities in
educational issues. NLC is made up of six Centers: Research and Innovation;
Federal Relations; Public Affairs and Member Relations; Enterprise Programs;
Conferences, Education and Training; and the Institute for Youth, Education and
Families. History. The NLC was founded in 1926 when 10 state municipal leagues
banded as the American Municipal Association. At this time, 37 state leagues
existed, although only 21 were considered active. Over time, the organization's
membership expanded to include individual cities of all sizes. The current
president of the NLC is Ted L. Ellis, mayor of Bluffton, Indiana. Programs.
Federal lobbying. NLC lobbies Congress on multiple issues, including city
infrastructure, particularly transportation; supporting local energy efficiency
and conservation efforts; strengthening and stabilizing the housing market;
helping build stable families; supporting community safety; and reforming the
country’s immigration system. NLC’s core lobbying principles include
avoiding unfunded mandates, preserving local authority and protecting the
intergovernmental partnership. Institute for Youth, Education and Families. The
Institute for Youth, Education, and Families is an entity within NLC which
assists municipal officials in providing services on behalf of the children,
youth and families in their communities. The YEF Institute offers resources in
five core program areas, including early childhood success, education and
afterschool, benefits for working families, youth participation in local
government and child and youth safety. Conferences. NLC hosts the annual
Congress of Cities & Exposition, at which municipal officials participate in
workshops, general sessions, networking opportunities and leadership training
seminars. NLC's other yearly conference is the Congressional City Conference,
held each March in Washington, D.C. Thousands of municipal officials discuss
NLC legislative priorities with Members of Congress and the Administration,
share promising practices, discuss policy and participate in leadership
training opportunities. Leadership Training Institute. The Leadership Training
Institute (LTI) is NLC’s primary learning and resource center for leadership
development and training for our nation’s local municipal leaders, initiated
in 1992. Programs provided by the Leadership Training Institute focus on
strengthening leadership skills, along with exploring, sharing and recognizing
innovative thinking and initiatives in community leadership. LTI is led by the
Leadership Training Council, made up of local elected officials and appointed
annually by the NLC President. "Nation's Cities Weekly". "Nation’s Cities
Weekly" is the official publication of the National League of Cities,
highlighting Congressional activities, NLC research and NLC-sponsored
conferences and workshops. NLC TV. NLC TV is NLC’s Internet-based TV web
channel about and for cities. NLC TV features monthly newscasts showcasing the
latest news about cities and the views of municipal officials. The channel also
features web casts of events and seminars relevant to municipal officials.
