National Agenda Document Project The National Agenda Document Project is a non-
partisan collaboration that allows citizens to participate in national planning
and provide more coherent input to their elected representatives. This
political experiment founded in 2006, has already emerged as a fascinating
example of postpartisan citizen collaboration, especially in light of the
striking political and social diversity of the participants. The National
Agenda document resides Google Docs, a collaborative online word processor.
Members of Congress are invited to review the document. Participants are
currently collaborating on the next edition with the intent to finalize and
publish it by December, 2007. The 2007 National Agenda Document was frozen and
published on January 3, 2007, and can be viewed at: National Agenda Document
Origin of The National Agenda Document Project. The 2005 book "America 2076",
asserted that network centric consumer technologies could be leveraged to
neutralize or resolve the key issues that undermine American Democracy and
frustrate the national discourse: corrupt lobbying, partisanship, polarization,
over-reliance on mass media among others. The book went on to propose the
development of an Internet application that would allow US registered voters to
use web browsers, cell phones and other devices to collaborate on the annual
creation of a "National Agenda" document. Instead of relying on K-Street (the
lobbying industry) to arbitrate and prioritize the input of 300 million
citizens, the arbitration process would be pushed down to the citizen level.
Input would be refined by teams of registered voters collaborating online to
create coherent input on key issues. The resulting documents (a National Agenda
document and a 100 Year Plan document) would be updated and published each year
before the opening of the next session of Congress. Elected representatives
will be motivated to follow the document because the Internet application would
also generate election year scorecards showing how well each elected official
complied with the citizen input provided in the National Agenda Document. The
National Agenda Document Project was founded in 2006 with the encouragement and
assistance of readers of America 2076. It is so far a small political
experiment, and does not implement the full system proposed in America 2076.
However the project represents an important proof of concept and first step
toward collaborative national planning, with potentially large implications for
the future of American politics. How to Participate. NOTE: The National Agenda
Document Project is not affiliated with Google in any way.
