National Action Party (Mexico) The National Action Party (, PAN), is one of the
three main political parties in Mexico. The party's political platform is
generally considered Right-wing in the Mexican political spectrum. Since 2000,
the President of Mexico has been a member of this party; both houses have PAN
pluralities, but the party does not have a majority in either house of the
Congress. In the 2006 legislative elections the party won 207 out of 500 seats
in the Chamber of Deputies and 52 out of 128 Senators. History. 20th century.
Mexican Roman Catholics, together with other conservatives (mainly Manuel
Gómez Morín), founded the PAN on September 17, 1939, after the "cristero"
insurgency was forced by the Mexican bishops to abandon the Cristero War. They
were looking for a peaceful way to bring about change in the country and to
achieve political representation, after the years of chaos and violence that
followed the Mexican Revolution. The turning point in the Cristero War was when
the Roman Catholic Church reached an agreement with the National Revolutionary
Party – the forerunner of the Institutional Revolutionary Party (PRI) that
dominated the country for most of the 20th century – under which it turned a
blind eye to the lack of democracy in the country and stopped supporting the
Catholic rebels, threatening its members with excommunication if they disobeyed
the government. In 1946, PAN members Miguel Ramírez Munguía (Tacámbaro,
Michoacán), Juan Gutiérrez Lascurain (Federal District), Antonio L.
Rodríguez (Nuevo León) and Aquiles Elorduy García (Aguascalientes) become
the first four federal deputies from the opposition in post-Revolutionary
Mexico. The following year Manuel Torres Serranía, from Quiroga, Michoacán,
becomes the party's first municipal president and Alfonso Hernández Sánchez
(from Zamora, Michoacán) its first state deputy. In 1962, Rosario Alcalá
(Aguascalientes) became the first female candidate for state governor and two
years later Florentina Villalobos Chaparro (Parral, Chihuahua), became the
first female federal deputy. In 1967 Norma Villarreal de Zambrano (San Pedro
Garza García, Nuevo León) became the first female municipal president. In
1988, the newly created Assembly of Representatives of the Federal District
had, for the first time, members of the PAN. In 1989, Ernesto Ruffo Appel (Baja
California) became the first opposition governor. Two years later, his future
successor in the Baja California government, Héctor Terán Terán, became the
first federal senator from the PAN. From 1992 to 2000, PAN candidates won the
elections for governorships in Guanajuato, Chihuahua, Jalisco, Querétaro,
Nuevo León, Aguascalientes, Yucatán and Morelos. 21st century. In the 2000
presidential elections, the candidate of the "Alianza por el cambio" ("Alliance
for change"), formed by the PAN and the Ecologist Green Party of Mexico (PVEM),
Vicente Fox Quesada won 42.5% of the popular vote and was elected president of
Mexico. In the senate elections of the same date, the Alliance won 46 out of
128 seats in the Senate. The Alliance broke off the following year and the PVEM
has since participated together with the PRI in most elections. In the 2003
mid-term elections, the party won 30.74% of the popular vote and 153 out of 500
seats in the Chamber of Deputies. In 2003, the PAN lost the governorship of
Nuevo León to the PRI and, the following year, failed to win back the state of
Chihuahua from the PRI. Coupled with a bitterly fought election in Colima that
was cancelled and later re-run, these developments were interpreted by some
political analysts to be a significant rejection of the PAN in advance of the
2006 presidential election. In contrast, 2004 did see the PAN win for the first
time in Tlaxcala, in a state that would not normally be considered PAN
territory, although its candidate was a member of the PRI until a few months
before the elections. It also managed to hold on to Querétaro (by a mere 3%
margin against the PRI) and Aguascalientes (although in 2007, it lost most of
the municipalities and the local Congress to the PRI). However, in 2005 the PAN
lost the elections for the state government of Mexico State and Nayarit to the
PRI. The former was considered one of the most important elections in the
country because of the number of voters involved, which is higher than the
elections for head of government of the Federal District. (See: 2003 Mexican
elections, 2004 Mexican elections and 2005 Mexican elections for results.) For
the presidential election in 2006, Felipe Calderón, a former party president,
was selected as the PAN's candidate, after beating his opponents Santiago Creel
(Secretary of the Interior during Fox's term) and Alberto Cárdenas (former
governor of Jalisco) in every voting round in the party primaries. On July 2,
2006, Felipe Calderón secured a plurality of the votes cast. Finishing less
than one percent behind was Andrés Manuel López Obrador, who challenged the
results of the election on possible grounds of electoral fraud. In addition to
the presidency, the PAN won 206 seats in the Chamber of Deputies and 52 in the
Senate, securing it the largest single party blocs in both houses. In 2007, the
PAN lost the governorship and the majority in the state congress of Yucatán to
the PRI as well as the municipal presidency of Aguascalientes, but kept both
the governorship and the majority in the state congress of Baja California. The
PRI also obtained more municipal presidents and local congresspeople in
Chihuahua, Durango, Zacatecas, Aguascalientes, Chiapas and Oaxaca. The PRD
obtained more posts than the PAN in Zacatecas, Chiapas and Oaxaca. Ideology.
The PAN has been linked to a conservative stance in Mexican politics since its
inception, but the party does not consider itself a fundamentally conservative
party. The party ideology, at least in principle, is that of "National Action"
which rejects a fundamental adherence to left- or right-wing politics or
policies, instead requiring the adoption of such policies as correspond to the
problems faced by the nation at any given moment. Thus both right and left wing
policies may be considered equally carefully in formulation of national policy.
(This is a similar theoretical basis as both Gaullism and Peronism, although
the similarity is weakened in the late authoritarian stance of Perón.) This
theory of National Action politics, rejecting a fundamental adherence to right
or left, is held within a strongly Christian context, and falls under the
umbrella of Christian Democracy. The party theory was largely developed by
early figures such as Gómez Morín and his associates. However, some observers
consider the PAN claim to National Action politics to be weakened by the
apparent persistent predominance of conservatism in PAN policy in practice.
Economic policies. The PAN currently occupies the right of Mexico's political
spectrum, advocating free enterprise, privatization, smaller government, and
liberal reforms as well as opposition to same-sex unions and abortion. Its
philosophy has similarities with Europe's Christian Democratic parties. The PAN
is a member of the Christian Democrat Organization of America (CDOA). The PAN
officially claims to be a non-confessional party in a country that is almost
90% Christian; however, while on the campaign trail in 2000, Vicente Fox
appeared holding a banner emblazoned with the revered icon of the Virgin of
Guadalupe – and was fined MXN $20,000 for mixing religion and politics. As
president, he continued to make public appearances attending mass as well as
proclaiming his faith (even kissing Pope John Paul II's ring upon his arrival
in Mexico in 2002) and ended his speeches with a "God bless you". In general,
PAN claims to support free enterprise and thus trade agreements. The opposition
criticizes the PAN's support of the North American Free Trade Agreement
(NAFTA). Some intellectuals denounce NAFTA as unfair trade, rather than "free
trade". Another controversial position is privatization of the energy sector.
Social policies. Abortion. Carlos Abascal, secretary of the interior in the
latter part of the Fox administration, called emergency contraception a "weapon
of mass destruction" in July 2005. It was during Fox's term, however, that the
"morning-after" pill was legalized, even though the Church had condemned the
use of these kind of pills, calling them "abortion pills". The PAN produced a
television spot against state-financed abortion, one that features popular
comedian Chespirito (who was also featured on a TV spot promoting Vicente Fox
in the 2000 presidential elections) and a second one that accuses the PRI and
PRD of wanting to kill the unborn. After the abortion bill, which made abortion
available, anonymous, and free or government-paid, was approved at the local
legislature, the PAN requested the Human Rights Commission of the Federal
District (CDHDF) to enact actions on the unconstitutionality of the measure,
the CDHDF rejected the request as it found no basis of unconstitutionality.
After unsuccessfully appealing to unconstitutionality, the PAN declared that it
may request the remotion of Emilio Álvarez Icaza, the president of the Human
Rights Commission of the Federal District, for his lack of moral quality. The
PAN, with the members of the Association of Catholic Lawyers, gathered
signatures and turned them in to the Federal District Electoral Institute
(IEDF) to void the abortion bill and force a referendum, which was also
rejected by the IEDF. In May 2007, the PAN started a campaign to encourage
rejections to perform abortion amongst doctors in the Federal District based on
conscience. Recognition of same-sex unions in Mexico. The PAN has opposed
measures to establish civil unions in Mexico City and Coahuila. On November 9,
2006, the government of the Federal District approved the first law
establishing civil unions in Mexico. The members of the PAN, and a member of
New Alliance were the only legislators that voted against it. The same year,
the local legislature of Coahuila approved the law of civil unions to which the
PAN also opposed. The PAN also lodged an unconstitutionality plea before the
Supreme Court of Justice of the State of Coahuila, alleging that the
constitution has vowed to protect the institution of the family. Guillermo
Bustamente Manilla, a member of the PAN and the president of the National
Parents Union (UNPF) is the father of Guillermo Bustamante Artasánchez, a law
director of the Secretary of the Interior, Carlos Abascal, during Fox's
presidency and is currently working in the Calderón administration against
abortion and same-sex civil unions. He called the latter as "anti-natural." He
has publicly asked voters not to cast votes for "abortionist" parties and those
who are in favor of homosexual relationships. Other issues. In some cases, PAN
mayors and governors have banned public employees from wearing miniskirts
(Guadalajara), clamped down on the use of profanity in public marketplaces
(Santiago de Querétaro), and the last and most polemical had to be with the
mayor of Guanajuato City, who tried to prevent couples from kissing on the
streets, although this law did not pass. Party Presidents. "1.- Resigned to run
for president "
