National Convention During the French Revolution, the National Convention or
Convention, in France, comprised the constitutional and legislative assembly
which sat from 20 September 1792 to 26 October 1795 (the 4th of Brumaire of the
year IV under the French Republican Calendar adopted by the Convention). It
held executive power in France during the first years of the French First
Republic. It was succeeded by the Directory, commencing 2 November 1795.
Prominent members of the original Convention included Maximilien Robespierre of
the Jacobin Club, Jean-Paul Marat (affiliated with the Jacobins, though never a
formal member), and Georges Danton of the Cordeliers. From 1793 to 1794,
executive power was "de facto" exercised by the Convention's Committee of
Public Safety. France, like the rest of Europe, has never again used an elected
constitutional convention to draft its constitutions, instead relying on the
executive or legislative branches to draft successive constitutions before
usually (but not always) submitting them to the electorate for approval in
referendums. Formation. During the insurrection of 10 August 1792, when the
populace of Paris stormed the Tuileries and demanded the abolition of the
monarchy, the Legislative Assembly decreed the provisional suspension of King
Louis XVI and the convocation of a "national convention" which should draw up a
constitution. At the same time it was decided that deputies to that convention
should be elected by all Frenchmen 25 years old or more, domiciled for a year
and living by the product of their labor. The National Convention was therefore
the first French assembly elected by universal male suffrage, without
distinctions of class. The age limit of the electors was further lowered to 21,
and that of eligibility was fixed at 25 years. The first session was held 20
September 1792. The following day, the French monarchy was abolished. A little
over a year later, 22 September would become the base date of the new French
Revolutionary Calendar, the beginning of the Year I of the French Republic.
Revolutionary government. The Convention lasted for three years and came after
the National Assembly and Legislative Assembly. The country was at war, and it
seemed best to postpone the implementation of the new constitution until peace
should be concluded. At the same time, as the Convention prolonged its powers,
it extended them considerably in order to meet the pressing dangers which
menaced the Republic. Although it was a legislative assembly, it took over the
executive power, entrusting it to its own members. This "confusion of powers",
contrary to the philosophical theories – those of Montesquieu especially –
which had inspired the Revolution at first, was one of the essential
characteristics of the Convention. The series of exceptional measures by which
that confusion of powers was created constitutes the "Revolutionary government"
in the strict sense of the word, a government which was principally in vigour
during the Reign of Terror. There is thus a distinction to be made, discussing
the Convention, between these temporary expedients and those measures intended
to be permanent. The first years of the Convention were the height of the
importance of the revolutionary political clubs such as the Jacobins and
Cordeliers; the informally constituted Girondists, although past the peak of
their power, were also an important factor. By the end of the Convention, most
prominent members of all of these groups were dead, the bulk of them victims
either of the Terror or of the Thermidorian Reaction that brought the Terror to
an end. Structure and membership. The Convention held its first session in a
hall of the Tuileries, then it sat in the Salle du Manège, and finally from 10
May 1793 in that of the Spectacles (or Machine), an immense hall in which the
deputies were but loosely scattered. This last hall had tribunes for the
public, who often influenced the debate by interruptions or by applause. The
members of the Convention came from all classes of society, but the most
numerous were lawyers. Seventy-five members had sat in the National Constituent
Assembly, 183 in the Legislative Assembly. The full number of deputies was 749,
not counting 33 from the colonies, of whom only some arrived in Paris. Besides
these, however, the newly formed "départements" annexed to France from 1792 to
1795 were allowed to send deputations. Many of the original deputies died or
were exiled during the Convention, but not all their places were filled by
"suppléants". Some members proscribed during the Terror returned after the
legislative coup of 9 Thermidor began the Thermidorian Reaction. Finally, many
members were sent away, either to the "départments" or to the armies, on
missions which lasted sometimes for a considerable length of time. For all
these reasons it is difficult to find out the number of deputies present at any
given date, for votes by roll-call were rare. During the Terror the number of
those voting averaged only 250. According to its own ruling, the Convention
elected its president every fortnight. He was eligible for re-election after
the lapse of a fortnight. Ordinarily the sessions were held in the morning, but
evening sessions also occurred frequently, often extending late into the night.
Sometimes in exceptional circumstances the Convention declared itself in
permanent session and sat for several days without interruption. For both
legislative and administrative the Convention used committees, with powers more
or less widely extended and regulated by successive laws. The most famous of
these committees included the Committee of Public Safety ("Comité de salut
public"), the Committee of General Security ("Comité de sûreté générale"),
and the Committee of Education ("Comité de l’instruction"). Legacy. The
article on the Convention in the 1911 Encyclopædia Britannica concludes, "The
work of the Convention was immense in all branches of public affairs. To
appreciate it without prejudice, one should recall that this assembly saved
France from a civil war and invasion, that it founded the system of public
education ("Museum", "École Polytechnique", "École Normale Supérieure",
"École des langues orientales", "Conservatoire"), created institutions of
capital importance, like that of the "Grand Livre de la Dette publique", and
definitely established the social and political gains of the Revolution." By a
decree of 4 February 1794 (16 pluviôse) it also ratified and expanded to the
whole French colonial empire the 1793 abolition of slavery on Saint-Domingue by
civil commissioners Sonthonax and Polverel, though this did not affect
Martinique or Guadeloupe and was abolished by the law of 20 May 1802.
