National Maternity Action Plan The National Maternity Action Plan (NMAP) is an
Australian document prepared by maternity consumer groups to alter the way
Governments fund and resource maternity services. History. The plan was drafted
in 2002 by Dr Barbara Vernon Dr Tracy Reibel, and Dr Sally Tracy as
representatives of the Maternity Coalition. It arose out of the recognition
that up to 2002, States and Territory maternity lobby groups had worked
independently for change, but until they were united in seeking the same
outcomes, the Federal and State Governments would not change funding methods.
The Plan was subsequently launched in Mount Gambier in South Australia and
Mareeba in Queensland. Content. The NMAP was prepared by a broad coalition of
consumer and midwifery representatives and organisations from across Australia.
The NMAP outlines the rationale behind the need for major reform of maternity
services, and, proposes a strategy for Federal and State/Territory governments
to enable comprehensive implementation of community midwifery services in both
urban and regional/rural Australia within the public health system. The NMAP
calls on both Federal and State/Territory governments to facilitate substantial
change to the way in which maternity services are provided, by making available
to all women the choice of having a community midwife provide continuous
maternity care through the publicly funded health system. Community midwifery
services in the main provide continuity of midwifery led care to healthy women
throughout the childbearing continuum, in collaboration with other
practitioners such as general practitioners and specialist obstetricians, where
indicated. Midwives are able to follow individual women across the interface
between community and acute health services and to provide care to each woman
from early in her pregnancy until the baby is 4-6 weeks of age. Universal
access to continuity of midwifery care will ensure savings in health dollars
and bring Australia into line with international best practice in addition to
meeting community demands for a range of readily accessible and appropriate
maternity services. Community midwifery is informed by international best
practice standards that acknowledge midwives as “the most appropriate and
cost effective type of health care provider to be assigned to the care of women
in normal pregnancy and birth, including the risk assessment and the
recognition of complications” (World Health Organisation, 1999, Care in
Normal Birth). In other western countries, particularly in the United Kingdom,
New Zealand and Canada, midwifery is promoted and funded both as a public
health and a primary health strategy, since community based care from midwives
can be responsive to local needs, particularly with regard to health
inequalities and social exclusion.
