National Bolshevism National Bolshevism is a political movement that combines
elements of nationalism and Bolshevism. It is often anti-capitalist in tone,
and sympathetic towards certain nationalist forms of communism and socialism.
Nevertheless, National Bolshevism is separate and distinct from National
Communism. Today, Russia is considered to be the center of National Bolshevism,
and almost all of the National Bolshevik parties and organizations in the world
are connected to it. Amongst the leading practitioners and theorists of
National Bolshevism are Aleksandr Dugin and Eduard Limonov, who leads the
unregistered and banned National Bolshevik Party (NBP) in Russia. Influenced
heavily by the idea of geopolitics, current Russian National Bolshevik
movements propose a merger between Russia, Europe and parts of Asia, in a union
to be known as Eurasia. The Franco-Belgian "Parti Communautaire National-
Européen" shares National Bolshevism's desire for the creation of a united
Europe, as well as many of the NBP's economic ideas. French political figure
Christian Bouchet has also been influenced by the idea. Influences and origins.
National Bolshevism is said to have roots in World War I Germany, where
nationalist writers such as Ernst Niekisch and Ernst Jünger were prepared to
tolerate the spread of communism as long as it took on the clothes of
nationalism and abandoned its internationalist mission. This tendency, although
minor, continued into the 1930s when it became associated with the National
Socialist Combat Movement, a dissident breakaway movement from the Nazi Party
which espoused left-wing economics and which was led by Hermann Ehrhardt, Otto
Strasser and Walther Stennes. Karl Radek wanted some of the right-wing
nationalists he had met in prison to unite with the Bolsheviks in the name of
National Bolshevism. He saw in National Bolshevism a way to "remove the
capitalist isolation" of the Soviet Union. Radek had been influenced by the
earlier ideas of Heinrich Laufenberg and Fritz Wolffheim, two Hamburg-based
dissident communists whose ideas about a Germany-Soviet Union alliance in a
nationalist war against the United States and the United Kingdom he had
previously criticised. Russia. Russian Civil War (1917–1921). In Russia, as
the civil war dragged on, a number of prominent "Whites" switched to the
Bolshevik side because they saw it as the only hope for restoring greatness to
Russia. Amongst these was Professor Nikolai Ustrialov, initially an anti-
communist, who came to believe that Bolshevism could be modified to serve
nationalistic purposes. His followers, the Smenovekhovtsi (named after a series
of articles he published in 1921) "Smena vekh" (Russian: volte-face), came to
regard themselves as National Bolsheviks, borrowing the term from Niekisch.
Similar ideas were expressed by the Evraziitsi party and the pro-Monarchist
Mladorossi. Joseph Stalin's idea of "socialism in one country" was interpreted
as a victory by the National Bolsheviks. Vladimir Lenin, who did not use the
term 'National Bolshevism', identified the Smenovekhovtsi as a tendency of the
old Constitutional Democratic Party who saw Russian communism as just an
evolution in the process of Russian aggrandisement. He further added that they
were a 'class enemy' and warned against communist believing them to be
allies.The movement attracted many party members, but was itself an
intellectual current and not a political party. Lunacharsky supported it. that
Zinoviev and Bukharin condemned it. Stalin condemned it in 1923. Co-option of
National Bolshevism. Ustrialov and others sympathetic to the Smenovekhovtsi
cause, such as Aleksey Nikolayevich Tolstoy and Ilya Ehrenburg, were eventually
able to return to the Soviet Union and, following the co-option of aspects of
nationalism by Stalin and his ideologue Andrei Zhdanov, enjoyed membership of
the intellectual elite under the designation "non-party" Bolsheviks. Similarly
B.D. Grekov's National Bolshevik school of historiography, a frequent target
under Lenin, was officially recognised and even promoted under Stalin, albeit
after accepting the main tenets of Stalinism. Indeed it has been argued that
National Bolshevism was the main impetus for the revival of patriotism as an
official part of state ideology in the 1930s. Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn vs Eduard
Limonov. The term "National Bolshevism" has sometimes been applied to Aleksandr
Solzhenitsyn, and his brand of anti-communism. However, Solzhenitsyn cannot be
labeled a National Bolshevik since he was thoroughly anti-Marxist and anti-
Stalinist, and he wished a revival of Russian culture that would see a greater
role for the Russian Orthodox Church, a withdrawal of Russia from its role
overseas, and a state of international isolationism. Solzhenitsyn and his
followers, known as "vozrozhdentsy" ("revivalists") differed from the National
Bolsheviks, who were not religious in tone (although not completely hostile to
religion), and who felt that involvement overseas was important for the
prestige and power of Russia. There was open hostility between Solzhenitsyn and
Eduard Limonov, the head of Russia's unregistered National Bolshevik Party.
Solzhenitsyn had described Limonov as "a little insect who writes pornography",
and Limonov described Solzhenitsyn as a traitor to his homeland who contributed
to the downfall of the USSR. In "The Oak and the Calf", Solzhenitsyn openly
attacked the notions that the Russians were 'the noblest in the world' and that
'tsarism and Bolshevism ... equally irreproachable', defining this as the core
of the National Bolshevism to which he was opposed. National Bolshevik Party.
The National Bolshevik Party was founded in 1992 as the National Bolshevik
Front, an amalgamation of six minor groups. The party has always been led by
Eduard Limonov. The group's early policies and actions show some alignment and
sympathy with radical nationalist groups, but a split occurred in the 2000s
which changed this to an extent. Opposed to the Vladimir Putin regime in
Russia, Limonov has somewhat liberalized the NBP, and joined forces with
leftist and liberal groups in Kasparov's United Civil Front to fight Putin.
Some National Bolsheviks are opposed to Limonov's attempts to find allies even
if they are pro-Western politicians; some have left the NBP and formed the
National Bolshevik Front.
