Nation state The nation state is a state that self-identifies as deriving its
political legitimacy from serving as a sovereign entity for a nation as a
sovereign territorial unit. The state is a political and geopolitical entity;
the nation is a cultural and/or ethnic entity. The term "nation state" implies
that the two geographically coincide. Nation state formation took place at
different times in different parts of the earth but has become the dominant
form of state organization. The concept and actuality of the nation state can
be compared and contrasted with that of the multinational state, city state,
empire, confederation, and other state forms with which it may overlap. The key
distinction from the other forms is the identification of a people with a
polity. History and origins. The origins and early history of nation states are
disputed. A major theoretical issue is: "Which came first, the nation or the
nation state?" For nationalists, the answer is that the nation existed first,
nationalist movements arose to present its legitimate demand for sovereignty,
and the nation state met that demand. Some "modernization theories" of
nationalism see the national identity largely as a product of government policy
to unify and modernize an already existing state. Most theories see the nation
state as a 19th-century European phenomenon, facilitated by developments such
as mass literacy and the early mass media. However, historians also note the
early emergence of a relatively unified state, and a sense of common identity,
in Portugal and the Dutch Republic. In France, Eric Hobsbawm argues the French
state preceded the formation of the French people. Hobsbawm considers that the
state made the French nation, not French nationalism, which emerged at the end
of the 19th century, the time of the Dreyfus Affair. At the time of the 1789
French Revolution, only half of the French people spoke some French, and 12-13%
spoke it "fairly", according to Hobsbawm. During the Italian unification, the
number of people speaking the Italian language was even lower. The French state
promoted the unification of various dialects and languages into the French
language. The introduction of conscription and the Third Republic's 1880s laws
on public instruction, facilitated the creation of a national identity, under
this theory. The theorist Benedict Anderson argues that nations are "imagined
communities" (the members cannot possibly know each other), and that the main
causes of nationalism and the creation of an imagined community are the
reduction of privileged access to particular script languages (such as Latin),
the movement to abolish the ideas of divine rule and monarchy, as well as the
emergence of the printing press under a system of capitalism (or, as Anderson
calls it, "print-capitalism"). The "state-driven" theories of the origin of
nation states tend to emphasize a few specific states, such as England and its
rival France. These states expanded from core regions, and developed a national
consciousness and sense of national identity ("Englishness" and "Frenchness").
Both assimilated peripheral nations (Wales, Cornubia, Brittany, Occitania);
these areas experienced a revival of interest in the national culture in the
19th century, leading to the creation of autonomist movements in the 20th
century. Some nation states, such as Germany or Italy, came into existence at
least partly as a result of political campaigns by nationalists, during the
19th century. In both cases, the territory was previously divided among other
states, some of them very small. The sense of common identity was at first a
cultural movement, such as in the "Völkisch movement" in German-speaking
states, which rapidly acquired a political significance. In these cases, the
nationalist sentiment and the nationalist movement clearly precede the
unification of the German and Italian nation states. Historians Hans Kohn, Liah
Greenfeld, Philip White and others have classified nations such as Germany or
Italy, where cultural unification preceded state unification, as "ethnic
nations" or "ethnic nationalities". Whereas 'state-driven' national
unification's, such as in France, England or China, are more likely to flourish
in multiethnic societies, producing a traditional national heritage of "civic
nations", or "territory-based nationalities". The idea of a nation state is
associated with the rise of the modern system of states, often called the
"Westphalian system" in reference to the Treaty of Westphalia (1648). The
balance of power, which characterizes that system, depends for its
effectiveness upon clearly defined, centrally controlled, independent entities,
whether empires or nation states, which recognize each others sovereignty and
territory. The Westphalian system did not create the nation state, but the
nation state meets the criteria for its component states (by assuming that
there is no disputed territory). The nation state received a philosophical
underpinning in the era of Romanticism, at first as the 'natural' expression of
the individual peoples (romantic nationalism: see Johann Gottlieb Fichte's
conception of the Volk, which would be later opposed by Ernest Renan). The
increasing emphasis during the 19th century on the ethnic and racial origins of
the nation, led to a redefinition of the nation state in these terms. Racism,
which in Boulainvilliers's theories was inherently antipatriotic and
antinationalist, joined itself with colonialist imperialism and "continental
imperialism", most notably in pan-Germanic and pan-Slavic movements. The
relation between racism and ethnic nationalism reached its height in the 20th
century fascism and Nazism. The specific combination of 'nation' ('people') and
'state' expressed in such terms as the "Völkische Staat" and implemented in
laws such as the 1935 Nuremberg laws made fascist states such as early Nazi
Germany qualitatively different from non-fascist nation states. Minorities were
not considered part of the people ("Volk"), and were consequently denied to
have an authentic or legitimate role in such a state. In Germany, neither Jews
nor the Roma were considered part of the people, and were specifically targeted
for persecution. German nationality law defined 'German' on the basis of German
ancestry, excluding "all" non-Germans from the people. In recent years, the
nation state's claim to absolute sovereignty within its borders has been much
criticized. A global political system based on international agreements and
supra-national blocs characterized the post-war era. Non-state actors, such as
international corporations and non-governmental organizations, are widely seen
as eroding the economic and political power of nation states, potentially
leading to their eventual disappearance. Before nation states. In Europe, in
the 18th century, the classic non-national states were the "multiethnic"
empires, (the Austro-Hungarian Empire, Kingdom of France the Russian Empire,
the Ottoman Empire, the British Empire) and smaller states at what would now be
called sub-national level. The multi-ethnic empire was a monarchy ruled by a
king, emperor or sultan. The population belonged to many ethnic groups, and
they spoke many languages. The empire was dominated by one ethnic group, and
their language was usually the language of public administration. The ruling
dynasty was usually, but not always, from that group. This type of state is not
specifically European: such empires existed on all continents, excepting
Australia and Antarctica. Some of the smaller European states were not so
ethnically diverse, but were also dynastic states, ruled by a royal house.
Their territory could expand by royal intermarriage or merge with another state
when the dynasty merged. In some parts of Europe, notably Germany, very small
territorial units existed. They were recognised by their neighbours as
independent, and had their own government and laws. Some were ruled by princes
or other hereditary rulers, some were governed by bishops or abbots. Because
they were so small, however, they had no separate language or culture: the
inhabitants shared the language of the surrounding region. In some cases these
states were simply overthrown by nationalist uprisings in the 19th century.
Liberal ideas of free trade played a role in German unification, which was
preceded by a customs union, the Zollverein. However, the Austro-Prussian War,
and the German alliances in the Franco-Prussian War, were decisive in the
unification. The Austro-Hungarian Empire and the Ottoman Empire broke up after
the First World War and the Russian Empire became the Soviet Union, after the
Russian Civil War. A few of the smaller states survived: the independent
principalities of Liechtenstein, Andorra, Monaco, and the republic of San
Marino. (Vatican City is different. Although there was a larger Papal State, it
was created in its present form by the 1929 Lateran treaties between Italy and
the Roman Catholic Church.) Characteristics of the nation state. "Legitimate
states that govern effectively and dynamic industrial economies are widely
regarded today as the defining characteristics of a modern nation-state."
Nation states have their own characteristics, differing from those of the pre-
national states. For a start, they have a different attitude to their
territory, compared to the dynastic monarchies: it is semisacred, and
nontransferable. No nation would swap territory with other states simply, for
example, because the king's daughter married. They have a different type of
border, in principle defined only by the area of settlement of the national
group, although many nation states also sought natural borders (rivers,
mountain ranges). The most noticeable characteristic is the degree to which
nation states use the state as an instrument of national unity, in economic,
social and cultural life. The nation state promoted economic unity, by
abolishing internal customs and tolls. In Germany, that process, the creation
of the Zollverein, preceded formal national unity. Nation states typically have
a policy to create and maintain a national transportation infrastructure,
facilitating trade and travel. In 19th-century Europe, the expansion of the
rail transport networks was at first largely a matter for private railway
companies, but gradually came under control of the national governments. The
French rail network, with its main lines radiating from Paris to all corners of
France, is often seen as a reflection of the centralised French nation state,
which directed its construction. Nation states continue to build, for instance,
specifically national motorway networks. Specifically, transnational
infrastructure programmes, such as the Trans-European Networks, are a recent
innovation. The nation states typically had a more centralised and uniform
public administration than its imperial predecessors: they were smaller, and
the population less diverse. (The internal diversity of the Ottoman Empire, for
instance, was very great.) After the 19th-century triumph of the nation state
in Europe, regional identity was subordinate to national identity, in regions
such as Alsace-Lorraine, Catalonia, Brittany, Sicily, Sardinia and Corsica. In
many cases, the regional administration was also subordinated to central
(national) government. This process was partially reversed from the 1970s
onward, with the introduction of various forms of regional autonomy, in
formerly centralised states such as France. The most obvious impact of the
nation state, as compared to its non-national predecessors, is the creation of
a uniform national culture, through state policy. The model of the nation state
implies that its population constitutes a nation, united by a common descent, a
common language and many forms of shared culture. When the implied unity was
absent, the nation state often tried to create it. It promoted a uniform
national language, through language policy. The creation of national systems of
compulsory primary education and a relatively uniform curriculum in secondary
schools, was the most effective instrument in the spread of the national
languages. The schools also taught the national history, often in a
propagandistic and mythologised version, and (especially during conflicts) some
nation states still teach this kind of history. Language and cultural policy
was sometimes negative, aimed at the suppression of non-national elements.
Language prohibitions were sometimes used to accelerate the adoption of
national languages and the decline of minority languages (see Germanisation).
In some cases, these policies triggered bitter conflicts and further ethnic
separatism. But where it worked, the cultural uniformity and homogeneity of the
population increased. Conversely, the cultural divergence at the border became
sharper: in theory, a uniform French identity extends from the Atlantic coast
to the Rhine, and on the other bank of the Rhine, a uniform German identity
begins. To enforce that model, both sides have divergent language policy and
educational systems, although the linguistic boundary is in fact well inside
France, and the Alsace region changed hands four times between 1870 and 1945.
The nation state in practice. In some cases, the geographic boundaries of an
ethnic population and a political state largely coincide. In these cases, there
is little immigration or emigration, few members of ethnic minorities, and few
members of the "home" ethnicity living in other countries. The notion of a
unifying "national identity" also extends to countries that host multiple
ethnic or language groups, such as India and China. For example, Switzerland is
constitutionally a confederation of cantons, and has four official languages,
but it has also a 'Swiss' national identity, a national history and a classic
national hero, Wilhelm Tell. Innumerable conflicts have arisen where political
boundaries did not correspond with ethnic or cultural boundaries. For one
example, the Hatay Province was transferred to Turkey from Syria after the
majority-Turkish population complained of mistreatment. The traditional
homeland of the Kurdish people extends between northern Iraq, southeastern
Turkey, and western Iran. Some of its inhabitants call for the creation of an
independent Kurdistan, citing mistreatment by the Turkish and Iraqi
governments. An armed conflict between the terrorist Kurdistan Workers Party
and the Turkish government over this issue has been ongoing since 1984. After
WWII in the Tito era, nationalism was appealed to for uniting South Slav
peoples. Later in the 20th century, after the break-up of the Soviet Union,
leaders appealed to ancient ethnic feuds or tensions that ignited conflict
between the Serbs, Croats and Slovenes, as well Bosnians, Montenegrins and
Macedonians, eventually breaking up the long collaboration of peoples and
ethnic cleansing was carried out in the Balkans, resulting in the destruction
of the formerly communist republic and produced the civil wars in Bosnia and
Herzegovina in 1992–95, resulted in mass population displacements and
segregation that radically altered what was once a highly diverse and
intermixed ethnic makeup of the region. These conflicts were largely about
creating a new political framework of states, each of which would be ethnically
and politically homogeneous. Serbians, Croatians and Bosnians insisted they
were ethnically distinct although many communities had a long history of
intermarriage. All could speak the common Serbo-Croatian Language. Presently
Slovenia (89% Slovene), Croatia (88% Croat) and Serbia (83% Serb) could be
classified as nation states per se, whereas Macedonia (66% Macedonian),
Montenegro (42% Montenegrin) and Bosnia and Herzegovina (47% Bosniak) are
multinational states. Belgium is a classic example of an artificial state that
is not a nation state. The state was formed by secession from the United
Kingdom of the Netherlands in 1830, whose neutrality and integrity was
protected by the Treaty of London 1839; thus it served as a buffer state
between the European powers France, Prussia (after 1871 the German Empire), the
United Kingdom and the Kingdom of the Netherlands until World War I. Belgium is
divided between the Flemings in the north and the French-speaking or the
German-speaking population in the south. The Flemish population in the north
speaks Dutch, the Walloon population in the south speaks French and/or German.
The Brussels population speaks French and/or Flemish. The Flemish identity is
also ethnic and cultural, and there is a strong separatist movement espoused by
the political parties, Vlaams Belang and the Nieuw-Vlaamse Alliantie. The
Francophone Walloon identity of Belgium is linguistically distinct and
regionalist. There is also is unitary Belgian nationalism, several versions of
a Greater Netherlands ideal, and a German-speaking community of Belgium annexed
from Prussia in 1920, and re-annexed by Germany in 1940–1944. However these
ideologies are all very marginal and politically insignificant during
elections. China covers a large geographic area and uses the concept of
"Zhonghua minzu" or Chinese nationality, in the sense of ethnic groups, but it
also officially recognizes the majority Han ethnic group which accounts for
over 90% of the population, and no fewer than 55 ethnic national minorities.
Exceptions. The United Kingdom. The United Kingdom is a controversial example
of a nation state, due to its "countries within a country" status. The UK is a
unitary state formed initially by the merger of two independent kingdoms, the
Kingdom of England and the Kingdom of Scotland, but the Treaty of Union (1707)
that set out the agreed terms has ensured the continuation of distinct features
of each state, including separate legal systems and separate national churches.
In 2003, the British Government described the United Kingdom as "countries
within a country". While the Office for National Statistics and others describe
the United Kingdom as a "nation state", others, including a then Prime
Minister, describe it as a "multinational state", and the term Home Nations is
used to describe the four national teams that represent the four nations of the
United Kingdom (England, Northern Ireland, Scotland, Wales). Israel. Israel's
definition of a nation state differs from other countries as its concept of a
nation state is based on the Ethnoreligious group (Judaism) rather than solely
on ethnicity, while the ancient mother language of the Jews, Hebrew, was
revived as a unifying bond between them as a national and official language.
Israel was founded as a Jewish state in 1948, and the country's Basic Laws
describe it as both a Jewish and a democratic state. According to the Israel
Central Bureau of Statistics, 75.7% of Israel's population is Jewish. Large
numbers of Jews continue to emigrate to Israel. Arabs, who make up 20.4% of the
population, are the largest ethnic minority in Israel. Israel also has very
small communities of Armenians, Circassians, Assyrians, Samaritans, and persons
of some Jewish heritage. There are also some non-Jewish spouses of Israeli
Jews. However, these communities are very small, and usually number only in the
hundreds or thousands. Pakistan. Pakistan, even being an ethnically diverse
country, is regarded as a nation state due to its ideology on basis of which it
got independence from British India as a separate nation rather than as a
unified India. Different Ethnic groups in Pakistan are strongly bonded by their
common Muslim identity, common cultural and social values, common historical
heritage, a national Lingua franca (Urdu) and joint political, strategic and
economic interests. Minorities. The most obvious deviation from the ideal of
'one nation, one state', is the presence of minorities, especially ethnic
minorities, which are clearly not members of the majority nation. An ethnic
nationalist definition of a nation is necessarily exclusive: ethnic nations
typically do not have open membership. In most cases, there is a clear idea
that surrounding nations are different, and that includes members of those
nations who live on the 'wrong side' of the border. Historical examples of
groups, who have been specifically singled out as "outsiders", are the Roma and
Jews in Europe. Negative responses to minorities within the nation state have
ranged from cultural assimilation enforced by the state, to expulsion,
persecution, violence, and extermination. The assimilation policies are usually
enforced by the state, but violence against minorities is not always state
initiated: it can occur in the form of mob violence such as lynching or
pogroms. Nation states are responsible for some of the worst historical
examples of violence against minorities: minorities not considered part of the
nation. However, many nation states accept specific minorities as being part of
the nation, and the term "national minority" is often used in this sense. The
Sorbs in Germany are an example: for centuries they have lived in German-
speaking states, surrounded by a much larger ethnic German population, and they
have no other historical territory. They are now generally considered to be
part of the German nation and are accepted as such by the Federal Republic of
Germany, which constitutionally guarantees their cultural rights. Of the
thousands of ethnic and cultural minorities in nation states across the world,
only a few have this level of acceptance and protection. Multiculturalism is an
official policy in many states, establishing the ideal of peaceful existence
among multiple ethnic, cultural, and linguistic groups. Many nations have laws
protecting minority rights. When national boundaries that do not match ethnic
boundaries are drawn, such as in the Balkans and Central Asia, ethnic tension,
massacres and even genocide, sometimes has occurred historically (see Bosnian
genocide and Ethnic Violence in Southern Kyrgyzstan (2010)). Irredentism.
Ideally, the border of a nation state extends far enough to include all the
members of the nation, and all of the national homeland. Again, in practice
some of them always live on the 'wrong side' of the border. Part of the
national homeland may be there too, and it may be governed by the 'wrong'
nation. The response to the non-inclusion of territory and population may take
the form of irredentism: demands to annex "unredeemed" territory and
incorporate it into the nation state. "Irredentist" claims are usually based on
the fact that an identifiable part of the national group lives across the
border. However, they can include claims to territory where no members of that
nation live at present, because they lived there in the past, the national
language is spoken in that region, the national culture has influenced it,
geographical unity with the existing territory, or a wide variety of other
reasons. Past grievances are usually involved and can cause revanchism. It is
sometimes difficult to distinguish irredentism from pan-nationalism, since both
claim that all members of an ethnic and cultural nation belong in one specific
state. Pan-nationalism is less likely to specify the nation ethnically. For
instance, variants of Pan-Germanism have different ideas about what constituted
Greater Germany, including the confusing term "Grossdeutschland", which, in
fact, implied the inclusion of huge Slavic minorities from the Austro-Hungarian
Empire. Typically, irredentist demands are at first made by members of non-
state nationalist movements. When they are adopted by a state, they typically
result in tensions, and actual attempts at annexation are always considered a
"casus belli", a cause for war. In many cases, such claims result in long-term
hostile relations between neighbouring states. Irredentist movements typically
circulate maps of the claimed national territory, the "greater" nation state.
That territory, which is often much larger than the existing state, plays a
central role in their propaganda. Irredentism should not be confused with
claims to overseas colonies, which are not generally considered part of the
national homeland. Some French overseas colonies would be an exception: French
rule in Algeria unsuccessfully treated the colony as a "département" of
France. Future. It has been speculated by both proponents of globalization and
various science fiction writers that the concept of a nation state may
disappear with the ever-increasingly interconnected nature of the world. Such
ideas are sometimes expressed around concepts of a world government. Another
possibility is a societal collapse and move into communal anarchy or zero world
government, in which nation states no longer exist and government is done on
the local level based on a global ethic of human rights. This falls into line
with the concept of internationalism, which states that sovereignty is an
outdated concept and a barrier to achieving peace and harmony in the world,
thus also stating that nation states are also a similar outdated concept. If
the nation state begins to disappear, it may well be the direct or indirect
result of globalization and internationalism. The two concepts state that
sovereignty is an outdated concept and, as the concept and existence of a
nation state depends on 'untouchable' sovereignty, it is therefore reasonable
to assume that. Globalization especially has helped to bring about the
discussion about the disappearance of nation states, as global trade and the
rise of the concepts of a 'global citizen' and a common identity have helped to
reduce differences and 'distances' between individual nation states, especially
with regards to the internet. Clash of civilizations. In direct contrast to
cosmopolitan theories about an ever more connected world that no longer
requires nation states, is the Clash of Civilizations theory. The proposal by
political scientist Samuel P. Huntington is that people's cultural and
religious identities will be the primary source of conflict in the post–Cold
War world. The theory was originally formulated in a 1992 lecture at the
American Enterprise Institute, which was then developed in a 1993 "Foreign
Affairs" article titled "The Clash of Civilizations?", in response to Francis
Fukuyama's 1992 book, "The End of History and the Last Man". Huntington later
expanded his thesis in a 1996 book "The Clash of Civilizations and the Remaking
of World Order". Huntington began his thinking by surveying the diverse
theories about the nature of global politics in the post–Cold War period.
Some theorists and writers argued that human rights, liberal democracy and
capitalist free market economics had become the only remaining ideological
alternative for nations in the post–Cold War world. Specifically, Francis
Fukuyama argued that the world had reached the 'end of history' in a Hegelian
sense. Huntington believed that while the age of ideology had ended, the world
had reverted only to a normal state of affairs characterized by cultural
conflict. In his thesis, he argued that the primary axis of conflict in the
future will be along cultural and religious lines. As an extension, he posits
that the concept of different civilizations, as the highest rank of cultural
identity, will become increasingly useful in analyzing the potential for
conflict. Scholar Sandra Joireman suggests that Huntington may be characterised
as a neo-primordialist since while he sees people as having strong ties to
their ethnicity, he does not believe that these ties have always existed.
