Nation A nation may refer to a community of people who share a common language,
culture, ethnicity, descent, or history. In this definition, a "nation" has no
physical borders. However, it can also refer to people who share a common
territory and government (for example the inhabitants of a sovereign state)
irrespective of their ethnic make-up. The word "nation" can more specifically
refer to people of North American Indians, such as the Cherokee Nation that
prefer this term over the contested term tribe. According to Joseph Stalin
writing in 1913 in "Marxism and the National Question": "a nation is not a
racial or tribal, but a historically constituted community of people;" "a
nation is not a casual or ephemeral conglomeration, but a stable community of
people"; "a common language is one of the characteristic features of a nation";
"a nation is formed only as a result of lengthy and systematic intercourse, as
a result of people living together generation after generation"; "a common
territory is one of the characteristic features of a nation"; "a common
economic life, economic cohesion, is one of the characteristic features of a
nation"; "a common psychological make-up, which manifests itself in a common
culture, is one of the characteristic features of a nation"; "A nation is a
historically constituted, stable community of people, formed on the basis of a
common language, territory, economic life, and psychological make-up manifested
in a common culture." According to Stalin, this would exclude Jews as they have
no common territory. An alternative view, expressed by Otto Bauer, author of
"Social Democracy and the Nationalities Question" (1907), that "A nation is an
aggregate of people bound into a community of character by a common destiny."
would include Jews. R. Springer, author of "The National Problem" (1909), also
cited by Stalin in his discussion of this matter, held similar views.
Etymology. The word "nation" came to English from the Old French word "nacion",
which in turn originates from the Latin word "natio" ("") literally meaning
"that which has been born". The sometime mentioned early use of the word
"nation" already in 968 in modern meaning is historically unfounded. to
describe the colleagues in a college or students, above all at the University
of Paris, who were all born within a "pays", spoke the same language and
expected to be ruled by their own familiar law. In 1383 and 1384, while
studying theology at Paris, Jean Gerson was elected twice as a procurator for
the French "natio". The University of Prague adopted the division of students
into "nationes": from its opening in 1349 the "studium generale" which
consisted of Bohemian, Bavarian, Saxon and Polish "nations". In a similar way,
the "nationes" were segregated by the Knights Hospitaller of Jerusalem, who
maintained at Rhodes the hostels from which they took their name "where
foreigners eat and have their places of meeting, each nation apart from the
others, and a Knight has charge of each one of these hostels, and provides for
the necessities of the inmates according to their religion", as the Spanish
traveller Pedro Tafur noted in 1436.
