National Assembly (France) The National Assembly (; ) is the lower house of the
bicameral Parliament of France under the Fifth Republic. The upper house is the
Senate (""Sénat""). The National Assembly's members are known as "députés"
( ; "delegate" or "envoy" in English; the word is an etymological cognate of
the English word "deputy", usually ""adjoint"" in French). There are 577
"députés", each elected by a single-member constituency through a two-rounds
system. 289 seats are therefore required for a majority. The assembly is
presided over by a president (currently Claude Bartolone), normally from the
largest party represented, assisted by vice-presidents from across the
represented political spectrum. The term of the National Assembly is five
years; however, the President of the Republic may dissolve the Assembly
(thereby calling for new elections) unless he has dissolved it in the preceding
twelve months. This measure is becoming rarer since the 2000 referendum reduced
the President's term from seven to five years: a President usually has a
majority elected in the Assembly two months after him, and it would be useless
for him to dissolve it for those reasons. The official seat of the National
Assembly is the Palais Bourbon on the banks of the river Seine (); the Assembly
also uses other neighbouring buildings, including the "Immeuble Chaban-Delmas"
on the rue de l'Université (). It is guarded by Republican Guards. Following a
tradition started by the first National Assembly during the French Revolution,
the "left-wing" parties sit to the left as seen from the president's seat, and
the "right-wing" parties sit to the right, and the seating arrangement thus
directly indicates the political spectrum as represented in the Assembly.
Relationships with the executive. The Constitution of the French Fifth Republic
greatly increased the power of the executive at the expense of Parliament,
compared to previous constitutions (Third and Fourth Republic). The President
of the Republic can decide to dissolve the National Assembly and call for new
legislative elections. This is meant as a way to resolve stalemates where the
Assembly cannot decide on a clear political direction. This possibility is
seldom exercised. The last dissolution was by Jacques Chirac in 1997, following
from the lack of popularity of prime minister Alain Juppé; however, the plan
backfired, and the newly elected majority was opposed to Chirac. The National
Assembly can overthrow the executive government (that is, the Prime Minister
and other ministers) by a vote of no-confidence ("motion de censure"). For this
reason, the prime minister and his cabinet are necessarily from the dominant
party or coalition in the assembly. In the case of a president and assembly
from opposing parties, this leads to the situation known as "cohabitation";
this situation, which has occurred three times (twice under Mitterrand, once
under Chirac), is likely to be rarer now that presidential and assembly terms
are the same length. While "motions de censure" are periodically proposed by
the opposition following government actions that it deems highly inappropriate,
they are purely rhetorical; party discipline ensures that, throughout a
parliamentary term, the government is never overthrown by the Assembly. Since
the beginning of the Fifth Republic, there has only been one single successful
"motion de censure", in 1962 in hostility to the referendum on the method of
election of the President, and president Charles de Gaulle dissolved the
Assembly within a few days. The Government (the Prime Minister and the Minister
of relationships with Parliament) used to set the priorities of the agenda for
the Assembly's sessions, except for a single day each month. In practice, given
the number of priority items, it meant that the schedule of the Assembly was
almost entirely set by the executive; bills generally only have a chance to be
examined if proposed or supported by the executive. This, however, was amended
on 23 July 2008. Under the amended constitution, the Government sets the
priorities for two weeks in a month. Another week is designated for the
Assembly's "control" prerogatives (consisting mainly of verbal questions
addressed to the government). And the fourth one is set by the Assembly. Also,
one day per month is set by a "minority" (group supporting the government but
which isn't the biggest group) or "opposition" (group having officially
declared it didn't support the government) group. Members of the assembly can
ask written or oral questions to ministers. The Wednesday afternoon session of
oral "questions to the Government" is shown on television. It is largely a show
for the viewers, with members of the majority generally asking praising
questions, while the opposition tries to embarrass the government. Elections.
Since 1988, the 577 deputies are elected by the direct universal suffrage with
a two-round system by constituency, for a five-year mandate, subject to
dissolution. The constituencies each have approximately 100,000 inhabitants.
The electoral law of 1986 specifies that variations of population between
constituencies should not, in any case, lead to a constituency exceeding more
than 20% the average population of the constituencies of the "département".
However, districts were not redrawn between 1982 and 2009. As a result of
population movements over that period, there were inequalities between the less
populous rural districts and the urban districts. For example, the deputy for
the most populous constituency, in the department of Val-d'Oise, represented
188,000 voters, while the deputy for the least populous constituency, in the
department of Lozère, represented only 34,000. The constituencies were redrawn
in 2009, but this redistribution was controversial. Among other controversial
measures, it created eleven constituencies and seats for French residents
overseas, albeit without increasing the overall number of seats beyond 577. To
be elected in the first round of voting, a candidate must obtain at least 50%
of the votes cast, with a turn-out of at least 25% of the registered voters on
the electoral rolls. If no candidate is elected in the first round, those who
poll in excess of 12.5% of the registered voters in the first-round vote are
entered in the second round of voting. If no candidate comply such conditions,
the two highest-placing candidates advance to second round. In the second
round, the candidate who receives the most votes is elected. Each candidate is
enrolled along with a substitute, who takes the candidate's place in the event
of inability to represent the constituency, when the deputy becomes minister
for example. The organic law of 10 July 1985 established a system of party-list
proportional representation within the framework of the "". It was necessary
within this framework to obtain at least 5% of the vote to elect an official.
However, the legislative election of 1986, carried out under this system, gave
France a new majority which returned the National Assembly to the plurality
voting system described above. There are 570 elected officials of the
departments, five representatives of the overseas collectivities (two for
French Polynesia, one for Wallis and Futuna, and one for Saint Pierre and
Miquelon) and two for New Caledonia since 1986. Conditions and privileges for
members. The allowances and privileges of the members: Assembly members receive
a salary of 7,043.69 euros per month (USD 10,389.49). There is also the
"compensation representing official expenses" ("IRFM" – "indemnité
représentative de frais de mandat") of 5 867,39 euros per month (USD 8,654.44)
to pay costs related to the office, and finally a total of 8 949 euros per
month (USD 11,884.07) to pay up to 5 employees. They also have an office in the
Assembly, various advantages in terms of transport and communications, social
security, a pension fund and unemployment insurance specific. Under Article 26
of the Constitution, deputies, like Senators, are protected by parliamentary
immunity. In the case of an accumulation of mandates, a member cannot receive a
wage of more than 9 779.11 euros (USD 14,424.25). Accumulation of mandates and
minimum age (see Cumul des mandats): Since 1958, the position of member of the
National Assembly is incompatible with that of any other elected member
(Senator or Member of European Parliament), or with some administrative
functions (members of the Constitutional Council of France and senior officials
such as prefects, magistrates or officers who are ineligible for Department
where they are stationed). Members may not have more than one local mandate (in
a municipal, intercommunal, general or regional council) in addition to their
current mandate. The mandate is also incompatible with a ministerial function.
Upon appointment to the Government, the elected member has one month to choose
between the mandate and the office. If he or she chooses the second option,
then they are replaced by their deputy. To be eligible to be elected to the
National Assembly, one must be at least 23 years old, of French citizenship,
and not subject to a sentence of deprivation of civil rights or to personal
bankruptcy.
