National Socialist Program The National Socialist Programme (aka the 25-point
Programme and the 25-point Plan) was the political program firstly of the
German National Socialist Party (DNSAP, "Deutsche Nationalsozialistische
Arbeiterpartei") in 1918, and later, in the 1920s, of the National Socialist
German Workers' Party (NSDAP, "Nationalsozialistische Deutsche Arbeiterpartei")
headed by Adolf Hitler. The National Socialist Program originated at a DAP
congress in Vienna, then was taken to Munich, by the civil engineer and
theoretician Rudolf Jung, who, having explicitly supported Hitler, had been
expelled from Czechoslovakia, because of his political agitation. The
politician Josef Pfitzner, a Sudetenland German Nazi, wrote that “the
synthesis of the two, great dynamic powers of the century, of the national and
social ideas, had been perfected in the German borderlands the Sudetenland,
which thus were far ahead of their motherland.” History. When the national
socialists redacted their 25-point Programme, Czechoslovakia and Austria were
sub-ordinate states integral to the Austro-Hungarian Empire (1867–1918), not
sovereign nations. Hence, the political programs of the Sudetenland and the
Austrian national socialist parties addressed their particular discontents with
the Habsburg monarchic society; thus the development of ideologically discrete
German Worker parties in Vienna, Aussig, and Eger. In the event, Adolf Hitler
and cohort, the government of Nazi Germany (1933–45), did not participate in
originating such national socialist programs; thus the politics and ideology of
the NSDAP were specifically German adaptations of such. German Party program.
In Munich, on 24 February 1920, Adolf Hitler publicly proclaimed the 25-point
Program of the NSDAP (National Socialist German Workers’ Party), when the
Nazis were still known as the DAP (German Workers Party). They retained the
National Socialist Program upon renaming themselves as the National Socialist
German Workers Party (NSDAP) in April 1920, and it remained the Party’s
official program. The 25-point Program was a German adaptation — by Anton
Drexler, Adolf Hitler, Gottfried Feder, and Dietrich Eckart — of Rudolf
Jung’s Austro–Bohemian program; unlike the Austrians, the Germans did not
claim to being either liberal or democratic, and opposed neither political
reaction nor the aristocracy, yet advocated democratic institutions (i.e. the
German central parliament) and voting rights solely for Germans — implying
that a Nazi Government would retain popular suffrage. The Austrian monarchist
Erik von Kuehnelt-Leddihn proposed that the 25-point Program was pro-labour:
“the program championed the right to employment, and called for the
institution of profit sharing, confiscation of war profits, prosecution of
userers and profiteers, nationalization of trusts, communalization of
department stores, extension of the old-age pension system, creation of a
national education program of all classes, prohibition of child labour, and an
end to the dominance of investment capital.” Whereas historian William
Brustein proposes that said program points, and party founder Anton Drexler’s
statements, indicate that the Nazi Party (NSDAP) originated as a working-class
political party. In the course of pursuing public office, the agrarian failures
of the 1920s prompted Hitler to further explain the “true” meaning of Point
17 (land reform, legal land expropriation for public utility, abolishment of
the land value tax, and proscription of land speculation), in the hope of
winning the farmers’ votes in the May 1928 elections. Hitler disguised the
implicit contradictions of Point 17 of the National Socialist Program, by
explaining that “gratuitous expropriation concerns only the creation of legal
opportunities, to expropriate, if necessary, land which has been illegally
acquired, or is not administered from the view-point of the national welfare.
This is directed primarily against the Jewish land-speculation companies”.
Moreover, throughout the 1920s, other members of the NSDAP, seeking ideologic
consistency, sought either to change or to replace the National Socialist
Program. In 1924, the economist Gottfried Feder proposed a 39-point program
retaining some original policies and introducing new policies. Hitler
suppressed every instance of programatic change, by refusing to broach the
matters after 1925, because the National Socialist Program was
“inviolable”, hence immutable. Simultaneously, however, he did not publicly
support it; in his political biography, "Mein Kampf" (1925, 1926), Hitler only
mentions it as “the so-called program of the movement”. The historian Henry
A. Turner proposes that many of the Program’s policies for economic reform,
pro-labour legislation, and popular democratic politics, contradicted Adolf
Hitler’s basis of his dictatorial ambition. That the land reform and anti-
trust legislation especially threatened the financial interests of the
businessmen whom Hitler courted for political campaign money. Because he could
not safely discard the National Socialist Program of the Nazi Party — without
provoking voter mutinies — Adolf Hitler, by force of personality,
definitively closed all such ideologic discussion.
