National Organization for the Reform of Marijuana Laws The National
Organization for the Reform of Marijuana Laws (NORML ) is an American non-
profit organization based in Washington, DC whose aim is to move public opinion
sufficiently to achieve the legalization of non-medical marijuana in the United
States so that the responsible use of cannabis by adults is no longer subject
to penalty. According to their website, NORML "supports the removal of all
criminal penalties for the private possession and responsible use of marijuana
by adults, including the cultivation for personal use, and the casual nonprofit
transfers of small amounts," and "supports the development of a legally
controlled market for cannabis." NORML and the NORML Foundation support both
those fighting prosecution under marijuana laws and those working to legalize
marijuana. Similar affiliated organizations operate under the NORML banner in
other countries, among them NORML New Zealand. In the 2006 United States
midterm elections, NORML promoted several successful local initiatives that
declared marijuana enforcement to be the lowest priority for local law
enforcement. NORML claims that this frees up police resources to combat violent
and serious crime. NORML plans to support efforts now underway in states such
as California, Washington, and Oregon to legalize and tax marijuana, which it
claims is a means of coping with growing federal and state deficits without
having to raise other taxes. NORML Foundation. The NORML Foundation, the
organization's tax-exempt unit, conducts educational and research activities.
Examples of the NORML Foundation's advocacy work is a detailed 2006 report,
"Emerging Clinical Applications For Cannabis". A comprehensive report with
county-by-county marijuana arrest data, "Crimes of Indiscretion: Marijuana
Arrest in America", was published in 2005. In October 1998, NORML Foundation
published the "NORML Report on U.S. Domestic Marijuana Production" that was
widely cited in the mainstream media. The report methodically estimated the
value and number of cannabis plants grown in 1997, finding that Drug
Enforcement Administration, state and local law enforcement agencies seized 32%
of domestic cannabis plants planted that year. According to the report,
"Marijuana remains the fourth largest cash crop in America despite law
enforcement spending an estimated $10 billion annually to pursue efforts to
outlaw the plant." Recent studies show that marijuana is larger than all other
cash crops combined. In 2002, the organization used ads containing New York
City mayor Michael Bloomberg quotes on his past use of pot, saying "You bet I
did. And I enjoyed it." The mayor said "I’m not thrilled they’re using my
name. I suppose there’s that First Amendment that gets in the way of me
stopping it," but maintained that the NYPD will continue to vigorously enforce
the laws. History. NORML was founded in 1970 by Keith Stroup, funded by $5,000
from the Playboy Foundation. Since then, the organization has played a central
role in the cannabis decriminalization movement. The organization has a large
grassroots network with 135 chapters and over 550 lawyers. NORML holds annual
conferences and Continuing Legal Education (CLE)-accredited seminars. Its board
of directors has, at times, included such prominent political figures as
Senators Philip Hart, Jacob K. Javits, and Ross Mirkarimi. Media and activism.
As an advocacy group, NORML has been active in spreading its message to the
public. In early 2009, a petition to President Barack Obama was written asking
that he appoint a "Drug Czar" who will treat drug abuse as a health issue
rather than a criminal issue and will move away from a "War on Drugs" paradigm.
NORML's goal for this petition is 100,000 signatures. Also in early 2009, when
the Kellogg Company dropped its contract with Olympic swimmer Michael Phelps
after pictures of him using a bong surfaced in the media, head members of NORML
began boycotting Kellogg products and urging all members and supporters of
NORML to boycott Kellogg, until the company reversed the decision. NORML also
suggested that supporters of the cause send emails or letters to Kellogg
explaining the boycott and the reasons behind it, even providing a template for
emails and letters. Although Kellogg's profits did not suffer in the first
quarter of 2009, consumer ratings polls at Vanno have been cited as indicating
that Kellogg's reputation has suffered. Specifically, a small poll of Kellogg's
brand reputation at Vanno showed a drop from its previous rank of 9 to 83 after
Kellogg decided not to renew its contract with Michael Phelps. It is not clear
whether or not NORML's boycott played a significant role in this decline. On
April 20, 2009, NORML released the first national pro-marijuana television
advertisement. The PSA, which overtly promotes the legalization of marijuana
use, was created by Philadelphia filmmaker Jason Druss as an entry into NORML's
annual video contest. The television commercial was discussed in the April 20,
2009 edition of The New York Times, CBS News, as well as hundreds of blogging
and news websites. On February 15, 2010, a 15 second Flash animation from NORML
discussing the potential economic and financial benefit of legalized marijuana
was deemed by CBS to be "too political" to display on billboards in New York
City's Times Square. This drew criticism in the blogosphere and accusations of
hypocrisy on Twitter, since CBS had recently aired an anti-abortion television
spot during the 2010 Super Bowl. CBS has since reversed its decision and the ad
was debuted on the CBS Times Square Superscreen on Tuesday April 20, 2010.
