Natural capital Natural capital is the extension of the economic notion of
capital (manufactured means of production) to goods and services relating to
the natural environment. Natural capital is thus the stock of natural
ecosystems that yields a flow of valuable ecosystem goods or services into the
future. For example, a stock of trees or fish provides a flow of new trees or
fish, a flow which can be indefinitely sustainable. Natural capital may also
provide services like recycling wastes or water catchment and erosion control.
Since the flow of services from ecosystems requires that they function as whole
systems, the structure and diversity of the system are important components of
natural capital. Background. In "" the authors see the world's economy as being
within the larger economy of natural resources and ecosystem services that
sustain us. This implies that we should attribute value to things such as human
intelligence and cultures to hydrocarbons, minerals, trees, and microscopic
fungi. The authors argue that only through recognizing this essential
relationship with the Earth's valuable resources can businesses, and the people
they support, continue to exist. The book has many practical suggestions for
companies interested in a sustainable future. According to the authors, the
"next industrial revolution" depends on the espousal of four central
strategies: "the conservation of resources through more effective manufacturing
processes, the reuse of materials as found in natural systems, a change in
values from quantity to quality, and investing in natural capital, or restoring
and sustaining natural resources." Natural capital is described in the book
Natural Capitalism as a metaphor for the mineral, plant, and animal formations
of the Earth's biosphere when viewed as a means of production of oxygen, water
filter, erosion preventer, or provider of other ecosystem services. It is one
approach to ecosystem valuation, an alternative to the traditional view of all
non-human life as passive natural resources, and to the idea of ecological
health. However, human knowledge and understanding of the natural environment
is never complete, and therefore the boundaries of natural capital expand or
contract as knowledge is gained or lost. In a traditional economic analysis of
the factors of production, natural capital would usually be classified as
"land" distinct from "capital" in its original sense. The historical
distinction between "land" and "capital" was that land is naturally occurring
and its supply is assumed to be fixed, whereas capital as originally defined
referred only to man-made goods, (e.g., Georgism). It has been argued that it's
useful to view many natural systems as capital because they can be improved or
degraded by the actions of man over time (see Tragedy of the commons), so that
to view them as if their productive capacity is fixed by nature alone is
misleading. Moreover, they yield benefits naturally which are harvested by
humans, those being nature's services, 17 of which were closely analyzed by
Robert Costanza. These benefits are in some ways similar to those realized by
owners of infrastructural capital which yields more goods, e.g. a factory which
produces automobiles just as an apple tree produces apples. The term and
metaphor were first used by E.F. Schumacher in his book "Small Is Beautiful"
and are closely identified with Herman Daly, Robert Costanza, the Biosphere 2
project, and the Natural Capitalism economic model of Paul Hawken, Amory
Lovins, and Hunter Lovins until recently, when it began to be used by
politicians, notably Ralph Nader, Paul Martin Jr., and agencies of the UK
government including the London Health Observatory. Some economists and
politicians, including Martin, believe natural capital measures play a key role
in money supply and inflation measurements in a modern economy. They point to
uneconomic growth and a lack of any direct connection between measuring well-
being and such indicators as GDP. Indicators adopted by United Nations
Environment Programme's World Conservation Monitoring Centre and the
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) to measure
natural biodiversity use the term in a slightly more specific way. However, all
users of the term differentiate natural from man-made manufactured capital or
infrastructural capital in some way. It does not appear that the basic
principle is controversial, although there is much controversy on ecological
health indicators, value of nature's services and Earth itself, consistent
methods of ecosystem valuation, biodiversity metrics and methods of audit that
might apply to these services, systems and biomes. Full cost accounting, triple
bottom line, measuring well-being and other proposals for accounting reform
often include proposals to measure an "ecological deficit" or "natural deficit"
alongside a social deficit and financial deficit. It is difficult to measure
such a deficit without some agreement on methods of valuating and auditing at
least the global forms of natural capital (e.g. value of air, water, soil). The
concept of natural capital implies that the savings rate of an economy is an
imperfect measure of what the country is actually saving, because it measures
only investment in man-made capital. The World Bank now calculates the genuine
savings rate of a country, taking into account the extraction of natural
resources and the ecological damage caused by CO2 emissions. Ecologists are
teaming up with economists to measure the wealth of ecosystems and to express
their value as a way of finding solutions to the biodiversity crisis. Some
researchers have attempted to place a dollar figure on ecosystem services, such
as the value that the Canadian boreal forest is contributing to global
ecosystem services. If ecologically intact, the boreal forest has an estimated
value of US$3.7 trillion. The boreal forest ecosystem is one of the planet's
great atmospheric regulators and it stores more carbon than any other biome on
the planet. The annual value for ecological services of the Boreal Forest is
estimated at US$93.2 billion, or 2.5 greater than the annual value of resource
extraction. The economic value of 17 ecosystem services for the entire
biosphere (calculated in 1997) has an estimated average value of US$33 trillion
per year. These ecological economic values are not currently included in
calculations of national income accounts, the GDP and they have no price
attributes because they exist mostly outside of the global markets. The loss of
natural capital continues to accelerate and goes undetected by mainstream
monetary analysis.
