Nature versus nurture The nature versus nurture debate concerns the relative
importance of an individual's innate qualities ("nature," i.e. nativism, or
innatism) versus personal experiences ("nurture," i.e. empiricism or
behaviorism) in determining or causing individual differences in physical and
behavioral traits. The phrase "Nature versus nurture" in its modern sense was
coined by the English Victorian polymath Francis Galton in discussion of the
influence of heredity and environment on social advancement, although the terms
had been contrasted previously, for example by Shakespeare (in his play, "The
Tempest": 4.1). Galton was influenced by the book "On the Origin of Species"
written by his cousin, Charles Darwin. The concept embodied in the phrase has
been criticized for its binary simplification of two tightly interwoven
parameters, as for example an environment of wealth, education and social
privilege are often historically passed to genetic offspring. The view that
humans acquire all or almost all their behavioral traits from "nurture" was
termed "tabula rasa" ("blank slate") by philosopher John Locke, and proposes
that humans develop from only environmental influences. This question was once
considered to be an appropriate division of developmental influences, but since
both types of factors are known to play such interacting roles in development,
most modern psychologists and anthropologists consider the question
naive—representing an outdated state of knowledge. In the social and
political sciences, the nature versus nurture debate may be contrasted with the
structure versus agency debate (i.e. socialization versus individual autonomy).
For a discussion of nature versus nurture in language and other human
universals, see also psychological nativism. Scientific approach. "Many
properties of the brain are genetically organized, and don't depend on
information coming in from the senses.” - Steven Pinker To disentangle the
effects of genes and environment, behavioral geneticists perform adoption and
twin studies. These seek to decompose the variance in a population into genetic
and environmental components. This move from individuals to populations makes a
critical difference in the way we think about nature and nurture. This
difference is perhaps highlighted in the quote attributed to psychologist
Donald Hebb who is said to have once answered a journalist's question of
"which, nature or nurture, contributes more to personality?" by asking in
response, "Which contributes more to the area of a rectangle, its length or its
width?" For a particular rectangle, its area is indeed the product of its
length and width. Moving to a population, however, this analogy masks the fact
that there are many individuals, and that it is meaningful to talk about their
differences. Scientific approaches also seek to break down variance beyond
these two categories of nature and nurture. Thus rather than "nurture",
behavior geneticists distinguish shared family factors (i.e., those shared by
siblings, making them more similar) and nonshared factors (i.e., those that
uniquely affect individuals, making siblings different). To express the portion
of the variance due to the "nature" component, behavioral geneticists generally
refer to the heritability of a trait. With regard to personality traits and
adult IQ in the general U.S. population, the portion of the overall variance
that can be attributed to shared family effects is often negligible. In her
Pulitzer Prize-nominated book "The Nurture Assumption", author Judith Harris
argues that "nurture," as traditionally defined in terms of family upbringing
does not effectively explain the variance for most traits (such as adult IQ and
the Big Five personality traits) in the general population of the United
States. On the contrary, Harris suggests that either peer groups or random
environmental factors (i.e., those that are independent of family upbringing)
are more important than family environmental effects. Although "nurture" has
historically been referred to as the care given to children by the parents,
with the mother playing a role of particular importance, this term is now
regarded by some as any environmental (not genetic) factor in the contemporary
"nature versus nurture" debate. Thus the definition of "nurture" has expanded
to include influences on development arising from prenatal, parental, extended
family, and peer experiences, and extending to influences such as media,
marketing, and socio-economic status. Indeed, a substantial source of
environmental input to human nature may arise from stochastic variations in
prenatal development. Heritability estimates. It is important to note that the
term "heritability" refers only to the degree of genetic variation between
people on a trait. It does not refer to the degree to which a trait of a
particular individual is due to environmental or genetic factors. The traits of
an individual are always a complex interweaving of both. For an individual,
even strongly genetically influenced, or "obligate" traits, such as eye color,
assume the inputs of a typical environment during ontogenetic development
(e.g., certain ranges of temperatures, oxygen levels, etc.). In contrast, the
"heritability index" statistically quantifies the extent to which variation
"between individuals" on a trait is due to variation in the genes those
individuals carry. In animals where breeding and environments can be controlled
experimentally, heritability can be determined relatively easily. Such
experiments would be unethical for human research. This problem can be overcome
by finding existing populations of humans that reflect the experimental setting
the researcher wishes to create. One way to determine the contribution of genes
and environment to a trait is to study twins. In one kind of study, identical
twins reared apart are compared to randomly selected pairs of people. The twins
share identical genes, but different family environments. In another kind of
twin study, identical twins reared together (who share family environment and
genes) are compared to fraternal twins reared together (who also share family
environment but only share half their genes). Another condition that permits
the disassociation of genes and environment is adoption. In one kind of
adoption study, biological siblings reared together (who share the same family
environment and half their genes) are compared to adoptive siblings (who share
their family environment but none of their genes). In many cases, it has been
found that genes make a substantial contribution, including psychological
traits such as intelligence and personality. Twin and adoption studies have
their methodological limits. For example, both are limited to the range of
environments and genes which they sample. Almost all of these studies are
conducted in Western, first-world countries, and therefore cannot be
extrapolated globally to include poorer, non-western populations. Additionally,
both types of studies depend on particular assumptions, such as the equal
environments assumption in the case of twin studies, and the lack of pre-
adoptive effects in the case of adoption studies. Interaction of genes and
environment. Heritability refers to the origins of differences between people.
Individual development, even of highly heritable traits, such as eye color,
depends on a range of environmental factors, from the other genes in the
organism, to physical variables such as temperature, oxygen levels etc. during
its development or ontogenesis. The variability of trait can be meaningfully
spoken of as being due in certain proportions to genetic differences
("nature"), or environments ("nurture"). For highly Mendelian genetic disorders
such as Huntington's disease virtually all the incidence of the disease is due
to genetic differences. Huntington's animal models live much longer or shorter
lives depending on how they are cared for . At the other extreme, traits such
as native language are environmentally determined: linguists have found that
any child (if capable of learning a language at all) can learn any human
language with equal facility . With virtually all biological and psychological
traits, however, genes and environment work in concert, communicating back and
forth to create the individual. At a molecular level, genes interact with
signals from other genes and from the environment. While there are many
thousands of single-gene-locus traits, so-called complex traits are due to the
additive effects of many (often hundreds) of small gene effects. A good example
of this is height, where variance appears to be spread across many hundreds of
loci. Extreme genetic or environmental conditions can predominate in rare
circumstances—if a child is born mute due to a genetic mutation, it will not
learn to speak any language regardless of the environment; similarly, someone
who is practically certain to eventually develop Huntington's disease according
to their genotype may die in an unrelated accident (an environmental event)
long before the disease will manifest itself. When traits are determined by a
complex interaction of genotype and environment it is possible to measure the
heritability of a trait within a population. However, many non-scientists who
encounter a report of a trait having a certain percentage heritability imagine
non-interactional, additive contributions of genes and environment to the
trait. As an analogy, some laypeople may think of the degree of a trait being
made up of two "buckets," genes and environment, each able to hold a certain
capacity of the trait. But even for intermediate heritabilities, a trait is
always shaped by both genetic dispositions and the environments in which people
develop, merely with greater and lesser plasticities associated with these
heritability measures. Heritability measures always refer to the degree of
"variation between individuals in a population". These statistics cannot be
applied at the level of the individual. It is incorrect to say that since the
heritability index of personality is about 0.6, you got 60% of your personality
from your parents and 40% from the environment. To help to understand this,
imagine that all humans were genetic clones. The heritability index for all
traits would be zero (all variability between clonal individuals must be due to
environmental factors). And, contrary to erroneous interpretations of the
heritibility index, as societies become more egalitarian (everyone has more
similar experiences) the heritability index goes up (as environments become
more similar, variability between individuals is due more to genetic factors).
Some have pointed out that environmental inputs affect the expression of genes
(see the article on epigenetics). This is one explanation of how environment
can influence the extent to which a genetic disposition will actually manifest.
The interactions of genes with environment, called gene–environment
interactions, are another component of the nature–nurture debate. A classic
example of gene–environment interaction is the ability of a diet low in the
amino acid phenylalanine to partially suppress the genetic disease
phenylketonuria. Yet another complication to the nature–nurture debate is the
existence of gene-environment correlations. These correlations indicate that
individuals with certain genotypes are more likely to find themselves in
certain environments. Thus, it appears that genes can shape (the selection or
creation of) environments. Even using experiments like those described above,
it can be very difficult to determine convincingly the relative contribution of
genes and environment. A very convincing experiment conducted by T.J. Bouchard,
Jr. has shown data that has been significant evidence for the importance of
genes when testing middle-aged twins reared together and reared apart. The
results shown have been important evidence against the importance of
environment when determining, happiness, for example. In the Minnesota study of
twins reared apart, it was actually found that there was higher correlation for
monozygotic twins reared apart (.52)than monozygotic twins reared together
(.44). Also, highlighting the importance of genes, these correlations found
much higher correlation among monozygotic than dizygotic twins that had a
correlation of .08 when reared together and -.02 when reared apart (Lykken &
Tellegen, 1996). Obligate vs. Facultative Adaptations. Traits may be considered
likely to be adaptations (such as the umbilical cord), byproducts of
adaptations (the belly button) or due to random variation (convex or concave
belly button shape). An alternative to contrasting nature and nurture focuses
on "obligate vs. facultative" adaptations Adaptations maybe generally more
obligate (robust in the face of typical environmental variation) or more
facultative (sensitive to typical environmental variation). For example, the
rewarding sweet taste of sugar and the pain of bodily injury are obligate
psychological adaptations—typical environmental variability during
development does not much affect their operation. On the other hand,
facultative adaptations are somewhat like "if-then" statements. An example of a
facultative psychological adaptation may be adult attachment style. The
attachment style of adults, (for example, a "secure attachment style," the
propensity to develop close, trusting bonds with others) is proposed to be
conditional on whether an individual's early childhood caregivers could be
trusted to provide reliable assistance and attention. An example of a
facultative physiological adaptation is tanning of skin on exposure to sunlight
(to prevent skin damage). Advanced techniques. The power of quantitative
studies of heritable traits has been expanded by the development of new
techniques. "Developmental genetic analysis" examines the effects of genes over
the course of a human lifespan. For example, early studies of intelligence,
which mostly examined young children, found that heritability measures
40–50%. Subsequent developmental genetic analyses found that variance
attributable to additive environmental effects is less apparent in older
individuals, with estimated heritability of IQ being higher than that in
adulthood. Another advanced technique, "multivariate genetic analysis",
examines the genetic contribution to several traits that vary together. For
example, multivariate genetic analysis has demonstrated that the genetic
determinants of all specific cognitive abilities (e.g., memory, spatial
reasoning, processing speed) overlap greatly, such that the genes associated
with any specific cognitive ability will affect all others. Similarly,
multivariate genetic analysis has found that genes that affect scholastic
achievement completely overlap with the genes that affect cognitive ability.
"Extremes analysis", examines the link between normal and pathological traits.
For example, it is hypothesized that a given behavioral disorder may represent
an extreme of a continuous distribution of a normal behavior and hence an
extreme of a continuous distribution of genetic and environmental variation.
Depression, phobias, and reading disabilities have been examined in this
context. For a few highly heritable traits, some studies have identified loci
associated with variance in that trait in some individuals. For example,
research groups have identified loci that are associated with schizophrenia
(Harrison and Owen, 2003) in subsets of patients with that diagnosis. Nature
and nurture. “Give me a dozen healthy infants, well-formed, and my own
specified world to bring them up in and I'll guarantee to take any one at
random and train him to become any type of specialist I might select –
doctor, lawyer, artist, merchant-chief and, yes, even beggar-man and thief,
regardless of his talents, penchants, tendencies, abilities, vocations, and
race of his ancestors.” – John B. Watson The nature side of this debate
emphasizes how much of an organism reflects biological factors. But, on the
other hand genes are activated at appropriate times during development and are
the basis for protein production. Proteins include a wide range of molecules,
such as hormones and enzymes that act in the body as signaling and structural
molecules to direct development. When looking at the influence of genes in the
Nature vs. Nurture debate there has been found to be variation in the promotor
region of the serotonin transporter gene (5-HTTLPR). The discovery of this
inherited, genetic "happiness gene" is promising evidence for the nature side
of the debate when measuring life satisfaction (Jan-Emmanuel De Neve, 2010).
The nurture side, on the other hand, emphasizes how much of an organism
reflects environmental factors. In reality, it is most likely an interaction of
both genes and environment, nature and nurture, that affect the development of
a person. Even in the womb, genes interact with hormones in the environment to
signal the start of a new developmental phase. The hormonal environment,
likewise, does not act independently of the genes and it cannot correct lethal
errors in the genetic makeup of a fetus. The genes and the environment must be
in sync for normal development. Similarly, even if a person has inherited genes
for taller than average height, the person may not grow to be as tall as is
genetically possible if proper nutrition is not provided. Here too the
interaction of genes and the environment is blurred. It has been suggested that
the key to understanding complex human behaviour and diseases is to study
genes, the environment, and the interactions between the two equally. IQ
debate. Evidence suggests that family environmental factors may have an effect
upon childhood IQ, accounting for up to a quarter of the variance. The American
Psychological Association's report "Intelligence: Knowns and Unknowns" (1995)
states that there is no doubt that normal child development requires a certain
minimum level of responsible care. Here, environment is playing a role in what
is believed to be fully genetic (intelligence) but it was found that severely
deprived, neglectful, or abusive environments have highly negative effects on
many aspects of children's intellect development. Beyond that minimum, however,
the role of family experience is in serious dispute. On the other hand, by late
adolescence this correlation disappears, such that adoptive siblings are no
more similar in IQ than strangers. Moreover, adoption studies indicate that, by
adulthood, adoptive siblings are no more similar in IQ than strangers (IQ
correlation near zero), while full siblings show an IQ correlation of 0.6. Twin
studies reinforce this pattern: monozygotic (identical) twins raised separately
are highly similar in IQ (0.74), more so than dizygotic (fraternal) twins
raised together (0.6) and much more than adoptive siblings (~0.0). Recent
adoption studies also found that supportive parents can have a positive effect
on the development of their children. Personality traits. is a frequently cited
example of a heritable trait that has been studied in twins and adoptions. The
most famous categorical organization of heritable personality traits were
created by Goldberg (1990) in which he had college students rate their
personalities on 1400 dimensions to begin, and then narrowed these down into
"The Big Five" factors of personality--Openness, conscientiousness,
extraversion, agreeableness, and neuroticism. The close genetic relationship
between positive personality traits and, for example, our happiness traits are
the mirror images of comorbidity in psychopathology(Kendler et al., 2006,
2007). These personality factors were consistent across cultures, and many
experiments have also tested the heritability of these traits. Identical twins
reared apart are far more similar in personality than randomly selected pairs
of people. Likewise, identical twins are more similar than fraternal twins.
Also, biological siblings are more similar in personality than adoptive
siblings. Each observation suggests that personality is heritable to a certain
extent. A supporting article had focused on the heritability of personality
(which is estimated to be around 50% for subjective well-being) in which an
experiment was conducted using a representative sample of 973 twin pairs to
test the heritable differences in subjective well-being which were found to be
fully accounted for by the genetic model of the Five-Factor Model’s
personality domains (Weiss, Bates, & Luciano, 2007). However, these same study
designs allow for the examination of environment as well as genes. Adoption
studies also directly measure the strength of shared family effects. Adopted
siblings share only family environment. Most adoption studies indicate that by
adulthood the personalities of adopted siblings are little or no more similar
than random pairs of strangers. This would mean that shared family effects on
personality are zero by adulthood. As is the case with personality, non-shared
environmental effects are often found to out-weigh shared environmental
effects. That is, environmental effects that are typically thought to be life-
shaping (such as family life) may have less of an impact than non-shared
effects, which are harder to identify. One possible source of non-shared
effects is the environment of pre-natal development. Random variations in the
genetic program of development may be a substantial source of non-shared
environment. These results suggest that "nurture" may not be the predominant
factor in "environment". Environment and our situations, do in fact impact our
lives, but not the way in which we would typically react to these environmental
factors. We are preset with personality traits that are the basis for how we
would react to situations. An example would be how extraverted prisoners become
less happy than introverted prisoners and would react to their incarceration
more negatively due to their preset extraverted personality (Kette,1991).
Genomics. The relationship between personality and our own well-being is
influenced and mediated by genes (Weiss, Bates, & Luciano, 2008). There has
been found to be a stable set point for happiness that is characteristic of the
individual (largely determined by our genes). Happiness fluctuates around that
setpoint (again, genetically determined) based on whether good things or bad
things are happening to us ("nurture"), but only fluctuates in small magnitude
in a normal human. The midpoint of these fluctuations is determined by the
"great genetic lottery" that we are born with, which leads us to conclude that
how happy we may feel at the moment or overtime is simply due to the luck of
the draw, or gene. This fluctuation was also not due to educational attainment,
which only accounted for less than 2% of the variance in well-being for women,
and less than 1% of the variance for men.(Lykken & Tellegen, 1996). With the
advent of genomic sequencing, it has become possible to search for and identify
specific gene polymorphisms that affect traits such as IQ and personality.
These techniques work by tracking the association of differences in a trait of
interest with differences in specific molecular markers or functional variants.
An example of a visible human traits for which the precise genetic basis of
differences are relatively well known is eye color. For traits with many genes
affecting the outcome, a smaller portion of the variance is currently
understood: For instance for height known gene variants account for around 5-
10% of height variance at present. When discussing the significant role of
genetic heritability in relation to one's level of happiness, it has been found
that from 44% to 52% of the variance in one's well-being is associated with
genetic variation. Based on the retest of smaller samples of twins studies
after 4,5, and 10 years, it is estimated that the heritability of the genetic
stable component of subjective well-being approaches 80% (Lykken & Tellegen,
1996). Other studies that have found that genes are a large influence in the
variance found in happiness measures, exactly around 35-50%(Roysamb et al.,
2002; Stubbe et al., 2005; Nes et al., 2005, 2006). Philosophical difficulties.
Philosophical questions regarding nature and nurture include the question of
the nature of the trait itself, questions of determinism, and whether the
question is well posed. As well as asking if a trait such as IQ is heritable,
one can ask what it is about "intelligence" that is being inherited. Similarly,
if in a broad set of environments genes account for almost all observed
variation in a trait then this raises the notion of genetic determinism and or
biological determinism, and the level of analysis which is appropriate for the
trait. Finally, as early as 1951, Calvin Hall suggested that discussion
opposing nature and nurture was fruitless. Environments may be able to be
varied in ways that affect development: This would alter the heritability of
the character changes, too. Conversely, if the genetic composition of a
population changes, then heritability may also change. The example of
phenylketonuria (PKU) is informative. Untreated, this is a completely penetrant
genetic disorder causing brain damage and progressive mental retardation. PKU
can be treated by the elimination of phenylalanine from the diet. Hence, a
character (PKU) that used to have a virtually perfect heritability is not
heritable any more if modern medicine is available (the actual "allele" causing
PKU would still be inherited, but the "phenotype" PKU would not be expressed
anymore). It is useful then to think of what is inherited as a mechanism for
breaking down phenylalanine. Separately from this we can consider whether the
organism has other mechanisms (for instance a drug that breakdown this amino
acid) or does not need the mechanism (due to dietary exclusion). Similarly,
within, say, an inbred strain of mice, no genetic variation is present and
every character will have a zero heritability. If the complications of
gene–environment interactions and correlations (see above) are added, then it
appears to many that heritability, the epitome of the nature–nurture
opposition, is "a station passed." A related concept is the view that the idea
that "either" nature "or" nurture explains a creature's behavior is an example
of the single cause fallacy. Free will. Some believe that evolutionary
explanations describes factors which limit our free will, in that it can be
seen to imply that we behave in ways in which we are ‘naturally inclined’.
J. Mizzoni wrote “There are some moral philosophers (such as Thomas Nagel)
who believe that evolutionary considerations are irrelevant to a full
understanding of the foundations of ethics. Other moral philosophers (such as
J. L. Mackie) tell quite a different story. They hold that the admission of the
evolutionary origins of human beings compels us to concede that there are no
foundations for ethics.” Critics of this ethical view point out that whether
or not a behavioral trait is inherited does not affect whether it can be
changed by one's culture or independent choice, and that evolutionary
inclinations could be discarded in ethical and political discussions regardless
of whether they exist or not. Leda Cosmides and John Tooby argue that William
James (1842–1910) argued that humans have more "instincts" than animals, and
that greater freedom of action is the result of having more psychological
instincts, not fewer. Daniel C. Dennett explores this idea in his 2003 book
"Freedom Evolves". Use in fiction. The nature vs. nurture debate has come up in
fiction in various ways. An obvious example of the debate can be seen in
science-fiction stories involving cloning, where genetically identical people
experience different lives growing up and are consequently shaped into
different people despite beginning with the same potential. An example of this
is "The Boys from Brazil", where multiple clones of Hitler are created as part
of a Nazi scientist's experiments to recreate the Führer by arranging for the
clones to experience the same defining moments that Hitler did, or "", where
the film's villain is a clone of protagonist Captain Jean-Luc Picard who
regularly 'defends' his actions by arguing that Picard would do the same thing
if he had lived the clone's life (Although Picard's crew argue that Picard has
shown a desire to better himself from the beginning that the clone has never
displayed). Other, more complex examples include the film "Trading Places"-
where two wealthy brothers make a bet over the debate by ruining the life of
one of their employees and promoting a street bum to replace him to see what
happens-, or the differences between the Marvel Comics characters Nate Grey and
Cable, two people who are essentially alternate versions of each other from two
different timelines, beginning with the same power potential but developing in
a highly different manner afterwards due to Cable's military training
contrasting with Nate's reliance on his powers. Implications in law. Recently,
the nature versus nurture debate has entered the realm of law and criminal
defense. In some cases, lawyers for violent offenders have begun to argue that
an individual’s genes, rather than their rational decision-making processes,
can cause criminal activity. Early attempts to employ a genetic defense were
concerned with XYY syndrome – a genetic abnormality in which men have a
second Y chromosome. However, several critiques argue that XYY individuals are
not predisposed to aggression or violence, discrediting the theory as a
plausible criminal defense. Evidence that supports the genetic defense stems
includes H.G. Brunner's 1993 discovery of what is now known as Brunner
Syndrome, and a series of studies on mice. Proponents of the defense suggest
that individuals cannot be held accountable for their genes, and as a result,
should not be held responsible for their dispositions and resulting actions. If
a single gene mutation is the reason for aggressive behaviour, there is a
possibility that aggressive offenders would have a genetic excuse for their
crimes. Genetic determinism has been debated for its plausibility of use in the
judicial system for some time, yet "the use of a 'genetic defense' in the
courtroom is a fairly new phenomenon." In the United States, use of genetics in
court defense has been used and successful in reducing sentencing for violent
offenders, for "certain predispositions may reduce the blameworthiness of the
offender." Canadian Judge Justice McLachlin denotes, "I can find no support in
criminal theory for the conclusion that protection of the morally innocent
requires a general consideration of individual excusing conditions. The
principle comes into play only at the point where the person is shown to lack
the capacity to appreciate the nature and quality or consequences of his or her
acts." Several mitigating factors already shape the purposes and principles of
sentencing in relation to genetics such as impairment of judgment and a
disadvantaged background. A 'genetic predisposition to violence' could fall
similarly under the same statute laws 718c in the USA as a mitigating factor in
crime if the science behind genetic determinants can be found conclusive.
However, Duke University researcher Laura Baker disagrees, as "although genes
may increase the propensity for criminality, for example, they do not determine
it."
