Natural monopoly A monopoly describes a situation where all (or most) sales in
a market are undertaken by a single firm. A natural monopoly by contrast is a
condition on the cost-technology of an industry whereby it is most efficient
(involving the lowest long-run average cost) for production to be concentrated
in a single firm. In some cases, this gives the largest supplier in an
industry, often the first supplier in a market, an overwhelming cost advantage
over other actual and potential competitors. This tends to be the case in
industries where capital costs predominate, creating economies of scale that
are large in relation to the size of the market, and hence high barriers to
entry; examples include public utilities such as water services and
electricity. Explanation. All industries have costs associated with entering
them. Often, a large portion of these costs is required for investment. Larger
industries, like utilities, require enormous initial investment. This barrier
to entry reduces the number of possible entrants into the industry regardless
of the earning of the corporations within. Natural monopolies arise where the
largest supplier in an industry, often the first supplier in a market, has an
overwhelming cost advantage over other actual or potential competitors; this
tends to be the case in industries where fixed costs predominate, creating
economies of scale that are large in relation to the size of the market, as is
the case in water and electricity services. The cost of constructing a
competing transmission network is so high that it effectively bars potential
competitors from the monopolist's market, acting as an early insurmountable
barrier to entry into the market place. Companies that take advantage of
economies of scale often run into problems of bureaucracy; these factors
interact to produce an "ideal" size for a company, at which the company's
average cost of production is minimized. If that ideal size is large enough to
supply the whole market, then that market is a natural monopoly. Two different
types of cost are important in microeconomics: marginal cost, and fixed cost.
The marginal cost is the cost to the company of serving one more customer. In
an industry where a natural monopoly does not exist, the vast majority of
industries, the marginal cost decreases with economies of scale, then increases
as the company has growing pains (overworking its employees, bureaucracy,
inefficiencies, etc.). Along with this, the average cost of its products
decreases and increases. A natural monopoly has a very different cost
structure. A natural monopoly has a high fixed cost for a product that does not
depend on output, but its marginal cost of producing one more good is roughly
constant, and small. A firm with high fixed costs requires a large number of
customers in order to have a meaningful return on investment. This is where
economies of scale become important. Since each firm has large initial costs,
as the firm gains market share and increases its output the fixed cost (what
they initially invested) is divided among a larger number of customers.
Therefore, in industries with large initial investment requirements, average
total cost declines as output increases over a much larger range of output
levels. Once a natural monopoly has been established because of the large
initial cost and that, according to the rule of economies of scale, the larger
corporation (to a point) has lower average cost and therefore a huge advantage.
With this knowledge, no firms attempt to enter the industry and an oligopoly or
monopoly develops. Formal definition of a natural monopoly. William Baumol
(1977) provided the current formal definition of a natural monopoly where ‚Äún
industry in which multiform production is more costly than production by a
monopoly‚Äù (p.¬ 810). He linked the definition to the mathematical concept of
subadditivity; specifically of the cost function. Baumol also noted that for a
firm producing a single product, scale economies were a sufficient but not a
necessary condition to prove subadditivity. Etymology. The original concept of
natural monopoly is often attributed to John Stuart Mill, who (writing before
the marginalist revolution) believed that prices would reflect the costs of
production in absence of an artificial or natural monopoly. In "Principles of
Political Economy" Mill criticised Smith's neglect of an area that could
explain wage disparity. Taking up the examples of professionals such as
jewellers, physicians and lawyers, he said, "The superiority of reward is not
here the consequence of competition, but of its absence: not a compensation for
disadvantages inherent in the employment, but an extra advantage; a kind of
monopoly price, the effect not of a legal, but of what has been termed a
natural monopoly... independently of... artificial monopolies grants by
government, there is a natural monopoly in favour of skilled labourers against
the unskilled, which makes the difference of reward exceed, sometimes in a
manifold proportion, what is sufficient merely to equalize their advantages. If
unskilled labourers had it in their power to compete with skilled, by merely
taking the trouble of learning the trade, the difference of wages might not
exceed what would compensate them for that trouble, at the ordinary rate at
which labour is remunerated. But the fact that a course of instruction is
required, of even a low degree of costliness, or that the labourer must be
maintained for a considerable time from other sources, suffices everywhere to
exclude the great body of the labouring people from the possibility of any such
competition. So Mill's initial use of the term concerned natural abilities, in
contrast to the common contemporary usage, which refers solely to market
failure in a particular type of industry, such as rail, post or electricity.
Mill's development of the idea is that what is true of labour is true of
capital. "All the natural monopolies (meaning thereby those which are created
by circumstances, and not by law) which produce or aggravate the disparities in
the remuneration of different kinds of labour, operate similarly between
different employments of capital. If a business can only be advantageously
carried on by a large capital, this in most countries limits so narrowly the
class of persons who can enter into the employment, that they are enabled to
keep their rate of profit above the general level. A trade may also, from the
nature of the case, be confined to so few hands, that profits may admit of
being kept up by a combination among the dealers. It is well known that even
among so numerous a body as the London booksellers, this sort of combination
long continued to exist. I have already mentioned the case of the gas and water
companies. Mill also applied the term to land, which can manifest a natural
monopoly by virtue of it being the only land with a particular mineral, etc.
Furthermore, Mill referred to network industries, such as electricity and water
supply, roads, rail and canals, as "practical monopolies", where "it is the
part of the government, either to subject the business to reasonable conditions
for the general advantage, or to retain such power over it, that the profits of
the monopoly may at least be obtained for the public." So, a legal prohibition
against competition is often advocated and rates are not left to the market but
are regulated by the government. For an excellent discussion of the historical
origins of the term 'natural monopoly' see Mosca. Regulation. As with all
monopolies, a monopolist who has gained his position through natural monopoly
effects may engage in behavior that abuses his market position, which often
leads to calls from consumers for government regulation. Government regulation
may also come about at the request of a business hoping to enter a market
otherwise dominated by a natural monopoly. Common arguments in favor of
regulation include the desire to control market power, facilitate competition,
promote investment or system expansion, or stabilize markets. In general,
though, regulation occurs when the government believes that the operator, left
to his own devices, would behave in a way that is contrary to the government's
objectives. In some countries an early solution to this perceived problem was
government provision of, for example, a utility service. However, this approach
raised its own problems. Some governments used the state-provided utility
services to pursue political agendas, as a source of cash flow for funding
other government activities, or as a means of obtaining hard currency. These
and other consequences of state provision of services often resulted in
inefficiency and poor service quality. As a result, governments began to seek
other solutions, namely regulation and providing services on a commercial
basis, often through private participation. Advocates of laissez-faire
capitalism generally argue that permanent natural monopolies are merely
theoretical. Economists from the Austrian school claim that governments take
ownership of the means of production in certain industries and ban competition
under the false pretense that they are natural monopolies.
