Natural and legal rights Natural and legal rights are two types of rights
theoretically distinct according to philosophers and political scientists.
Natural rights are rights not contingent upon the laws, customs, or beliefs of
any particular culture or government, and therefore universal and inalienable.
In contrast, legal rights are those bestowed onto a person by the law of a
particular political and legal system, and therefore relative to specific
cultures and governments. Legal rights may be constitutional, statutory,
regulatory, contractual, common-law, or conferred by international human rights
law. Legal rights are almost always qualified, whether by implication, by the
law which created the right itself or by legal rights held by others. A legal
right can be enforced in courts of law against another who has infringed the
right. The right may be enforced by a court order or injunction prohibiting the
other person or persons from infringing a right, by the awarding of money to
compensate the holder of the right. If a person's right to liberty is
infringed, he or she may bring an action of "habeas corpus" so that a court can
order his or her release. The owner of the copyright in a work may seek
monetary compensation against someone who copied the work without permission. A
landowner whose land is being used without his or her permission may bring an
action for trespass. A worker may sue his or her employer for breach of
contract if the employer refuses to pay the employee's wages. The theory of
natural law is closely related to the theory of natural rights. During the Age
of Enlightenment, natural law theory challenged the divine right of kings, and
became an alternative justification for the establishment of a social contract,
positive law, and government — and thus legal rights — in the form of
classical republicanism. Conversely, the concept of natural rights is used by
some anarchists to challenge the legitimacy of all such establishments. The
idea of human rights is also closely related to that of natural rights; some
recognize no difference between the two and regard both as labels for the same
thing, while others choose to keep the terms separate to eliminate association
with some features traditionally associated with natural rights. Natural
rights, in particular, are considered beyond the authority of any government or
international body to dismiss. The Universal Declaration of Human Rights is an
important legal instrument enshrining one conception of natural rights into
international soft law. Natural rights were traditionally viewed as exclusively
negative rights, whereas human rights also comprise positive rights. The idea
that animals have natural rights is one that has gained the interest of
philosophers and legal scholars in the 20th century, Even on a natural rights
conception of human rights, the two terms may not be synonymous. The legal
philosophy known as Declarationism seeks to incorporate the natural rights
philosophy of the United States Declaration of Independence into the body of
American case law on a level with the United States Constitution. Natural
rights theories. The existence of natural rights has been asserted by different
individuals on different premises, such as a priori philosophical reasoning or
religious principles. For example, Immanuel Kant claimed to derive natural
rights through reason alone. The Declaration of Independence, meanwhile, is
based upon the "self-evident" truth that "all men are ... endowed by their
Creator with certain unalienable Rights". Likewise, different philosophers and
statesmen have designed different lists of what they believe to be natural
rights; almost all include the right to life and liberty as the two highest
priorities. H. L. A. Hart argued that if there are any rights at all, there
must be the right to liberty, for all the others would depend upon this. T. H.
Green argued that “if there are such things as rights at all, then, there
must be a right to life and liberty, or, to put it more properly to free
life.” John Locke emphasized "life, liberty and property" as primary.
However, despite Locke's influential defense of the right of revolution, Thomas
Jefferson substituted "pursuit of happiness" in place of "property" in the
United States Declaration of Independence. Thomas Hobbes. Thomas Hobbes
(1588–1679) included a discussion of natural rights in his moral and
political philosophy. Hobbes' conception of natural rights extended from his
conception of man in a "state of nature". Thus he argued that the essential
natural (human) right was "to use his own power, as he will himself, for the
preservation of his own Nature; that is to say, of his own Life; and
consequently, of doing any thing, which in his own judgement, and Reason, he
shall conceive to be the aptest means thereunto." (Leviathan. 1,XIV) Hobbes
sharply distinguished this natural "liberty", from natural "laws", described
generally as "a precept, or general rule, found out by reason, by which a man
is forbidden to do, that, which is destructive of his life, or taketh away the
means of preserving his life; and to omit, that, by which he thinketh it may
best be preserved." (ibid.) In his natural state, according to Hobbes, man's
life consisted entirely of liberties and not at all of laws – "It followeth,
that in such a condition, every man has the right to every thing; even to one
another's body. And therefore, as long as this natural Right of every man to
every thing endureth, there can be no security to any man... of living out the
time, which Nature ordinarily allow men to live." (ibid.) This would lead
inevitably to a situation known as the "war of all against all", in which human
beings kill, steal and enslave others in order to stay alive, and due to their
natural lust for "Gain", "Safety" and "Reputation". Hobbes reasoned that this
world of chaos created by unlimited rights was highly undesirable, since it
would cause human life to be "solitary, poor, nasty, brutish, and short". As
such, if humans wish to live peacefully they must give up most of their natural
rights and create moral obligations in order to establish political and civil
society. This is one of the earliest formulations of the theory of government
known as the social contract. Hobbes objected to the attempt to derive rights
from "natural law," arguing that law ("lex") and right ("jus") though often
confused, signify opposites, with law referring to obligations, while rights
refer to the absence of obligations. Since by our (human) nature, we seek to
maximize our well being, rights are prior to law, natural or institutional, and
people will not follow the laws of nature without first being subjected to a
sovereign power, without which all ideas of right and wrong are meaningless –
"Therefore before the names of Just and Unjust can have place, there must be
some coercive Power, to compel men equally to the performance of their
Covenants..., to make good that Propriety, which by mutual contract men
acquire, in recompense of the universal Right they abandon: and such power
there is none before the erection of the Commonwealth." (Leviathan. 1, XV) This
marked an important departure from medieval natural law theories which gave
precedence to obligations over rights. John Locke. John Locke (1632–1704) was
another prominent Western philosopher who conceptualized rights as natural and
inalienable. Like Hobbes, Locke was a major social contract thinker. He said
that man's natural rights are life, liberty, and property. It was once
conventional wisdom that Locke greatly influenced the American Revolutionary
War with his writings of natural rights, but this claim has been the subject of
protracted dispute in recent decades. For example, the historian Ray Forrest
Harvey declared that Jefferson and Locke were at "two opposite poles" in their
political philosophy, as evidenced by Jefferson’s use in the Declaration of
Independence of the phrase "pursuit of happiness" instead of "property." More
recently, the eminent legal historian John Phillip Reid has deplored
contemporary scholars’ "misplaced emphasis on John Locke," arguing that
American revolutionary leaders saw Locke as a "commentator" on established
constitutional principles. Thomas Pangle has defended Locke's influence on the
Founding, claiming that historians who argue to the contrary either
misrepresent the classical republican alternative to which they say the
revolutionary leaders adhered, do not understand Locke, or point to someone
else who was decisively influenced by Locke. This position has also been
sustained by Michael Zuckert. The social contract is an agreement between
members of a country to live within a shared system of laws. Specific forms of
government are the result of the decisions made by these persons acting in
their collective capacity. Government is instituted to make laws that protect
these three natural rights. If a government does not properly protect these
rights, it can be overthrown. Debate. Various definitions of inalienability
include non-relinquishability, non-salability, and non-transferability. This
concept has been recognized by libertarians as being central to the question of
voluntary slavery, which Murray Rothbard dismissed as illegitimate and even
self-contradictory. Stephan Kinsella argues that "viewing rights as alienable
is perfectly consistent with—indeed, implied by—the libertarian non-
aggression principle. Under this principle, only the initiation of force is
prohibited; defensive, restitutive, or retaliatory force is not." The concept
of inalienable rights was criticized by Jeremy Bentham and Edmund Burke as
groundless. Bentham and Burke, writing in the 18th century, claimed that rights
arise from the actions of government, or evolve from tradition, and that
neither of these can provide anything "inalienable". (See Bentham's "Critique
of the Doctrine of Inalienable, Natural Rights", and Burke's "Reflections on
the Revolution in France"). Presaging the shift in thinking in the 19th
century, Bentham famously dismissed the idea of natural rights as "nonsense on
stilts". By way of contrast to the views of Burke and Bentham, the leading
American revolutionary scholar James Wilson condemned Burke's view as
"tyranny." The signers of the Declaration of Independence deemed it a "self-
evident truth" that all men are "endowed by their Creator with certain
unalienable Rights". Critics, however, could argue that use of the word
"Creator" signifies that these rights are based on theological principles, and
might question which theological principles those are, or why those theological
principles should be accepted by people who do not adhere to the religion from
which they are derived. The signers did not all, however, share the same
religion. In "The Social Contract," Jean-Jacques Rousseau claims that the
existence of inalienable rights is unnecessary for the existence of a
constitution or a set of laws and rights. This idea of a social contractthat
rights and responsibilities are derived from a consensual contract between the
government and the peopleis the most widely recognized alternative. Samuel P.
Huntington, an American political scientist, wrote that the "inalienable
rights" argument from the Declaration of Independence was necessary because
"The British were white, Anglo, and Protestant, just as we were. for the
Declaration's adoption had to have some other basis on which to justify
independence". Other critics have argued that the attempt to derive rights from
"natural law" or "human nature" is an example of the is-ought problem. However,
the term "natural" in "natural rights" refers to the opposite of "artificial",
rather than meaning "physical" as it does in the sense of ethical naturalism,
which according to G.E. Moore does suffer the is-ought problem in the form of
the naturalistic fallacy. Hugh Gibbons has proposed a descriptive argument
based on human biology. He claims that Human Beings were other-regarding as a
matter of necessity, in order to avoid the costs of conflict. Over time they
developed expectations that individuals would act in certain ways which were
then prescribed by society (duties of care etc.) and that eventually
crystallized into actionable rights. There is also debate as to whether all
rights are either natural or legal. Fourth president of the United States James
Madison, while representing Virginia in the House of Representatives, believed
that there are rights, such as trial by jury, that are social rights, arising
neither from natural law nor from positive law (which are the basis of natural
and legal rights respectively) but from the social contract from which a
government derives its authority. History. While the existence of legal rights
has always been uncontroversial, the idea that certain rights are natural or
inalienable also has a history dating back at least to the Stoics of late
Antiquity and Catholic law of the early Middle Ages, and descending through the
Protestant Reformation and the Age of Enlightenment to today. Ancient history.
Of fundamental importance to the development of the idea of natural rights was
the emergence of the idea of natural human equality. As the historian A.J.
Carlyle notes: "There is no change in political theory so startling in its
completeness as the change from the theory of Aristotle to the later
philosophical view represented by Cicero and Seneca... We think that this
cannot be better exemplified than with regard to the theory of the equality of
human nature." Charles H. McIlwain likewise observes that "the idea of the
equality of men is the profoundest contribution of the Stoics to political
thought" and that "its greatest influence is in the changed conception of law
that in part resulted from it." Cicero argues in De Legibus that "we are born
for Justice, and that right is based, not upon's opinions, but upon Nature."
Modern history. 17th-century English philosopher John Locke discussed natural
rights in his work, identifying them as being "life, liberty, and estate
(property)", and argued that such fundamental rights could not be surrendered
in the social contract. Preservation of the natural rights to life, liberty,
and property was claimed as justification for the rebellion of the American
colonies. As George Mason stated in his draft for the "Virginia Declaration of
Rights", "all men are born equally free," and hold "certain inherent natural
rights, of which they cannot, by any compact, deprive or divest their
posterity." Another 17th-century Englishman, John Lilburne (known as "Freeborn
John"), who came into conflict with both the monarchy of King Charles I and the
military dictatorship of Oliver Cromwell governed republic, argued for level
human basic rights he called ""freeborn rights"" which he defined as being
rights that every human being is born with, as opposed to rights bestowed by
government or by human law. The distinction between alienable and unalienable
rights was introduced by Francis Hutcheson. In his "Inquiry into the Original
of Our Ideas of Beauty and Virtue" (1725), Hutcheson foreshadowed the
Declaration of Independence, stating: “For wherever any Invasion is made upon
unalienable Rights, there must arise either a perfect, or external Right to
Resistance. . . . Unalienable Rights are essential Limitations in all
Governments.” Hutcheson, however, placed clear limits on his notion of
unalienable rights, declaring that “there can be no Right, or Limitation of
Right, inconsistent with, or opposite to the greatest publick Good." Hutcheson
elaborated on this idea of unalienable rights in his "A System of Moral
Philosophy" (1755), based on the Reformation principle of the liberty of
conscience. One could not in fact give up the capacity for private judgment
(e.g., about religious questions) regardless of any external contracts or oaths
to religious or secular authorities so that right is "unalienable." Hutcheson
wrote: "Thus no man can really change his sentiments, judgments, and inward
affections, at the pleasure of another; nor can it tend to any good to make him
profess what is contrary to his heart. The right of private judgment is
therefore unalienable." In discussion of social contract theory, "inalienable
rights" were said to be those rights that could not be surrendered by citizens
to the sovereign. Such rights were thought to be "natural rights", independent
of positive law. Some social contract theorists reasoned, however, that in the
natural state only the strongest could benefit from their rights. Thus, people
form an implicit social contract, ceding their natural rights to the authority
to protect the people from abuse, and living henceforth under the legal rights
of that authority. Many historical apologies for slavery and illiberal
government were based on explicit or implicit voluntary contracts to alienate
any "natural rights" to freedom and self-determination. The "de facto"
inalienability arguments of the Hutcheson and his predecessors provided the
basis for the anti-slavery movement to argue not simply against involuntary
slavery but against any explicit or implied contractual forms of slavery. Any
contract that tried to legally alienate such a right would be inherently
invalid. Similarly, the argument was used by the democratic movement to argue
against any explicit or implied social contracts of subjection ("pactum
subjectionis") by which a people would supposedly alienate their right of self-
government to a sovereign as, for example, in "Leviathan" by Thomas Hobbes.
According to Ernst Cassirer, Price raised a furor of opposition so in 1777 he
wrote another tract that clarified his position and again restated the "de
facto" basis for the argument that the "liberty of men as agents is that power
of self-determination which all agents, as such, possess." In Iran. By 1906,
the Iranians had managed to establish a parliament and, though this parliament
was short-lived, it was later reestablished and grew ever more powerful until
1953, when Operation Ajax overthrew Iran's first democratically-elected
government. Despite this, Iran's people have maintained a strong democratic
collective psyche even under the Islamic Republic's authoritarian policies
(See: Iranian Green Movement). Contemporary history. Many documents now echo
the phrase used in the United States Declaration of Independence. The preamble
to the 1948 Universal Declaration of Human Rights asserts that rights are
inalienable: "recognition of the inherent dignity and of the equal and
inalienable rights of all members of the human family is the foundation of
freedom, justice and peace in the world." Article 1, §1 of the California
Constitution recognizes inalienable rights, and articulated "some" (not all) of
those rights as "defending life and liberty, acquiring, possessing, and
protecting property, and pursuing and obtaining safety, happiness, and
privacy." However, there is still much dispute over which "rights" are truly
natural rights and which are not, and the concept of natural or inalienable
rights is still controversial to some. Erich Fromm argued that some powers over
human beings could be wielded only by God, and that if there were no God, no
human beings could wield these powers. Contemporary political philosophies
continuing the liberal tradition of natural rights include libertarianism,
anarcho-capitalism and Objectivism, and include amongst their canon the works
of authors such as Robert Nozick, Ludwig von Mises, Ayn Rand, and Murray
Rothbard. A libertarian view of inalienable rights is laid out in Morris and
Linda Tannehill's "The Market for Liberty", which claims that a man has a right
to ownership over his life and therefore also his property, because he has
invested time (i.e. part of his life) in it and thereby made it an extension of
his life. However, if he initiates force against and to the detriment of
another man, he alienates himself from the right to that part of his life which
is required to pay his debt: "Rights are "not" inalienable, but only the
possessor of a right can alienate himself from that right – no one else can
take a man's rights from him." Legal rights documents. The specific enumeration
of legal rights accorded to people has historically differed greatly from one
century to the next, and from one regime to the next, but nowadays is normally
addressed by the constitutions of the respective nations. The following
documents have each played important historical roles in establishing legal
rights norms around the world.
