Neo-Gramscianism Neo-Gramscianism applies a critical theory approach to the
study of International Relations (IR) and the Global Political Economy (GPE)
that explores the interface of ideas, institutions and material capabilities as
they shape the specific contours of the state formation. The theory is heavily
influenced by the writings of Antonio Gramsci. Neo-Gramscianism analyzes how
the particular constellation of social forces, the state and the dominant
ideational configuration define and sustain world orders. In this sense, the
Neo-Gramscian approach breaks the decades-old stalemate between the so-called
realist schools of thought, and the liberal theories by historicizing the very
theoretical foundations of the two streams as part of a particular world order,
and finding the interlocking relationship between agency and structure.
Furthermore, Karl Polanyi, Karl Marx, Max Weber, Niccolò Machiavelli, Max
Horkheimer, Theodor Adorno and Michel Foucault are cited as major sources
within the Critical theory of International Relations. Origins of the Neo-
Gramscian perspective. The beginning of the Neo-Gramscian perspective can be
traced to York University professor emeritus, Robert W. Cox's article "Social
Forces, States and World Orders: Beyond International Relations Theory", in
"Millennium" 10 (1981) 2, and "Gramsci, Hegemony and International Relations:
An Essay in Method", published in "Millennium" 12 (1983) 2. In his 1981
article, Cox demands a critical study of IR, as opposed to the usual "problem-
solving" theories, which do not interrogate the origin, nature and development
of historical structures, but accept for example that states and the
(supposedly) "anarchic" relationships between them as Kantian "Dinge an sich".
However Cox disavows the label Neo-Gramscian despite the fact that in a follow-
up article, he showed how Gramsci's thought can be used to analyze power
structures within the GPE. Particularly Gramsci's concept of hegemony, vastly
different from the realists' conception of hegemony, appears fruitful.
Gramsci's state theory, his conception of ""historic blocs"" – dominant
configurations of material capabilities, ideologies and institutions as
determining frames for individual and collective action – and of élites
acting as "organic intellectuals" forging "historic blocs", is also deemed
useful. The Neo-Gramscian approach has also been developed along somewhat
different lines by Cox's colleague, Stephen Gill, distinguished research
professor of political science at York University in Toronto. Gill contributed
to showing how the elite Trilateral Commission acted as an "organic
intellectual", forging the (currently hegemonic) ideology of neoliberalism and
the so-called "Washington Consensus" and later in relation to the globalization
of power and resistance in his book "Power and Resistance in the New World
Order" (Palgrave 2003). Outside of North America, the so-called "Amsterdam
School" around Kees Van Der Pijl and Henk Overbeek (at VU University Amsterdam)
and individual researchers in Germany, notably in Düsseldorf, Kassel and
Marburg as well as at the Centre for Global Political Economy at the University
of Sussex in the UK, and other parts of the world, have adopted the neo-
Gramscian critical method. Basics of the neo-Gramscian perspective. Theoretical
Approach. In the mainstream approaches to international or global political
economy the ontological centrality of the state is not in question. In
contrast, Neo-Gramscianism, using an approach which Henk Overbeek calls
transnational historical materialism, "identifies state formation and
interstate politics as moments of the transnational dynamics of capital
accumulation and class formation". It contrasts with the positivism and social
constructivist approaches of mainstream perspectives through "a rejection of
the separation between subject and object... and the adoption of a dialectic
understanding of reality as a dynamic totality and as a unity of opposites."
Hegemony. The neo-Gramscian view of hegemony is distinct from the realist view
of hegemony. Realists view hegemony as the "predominant power of a state (or a
group of states)". Gramscians look at hegemony in terms of class relations. A
class is considered hegemonic if it has legitimized its dominance through
institutions and concessions. When a class has established dominance in this
way, as well as in the formal political structural of a state, then it
constitutes a "historic bloc." Neo-Gramscians argue that, because of
globalisation, a neoliberal "transnational historic bloc" exists or is coming
into existence. Counterhegemony. A counterhegemony refers to an alternate
normative interpretation of the functioning of social, economic, and political
institutions. If a counterhegemony grows large enough it is able to subsume and
replace the "historic bloc" it was born in. Neo-Gramscians use the
Machiavellian terms "war of position" and "war of movement" to explain how this
is possible. In a war of position a counterhegemonic movement attempts, through
persuasion or propaganda, to increase the number of people who share its view
on the hegemonic order; in a war of movement the counterhegemonic tendencies
which have grown large enough overthrow, violently or democratically, the
current hegemony and establish themselves as a new "historic bloc."
