Neo-medievalism Neo-medievalism (or neomedievalism) is a neologism that was
first popularized by Italian medievalist Umberto Eco in his 1986 essay
"Dreaming in the Middle Ages".. Prior to this the term was used in Isaiah
Berlin's "The Hedgehog and the Fox" to refer to a nostalgic romanticism for the
simplicity and order of the medieval period. In its modern use, it has been
used by various writers such as medieval historians who see it as the
intersection between popular fantasy and medieval history; as a term describing
the post-modern study of medieval history; and as political theory about modern
international relations. Culture. The widespread interest in medieval themes in
popular culture, especially computer games such as MMORPGs, films and
television, neo-medieval music, and popular literature, has been called
neomedieval. Critics have discussed why medieval themes continue to fascinate
audiences in a modern, heavily technological world. A possible explanation is
the need for a romanticized historical narrative to clarify the confusing
panorama of current political and cultural events. Political theory. The idea
of neomedievalism in political theory was first discussed in 1977 by theorist
Hedley Bull in "The Anarchical Society: A Study of Order in World Politics"
(pg. 254-55). Hedley Bull suggested society was moving towards a form of
"neomedievalism" in which individual notions of rights and a growing sense of a
"world common good" were undermining national sovereignty. He saw a complex
layering of international, national and subnational organizations which might
help "avoid the classic dangers of the system of sovereign states by a
structure of overlapping structures and cross-cutting loyalties that hold all
peoples together in a universal society while at the same time avoiding the
concentration inherent in a world government." Stephen J. Korbin in 1998 added
the forces of the digital world economy to the picture of neomedievalism. In an
article entitled "Back to the Future: Neomedievalism and the Postmodern Digital
World Economy" published in 1998 in the "Journal of International Affairs",
argues that the sovereign state as we know it—defined within certain
territorial borders—is about to change profoundly, if not to wither away, due
in part to the digital world economy created by the Internet, suggesting that
cyberspace is a trans-territorial domain operating outside of the jurisdiction
of national law. Although Hedley Bull originally envisioned neomedievalism as a
positive trend which might help "avoid the classic dangers of the system of
sovereign states", neomedievalism has its critics. Bruce Holsinger in
"Neomedievalism, Neoconservatism, and the War on Terror" (2007) argues that
neoconservatives have exploited neomedievalism's conceptual slipperiness for
their own tactical ends.
