Neoclassical economics Neoclassical economics is a term variously used for
approaches to economics focusing on the determination of prices, outputs, and
income distributions in markets through supply and demand, often mediated
through a hypothesized maximization of utility by income-constrained
individuals and of profits by cost-constrained firms employing available
information and factors of production, in accordance with rational choice
theory. Neoclassical economics dominates microeconomics, and together with
Keynesian economics forms the neoclassical synthesis which dominates mainstream
economics today. Although neoclassical economics has gained widespread
acceptance by contemporary economists, there have been many critiques of
neoclassical economics, often incorporated into newer versions of neoclassical
theory as awareness of economic criteria changes. Overview. The term was
originally introduced by Thorstein Veblen in 1900, in his article
'Preconceptions of Economic Science', to distinguish marginalists in the
tradition of Alfred Marshall from those in the Austrian School. Veblen, T.
(1900). 'The Preconceptions of Economic Science - III', "The Quarterly Journal
of Economics", 14(2), 240-269. (Term on pg. 261). It was later used by John
Hicks, George Stigler, and others to include the work of Carl Menger, William
Stanley Jevons, John Bates Clark and many others. Today it is usually used to
refer to mainstream economics, although it has also been used as an umbrella
term encompassing a number of other schools of thought, notably excluding
institutional economics, various historical schools of economics, and Marxian
economics, in addition to various other heterodox approaches to economics.
Neoclassical economics is characterized by several assumptions common to many
schools of economic thought. There is not a complete agreement on what is meant
by neoclassical economics, and the result is a wide range of neoclassical
approaches to various problem areas and domains—ranging from neoclassical
theories of labor to neoclassical theories of demographic changes. From these
three assumptions, neoclassical economists have built a structure to understand
the allocation of scarce resources among alternative ends—in fact
understanding such allocation is often considered the definition of economics
to neoclassical theorists. Here's how William Stanley Jevons presented "the
problem of Economics". William Stanley Jevons (1879, 2nd ed., p. 289), Theory
of Political Economy". Italics in original. From the basic assumptions of
neoclassical economics comes a wide range of theories about various areas of
economic activity. For example, profit maximization lies behind the
neoclassical theory of the firm, while the derivation of demand curves leads to
an understanding of consumer goods, and the supply curve allows an analysis of
the factors of production. Utility maximization is the source for the
neoclassical theory of consumption, the derivation of demand curves for
consumer goods, and the derivation of labor supply curves and reservation
demand. Market supply and demand are aggregated across firms and individuals.
Their interactions determine equilibrium output and price. The market supply
and demand for each factor of production is derived analogously to those for
market final output to determine equilibrium income and the income
distribution. Factor demand incorporates the marginal-productivity relationship
of that factor in the output market. Neoclassical economics emphasizes
equilibria, where equilibria are the solutions of agent maximization problems.
Regularities in economies are explained by methodological individualism, the
position that economic phenomena can be explained by aggregating over the
behavior of agents. The emphasis is on microeconomics. Institutions, which
might be considered as prior to and conditioning individual behavior, are de-
emphasized. Economic subjectivism accompanies these emphases. See also general
equilibrium. Origins. Classical economics, developed in the 18th and 19th
centuries, included a value theory and distribution theory. The value of a
product was thought to depend on the costs involved in producing that product.
The explanation of costs in Classical economics was simultaneously an
explanation of distribution. A landlord received rent, workers received wages,
and a capitalist tenant farmer received profits on their investment. This
classic approach included the work of Adam Smith and David Ricardo. However,
some economists gradually began emphasizing the perceived value of a good to
the consumer. They proposed a theory that the value of a product was to be
explained with differences in utility (usefulness) to the consumer. (In
England, economists tended to conceptualize utility in keeping with the
Utilitarianism of Jeremy Bentham and later of John Stuart Mill.) The third step
from political economy to economics was the introduction of marginalism and the
proposition that economic actors made decisions based on margins. For example,
a person decides to buy a second sandwich based on how full they are after the
first one, a firm hires a new employee based on the expected increase in
profits the employee will bring. This differs from the aggregate decision
making of classical political economy in that it explains how vital goods such
as water can be cheap, while luxuries can be expensive. The Marginal
Revolution. In particular, Jevons saw his economics as an application and
development of Jeremy Bentham's utilitarianism and never had a fully developed
general equilibrium theory. Menger did not embrace this hedonic conception,
explained diminishing marginal utility in terms of subjective prioritization of
possible uses, and emphasized disequilibrium and the discrete; further Menger
had an objection to the use of mathematics in economics, while the other two
modeled their theories after 19th century mechanics. Walras' conception of
utility, like that of Menger, was that of "usefulness" in general, rather than
the hedonic conception of Bentham or of Mill; and Walras was more interested in
the interaction of markets than in explaining the individual psyche. Alfred
Marshall's textbook, "Principles of Economics" (1890), was the dominant
textbook in England a generation later. Marshall's influence extended
elsewhere; Italians would compliment Maffeo Pantaleoni by calling him the
"Marshall of Italy". Marshall thought classical economics attempted to explain
prices by the cost of production. He asserted that earlier marginalists went
too far in correcting this imbalance by overemphasizing utility and demand.
Marshall thought that "We might as reasonably dispute whether it is the upper
or the under blade of a pair of scissors that cuts a piece of paper, as whether
value is governed by utility or cost of production". Marshall took supply and
demand as stable functions and extended supply and demand explanations of
prices to all runs. He argued supply was easier to vary in longer runs, and
thus became a more important determinant of price in the very long run. Further
developments. An important change in neoclassical economics occurred around
1933. Joan Robinson and Edward H. Chamberlin, with the near simultaneous
publication of their respective books, "The Economics of Imperfect Competition"
(1933) and "The Theory of Monopolistic Competition" (1933), introduced models
of imperfect competition. Theories of market forms and industrial organization
grew out of this work. They also emphasized certain tools, such as the marginal
revenue curve. Joan Robinson's work on imperfect competition, at least, was a
response to certain problems of Marshallian partial equilibrium theory
highlighted by Piero Sraffa. Anglo-American economists also responded to these
problems by turning towards general equilibrium theory, developed on the
European continent by Walras and Vilfredo Pareto. J. R. Hicks's "Value and
Capital" (1939) was influential in introducing his English-speaking colleagues
to these traditions. He, in turn, was influenced by the Austrian School
economist Friedrich Hayek's move to the London School of Economics, where Hicks
then studied. These developments were accompanied by the introduction of new
tools, such as indifference curves and the theory of ordinal utility. The level
of mathematical sophistication of neoclassical economics increased. Paul
Samuelson's "Foundations of Economic Analysis" (1947) contributed to this
increase in mathematical modelling. The interwar period in American economics
has been argued to have been pluralistic, with neoclassical economics and
institutionalism competing for allegiance. Frank Knight, an early Chicago
school economist attempted to combine both schools. But this increase in
mathematics was accompanied by greater dominance of neoclassical economics in
Anglo-American universities after World War II. Hicks' book, "Value and
Capital" had two main parts. The second, which was arguably not immediately
influential, presented a model of temporary equilibrium. Hicks was influenced
directly by Hayek's notion of intertemporal coordination and paralleled by
earlier work by Lindhal. This was part of an abandonment of disaggregated long
run models. This trend probably reached its culmination with the Arrow-Debreu
model of intertemporal equilibrium. The Arrow-Debreu model has canonical
presentations in Gérard Debreu's "Theory of Value" (1959) and in Arrow and
Hahn's "General Competitive Analysis" (1971). Many of these developments were
against the backdrop of improvements in both econometrics, that is the ability
to measure prices and changes in goods and services, as well as their aggregate
quantities, and in the creation of macroeconomics, or the study of whole
economies. The attempt to combine neo-classical microeconomics and Keynesian
macroeconomics would lead to the neoclassical synthesis which has been the
dominant paradigm of economic reasoning in English-speaking countries since the
1950s. Hicks and Samuelson were for example instrumental in mainstreaming
Keynesian economics. Macroeconomics influenced the neoclassical synthesis from
the other direction, undermining foundations of classical economic theory such
as Say's Law, and assumptions about political economy such as the necessity for
a hard-money standard. These developments are reflected in neoclassical theory
by the search for the occurrence in markets of the equilibrium conditions of
Pareto optimality and self-sustainability. Criticisms. Neoclassical economics
is sometimes criticized for having a normative bias. In this view, it does not
focus on explaining actual economies, but instead on describing a "utopia" in
which Pareto optimality applies. The assumption that individuals act rationally
may be viewed as ignoring important aspects of human behavior. Many see the
"economic man" as being quite different from real people. Many economists, even
contemporaries, have criticized this model of economic man. Thorstein Veblen
put it most sardonically. Neoclassical economics assumes a person to be,
Thorstein Veblen (1898) "Why Is Economics Not an Evolutionary Science?",
reprinted in The Place of Science in Modern Civilization (New York, 1919), p.
73. Large corporations might perhaps come closer to the neoclassical ideal of
profit maximization, but this is not necessarily viewed as desirable if this
comes at the expense of neglect of wider social issues. The response to this is
that neoclassical economics is descriptive and not normative. It addresses such
problems with concepts of private versus social utility. Problems exist with
making the neoclassical general equilibrium theory compatible with an economy
that develops over time and includes capital goods. This was explored in a
major debate in the 1960s—the "Cambridge capital controversy"—about the
validity of neoclassical economics, with an emphasis on the economic growth,
capital, aggregate theory, and the marginal productivity theory of
distribution. There were also internal attempts by neoclassical economists to
extend the Arrow-Debreu model to disequilibrium investigations of stability and
uniqueness. However a result known as the Sonnenschein-Mantel-Debreu theorem
suggests that the assumptions that must be made to ensure that the equilibrium
is stable and unique are quite restrictive. Neoclassical economics is also
often seen as relying too heavily on complex mathematical models, such as those
used in general equilibrium theory, without enough regard to whether these
actually describe the real economy. Many see an attempt to model a system as
complex as a modern economy by a mathematical model as unrealistic and doomed
to failure. A famous answer to this criticism is Milton Friedman's claim that
theories should be judged by their ability to predict events rather than by the
realism of their assumptions. Mathematical models also include those in game
theory, linear programming, and econometrics. Critics of neoclassical economics
are divided into those who think that highly mathematical method is inherently
wrong and those who think that mathematical method is potentially good even if
contemporary methods have problems. In general, allegedly overly unrealistic
assumptions are one of the most common criticisms towards neoclassical
economics. It is fair to say that many (but not all) of these criticisms can
only be directed towards a subset of the neoclassical models (for example,
there are many neoclassical models where unregulated markets fail to achieve
Pareto-optimality and there has recently been an increased interest in modeling
non-rational decision making).
