Neoliberalism (international relations) In the study of international
relations, neoliberalism refers to a school of thought which believes that
nation-states are, or at least should be, concerned first and foremost with
absolute gains rather than relative gains to other nation-states. This theory
is often confused with neoliberal economic ideology, although both use some
common methodological tools, such as game theory. Activities of the
International System. Neoliberal international relations thinkers often employ
game theory to explain why states do or do not cooperate; since their approach
tends to emphasize the possibility of mutual wins, they are interested in
institutions which can arrange jointly profitable arrangements and compromises.
Neoliberalism is a response to Neorealism; while not denying the anarchic
nature of the international system, neoliberals argue that its importance and
effect has been exaggerated. The neoliberal argument is focused on the
neorealists' underestimation of "the varieties of cooperative behavior possible
within... a decentralized system." Both theories, however, consider the state
and its interests as the central subject of analysis; Neoliberalism may have a
wider conception of what those interests "are". Neoliberalism argues that even
in an anarchic system of autonomous rational states, cooperation can emerge
through the building of norms, regimes and institutions. In terms of the scope
of international relations theory and foreign interventionism, the debate
between Neoliberalism and Neorealism is an intra paradigm one, as both theories
are positivist and focus mainly on the state system as the primary unit of
analysis.. Development. Robert Keohane and Joseph Nye are considered the
founders of the neoliberal school of thought; Keohane's book "After Hegemony"
is a classic of the genre. Another major influence is the hegemonic stability
theory of Stephen Krasner, Charles P. Kindleberger, and others. Contentions.
Keohane and Nye. Robert O. Keohane and Joseph S. Nye, in response to
neorealism, develop an opposing theory they dub "Complex interdependence."
Robert Keohane and Joseph Nye explain, “…complex interdependence sometimes
comes closer to reality than does realism.” In explaining this, Keohane and
Nye cover the three assumptions in realist thought: First, states are coherent
units and are the dominant actors in international relations; second, force is
a usable and effective instrument of policy; and finally, the assumption that
there is a hierarchy in international politics. The heart of Keohane and
Nye’s argument is that in international politics there are, in fact, multiple
channels that connect societies exceeding the conventional Westphalian system
of states. This manifests itself in many forms ranging from informal
governmental ties to multinational corporations and organizations. Here they
define their terminology; interstate relations are those channels assumed by
realists; "transgovernmental" relations occur when one relaxes the realist
assumption that states act coherently as units; "transnational" applies when
one removes the assumption that states are the only units. It is through these
channels that political exchange occurs, not through the limited interstate
channel as championed by realists. Secondly, Keohane and Nye argue that there
is not, in fact, a hierarchy among issues, meaning that not only is the martial
arm of foreign policy not the supreme tool by which to carry out a state's
agenda, but that there are a multitude of different agendas that come to the
forefront. The line between domestic and foreign policy becomes blurred in this
case, as realistically there is no clear agenda in interstate relations.
Finally, the use of military force is not exercised when complex
interdependence prevails. The idea is developed that between countries in which
a complex interdependence exists, the role of the military in resolving
disputes is negated. However, Keohane and Nye go on to state that the role of
the military is in fact important in that "alliance’s political and military
relations with a rival bloc." Lebow. Richard Ned Lebow states that the failure
of neorealism lies in its “institutionalist” ontology, whereas the
neorealist thinker Kenneth Waltz states, “the creators the system become the
creatures of the market that their activity gave rise to.” This critical
failure, according to Lebow, is due to the realists’ inability “to escape
from the predicament of anarchy.” Or rather, the assumption that states do
not adapt and will respond similarly to similar constraints and opportunities.
Mearsheimer. Norman Angell, a classical London School of Economics liberal, had
held: "We cannot ensure the stability of the present system by the political or
military preponderance of our nation or alliance by imposing its will on a
rival." Keohane and Lisa L. Martin expound upon these ideas in the mid 1990s as
a response to John J. Mearsheimer’s “The False Promise of International
Institutions,” where Mearsheimer purports that, “institutions cannot get
states to stop behaving as short-term power maximizers.” In fact
Mearsheimer’s article is a direct response to the liberal-institutionalist
movement created in response to neo-realism. The central point in Keohane and
Martin’s idea is that neo-realism insists that, “institutions have only
marginal effects…leaves [neo-realism without a plausible account of the
investments that states have made in such international institutions as the EU,
NATO, GATT, and regional trading organizations.” This idea is in keeping with
the notion of complex interdependence. Moreover, Keohane and Martin argue that
the fact that international institutions are created in response to state
interests, that the real empirical question is “knowing how to distinguish
the effects of underlying conditions from those of the institutions
themselves.” Mearsheimer, however, is concerned with ‘inner-directed’
institutions, which he states, “seek to cause peace by influencing the
behavior of the member states.” In doing so he dismisses Keohane and
Martin’s NATO argument in favor of the example of the European Community (EC)
and the International Energy Agency. According to Mearsheimer, the NATO
argument is an alliance and is interested in “an outside state, or coalition
of states, which the alliance aims to deter, coerce, or defeat in war.”
Mearsheimer reasons that since NATO is an alliance it has special concerns. He
concedes this point to Keohane and Martin. Mearsheimer attacks Martin’s
research on the EC, particularly her argument on Argentine sanctions by Britain
during the Falklands war, which were affected by Britain’s linking of issues
in context of the EC. Mearsheimer purports that the United States was not a
member of the EC and yet the US and Britain managed to cooperate on sanctions,
effectively creating an ad hoc alliance which effected change in its member
states.
