Neomercantilism Neomercantilism is a policy regime that encourages exports,
discourages imports, controls capital movement, and centralizes currency
decisions in the hands of a central government. The objective of neo-
mercantilist policies is to increase the level of foreign reserves held by the
government, allowing more effective monetary policy and fiscal policy. This is
generally believed to come at the cost of lower standards of living than an
open economy would bring at the same time, but offers the advantages to the
government in question of having greater autonomy and control. China, Japan and
Singapore are described as neo-mercantilist. It is called "neo-" because of the
change in emphasis from classical mercantilism on military development, to
economic development, and its acceptance of a greater level of market
determination of prices internally than was true of classical mercantilism. Its
policy recommendations sometimes echo the mercantilism of the early modern
period. These are generally protectionist measures in the form of high tariffs
and other import restrictions to protect domestic industries combined with
government intervention to promote industrial growth, especially manufacturing.
At its simplest level, it proposes that economic independence and self-
sufficiency are legitimate objectives for a nation to pursue, and systems of
protection are justified to allow the nation to develop its industrial and
commercial infrastructure to the point where it can compete on equal terms in
international trade. In macro-economic terms, it emphasizes a fixed currency
and autonomy over monetary policy over capital mobility. History. Rise of
mercantilism. As feudalism became incapable of regulating the new methods of
production and distribution, mercantilism emerged as a system for managing
economic growth through international trade. It was a form of merchant
capitalism relying on protectionism. It was developed in the sixteenth century
by the European nation-states to enrich their own countries by encouraging
exports and limiting imports. In modern terms, the intention was to achieve a
"favourable" balance of trade. Early criticism. In "The Wealth of Nations",
Adam Smith criticised the implicit political corruption of mercantilism in
limiting the benefits of trade to the elite classes, and asserted that free
trade should benefit all interested parties. Smith considered mercantilism a
system where one country increases its power by getting excess gold on foreign
transactions and it is a system created by merchants in order to get monopolies
and easy profits. Some people believe that, because Britain adopted his call
for free trade policies, it fell behind the United States and Germany by 1880,
having gained its dominance under the mercantilism of Cromwell and Elizabeth I
(when according to Adam Smith, England was much less mercantilist than Spain
and Portugal, who decayed much due to their colonial mercantilist policies,
their gold reserves all naturally flowed to Britain, who at the time had a much
more efficient production system, even though Portugal and Spain had colonies
with much richer natural resources than Britain). The success of the United
States and Germany drove the reintroduction of protectionist regulations in the
rest of Europe. Between 1870–1910 United States achieved a global industrial
dominance thanks to innovations in its production system (such as
interchangeable parts), culminating with Ford's Assembly line. These
innovations strongly increased the international competitiveness of American
products. Philosophy. Neomercantilism is founded on the use of control of
capital movement and discouraging of domestic consumption as a means of
increasing foreign reserves and promoting capital development. This involves
protectionism on a host of levels: both protection of domestic producers,
discouraging of consumer imports, structural barriers to prevent entry of
foreign companies into domestic markets, manipulation of the currency value
against foreign currencies and limitations on foreign ownership of domestic
corporations. While all nations engage in these activities to one degree or
another, neo-mercantilism makes them the focus of economic policy. The purpose
is to develop export markets to developed countries, and selectively acquire
strategic capital, while keeping ownership of the asset base in domestic hands.
This use of protectionism is criticized on grounds that go back to Adam Smith's
"The Wealth of Nations", which was aimed directly at classical mercantilist
policies, and whose arguments are applied to neo-mercantilism. Namely that
protectionism is effective as a means of fostering economic independence and
national stability; and questioning the conclusion that it allows for
sustainable development of the nation's industrial base in the most efficient
manner. Instead market economics has for over two centuries argued that
increasing competition within the nation which will more effectively promote
capital development and efficient allocation of resources. "Free traders" argue
that by closing an economy, resources will be spent duplicating products that
could more effectively be bought from abroad, and that there will be less
development of exports which offer a comparative advantage. Market economists
also argue that protection denies a nation's own consumers the opportunity to
buy at cheaper market prices when quotas or tariffs are imposed on imports. The
subsidy of goods has also been advocated under neomercantilism. The fair trade
movement claims that the protection of stability in emerging economies by
guaranteeing a minimum purchase of goods at prices above those available in the
current world markets, can contribute to restoring economic and social balance
as well as promote social justice. Proponents of the fair trade movement argue
that this may help to avoid the instability generated by the influence of
global corporations on developed and developing nations. Neomercantilists claim
that "Free Trade" results in a negative philosophy that a nation that is not
competitive deserves to decline and perish, just like an under-performing
corporation should. They argue that "free trade" does not work well whenever
dumping is practiced or the international rules do not take into account the
differences between wages, costs environmental regulations, and benets from
nation to nation. For instance, there is a major difference in the cost of
labour between a "First World" and "Third World" country for two equally
skilled (or unskilled) sets of workers. When this economic reality is exploited
by "First World" manufacturers, the benefits accrue to "First World"
shareholders and consumers (and slightly improved work condition of exploited
Third World workers) at the expense of privileged "First World" workers and
their status in the "middle class". An unquestioningly open policy in such
circumstances may effectively devalue "first world" human capital investments
in favor of financial capital investments. Consider for example, a person
deciding whether to invest in training as an engineer or in a portfolio of
financial assets. Offshoring dramatically increases the effective supply of
engineers, and as a result, their price will tend to decline (or grow at a
slower rate). This decline will be increased by the lower cost of living in
non-first world countries that would allow an engineer there to live much
better on a lower nominal salary than their first world counterpart. (see
purchasing power parity). This obviously is resulting in a huge immigration of
skilled professionals from first-world countries to the third world, seeking a
better quality of life. Faced with such prospects, rational economic agents
will tend to avoid investing in human capital in areas that are vulnerable to
such government-induced devaluation. Instead, they will shift training toward
areas that are protected by regulation (for example : careers in law, medicine,
government) or social tradition (tenured academia), or socio-cultural factors
(sales) or local physical requirements (nursing, medicine, construction).
Alternatively, rational economic agents in "first world" economies may choose
to invest in financial assets instead of human capital — further eroding the
long term ability of the "first world" country to produce and grow. As
predicted by Adam Smith, this effect would reduce the inequality between First
World and Third World countries, increasing overall fairness. Additionally,
since cost of goods sold tends to be a larger component of total revenue than
profits for most industries, production within a country may keep a larger
portion of the total wealth within the local economy in comparison to dividends
of profits and reduced prices on consumer goods. Furthermore, infrastructure
investments may be reduced when production is shifted offshore. Over the longer
term, such reduced local investments may reduce longer term productivity and
economic growth. Neomercantilist economies on the other hand are often
characterized by higher long term growth rates (that tend to flatten when
neomercantilist policies are halted). This claim unfortunately is not verified
among developed nations, where Australia is both the main proponent of
international free trade and among the first world countries, the one with the
higher sustained growth during the last fifteen years. Also, as of February
2009, Australia is also the only developed country who is not officially in
recession. The language of neomercantilist policies repeats the claims of
earlier centuries that protective measures benefit the nation as a whole and
that governmental intervention secures the "wealth of the nation" for future
generations. In doing so, neomercantilist admit that the interests of large
corporations might as often be represented and protected as pushed aside for
the national interest. As a neomercantilist nation's industrial production
capacity and improving research and development grow as a threat to the
hegemon's (who usually unilaterally practices free-trade as Britain in the 19th
century and the USA in the late 20th century) domestic markets, so
protectionism is the usual response, initially through political and, when
necessary, military means (see World War I). Examples of neomercantilism.
United States and Germany in 19th century. By 1880 the United States passed the
British Empire in economic strength — ahead of Germany, second in strength,
due to Bismarck's adherence to similar neomercantilist policies. After 1900,
Britain was unable to remain an effective hegemon, having followed its "free
trade" philosophy since the 1840s, but the United States was still pursuing
policies of its American School rooted in Hamilton's three reports, that it had
embraced in the 1860s under Abraham Lincoln. Germany followed Otto von
Bismarck's policies based on Friedrich List's "National System", and American
economic practices — allowing both powers to continue their dominance in
world economics and power. Germany chose to use its strength to pursue a
'balance of power' with the British Empire leading indirectly to World War I,
whereas the United States refrained from European power struggles through its
foreign policy of 'isolationism' or non-interventionism in foreign conflicts.
Criticism. Classic liberal economic theory states that free trade, sound money,
and prosperity are mutually interdependent parts of a single economic policy
but, when inflation intruded into the world trade system, protectionism
followed. In "Two Hegemonies", Pigman describes a hegemon's principal function
as, "...underwriting a liberal international trading system that is beneficial
to the hegemon but, paradoxically, even more beneficial to its potential
rivals." As it grows in significance, the hegemon expands its sphere of
influence to include interests that have to be promoted through liberal
economic policies. During this period, the hegemon will benefit directly from
the increased international trade. But other economies also prosper. They are
not burdened with high defence spending and the costs associated with overseas
development. The "hegemon's dilemma" is whether to revert to neomercantilist
policies if its hegemony is threatened, or to continue free trade and risk a
relative decline. History suggests that all the global powers experience a
period of growth under mercantilistic policy followed by a period where they
are benign and focused on promoting international peace and liberal trade which
is followed by a period of contraction when they become progressively more
unstable. Game theory analysis — trade policy as iterated prisoner's dilemma.
Trade Policy is perhaps best viewed economically as an ongoing iterated /
repeated prisoner's dilemma game. The prisoner's dilemma is not a zero-sum
game. Everyone would be better off if all players cooperated than if they
defected. (Mutual cooperation is a Pareto improvement over mutual defection).
Unfortunately, each player has an incentive to defect against their opponent.
By defecting a player can defend themselves against an opponent's defection,
and can exploit a cooperating opponent. In single-shot prisoner's dilemma, the
economically dominant action is to defect. However, trade policy is formed over
time — and is better modelled by iterated /repeated prisoner's dilemma. Key
early work in this area includes research by David Kreps, and by Robert
Axelrod. One of the most important developments in game theory is the
development of the folk theorem when applied to iterated prisoner's dilemma
games.
