Neosocialism Neosocialism was a political trend of socialism, represented in
France during the 1930s and in Belgium, which included several revisionist
tendencies in the French Section of the Workers' International (SFIO). In the
wake of the Great Depression, a group of right-wing members, led by Henri de
Man in Belgium, founder of "planisme", and in France Marcel Déat, Pierre
Renaudel, René Belin, the "neo-Turks" of the Radical-Socialist Party (Pierre
Mendès-France, etc.), opposed themselves both to Marxism and to gradual
reformism. Instead, influenced by Henri de Man's "planisme", they promoted a
"constructive revolution" headed by the state and technocrats, through economic
planification. Such ideas also influenced the Non-Conformist Movement in the
French right-wing. Marcel Déat published in 1930 "Perspectives socialistes"
(Socialist Perspectives), a revisionist work closely influenced by Henri de
Man's "planisme". Along with over a hundred articles written in "La Vie
Socialiste", the review of the SFIO's right-wing, "Perspective socialistes"
marked the shift of Déat from classical Socialism to Neo-Socialism. Déat
replaced class struggle by collaboration of classes and national solidarity,
advocated corporatism as a social organization model, replaced the notion of
"Socialism" by "anti-Capitalism" and supported an authoritarian state which
would plan the economy and from which parliamentarism would be repealed. The
Neo-Socialist faction inside of the SFIO, which included Marcel Déat and
Pierre Renaudel, were expelled during the November 1933 Congress, because of
their revisionist stances and admiration for Fascism. The neos advocated
alliances with the middle-classes and favored making compromises with the
"bourgeois" Radical-Socialist Party to enact the SFIO's program one issue at a
time. After having been expelled from the SFIO, Marcel Déat and his followers
created the "Parti socialiste de France-Union Jean Jaurès" (1933–1935) which
was one of the main expression of Neo-Socialism in France. Inside the
Confédération générale du travail (CGT) trade union, Neo-Socialism was
represented by René Belin's "Syndicats" (then "Redressements")'s faction. On
the other hand, Henri de Man's "planisme" influenced the left-wing of the
Radical Party, called "Young Turks" (among them Pierre Mendès France).
Planisme would later influence "dirigisme", semi-planified economy,
regionalism, spatial planning as well as Mendesism, "left-wing Gaullism" (Louis
Vallon) and Socialist clubs in the 1960s (Club Jean Moulin, etc.). The Neo-
Socialists, however, evolved toward a form of participatory and nationalist
socialism which eventually led them to join with the reactionary right and
support the collaborationist Vichy Regime during the Second World War (René
Belin and Marcel Déat became members of the Vichy government). As a result,
Déat's neo-socialism was discredited in France after the war.
