Netroots Netroots is a term coined in 2002 by Jerome Armstrong to describe
political activism organized through blogs and other online media, including
wikis and social network services. The word is a portmanteau of Internet and
grassroots, reflecting the technological innovations that set netroots
techniques apart from other forms of political participation. In the United
States, the term is used mainly in left-leaning circles. The term necessarily
overlaps with the related ideas of e-democracy, open politics, and
participatory democracy—all of which are somewhat more specific, better
defined, and more widely accepted. Netroots outreach is a campaign-oriented
activity that uses the web for complementing more traditional campaign
activities, such as collaborating with grassroots activism that involves get
out the vote and organizing through interconnecting local and regional efforts,
such as Meetup, and the netroots-grassroots coalition that propelled the
election of Howard Dean to the DNC Chair in January, 2005. At times, the term
netroots is used interchangeably with the term blogosphere, though the
blogosphere is considered a subset of netroots in that blogosphere describes
just the online community of blogs, where netroots includes that plus a number
of larger liberal on-line outposts such as MoveOn, Media Matters for America
and Think Progress. Advocates claim that the essential quality of the netroots
is its flatness and inter-linked web connectiveness—that it constitutes
communication points that reach out to influence traditional media, but is not
directed outward from any one point. Through events like a blogswarm, the
netroots displays non-hierarchical and decentralized features. American origins
of term. The first popular use of the term in its modern definition is Netroots
for Howard Dean, by Jerome Armstrong in December 2002 on MyDD. Democratic
political consultant Joe Trippi credits the short lived success of his then-
client Howard Dean to their listening and taking the lead from netroots
activity. The netroots also played a key role in drafting General Wesley Clark
into the 2004 Presidential campaign. The growing power of the netroots was seen
most recently during the 2006 midterm elections. In one such instance, a
volunteer for the senate campaign of Democrat James Webb of Virginia filmed
remarks by then-Senator George Allen. The remarks in question, in which Senator
Allen referred to the volunteer as a "macaca" (the volunteer was of South Asian
ethnicity), were viewed by many as being racially insensitive. The video was
posted on the popular video-sharing website YouTube. The resulting netroots
attention to the video triggered a series of events that resulted in the defeat
of the incumbent senator. James Webb had, in fact, been the subject of a
successful netroots draft, which resulted in his entry into the Virginia senate
race. Netroots activists also supported Ned Lamont in his 2006 primary victory
over Democratic Senator Joe Lieberman, wrote Ari Melber in "The Nation"
magazine [http://www.thenation.com/doc/20060814/melber]. Blog writers have
contributed to more than a few controversies and early netroots attention.
Amongst these were the remarks made by then-Senate Minority Leader Trent Lott
at a birthday celebration for then-Senator Strom Thurmond, the Dubai Ports
controversy, the Mark Foley congressional page controversy, and the recent US
Attorney controversy In addition, the recent controversy regarding a Democratic
presidential debate sponsored by Fox News, which the left-leaning netroots
attempted to stop, ended with the debate being canceled [http://
www.politico.com/news/stories/0307/3097.html. In a December 2005 interview with
"Newsweek" magazine [http://www.msnbc.msn.com/id/10629288/site/newsweek/],
Markos Moulitsas Zúniga, founder of Daily Kos, described the netroots as "the
crazy political junkies that hang out in blogs." He is also the co-author (with
Jerome Armstrong) of the book "Crashing the Gate: Netroots, Grassroots and the
Rise of People-Powered Politics" (ISBN 1-931498-99-7). Similar activities
elsewhere. So-called netroots activity also takes place in Iran, which has a
disproportionately high number of bloggers, and in the United Kingdom, where
there is strong support for e-democracy in the form of local issues forums have
become an approved form of feedback on government performance. Netroots UK is a
project started in 2011 in partnership with the US Netroots Nation organisers
to strengthen the UK's netroots through training and networking. In Australia,
the netroots "progressive" lobbying group GetUp has more members than all
Australian political parties combined. Netroots activity has also begun to
spring up in student politics where online social networking programs such as
Facebook have been used in student elections. Sweden NetrootS In Sweden Social
Democratic Party have initiated a network open to all "progressive" bloggers in
Sweden. The network meets on a regular basis and holds a yearly gathering,
Nätrot (Netroot in Swedish)Netroots.se. The first Nätrot gathering was held
in the Swedish parliament 2006 with Joe Trippi as guest speaker. The second
one, 2008 also in the Swedish parliament, and the third, Nätrot '09 was in
Visby, Almedalen featuring John Aravosis from Americablog and Jane Hamsher from
Firedoglake. In 2010, the book "Netroots - a progressive blog movement that set
the agenda" (Netroots - En progressiv bloggrörelse som sätter agendan) was
published in Sweden (author Johan Ulvenlöv). The book explains various
bloggers about how media content changed after blog entry and how they are
partially set the agenda. In 2012 the largest gathering of progressive bloggers
in Scandinavia will take place in Stockholm.
