Nevada Desert Experience The Nevada Desert Experience is a name for the
movement to stop U.S. nuclear weapons testing that came into use in the middle
1980s. It is also the name of an anti-nuclear organization which continues to
create public events to question the morality and intelligence of the U.S.
nuclear weapons program, with a main focus on the U.S. Department of Energy's
Nevada Test Site. Activists working for social justice, environmental
preservation, and international peace organized a six-week peace vigil in the
spring of 1982 about 60 miles from Las Vegas, Nevada at the entrance to the
Nevada Test Site. In 1983 they repeated the vigil, calling it the Lenten Desert
Experience. This anarchist group of Christian organizers decided that the
program had been successful enough to start an organization, which led to a
faith-based aspect to the nuclear abolition movement. They named it "Nevada
Desert Experience" or NDE because of the work within the prayer-actions for
peace that included learning to appreciate the Mojave and the Great Basin
Deserts of North America. Organizers believed that appreciation of the beauty
and power of the natural environment, coupled with a universal code of ethics
(the Golden Rule) organically leads humans to make a stand for peace and
environmental justice. The movement's immediate goal of ending nuclear testing
at the Nevada Test Site was met in 1992, when President George H. W. Bush
signed a moratorium on underground nuclear weapons tests. The abolition
movement, led by NDE and the Western Shoshone-based Shundahai Network were
sparked back into action with the renewal of non-nuclear explosions at the
Nevada Test Site in 1997. These "subcritical" bombs use fissile materials which
do not reach a self-sustaining chain reaction of a typical nuclear bomb. The
bombs are designed by Los Alamos National Laboratory and Lawrence Livermore
Laboratory, whereby the data collected can be fed to computers to simulate
full-scale nuclear explosions for the NSA and DOE. Their explosive yield is
low, and small amounts of radiation may be released. Because each sub-critical
experiment costs roughly 20 million dollars (USD) and much time from the humans
working within the nuclear weapons management industry, the tests indicate to
nuclear abolition activists a strong continued interest (within the U.S.
Government) in favor of nuclear weapons. Therefore, the Nevada Desert
Experience continues to work for deep ecological sensitivities and social
peacemaking, with one goal being to clean up and contain the contamination
created by 55 years of nuclear testing in Nevada & Western Shoshone country. In
protest to UAV attacks in Pakistan and the perceived extremely high danger of
harming civilians, in an event sponsored by Nevada Desert Experience, Father
Louie Vitale, Kathy Kelly, Stephen Kelly, SJ, John Dear, and others were
arrested outside the Air Force Base on Wednesday April 9, 2009. Subsequent
monthly protests have been ongoing and conducted by a number of organizations
including Code Pink. References. "Pilgrimage Through a Burning World, by Ken
Butigan" Chronicles and discusses the political and religious aspects of the
nonviolent protest against nuclear testing called the Nevada Desert Experience.
2003, 256 pp., paper"
