New Democracy New Democracy or the New Democratic Revolution is a concept based
on Mao Zedong's ""Bloc of Four Social Classes"" theory during post-
revolutionary China which argues that democracy in China will take a decisively
distinct path from either the liberal capitalist and/or parliamentary
democratic systems in the western world, or Soviet-style communism in Eastern
Europe and similar states. Concept. The New Democracy concept still aims to
overthrow feudalism and/or achieve a country's national independence from
colonialism, but it bypasses the rule of the capitalist class that Marx and
Lenin predicted would usually follow such a struggle, claiming instead to seek
to enter directly into socialism through a coalition of classes fighting the
old ruling order. The coalition is subsumed under the leadership and guidance
of the working class and its communist party, working with the communists
irrespective of their competing ideologies, in order to achieve the more
immediate goal of a "new democratic order" that the Chinese communists of
course hoped would then lead to full-blown socialism and communism, in spite of
the competing class interests of the social classes of the "bloc". The bloc of
classes reflecting the principles of New Democracy is symbolized most readily
by the stars on the Flag of China, with the largest star to symbolize the
Communist Party of China's leadership and the surrounding four smaller stars
symbolizing the Bloc of Four Classes: proletarian workers, peasants, the petty
bourgeoisie (small business owners), and the nationally-based capitalists. This
is the coalition of classes for Mao's "New Democratic Revolution" as he
described it in his works. Mao's New Democracy explains the Bloc of Four
Classes as an unfortunate but necessary consequence of imperialism as described
by Lenin. The classical Marxist understanding of the stages of economic and
historical development of the modes of production under which a socialist
revolution can take place is that the socialist revolution occurs only after
the capitalist bourgeois-democratic revolution happens first. According to
this, the bourgeois-democratic revolution paves the way for the industrial
proletarian class to emerge as the majority class in society, after which it
then overthrows capitalism and begins constructing socialism. Mao argued that
the bourgeois-democratic revolution and the socialist revolution could be
combined into a single stage rather than two separate back-to-back stages. He
called this stage New Democracy. Effects of Establishment. Once New Democracy
has been established in the way Mao's theory outlines, the country is
subsequently claimed to be ideologically socialist and working towards
communism under the leadership of its leading communist party, and its people
are actively involved in the construction of socialism—see the examples of
the Great Leap Forward and the Great Proletarian Cultural Revolution for what
Mao viewed as the participatory democracy inherent in the New Democracy
concept. According to the theory, this construction continues to happen even as
the country itself may maintain and further many aspects of capitalism, such as
a market economy (usually called a socialist market economy), for purposes of
rapid economic growth. However, it is usually these "lesser evil" aspects of
New Democracy that prompts many non-Maoist communists to criticise it as
precisely "not" the way to achieve communism. Because of New Democracy's nature
as an 'intermediate stage', it is considered a stepping-stone to socialism—an
essentially two-stage theory of first New Democracy, then the dictatorship of
the proletariat ("socialism"). Given that the self-proclaimed ultimate goal of
socialist construction is the creation of a stateless, classless and moneyless
communist society, adding the New Democratic Revolution as a prerequisite stage
arguably makes the whole process of the Revolution a three-stage theory: first
New Democracy, then socialism, then communism. Examples. Currently, the Shining
Path, the New People's Army of the Philippines and the Communist Party of India
(Maoist) pursue similar actions pursuant to similar ideas, conducting active
guerrilla warfare ("people's war") with the intent of establishing New
Democracy. In 2006, the Communist Party of Nepal entered the government of
Nepal using similar "New Democratic" reasoning and methods. However, it was
expelled from the coalition in 2009, and its leader (who had been elected Prime
Minister) was deposed, so since then the CPN(M) has oscillated between
threatening to return to 'armed struggle' and leading general strikes in Nepal
using its still-considerable influence in the Nepalese labour movement.
