New York University New York University (NYU) is a private, nonsectarian
American research university based in New York City. NYU's main campus is
situated in the Greenwich Village neighborhood of Lower Manhattan. Founded in
1831, NYU is one of the largest private nonprofit institutions of American
higher education. NYU was elected to the Association of American Universities
in 1950. The university counts 36 Nobel Prize winners, 3 Abel Prize winners, 10
National Medal of Science recipients, 16 Pulitzer Prize winners, 30 Academy
Award winners, 4 Putnam Competition winners, Russ Prize, Gordon Prize, and
Draper Prize winners, Turing Award winners, and Emmy, Grammy, and Tony Award
winners among its faculty and alumni. NYU also has MacArthur and Guggenheim
Fellowship holders as well as National Academy of Sciences members among its
past and present graduates and faculty. NYU is organized into 18 schools,
colleges, and institutes, located in six centers throughout Manhattan and
Downtown Brooklyn, as well as more than a dozen other sites across the world,
with plans for further expansion. According to the Institute of International
Education, NYU sends more students to study abroad than any other US college or
university, and the College Board reports more online searches by international
students for "NYU" than for any other university. History. Albert Gallatin,
Secretary of Treasury under Thomas Jefferson and James Madison, declared his
intention to establish "in this immense and fast-growing city ... a system of
rational and practical education fitting for all and graciously opened to all".
A three-day long "literary and scientific convention" held in City Hall in 1830
and attended by over 100 delegates debated the terms of a plan for a new
university. These New Yorkers believed the city needed a university designed
for young men who would be admitted based on merit, not birthright, status or
social class. On April 18, 1831, an institution was established, with the
support of a group of prominent New York City residents from the city's landed
class of merchants, bankers, and traders. Albert Gallatin was elected as the
institution's first president. On April 21, 1831, the new institution received
its charter and was incorporated as the University of the City of New York by
the New York State Legislature; older documents often refer to it by that name.
The university has been popularly known as New York University since its
beginning and was officially renamed New York University in 1896. In 1832, NYU
held its first classes in rented rooms of four-story Clinton Hall, situated
near City Hall. In 1835, the School of Law, NYU's first professional school,
was established. Although the impetus to found a new school was partly a
reaction by evangelical Presbyterians to what they perceived as the
Episcopalianism of Columbia College, NYU was created non-denominational, unlike
many American colleges at the time. Whereas NYU had its Washington Square
campus since its founding, the university purchased a campus at University
Heights in the Bronx because of overcrowding on the old campus. NYU also had a
desire to follow New York City's development further uptown. NYU's move to the
Bronx occurred in 1894, spearheaded by the efforts of Chancellor Henry Mitchell
MacCracken. The University Heights campus was far more spacious than its
predecessor was. As a result, most of the university's operations along with
the undergraduate College of Arts and Science and School of Engineering were
housed there. NYU's administrative operations were moved to the new campus, but
the graduate schools of the university remained at Washington Square. In 1914,
Washington Square College was founded as the downtown undergraduate college of
NYU. In 1935, NYU opened the "Nassau College-Hofstra Memorial of New York
University at Hempstead, Long Island". This extension would later become a
fully independent Hofstra University. In the late 1960s and early 1970s,
financial crisis gripped the New York City government and the troubles spread
to the city's institutions, including NYU. Feeling the pressures of imminent
bankruptcy, NYU President James McNaughton Hester negotiated the sale of the
University Heights campus to the City University of New York, which occurred in
1973. After the sale of the Bronx campus, University College merged with
Washington Square College. In the 1980s, under the leadership of President John
Brademas, NYU launched a billion-dollar campaign that was spent almost entirely
on updating facilities. The campaign was set to complete in 15 years, but ended
up being completed in 10. In 2003 President John Sexton launched a $2.5 billion
campaign for funds to be spent especially on faculty and financial aid
resources. University logo. The university logo, the upheld torch, is derived
from the Statue of Liberty, signifying NYU's service to the city of New York.
The torch is depicted on both the NYU seal and the more abstract NYU logo,
designed in 1965 by renowned graphic designer Tom Geismar of the branding and
design firm Chermayeff & Geismar. There are at least two versions of the
possible origin of the university color, violet. Some believe that it may have
been chosen because violets are said to have grown abundantly in Washington
Square and around the buttresses of the Old University Building. Others argue
that the color may have been adopted because the violet was the flower
associated with Athens, the center of learning in ancient Greece. Cultural
setting. Washington Square and Greenwich Village have been hubs of cultural
life in New York City since the early 19th century. Much of this culture has
intersected with NYU at various points in its history. Artists of the Hudson
River School, the United States' first prominent school of painters, settled
around Washington Square. Samuel F.B. Morse, the first chair of Painting and
Sculpture at NYU, and Daniel Huntington were early tenants of the Old
University Building in the mid-19th century. (The University rented out studio
space and residential apartments within the "academic" building.) Artists and
intellectuals, including Edgar Allan Poe, Mark Twain, Herman Melville, and Walt
Whitman, have contributed to the artistic scene encompassing NYU. As a result,
they had notable interaction with the cultural and academic life of the
university. In the 1870s, sculptors Augustus Saint-Gaudens and Daniel Chester
French lived and worked near the Square. By the 1920s, Washington Square Park
was nationally recognized as a focal point for artistic and moral rebellion. As
such, the Washington Square campus became more diverse and bustled with urban
energy, contributing to academic change at NYU. Famed residents of this time
include Eugene O'Neill, John Sloan, and Maurice Prendergast. In the 1930s, the
abstract expressionists Jackson Pollock and Willem de Kooning, and the realists
Edward Hopper and Thomas Hart Benton had studios around Washington Square. In
the 1960s the area became one of the centers of the beat and folk generation,
when Allen Ginsberg and Bob Dylan settled there. This led to tension with the
university, which at the time was in the midst of an aggressive facilities
expansion phase. In 1975, the university opened The Grey Art Gallery at 100
Washington Square East, housing the New York University art collection and
featuring museum quality exhibitions. Campus. Most of NYU's buildings are
located across a roughly area bounded by Houston Street to the south, Broadway
to the east, 14th Street to the north, and Sixth Avenue (Avenue of the
Americas) to the west. The core of NYU consists of buildings that surround
Washington Square Park. With approximately 12,500 residents, NYU has the
seventh-largest university housing system in the U.S. as of 2007, and one of
the largest among private schools. Washington Square campus. Since the late
1970s, the central part of NYU has been its Washington Square campus in the
heart of Greenwich Village. The Washington Square Arch is an unofficial symbol
of NYU. Until 2007, NYU had held its commencement ceremonies in Washington
Square Park, but moved the ceremonies to Yankee Stadium in 2008 because of
renovations to Washington Square. In the 1990s, NYU became a "two square"
university by building a second community around Union Square, in close
proximity to Washington Square. NYU's Union Square community primarily consists
of the priority residence halls of Carlyle Court, Palladium Residence Hall,
Alumni Hall, Coral Tower, Thirteenth Street Hall, University Hall, Third North
Residence Hall, and Founders Hall. NYU operates theaters and performance
facilities that are often used by the university's music conservatory and Tisch
School of the Arts. External productions are also occasionally held in NYU's
facilities. The largest performance accommodations at NYU are the Skirball
Center for Performing Arts (850 seats) at 566 LaGuardia Place, just south of
Washington Square South, and the Eisner-Lubin Auditorium (560 seats) in the
Kimmel Center. Recently, the Skirball Center hosted important speeches on
foreign policy by John Kerry and Al Gore as well as the recording of the third
season finale of The Apprentice. The Skirball Center is the largest performing
arts facility south of 42nd Street. Bobst Library. The Elmer Holmes Bobst
Library, built between 1967 and 1972, is the largest library at NYU and one of
the largest academic libraries in the United States. Designed by Philip Johnson
and Richard Foster, the 12-story, structure sits on the southern edge of
Washington Square Park (at 70 Washington Square South) and is the flagship of
an eight-library, 4.5 million-volume system. Bobst Library offers one
Multidisciplinary Reference Center, a Research Commons, 28 miles of open-stacks
shelving, and approximately 2,000 seats for student study. The library is
visited by more than 6,800 users each day, and circulates more than one million
books annually. Bobst's Avery Fisher Center for Music and Media is one of the
world's largest academic media centers, where students and researchers use more
than 95,000 audio and video recordings per year. The Digital Studio offers a
constantly evolving, leading-edge resource for faculty and student projects and
promotes and supports access to digital resources for teaching, learning,
research and arts events. Bobst Library is also home to significant special
collections. The Fales Collection houses one of the finest collections of
English and American fiction in the United States, the unique Downtown
Collection, documenting the New York literary avante-garde arts scene from the
1970s to the present, and the Food and Cookery Collection, which documents
American food history with a focus on New York City. Bobst Library also houses
the Tamiment Library, one of the finest collections in the world for scholarly
research in labor history, socialism, anarchism, communism, and American
radicalism. Tamiment includes the Robert F. Wagner Labor Archives, the Archives
of Irish America, the Center for the Cold War and the U.S., and the Frederic
Ewen Academic Freedom Center. New facilities. Since the early 2000s (decade),
NYU has developed new facilities on and around its Washington Square Campus.
The Kimmel Center for University Life was built in 2003 to serve as the primary
location for the university's student services offices. The center also houses
the Skirball Center for the Performing Arts, the Rosenthal Pavilion, the Eisner
& Lubin Auditorium, and the Loeb Student Center. The School of Law built Furman
Hall in 2004, incorporating elements of two historic buildings into the new
facade, one of which was occupied by poet Edgar Allan Poe. In 2005, NYU
announced the development of a new life science facility on Waverly Place. The
facility is the first NYU science building developed since the opening of Meyer
Hall in 1971. In November 2005, NYU announced plans to build a 26-floor,
residence hall on 12th Street. The residence hall, named "Founders Hall",
accommodates approximately 700 undergraduates and contains a host of other
student facilities. It is currently the tallest building in the East Village.
Polytechnic Institute (Brooklyn). The Polytechnic Institute of New York
University, often referred to as Polytechnic Institute of NYU, NYU Polytechnic,
NYU-Poly, or New York University School of Engineering and Technology, is
located in Downtown Brooklyn. Founded in 1854, the institute adopted the
European polytechnic university model, and its laboratory instruction at the
undergraduate and graduate levels led to close cooperation with the industry.
It is one of the oldest private technology institutes in the United States, and
has made contributions in the fields of electrical engineering, polymer
chemistry, aerospace, and microwave engineering. It is located in the MetroTech
Center, the nation's largest urban university-industry science and technology
park. NYU-Poly operates several on-campus and off-campus business incubators
and is known for its success in the transfer of technology from the laboratory
to the marketplace according to the New York City Economic Development
Corporation. NYU-Poly has state-of-the-art facilities including a brand new
library and new facilities for its electrical engineering, computer science and
computer engineering programs. The Brooklyn campus offers programs primarily
for undergraduate students but also offers opportunities for graduate students,
including executive programs for students with related experience. NYU Poly
also has campuses in downtown Manhattan, Long Island, Westchester, and in
international locations such as Israel, Abu Dhabi, Shanghai, and London. In
2010, a $250 million expansion project was launched to expand NYU-Poly's
Brooklyn campus. Other campuses and facilities. The New York University School
of Medicine is situated near the East River waterfront at 550 First Avenue
between East 30th and East 34th Streets. The campus hosts the medical school,
Tisch Hospital, and the Rusk Institute of Rehabilitation Medicine. Other NYU
Centers across the city include NYU Hospital for Joint Diseases and the
Bellevue Hospital Center. NYU's Silver School of Social Work (formerly
Ehrenkranz School of Social Work) manages branch campus programs in Westchester
County at Manhattanville College, in Rockland County at St. Thomas Aquinas
College, and on Staten Island at the City University of New York's College of
Staten Island. In Sterling Forest, near Tuxedo, New York, NYU has a research
facility that contains institutes, in particular the Nelson Institute of
Environmental Medicine. The Midtown Center at 11 West 42nd Street and the
Woolworth Building in the financial district are home to NYU's continuing
education programs. NYU has two units located on the Upper East Side. The
Institute for the Study of the Ancient World, a discrete entity within New York
University, independent of any other school or department of the university, is
located on East 84th St, while the New York University Institute of Fine Arts,
a graduate school of art history and fine arts, is located at the James B. Duke
Building at 1 East 78th St. Tisch School of the Arts, Asia was NYU's first
branch campus abroad. The result of a partnership between Tisch School of the
Arts and the Singapore Government, it offered Master of Fine Arts degrees in
animation and digital arts, dramatic writing, film and international media
producing. The campus opened in fall 2007 with the intention to enroll
approximately 250 students. Anticipated enrolment figures were not achieved,
financial irregularities were alleged and President Pari Sara Shirazi was
dismissed from her post by NYU in November 2011. She subsequently announced her
intention to commence legal proceedings against NYU alleging wrongful
termination and defamation. In a letter to the Tisch Asia community dated 8
November 2012, Dean Mary Schmidt Campbell announced that the campus would close
after 2014 with recruitment and admission of new students suspended with
immediate effect. In the Fall of 2010, NYU Abu Dhabi (NYUAD) opened as the
University's first overseas "Portal Campus" with an inaugural class of 150
students. Unlike the University's other study abroad centers, NYUAD functions
as a separate liberal arts college within a University, offering complete
degree programs to students admitted directly to NYUAD. NYUAD recruits students
from all over the world and describes itself as the "World's Honor College".
The main campus for NYUAD is under construction on Saadiyat Island and is
scheduled to open in 2014. Until then the school operates from a campus located
in downtown Abu Dhabi. The campus construction and operational costs are
entirely funded by the Abu Dhabi government. It was announced in 2011 that NYU
planned to open another portal campus, New York University Shanghai, for the
fall semester of 2013. It was set to have about 3,000 undergraduate students,
the majority of whom would be Chinese. It was approved by the Ministry of
Education of the People's Republic of China in January 2011. NYU's local
partner will be East China Normal University. ECNU's president Yu Lizhong will
be the chancellor and play a major role in government relations while Jeffrey
S. Lehman, former president of Cornell amongst other positions, will serve as
vice chancellor and have "free rein in academic affairs". NYU has a host of
foreign facilities used for study abroad programs, referred to as Global
Academic Centers. As of 2012, NYU operates 14 academic sites ‚Äì both degree-
granting research university campuses and study abroad sites ‚Äì in Africa,
Asia, Australia, Europe, the Middle East, and North and South America,
including undergraduate academic-year and summer study abroad programs in New
York, Florence, London, Paris, Prague, Berlin, Accra, Madrid, Shanghai, Buenos
Aires, Tel Aviv, Abu Dhabi, Sydney and Washington DC. One of the most
noteworthy is the campus of NYU Florence Villa LaPietra in Italy, bequeathed by
the late Sir Harold Acton to NYU in 1994. NYU also has international houses on
campus, including the Deutsches Haus, La Maison Fran√ßaise, Casa Italiana
Zerilli Marim√≤, the Glucksman Ireland House, the King Juan Carlos I of Spain
Center, the Hagop Kevorkian Center, an Africa House and a China House. NYU was
the founding member of the League of World Universities, an international
organization consisting of rectors and presidents from urban universities
across six continents. The league and its 47 representatives gather every two
years to discuss global issues in education. L. Jay Oliva formed the
organization in 1991 just after he was inaugurated president of New York
University. Sustainability. New York University has made the greening of its
campus a large priority. For example, NYU has been the largest university
purchaser of wind energy in the U.S. since 2009. With this switch to renewable
power, NYU is achieving benefits equivalent to removing 12,000 cars from the
road or planting 72,000 trees. In May 2008, the NYU Sustainability Task Force
awarded $150,000 in grants to 23 projects that would focus research and efforts
toward energy, food, landscape, outreach, procurement, transportation and
waste. These projects include a student-led bike-sharing program modeled after
Paris' Velib program with 30 bikes free to students, staff, and faculty. NYU
received a grade of "B" on the College Sustainability Report Card 2010 from the
Sustainable Endowments Institute. NYU purchased 118 million kilowatt-hours of
wind power during the 2006‚Äì2007 academic year ‚Äì the largest purchase of
wind power by any university in the country and any institution in New York
City. For 2007, the university expanded its purchase of wind power to 132
million kilowatt-hours. The EPA ranked NYU as one of the greenest colleges in
the country in its annual College & University Green Power Challenge. Residence
halls. With approximately 12,500 residents, NYU has the seventh-largest
university housing system in the U.S. as of 2007, and one of the largest among
private schools. NYU's undergraduate housing system consists of 21 buildings.
Uniquely, many of NYU's residence halls are converted apartment complexes or
old hotels. In general, NYU residence halls receive favorable ratings, and some
are opulent. Many rooms are spacious and contain amenities considered rare for
individual college residence hall rooms, such as kitchens, lavatories, living
rooms and common areas. The university operates its own transit system to
transport its students by bus to its campus. Undergraduate students are
guaranteed housing during their enrollment at NYU. Most freshman residence
halls are located near the Washington Square area. While nearly all of the
residence halls that primarily house sophomores are located near the Union
Square area, two former residence halls were located in the Financial District
and one is still in use in Chinatown. All of NYU's residence halls are governed
by the Inter-Residence Hall Council (IRHC), an umbrella student council
organization. In 2007, the National Association of College and University
Residence Halls named NYU the National School of the Year for IRHC and NRHH's
strong efforts over the past year. In addition, NYU was named the National
Program of the Year for UltraViolet Live, the annual inter-hall competition
that raises funds for Relay For Life. Academics. Schools and colleges. New York
University comprises 18 colleges, schools, and institutes. Arts and Science is
currently the largest academic unit of the university. It has three
subdivisions, which include the College of Arts and Science, the Graduate
School of Arts and Science, and Liberal Studies. The College of Arts and
Science (CAS) was the only school when NYU was founded. Other undergraduate
schools include the Gallatin School of Individualized Study, the School of
Social Work, the Preston Robert Tisch Center for Hospitality, Tourism and
Sports Management at the New York University School of Continuing and
Professional Studies, the Steinhardt School of Culture, Education and Human
Development (the first school of education in the United States), the Stern
School of Business, and Tisch School of the Arts. In 2008, Polytechnic
University merged with NYU to become the Polytechnic Institute, providing NYU
with an engineering school for the first time in three decades. The university
also plans to open up the Liberal Studies Program to all students for the Fall
2012 term by process of application, rather than by referral (as it has been
since 1972). Several schools at NYU also offer graduate and professional
programs. NYU's postgraduate schools and divisions include the Gallatin School
of Individualized Study, College of Dentistry, the College of Nursing, the
Courant Institute of Mathematical Sciences, the Institute of Fine Arts,
Institute for the Study of the Ancient World, the Polytechnic Institute, the
School of Continuing and Professional Studies, the School of Law, the School of
Medicine, the Graduate School of Arts and Science, and the Wagner Graduate
School of Public Service. NYU closed its School of Aeronautics in 1973, its
College of Veterinary Surgeons in 1922, and has merged various programs with
other schools. For example, its School of Engineering merged with the
Polytechnic University of New York in 1973, and NYU's former College Hofstra
Memorial became independent in 1937. Rankings. NYU is ranked 22nd among all
universities in the world by Global University Ranking (maintained by Wuhan
University), and 20th nationally and 27th globally by the Academic Ranking of
World Universities (formerly maintained by Shanghai Jiaotong University). NYU's
schools and institutes are regularly ranked within the top 10 worldwide. NYU's
philosophy department is ranked #1 among 50 philosophy departments in the
English-speaking world. NYU is also ranked #1 in finance, mathematics, Italian,
and theater in the U.S. by the Faculty Scholarly Productivity Index, which uses
data, such as faculty publications, grants, and honors and awards to rank 104
doctoral programs in 10 academic disciplines based on the research productivity
of faculty members. The Courant Institute of Mathematical Sciences is ranked #1
in applied mathematics in the U.S., #5 in citation impact worldwide and #12 in
citations worldwide. The Academic Ranking of World Universities ranked NYU's
math department #16 overall among top universities globally. The Courant
Institute of Mathematical Sciences is also known for its research in pure
mathematical areas, such as partial differential equations, probability and
differential geometry (Professors Peter Lax, S. R. Srinivasa Varadhan and
Mikhail Gromov won the 2005, 2007 and 2009 Abel Prize respectively for their
research in these areas) as well as applied mathematical areas, such as
computational biology and computational neuroscience. NYU's Stern School of
Business undergraduate program is ranked #5 by U.S. News and #15 by Business
Week (previous rankings include #12 in 2010 and #8 in 2009). Stern's MBA
program is ranked among the top in the U.S. and worldwide: #10 in U.S. News,
#15 in Financial Times, #18 in BusinessWeek, #14 in The Economist, and #2 by
research contribution. NYU's economics department is regularly ranked among the
top 10 worldwide, including #6 in an updated Dusansky-Vernon Journal of
Economic Literature study which ranked departments in terms of the publications
of their faculty in top-five rated journals. NYU was ranked #9 globally in
economics/business by the Academic Ranking of World Universities in 2009, one
ahead of Yale University. The School of Law is ranked #6 among law schools in
the U.S. by U.S. News and World Report (and has been ranked by the same source
as high as #4 in previous years). The law school is particularly noted as the
nation's top law school in tax law, international law, and jurisprudence
(philosophy of law). Some of NYU's alumni have been appointed justices of the
International Court of Justice and International Criminal Court. NYU School of
Medicine is ranked #26, and #11 for best AIDS program, by U.S. News and World
Report. The School of Medicine's alumni include four Nobel Prize recipients.
NYU's Polytechnic Institute ranks 4th among "Best Engineering Colleges By
Salary Potential" in the United States according to payscale. NYU-Poly remains
in the top 50 for undergraduate engineering and in the top 66 for graduate
engineering as compiled by U.S. News & World Report. The graduate computer
engineering program ranks #34 and the electrical engineering program ranks #32
in the world according to U.S. News & World Report. The "Princeton Review"
ranks NYU-Poly's undergraduate electrical engineering program 12th in the
nation, and its graduate electrical engineering program 13th in the nation. QS
World University Rankings ranked NYU-Poly #51 in the world for mechanical
engineering. Forbes.com regularly ranks NYU-Poly among the top ten in its list
of ‚ÄúTop Colleges for Getting Rich‚Äù. In 2012, NYU-Poly was ranked #21 by
graduate engineering enrollment in the United States according to the American
Society for Engineering Education, #34 on "The World's Best Engineering
Schools" list by Business Insider, and among the world's top universities and
institutions for engineering according to the National Broadcasting Company
(NBC). In the social sciences, NYU was ranked #10 by the Academic Ranking of
World Universities in 2009, and #11 among Shanghai Jiao Tong University's
world's top 100 universities. NYU's Steinhardt School of Culture, Education and
Human Development has one of the top 15 education programs in the U.S. NYU's
Wagner Graduate School of Public Service is ranked 6th nationally by U.S. News
and World Report. In addition, several of Wagner's public affairs
specializations are ranked in the top 10. NYU's Tisch School of the Arts has
produced more Academy Award winners than any other film institution in the U.S.
NYU Tisch members are regularly nominated to win Oscars, Emmys, and other
awards: in 2011, 15 Tisch members were nominated for Oscars, and 10 Tisch
members claimed Emmys. NYU's Creative Writing Program (GSAS) was included
within "The Atlantic's" list of "Top Ten Graduate Programs in Creative
Writing", having been selected from a pool of over 250 such programs currently
active in the United States. From 2004 to 2007, NYU was ranked by the Princeton
Review as America's #1 "dream school" among high school seniors. In 2008
however, NYU slipped to 4th place in the Princeton Review poll, led only by
Harvard, Yale, and Stanford, citing better financial aid among Ivy Leagues and
using additional parental ratings. In 2006, NYU was named by Kaplan as one of
the "New Ivies". NYU ranks 30th on the Webometrics Ranking of World
Universities, which ranks the world's universities based on a composite
indicator that takes into account both the volume of the Web contents (number
of web pages and files) and the visibility and impact of these web publications
according to the number of external inlinks (site citations) they received. NYU
ranks #1 among "Universities That Turn Research Into Revenue" according to
Forbes. According to data compiled by "Forbes Magazine" in 2008, NYU ranks 7th
among universities that have produced the largest number of living
billionaires. Admissions and enrollment. NYU has a large, diverse student
population representing all 50 states and more than 130 countries. About
25‚Äì30% of NYU's incoming freshmen are from New York, New Jersey, and
Connecticut, while the remaining 70‚Äì75% are from outside the Tri-State area.
10% of the students are from one of New York City's five boroughs. NYU's main
feeder schools reflect a heavy Northeastern U.S. presence, and particularly a
strong New York City influence. Among NYU's top feeder schools are prestigious
high schools including Stuyvesant High School, Brooklyn Technical High School,
Bronx High School of Science, and several top private schools in the northeast.
Out of the 42,242 applicants for the undergraduate class of 2015, around 30%
were offered admission (when including admission statistics for the Liberal
Studies Program). Out of the acceptances, 38% consisted of early decision
applicants, who together form 23% of the undergraduate class. 4,650 freshmen
joined NYU in Fall 2011. In 2008, NYU achieved a record low admission rate of
24% of applicants. The middle 50% of SAT scores for the class of 2015 was
630‚Äì730 for critical reading, 650‚Äì750 for math, and 660‚Äì750 for writing.
The middle 50% of ACT scores for the class of 2015 was between 29 and 31. The
average GPA corresponds with an A-range letter grade, and most incoming
students were in the top 10% of their class. On June 21, 2010, NYU announced
the profile of the first freshman class of NYU Abu Dhabi (NYUAD), which calls
itself the "World's Honors College". The class includes 150 students, 36% of
whom are from the United States. The average SAT score was 1470 and the
acceptance rate was 2.1%. In a quest to find talented individuals from around
the world and become a truly global university, New York University signed an
agreement to accept high-performing students from the University of the People
who are eligible to apply to New York University's Abu Dhabi campus. The Abu
Dhabi campus is able to grant generous financial aid, enabling those students
who are eligible, albeit disadvantaged financially, to attend the highly
selective NYU Abu Dhabi campus. During the admissions process, some
institutions at NYU are relatively more selective than others in certain
categories, depending on the institution's educational goals. For example,
NYU's Abu Dhabi program focuses more than other schools at NYU on students who
have demonstrated a history of leadership, whereas NYU's Tisch School of the
Arts focuses more on artistic and creative traits than do other schools at NYU.
NYU is among the top 15 universities in the U.S. in the number of National
Merit Scholars in the first-year undergraduate student body. Budget and
fundraising. New York University has successfully completed a seven-year, $2.5
billion campaign, surpassing expectations by raising more than $3 billion over
the seven-year period. Started in 2001, this campaign was the university's
largest in its history, in which they planned to "raise $1 million per day for
scholarships and financial aid, faculty building, new academic initiatives, and
enhancing NYU's physical facilities". The campaign included a $50 million gift
from the Tisch family (after which one building and the art school are named)
and a $60 million gift from six trustees called "The Partners Fund", aimed at
hiring new faculty. On October 15, 2007 the university announced that the
Silver family donated $50 million to the School of Social Work, which will be
renamed as a result. This is the largest donation ever to a school of social
work in the United States. The 2007‚Äì2008 academic year was the most
successful fundraising year to date for NYU, with the school raising $698
million in only the first 11 months of the year, representing a 70% increase in
donations from the prior year. The University also recently announced plans for
NYU's Call to Action, a new initiative to ask alumni and donors to support
financial aid for students at NYU. The university has announced a 25-year
strategic development plan, scheduled to coincide with its in 2031. Included in
the "NYU 200" plans are increasing resident and academic space, hiring
additional exemplary faculty, and involving the New York City community in a
transparent planning process. Additionally, NYU hopes to make their buildings
more environmentally friendly, which will be facilitated by an evaluation of
all campus spaces. As a part of this plan, NYU purchased 118 million kilowatt-
hours of wind power during the 2006‚Äì2007 academic year ‚Äì the largest
purchase of wind power by any university in the country and any institution in
New York City. For 2007, the university expanded its purchase of wind power to
132 million kilowatt-hours. As a result, the EPA ranked NYU as one of the
greenest college in the country in its annual College & University Green Power
Challenge. Student life. Student government. The Student Senators Council is
the governing student body at NYU. The SSC has been involved in controversial
debates on campus, including a campuswide ban on the sale of Coca-Cola products
in 2005, and the Graduate Student Organizing Committee unionization in 2001 and
subsequent strike in 2005. This ban was lifted by the University Senate on
February 5, 2009. Student organizations. NYU has over 450 student clubs and
organizations on campus. In addition to the sports teams, fraternities,
sororities, and study clubs, there are many organizations on campus that focus
on entertainment, arts, and culture. These organizations include various
student media clubs: for instance, the daily student newspaper the "Washington
Square News", the NYU Local daily blog, "The Plague" comedy magazine, and the
literary journals "Washington Square Review" and "The Minetta Review", as well
as student-run event producers such as the NYU Program Board and the Inter-
Residence Hall Council. It also operates radio station WNYU-FM 89.1 with a
diverse college radio format, transmitting to the entire New York metropolitan
area from the original campus, and via booster station WNYU-FM1 which fills in
the signal in lower Manhattan from atop one of the Silver Towers, next to the
football field at the Washington Square campus. During the University Heights
era, an apparent rift evolved with some organizations distancing themselves
from students from the downtown schools. The exclusive Philomathean Society
operated from 1832 to 1888 (formally giving way in 1907 and reconstituted into
the Andiron Club). Included among the Andiron's regulations was "Rule No.11:
Have no relations save the most casual and informal kind with the downtown
schools". The Eucleian Society, rival to the Philomathean Society, was founded
in 1832. The Knights of the Lamp was a social organization founded in 1914 at
the School of Commerce. This organization met every full moon and had a
glowworm as its mascot. The Red Dragon Society, founded in 1898, is thought to
be the most selective society at NYU. In addition, NYU's first yearbook was
formed by fraternities and "secret societies" at the university. New York
University has traditions which have persisted across campuses. Since the
beginning of the 20th century initiation ceremonies have welcomed incoming NYU
freshmen. At the Bronx University Heights Campus, seniors used to grab
unsuspecting freshmen, take them to a horse-watering trough, and then dunk them
head-first into what was known colloquially as "the Fountain of Knowledge".
This underground initiation took place until the 1970s. Today freshmen take
part in university-sponsored activities during what is called "Welcome Week".
In addition, throughout the year the university traditionally holds Apple Fest
(an apple-themed country fest that began at the University Heights campus), the
Violet Ball (a dance in the atrium of Bobst Library), Strawberry Fest
(featuring New York City's longest Strawberry Shortcake), and the semi-annual
midnight breakfast where Student Affairs administrators serve free breakfast to
students before finals. Greek life. Some of the first fraternities in the
country were formed at NYU. Greek life first formed on the NYU campus in 1837
when Psi Upsilon chartered its Delta Chapter. The first fraternities at NYU
were social ones. With their athletic, professional, intellectual, and service
activities, later groups sought to attract students who also formed other
groups. Since then, Greek letter organizations have proliferated to include 25
social fraternities and sororities. Approximately 7% of NYU students choose to
join fraternities or sororities. Four governing boards oversee Greek life at
the university. The Interfraternity Council (IFC) has jurisdiction over all
twelve recognized fraternities on campus. Eight sororities are under the
jurisdiction of the Panhellenic Council (PhC), which features six national
sororities (ŒîŒ¶Œà, ŒëŒàŒ¶, ŒÜŒ£Œ§, Œ ŒíŒ¶, KKŒì and ZTA) and two local
sororities (ŒÜŒ¶Œñ and ŒòŒ¶Œí). Five multicultural organizations maintain
membership in the Multicultural Greek Council (MGC), including two fraternities
and three sororities. All three of the aforementioned boards are managed under
the auspices of the Inter-Greek Council. Greek organizations have historical
significance at NYU. Delta Phi Epsilon, Zeta Psi, Alpha Epsilon Pi, Tau Delta
Phi, Alpha Kappa Psi and Delta Sigma Pi were founded at NYU. Zeta Psi
Fraternity of North America was chartered in 1847, Delta Sigma Pi in 1907, and
Alpha Epsilon Pi in 1913. Delta Phi Epsilon was founded in 1917. The NYU Gamma
chapter of Delta Phi, founded in 1841, is the longest continuously active
fraternity chapter in the world, having never gone inactive since its
establishment. Delta Phi is also the oldest continuously active fraternity in
the United States, being the only organization in the original Union Triad to
remain active since its institute. The NYU Gamma chapter of Zeta Beta Tau is
the oldest active ZBT chapter in the country. Athletics. NYU's sports teams are
referred to as the NYU Violets, the colors being the trademarked hue "NYU
Violet", and white. Since 1981, the school mascot has been a bobcat, whose
origin can be traced back to the abbreviation then being used by the Bobst
Library computerized catalog ‚Äî short: Bobcat. NYU's sports teams include
men's and women's varsity basketball, cross country, fencing, golf, soccer,
swimming and diving, tennis, track and field, volleyball, and wrestling. All of
NYU's sports teams participate in the NCAA's Division III and the University
Athletic Association, with the exceptions of Men's Volleyball, which competes
in the Division I Eastern Collegiate Volleyball Association, and fencing, which
also participates in Division I. The National Intercollegiate Women's Fencing
Association (NIWFA) was founded by NYU freshmen Julia Jones and Dorothy Hafner.
While NYU has had All-American football players, the school has not had a
varsity football team since 1952. Notable football players include Hall of Fame
Ken Strong (1956) and Ed Smith (1934), the model for the Heisman Trophy. In the
1940 season, before a football game between NYU and Missouri, students
protested against the "gentlemen's agreement" to exclude black athletes (at
Missouri's request). The protest against this practice is the first time such
protests were recorded to have occurred. NYU, within its brief history in NCAA
Division III, has won two national team championships and many league
championships. In 1997, the Women's Basketball team, led by head coach Janice
Quinn, won a national championship over the University of Wisconsin‚ÄìEau
Claire and in 2007 returned to the Final Four. NYU Men's Basketball and head
coach Joe Nesci appeared in the Division III National Championship game in
1994. In 2006, the Men's Cross Country team finished 2nd at the NCAA
Championship. The following year, behind the emotional support of Dan
Schwartzman, the Men's Cross Country team won the 2007 NCAA National Cross
Country Championship at St. Olaf College in Minnesota. NYU Men's and Women's
Swimming teams captured consecutive (2004‚Äì2005) Eastern College Athletic
Conference (ECAC) Division III Swimming and Diving Championships. Christian
Majdick of the Men's Track and Field team captured the NCAA Division III
championship for the triple jump in 2003. Lauren Henkel, a track and field
athlete and the current assistant coach of the Women's Track and Field team,
acquired All-American status three times for High Jump. The Men's Soccer team
won its league ECAC championship in the 2005‚Äì2006 season. The Men's Ice
Hockey team participates in the ACHA (DII) and is in the SECHL. During the
2003‚Äì2004 season, the Ice Hockey team finished second (2nd) in the nation,
losing to Oakland University of Michigan. NYU students also compete in club and
intramural sports, including badminton, baseball, basketball, crew,
equestrianism, ice hockey, lacrosse, rugby football, softball, squash, martial
arts, tennis, triathlon, and ultimate. The Coles Sports and Recreation Center
serves as the home base of several of NYU's intercollegiate athletic teams.
Many of NYU's varsity teams play their games at various facilities and fields
throughout Manhattan because of the scarcity of space for playing fields near
campus. In 2002, NYU opened the Palladium Athletic Facility as the second on-
campus recreational facility. In the same year, NYU's intramural dance team won
the National Championship title at the National Dance Alliance (NDA) Division
III competition in Daytona, Florida. Faculty and alumni. NYU counts 36 Nobel
Prize winners by affiliation, 3 winners of the Abel prize, 10 National Medal of
Science recipients, 16 Pulitzer Prize winners, 30 Academy Award winners, 4
Putnam Competition winners, Russ Prize, Gordon Prize, and Draper Prize winners,
Turing Award winners, Emmy, Grammy, and Tony Award winners, MacArthur and
Guggenheim Fellowship holders, and National Academy of Sciences members among
its past and present graduates and faculty. NYU has been insistent that its
faculty be active in instruction on the undergraduate and graduate level, as
well as active in research. As the largest private non-profit university in the
country, NYU has one of the largest alumni bodies in the world. At the end of
2004, NYU had about 350,000 alumni. Of these, at least 17,000 live abroad. The
New York University Office for Alumni Affairs oversees various activities such
as class reunions, local NYU Club gatherings, NYU alumni travel, and Career
Services. The Alumni club on campus is the Torch Club, located in Greenwich
Village. In addition, the Princeton Club of New York (PCNY) has also invited
New York University alumni for club membership. Notable graduating classes
include 1941, which graduated three later Nobel Prize laureates (Julius
Axelrod, Gertrude B. Elion and Clifford Shull), Olympic Gold Medalist John
Woodruff, sportscaster Howard Cosell and sociologist Morris Janowitz; 1957
included Pulitzer Prize winning author Frank McCourt and president of Technion-
Israel Institute of Technology Josef Singer (NYU-Poly); 1970 included Thomas S.
Popkewitz, professor of curriculum theory at the University of Wisconsin-
Madison; 1974 included author Warren Farrell, Ph.D.; and 1977 included: former
Fed Chairman Alan Greenspan; IRS Commissioner Mark Everson; INSEAD Dean Gabriel
Hawawini; Pulitzer, Oscar and Tony Award winner John Patrick Shanley; NHL
Commissioner Gary Bettman; physicist Lewis E. Little; NASDAQ CEO Robert
Greifeld; Ma Ying-jeou president of Republic of China (Taiwan); Guillermo
Endara president of Republic of Panama, Clive Davis music industry executive,
and Cathy Minehan, Federal Reserve Chairman Boston. NYU-Poly alumni include
Peter Staeker, the current Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers
(IEEE) president-elect, and Andrew Herrmann, the current president of the
American Society of Civil Engineers (ASCE). Many Fortune 500 companies are
currently being headed by NYU-Poly alumni, including Yahoo!, Lockheed Martin,
Xerox, and AECOM. Since 1885, the most spirited undergraduate class has been
awarded "The Bun". The award consisted of a bun enclosed in a long casket-like
enclosure made of silver. The Bun was taken three times: in 1921, 1971, and
1981. The award was last returned in 2002 and currently resides in the Silver
Center. In film and literature. NYU is often portrayed in a variety of
television shows, motion pictures, literature, and other media. Fictional NYU
students and faculty include Kramer's intern Darren in "Seinfeld", who helps
him run "Kramerica Industries"; a student reporter in a different episode of
Seinfeld who interviews Jerry; Theo Huxtable (Malcolm-Jamal Warner) from "The
Cosby Show", who graduates from NYU in the series finale; Ross Geller (David
Schwimmer) from "Friends", who becomes an NYU professor in Season 6; Character
Tom Collins from "Rent", who taught there; Bud Fox (Charlie Sheen) in the movie
"Wall Street" (1987); Finch (Eddie Kaye Thomas) from the "American Pie" films;
Paul Tannek (Jason Biggs) in "Loser" (2000); Alex Foreman (Scarlett Johansson)
in "In Good Company" (2005); Jack Campbell (Nicolas Cage) in "The Family Man"
(2000); Clark Kellogg (Matthew Broderick) in "The Freshman" (1990); Justin Cobb
(Lou Taylor Pucci) in the film version of "Thumbsucker" (2005), who secretly
applies and is accepted to NYU; the songwriter Albert Peterson in the musical
"Bye Bye Birdie" who promises his sweetheart Rosie to start studying at NYU and
become an English teacher; and the characters Blair Waldorf, Dan Humphrey,
Vanessa Abrams and Georgina Sparks in "Gossip Girl". In addition, the campus of
NYU has been the backdrop for various pieces of fiction: Grace Adler's office
in Will & Grace is portrayed in the show as being in the Puck Building, home to
NYU's Wagner School; Henry James' novel "Washington Square" is set around the
NYU area; and "Rose of Washington Square" (1939), "13 Washington Square"
(1928), "Annie Hall" (1977), "When Harry Met Sally" (1989), "I Am Legend"
(2007), "August Rush" (2007), "Remember Me" (2010), "Step Up 3-D" (2010) and
"The Sorcerer's Apprentice" (2010) are centered around the NYU campus. In Ralph
Bakshi's animated feature "Fritz The Cat" (1972), the dormitory that Fritz
burns down is clearly supposed to be NYU's Weinstein Hall, located at 5-11
University Place near the northeast corner of Washington Square Park. The
Warner Brothers show "Felicity" was set at the "University of New York",
clearly modeled after NYU; and NYU's old University Heights Campus in the Bronx
provided the scenery for "Sophie's Choice" (1982), "The Thomas Crown Affair"
(1999), "A Beautiful Mind" (2001), "Maid in Manhattan" (2002), "Mona Lisa
Smile" (2003), and "Step Up 3D" (2010). NYU is also featured in the TV show
"Californication".
