New Keynesian economics New Keynesian economics is a school of contemporary
macroeconomics that strives to provide microeconomic foundations for Keynesian
economics. It developed partly as a response to criticisms of Keynesian
macroeconomics by adherents of New Classical macroeconomics. Two main
assumptions define the New Keynesian approach to macroeconomics. Like the New
Classical approach, New Keynesian macroeconomic analysis usually assumes that
households and firms have rational expectations. But the two schools differ in
that New Keynesian analysis usually assumes a variety of market failures. In
particular, New Keynesians assume that there is imperfect competition in price
and wage setting to help explain why prices and wages can become "sticky",
which means they do not adjust instantaneously to changes in economic
conditions. Wage and price stickiness, and the other market failures present in
New Keynesian models, imply that the economy may fail to attain full
employment. Therefore, New Keynesians argue that macroeconomic stabilization by
the government (using fiscal policy) or by the central bank (using monetary
policy) can lead to a more efficient macroeconomic outcome than a laissez faire
policy would. Origins. Significant early contributions to New Keynesian theory
were compiled in 1991 by editors N. Gregory Mankiw and David Romer in "New
Keynesian Economics", volumes 1 and 2. The papers in these volumes focused
mostly on microfoundations, that is, microeconomic ingredients that could
produce Keynesian macroeconomic effects, and did not yet attempt to construct
complete macroeconomic models. More recently, macroeconomists have begun to
build Dynamic Stochastic General Equilibrium (DSGE) models with Keynesian
features. The New Keynesian DSGE modeling methodology is explained in Michael
Woodford's textbook "Interest and Prices: Foundations of a Theory of Monetary
Policy". Economists are now actively estimating quantitative models of this
type, and using them to analyze optimal monetary and fiscal policy.
Microfoundations of price stickiness. 'Nominal rigidities', that is, sticky
prices and wages, are a central aspect of all New Keynesian models. A key
question posed is "why should prices adjust slowly?" One common explanation
given by New Keynesians is the presence of 'menu costs', meaning small costs
that must be paid in order to adjust nominal prices. For example, the costs of
making a new catalog, price list, or menu would be considered menu costs. Even
though these costs seem small, New Keynesians explain how they could amplify
short-run fluctuations. Not only do the firms have to pay to change the price,
but also, according to N. Gregory Mankiw, there are externalities that go along
with changing prices. As Mankiw describes, a firm that lowers its prices
because of a decrease in the money supply will be raising the real income of
the customers of that product. This will allow the buyers to purchase more,
which will not necessarily be from the firm that lowered their prices. As firms
do not receive the full benefit from reducing their prices their incentive to
adjust prices in response to macroeconomic events is reduced. Recent studies
(e.g. Golosov and Lucas) find that the size of the menu cost needed to match
the micro-data of price adjustment inside an otherwise standard business cycle
model is implausibily large to justify the menu-cost argument. The reason is
that such models lack "real rigidity" (see Ball and Romer). This is a property
that markups do not get squeezed by large adjustment in factor prices (such as
wages) that could occur in response to the monetary shock. Modern New Keynesian
models address this issue by assuming that the labor market is segmented, so
that the expansion in employment by a given firm does not lead to lower profits
for the other firms (see Woodford 2003). Other microeconomic ingredients.
Besides sticky prices, another market imperfection built into most New
Keynesian models is the assumption that firms are monopolistic competitors. In
fact, without some monopoly power it would make no sense to assume sticky
prices, because under perfect competition, any firm with a price slightly
higher than the others would be unable to sell anything, and any firm with a
price slightly lower than the others would be obliged to sell much more than
they can profitably produce. Therefore, New Keynesian models assume instead
that firms use their market power to maintain their prices above marginal cost,
so that even if they fail to set prices optimally they will remain profitable.
Many macroeconomic studies have estimated typical firms' degree of market
power, so this information can be used in parameterizing New Keynesian models.
Other microeconomic elements that appear in some New Keynesian models (though
not so commonly as sticky prices and imperfect competition) include the
following. New Keynesian DSGE models. After the pioneering work, surveyed in
the Mankiw and Romer volumes, on what types of microeconomic ingredients might
produce Keynesian macroeconomic effects, economists began putting these pieces
together to construct macroeconomic models. These models describe the decisions
of households, monopolistically competitive firms, the government or central
bank, and sometimes other economic agents. The monopolistic firms are assumed
to face some type of price stickiness, so each time firms adjust their prices,
they must bear in mind that those prices are likely to remain fixed longer than
they would like. Many models assume wages are rigid too. Total output is
determined by households' purchases, which depend on the prices of the firms.
Since macroeconomic behavior is derived from the interaction of the decisions
of all these players, acting over time, in the face of uncertainty about future
conditions, these models are classified as dynamic stochastic general
equilibrium (DSGE) models. The parameters of the model are usually estimated or
chosen to make the model's dynamics resemble the actual macroeconomic data from
the country or region under study. This modeling methodology is surveyed in
Woodford (2003), "op. cit." Policy implications. New Keynesian economists fully
agree with New Classical economists that in the long run, the classical
dichotomy holds: changes in the money supply are neutral. However, because
prices are sticky in the New Keynesian model, an increase in the money supply
(or equivalently, a decrease in the interest rate) does increase output and
lower unemployment in the short run. Nonetheless, New Keynesian economists do
not advocate using expansive monetary policy for short run gains in output and
employment, as it would raise inflationary expectations and thus store up
problems for the future. Instead, they advocate using monetary policy for
stabilization. That is, suddenly increasing the money supply just to produce a
temporary economic boom is not recommended as eliminating the increased
inflationary expectations will be impossible without producing a recession.
However when the economy is hit by some unexpected external shock, it may be a
good idea to offset the macroeconomic effects of the shock with monetary
policy. This is especially true if the unexpected shock is one (like a fall in
consumer confidence) which tends to lower both output and inflation; in that
case, expanding the money supply (lowering interest rates) helps by increasing
output while stabilizing inflation and inflationary expectations. Studies of
optimal monetary policy in New Keynesian DSGE models have focused on interest
rate rules (especially 'Taylor rules'), specifying how the central bank should
adjust the nominal interest rate in response to changes in inflation and
output. (More precisely, optimal rules usually react to changes in the output
gap, rather than changes in output "per se".) In some simple New Keynesian DSGE
models, it turns out that stabilizing inflation suffices, because maintaining
perfectly stable inflation also stabilizes output and employment to the maximum
degree desirable. Blanchard and Galí have called this property the 'divine
coincidence'. However, they also show that in models with more than one market
imperfection (for example, frictions in adjusting the employment level, as well
as sticky prices), there is no longer a 'divine coincidence', and instead there
is a tradeoff between stabilizing inflation and stabilizing employment.
Further, while some macroeconomists believe that New Keynesian models are on
the verge of being useful for quarter-to-quarter quantitative policy advice,
disagreement exists. Relation to other macroeconomic schools. Over the years, a
sequence of 'new' macroeconomic theories related to or opposed to Keynesianism
have been influential. After World War II, Paul Samuelson used the term
"neoclassical synthesis" to refer to the integration of Keynesian economics
with neoclassical economics. The idea was that the government and the central
bank would maintain rough full employment, so that neoclassical
notions—centered on the axiom of the universality of scarcity—would apply.
John Hicks' IS/LM model was central to the neoclassical synthesis. Later work
by economists such as James Tobin and Franco Modigliani involving more emphasis
on the microfoundations of consumption and investment was sometimes called neo-
Keynesianism. It is often contrasted with the post-Keynesianism of Paul
Davidson, which emphasizes the role of fundamental uncertainty in economic
life, especially concerning issues of private fixed investment. New
Keynesianism, associated with John B. Taylor, Stanley Fischer, Gregory Mankiw,
David Romer, Olivier Blanchard, Nobuhiro Kiyotaki, Jordi Galí, and Michael
Woodford, is a response to Robert Lucas and the new classical school. That
school criticized the inconsistencies of Keynesianism in the light of the
concept of "rational expectations". The new classicals combined a unique
market-clearing equilibrium (at full employment) with rational expectations.
The New Keynesians use "microfoundations" to demonstrate that price stickiness
hinders markets from clearing. Thus, the rational expectations-based
equilibrium need not be unique. Whereas the neoclassical synthesis hoped that
fiscal and monetary policy would maintain full employment, the new classicals
assumed that price and wage adjustment would automatically attain this
situation in the short run. The new Keynesians, on the other hand, see full
employment as being automatically achieved only in the long run, since prices
are "sticky" in the short run. Government and central-bank policies are needed
because the "long run" may be very long. Emphasis has also been placed during
the 2008 global financial and economic crisis on Keynes' stress on the
importance of coordination of macroeconomic policies (e.g., monetary and fiscal
stimulus) and of international economic institutions such as the World Bank and
International Monetary Fund (IMF), and of the maintenance of an open trading
system. This has been reflected in the work of IMF economists and of Donald
Markwell.
