New Jersey Redistricting Commission The New Jersey Redistricting Commission is
a constitutional body of the government of New Jersey tasked with redrawing the
state's Congressional election districts after each decade's census. Like
Arizona, Idaho, Hawaii, Montana, and Washington; the redistricting is completed
within an independent, bipartisan commission. The apportionment of members of
the Redistricting Commission is carefully balanced between legislative and
executive majorities and is purposefully titled to allow the minority party an
equal amount of seats on the commission. Note that this commission deals with
districts for the U.S. House of Representatives while the New Jersey
Apportionment Commission deals with legislative districts for the New Jersey
Legislature. According to the state Constitution, New Jersey's commission has
13 members. The President of the Senate and Assembly Speaker each name two
members; the minority leaders of both houses each name two members and the
state's Democratic and Republican chairpersons each name two members. The 12
members then select a 13th "tie-breaking" member to chair of the commission. If
they cannot agree on the 13th member, then each party submits a name to the
state's Supreme Court, which chooses one as the 13th member. The commission is
required to hold three public meetings, but is otherwise allowed to meet in
private until it releases its new map. 2012 - 2021 Congressional Map. Following
the 2010 Census, New Jersey lost one of its 13 seats in Congress. The
commission named former Attorney General John Farmer, Jr. as its tiebreaking
member. Earlier in the year, Farmer had been counsel to the New Jersey
Apportionment Commission. On December 23 the commission chose a map endorsed by
Republican members, which combined New Jersey's 5th congressional district,
represented by Rep. Scott Garrett, with part of the 9th congressional district,
held by Rep. Steve Rothman. Much of the balance of the 9th District was
included in a redrawn 8th Congressional District, which is represented by Rep.
William Pascrell. Democratic members of the committee had also planned to pit
Rothman against Garrett. Instead of challenging Garrett, on Dec. 26 Rothman
announced a primary election challenge against Pascrell for the 8th District.
