New Left The New Left was a range of activists, educators, agitators and others
in the 1960s and 1970s who focused their attention on marginal identities and,
eventually, identity politics. They rejected involvement with the labor
movement and Marxism's historical theory of class struggle. Abandoning the
Marxist goals of educating the proletariat, the New Left turned to student
activism as its reservoir of power. In both the U.S. and Japan, the "New Left"
was associated with the Hippie movement and college campus protest movements.
The American New Left in particular opposed what it saw as the prevailing
authority structures in society, which it termed "The Establishment", and those
who rejected this authority became known as "anti-Establishment". Historical
origins. The seeds of the New Left were planted in the de-Stalinization of the
Soviet Union. Nikita Khrushchev's February 1956 speech "On the Cult of
Personality and Its Consequences", and the subsequent Hungarian Revolution of
1956, confused the Communist Party of the USA, the Communist Party of Great
Britain, and the Japanese Communist Party, none of whom were able to present a
unified response. Young Marxist intellectuals, seeing the failure of their
political organizations, began to develop a more democratic approach to
politics, opposed to what they saw as the centralised and authoritarian
politics of the pre-war leftist parties. Those Communists who became
disillusioned with Communism due to its authoritarian character eventually
formed the "new left", first among dissenting Communist Party intellectuals and
campus groups in the United Kingdom, and later alongside campus radicalism in
the US and elsewhere. The term "nouvelle gauche" was already current in France
in the 50s, associated with "France Observateur", and its editor Claude
Bourdet, who attempted to form a third position, between the dominant Stalinist
and Social Democratic tendencies of the left, and the two Cold War blocs. It
was from this French "new left" that the "First New Left" of Britain borrowed
the term. The term "New Left" was popularised in an open letter written in 1960
by sociologist C. Wright Mills (1916–62) entitled "Letter to the New Left".
Mills argued for a new leftist ideology, moving away from the traditional
"labor metaphysic", towards issues such as opposing alienation, anomie, and
authoritarianism. Mills argued for a shift from traditional leftism, toward the
values of the counter-culture, and emphasized an international perspective on
the movement. According to David Burner, C Wright Mills claimed that the
proletariat were no longer the revolutionary force; the new agent of
revolutionary change were young intellectuals around the world. In Britain, the
journal "New Left Review" was founded in 1960, representing a theoretical
synthesis of a revisionist, humanist, and socialist Marxism, departing from
orthodox Marxist theory. This publishing effort made the ideas of culturally
oriented theorists available to an undergraduate reading audience. In this
early period, many on the New Left were involved in the Campaign for Nuclear
Disarmament, formed in 1957. According to Robin Blackburn, "The decline of CND
by late 1961, however, deprived the New Left of much of its momentum as a
movement, and uncertainties and divisions within the Board of the journal led
to the transfer of the Review to a younger and less experienced group in 1962."
Theory and philosophy. The German-Jewish critical theorist Herbert Marcuse is
referred to as the "Father of the New Left". He rejected the theory of class
struggle and the Marxist concern with labor, instead claiming, according to
Leszek Kołakowski, that since "all questions of material existence have been
solved, moral commands and prohibitions are no longer relevant." He regarded
the realization of man's erotic nature as the true liberation of humanity,
which inspired the utopias of Jerry Rubin and others. Another prominent New
Left thinker, Ernst Bloch, believed that socialism would prove the means for
all human beings to become immortal and eventually create God. Student
movement. In the United States, student protests called the Free Speech
Movement took place during the 1964–1965 academic year on the campus of the
University of California, Berkeley under the informal leadership of students
Mario Savio, Brian Turner, Bettina Aptheker, Steve Weissman, Art Goldberg,
Jackie Goldberg, and others. In protests unprecedented in this scope at the
time, students insisted that the university administration lift the ban of on-
campus political activities and acknowledge the students' right to free speech
and academic freedom. In particular, on 2 December 1964 on the steps of Sproul
Hall Mario Savio gave a speech: "There's a time when the operation of the
machine becomes so odious—makes you so sick at heart—that you can't take
part. You can't even passively take part. And you've got to put your bodies
upon the gears and upon the wheels, upon the levers, upon all the apparatus,
and you've got to make it stop." Following the relative success in 1964-5 of
student organizing as opposed to the failure of community organizing, in 1966
the New Left began to overturn the traditional Marxist focus on the
proletariat, arguing that the Left should answer the needs of students and tap
student power. One SDS publication stated that "the revolution may come from
the universities after all if Berkeley is any indication." A 1967 pamphlet,
"The Student as Nigger", attempted to cast students as a marginalized class.
Other pamphlets and movement periodicals warned students not to get into
discussions with their teachers about politics, since professors were part of
the academic establishment attempting to oppress the student. As the campus
orientation of the American New Left became clear in the mid to late 1960s, the
student sections of the British New Left began taking action. The London School
of Economics became a key site of British student militancy. The influence of
protests against the Vietnam War and of the May 1968 events in France were also
felt strongly throughout the British New Left. Some within the British New Left
joined the International Socialists, which later became Socialist Workers Party
while others became involved with groups such as the International Marxist
Group. The politics of the British New Left can be contrasted with Solidarity,
UK, which continued to focus primarily on industrial issues. In the 1970s, the
theory was developed further by Nicos Poulantzas, André Gorz, et al. 1968
protests. The student activism of the New Left came to a head around the world
in 1968. The May 1968 protests in France temporarily shut down the city of
Paris, while the German student movement did the same in Bonn. Universities
were simultaneously occupied in May in Paris, in the Columbia University
protests of 1968, and in Japanese student strikes. Shortly thereafter, Swedish
students occupied a building at Stockholm University. However, all of these
protests were shut down by police authorities without achieving their goals,
which caused the influence of the student movement to lapse in the 1970s.
United States New Left. Many New Left thinkers in the U.S. were influenced by
the Vietnam War and the Chinese Cultural Revolution. Like the British New Left,
they recognized problems in the communism of the Soviet Union, but unlike the
British New Left, they did not turn to Trotskyism or social democracy. Some in
the U.S. New Left argued that since the Soviet Union could no longer be
considered the world center for proletarian revolution, new revolutionary
Communist thinkers had to be substituted in its place, such as Mao Zedong, Ho
Chi Minh and Fidel Castro. Todd Gitlin in "The Whole World Is Watching" in
describing the movement's influences stated, "The New Left, again, refused the
self-discipline of explicit programmatic statement until too late - until, that
is, the Marxist-Leninist sects filled the vacuum with dogmas, with clarity on
the cheap." Other elements of the U.S. New Left were anarchist and looked to
libertarian socialist traditions of American radicalism, the Industrial Workers
of the World and union militancy. This group coalesced around the historical
journal "Radical America". American Autonomist Marxism was also a child of this
stream, for instance in the thought of Harry Cleaver. Murray Bookchin was also
part of the anarchist stream of the New Left, as were the Yippies. The U.S. New
Left drew inspiration from black radicalism, particularly the Black Power
movement and the more explicitly Maoist and militant Black Panther Party. The
Panthers in turn influenced other similar militant groups, like the Young
Lords, the Brown Berets and the American Indian Movement. The New Left was also
inspired by SNCC, Student Non-violent Coordinating Committee. Students immersed
themselves into poor communities building up support with the locals. The New
Left sought to be a broad based, grass roots movement. The Vietnam war
conducted by liberal President Lyndon Johnson was a special target across the
worldwide New Left. Johnson and his top officials became unwelcome on American
campuses. The anti-war movement escalated the rhetorical heat, as violence
broke out on both sides. The climax came at the 1968 Democratic National
Convention. It could be argued that the New Left's most successful legacy was
the rebirth of feminism. As the leaders of the New Left were largely white men,
women reacted to the lack of progressive gender politics with their own social
intellectual movement. Ultimately though the New Left disintegrated, largely
because members of the SDS dissatisfied with the pace of change, incorporated
violent tendencies towards social transformation. After 1969, the New Left
degenerated into radicals and moderate factions, and that same year, the
Weathermen, a surviving faction of SDS, attempted to launch a guerrilla war in
an incident known as the "Days of Rage." Finally, in 1970 three members of the
Weathermen blew themselves up in a Greenwich Village brownstone trying to make
a bomb out of a stick of dynamite and an alarm clock. The New Left was also
marked by the invention of the modern environmentalist movement, which clashed
with the Old Left's disregard for the environment in favor of preserving the
jobs of union workers. Environmentalism also gave rise to various other social
justice movements such as the environmental justice movement, which aims to
prevent the toxification of the environment of minority and disadvantaged
communities. Students for a Democratic Society. The organization that really
came to symbolize the core of the New Left was the Students for a Democratic
Society (SDS). By 1962, the SDS had emerged as the most important of the new
campus radical groups; soon it would be regarded as virtually synonymous with
the ‘New Left’. In 1962, Tom Hayden wrote its founding document, the Port
Huron Statement, which issued a call for "participatory democracy" based on
non-violent civil disobedience. This was the idea that individual citizens
could help make ‘those social decisions determining the quality and
direction’ of their lives. The SDS marshalled anti-war, pro-civil rights and
free speech concerns on campuses, and brought together liberals and more
revolutionary leftists. The SDS became the leading organization of the anti-war
movement on college campuses during the Vietnam War. As the war escalated the
membership of the SDS also increased greatly as more people were willing to
scrutinise political decisions in moral terms. During the course of the war,
the people became increasingly militant. As opposition to the war grew
stronger, the SDS became a nationally prominent political organization, with
opposing the war an overriding concern that overshadowed many of the original
issues that had inspired SDS. In 1967, the old statement in Port Huron was
abandoned for a new call for action, which would inevitably lead to the
destruction of the SDS. In 1968 and 1969, as its radicalism reached a fever
pitch, the SDS began to split under the strain of internal dissension and
increasing turn towards Maoism. Along with adherents known as the New Communist
Movement, some extremist illegal factions also emerged, such as the Weather
Underground Organization. The SDS suffered the difficulty of wanting to change
the world while 'freeing life in the here and now.' This caused confusion
between short term and long term goals. The sudden growth due to the successful
rallies against the Vietnam War meant there were more people wanting action to
end the Vietnam war, whereas the original New Left had wanted to focus on
critical reflection. In the end, it was the anti-war sentiment that dominated
the SDS. Attacking liberalism. Kazin (1998) says, "The liberals who anxiously
turned back the assault of the postwar Right were confronted in the 1960s by a
very different adversary: a radical movement led, in the main, by their own
children. The white New Left." Kazin concludes, "For the young moralists of the
1960s — missionaries of a secular persuasion — only a self-conscious
rebellion from below could topple the corrupted liberal order." Singh (2007)
says the attack originated from "thinkers the political left and those
associated with the new social movements of the 1960s and 1970s." It was a
worldwide phenomenon, as a Culture war broke out on university campuses between
the older established liberals and the younger radicals of the New Left.
Herbert Marcuse, a philosopher of the New Left, said that "The new radicalism
militates against the centralized bureaucratic communist as well as against the
semi- democratic liberal organization." Isserman (2001) reports that the New
Left" "came to use the word 'liberal' as a political epithet." Historian
Richard Ellis (1998) says that the SDS's search for their own identity
"increasingly meant rejecting, even demonizing, liberalism." As Wolfe (2010)
notes, "no one hated liberals more than leftists.". Japanese New Left. The New
Left in Japan began simultaneously with the British and American movements and
rose to prominence in the country by occupying college campuses for several
years in the 1960s. After 1970, they splintered into several violent terrorist
groups including the United Red Army who tortured their own members and the
Japanese Red Army which murdered civilians and hijacked aircraft. They also
invented the political ideology of Anti-Japaneseism. Continental European New
Left. American influence on the European New Left appeared first in West
Germany, which became a prototype for European student radicals. German
students protesting against the Vietnam war often wore discarded US military
uniforms, and they made influential contacts with dissident GIs—draftees who
did not like the war either. The Prague Spring was legitimised by the
Czechoslovak government as a socialist reform movement. The 1968 events in the
Czechoslovakia were driven forward by industrial workers, and were explicitly
theorized by active Czechoslovak unionists as a revolution for workers'
control. The driving force of near-revolution in France in May 1968 were
students inspired by the ideas of the Situationist International, which in turn
had been inspired by Socialisme ou Barbarie. Both of these groups emphasised
culture as a form of production. While the Autonomia in Italy have been called
New Left, it is more appropriate to see them as the result of traditional,
industrially oriented, communism re-theorising its ideas and methods. Unlike
most of the New Left, Autonomia had a strong blue-collar arm, active in
regularly occupying factories. The Provos were a Dutch counter-cultural
movement of mostly young people with anarchist influences.
