Welsh devolution referendum, 2011 A referendum on extending the law-making
powers of the National Assembly for Wales was held in Wales on 3 March 2011.
The referendum asked the question: "Do you want the Assembly now to be able to
make laws on "all" matters in the 20 subject areas it has powers for?" If a
majority voted 'yes', the Assembly would then able to make laws, known as Acts
of the Assembly, on all matters in the subject areas, without needing the UK
Parliament's agreement. If a majority voted 'no', the arrangements at the time
of the referendum would have continued - that is, in each devolved area, the
Assembly would be able to make its own laws on some matters, but not others. To
make laws on any of these other matters, the Assembly would have had to ask the
UK Parliament to transfer the powers to it. The results of the referendum were
announced on 4 March 2011. Overall, 63.49% voted 'yes', and 36.51% voted 'no'.
In 21 of 22 local authorities the vote was 'yes', with the exception being
Monmouthshire by a slim majority. The overall turnout was 35.2%. First Minister
Carwyn Jones, welcoming the result, said: "Today an old nation came of age."
Background. In the "One Wales" coalition agreement on 27 June 2007 the Wales
Labour Party and Plaid Cymru made the commitment "to proceed to a successful
outcome of a referendum for full law-making powers under Part IV of the
Government of Wales Act 2006 as soon as practicable, at or before the end of
the Assembly term". The two parties agreed "in good faith to campaign for a
successful outcome to such a referendum" and to set up an All-Wales Convention
to prepare for such a successful outcome. On 27 October 2007 the then First
Minister Rhodri Morgan and the Deputy First Minster Ieuan Wyn Jones appointed
Sir Emyr Jones Parry, the recently retired Permanent Representatives from
Britain to the United Nations to head the convention. Sir Emyr stated on 22
November 2007 that he would like to begin to work as soon as possible and hoped
to have the report ready by 2009 at the latest. The All Wales Convention
reported to the First Minister and the Deputy First Minister on 18 November
2009. It reported that a "yes" vote would be obtainable but not guaranteed. An
opinion poll for the convention had found that 47% would vote Yes, and 37%
would vote No. The report suggested that the Assembly needed to decide before
June 2010 whether to trigger a referendum if the vote was to be held before the
next Assembly elections. On 2 February 2010 the new First Minister Carwyn
Jones, who had succeeded Rhodri Morgan on 9 December 2009, confirmed that a
trigger vote would be held on 9 February on whether the Assembly should request
a referendum on full law making powers. The Welsh Liberal Democrats and Welsh
Conservative Party stated they did not want the referendum to be held on the
same day as the 2011 Assembly elections and would abstain from voting to
trigger the referendum if this date was not ruled out. The trigger vote was
held in the Assembly on Tuesday 9 February 2010, and was approved unanimously
across all parties, with 53 out of the 60 AMs voting for it. Under the
Government of Wales Act 2006 the First Minister was required to send a letter
within two weeks to the Welsh Secretary Peter Hain, who would than have 120
days to lay a draft order for a referendum before Parliament. It was expected
that the referendum date would not be set until after the general election. On
15 June 2010 Cheryl Gillan, the new Welsh Secretary in the Conservative--
Liberal Democrat coalition government at Westminster, announced that the
referendum would probably be held between January and March 2011. Others
proposed that it should be held on 5 May 2011, together with both the Assembly
elections and the AV referendum. It was agreed that the referendum be held on 3
March 2011, after representations to the Welsh Secretary from the Welsh
Government. Referendum question. Draft question. This wording was, however,
criticised by the Welsh Government. Opinion polls and comments. In 2007, one
poll suggested that 47% might say Yes in a referendum vote, with 44% against. A
poll in February 2008 saw 49% in favour of a full law-making parliament and 41%
against. On 3 February 2010 the Western Mail endorsed the Yes campaign. A BBC
poll released on 1 March 2010 (St. David's Day) found that support had risen
for full law making powers, up to 56%, with 35% against, although Nick Bourne
the leader of the Welsh Conservative Party (who supported a yes vote) was
sceptical of the poll results. A summary table of poll results in advance of
the referendum is set out below. Results. Overall result. Confirmed result: Yes
The results were counted and announced on 4 March 2011, locally initially and
then formally confirmed at the Senedd. In 21 of 22 unitary authorities, the
vote was Yes. The only voting area to declare a No result was Monmouthshire,
which was announced following a recount. The difference was only 320 votes.
Provisional turnout (as per Electoral Commission): 35.2% Votes counted:
814,512. Results by unitary authority. Local area analysis. Turnout Highest:
Carmarthenshire - 44.36% Lowest: Wrexham - 27.04% Vote Highest % of Yes Vote:
Gwynedd - 76.03% Highest % of No Vote: Monmouthshire - 50.64% Reactions to the
result. First Minister Carwyn Jones said: "Today an old nation came of age."
Deputy First Minister and Plaid Cymru leader Ieuan Wyn Jones said it marked
"the beginning of a new era of Welsh devolution - the decade to deliver for
Wales... To demand respect, you must first display self respect. Today we have
done just that, and the rest of the world can now sit up and take notice of the
fact that our small nation, here on the western edge of the continent of
Europe, has demonstrated pride in who we are, and what we all stand for."
Conservative Welsh Secretary Cheryl Gillan said there had been concern over
turnout, but called it "a good day for Wales". She said that the British
Government reinforced its commitment to make the arrangements work effectively.
Roger Lewis, chairman of the Yes for Wales campaign, said he was delighted,
adding: "It is clear, the people of Wales have spoken." Rachel Banner, of the
No campaign, said it marked a "turning point for our nation". No Campaigner,
Rachel Banner, questioned the legitimacy of the result, stating that it "Has it
got the full-hearted consent of the Welsh people?" and stated that she didn't
believe that the 42 backbench assembly members could provide the high quality
scrunity to the Welsh Government.
