NLRB election procedures The National Labor Relations Board, an agency within
the United States government, was created in 1935 as part of the National Labor
Relations Act. Among the NLRB’s chief responsibilities is the holding of
elections to permit employees to vote whether they wish to be represented by a
particular labor union. Congress amended the Act in 1947 through the
Taft–Hartley Act to give workers the ability to decertify an already
recognized or certified union as well. This article describes, in a very
summary manner, the procedures that the NLRB uses to hold such elections, as
well as the circumstances in which a union may obtain the right to represent a
group of employees without an election. Obtaining authorization cards. To
obtain an NLRB-conducted election, the union must file a petition supported by
a showing of interest from at least thirty percent of the employees in the
group that the union seeks to represent, typically called the bargaining unit.
Unions typically use authorization cards, individual forms in which a worker
states that he or she wishes to be represented by the union, as evidence of
employee support. A card or petition that simply states that the signer wanted
an election would not be valid. Similarly if an employee signed the card
because the union had told him that the only reason to sign the card was to
have an election, the Board will not count that card. The cards must be signed
and dated within six months of when the union files its petition to be valid;
if a worker subsequently signs a card for another union the NLRB will not count
the card in support of either union. The Board also treats cards as invalid if
they were obtained with illegal assistance from the employer: for example, if
the employer gave the petitioning union access to its facility that it did not
permit other unions or other organizations to have, or if it made threats or
promises that coerced employees into signing these cards. Cards collected with
the help of low level supervisors may also be “tainted”, even if the
employer is opposed to the union, depending on what the supervisor said or did
and the nature of the employer’s response. Some union promises, such as a
promise to waive union initiation fees for employees who sign a card before a
certain date, may also make an authorization card invalid. Petitioning for an
election. When the union files its petition, the NLRB first checks the
sufficiency of the union’s showing of support. The Board will not show the
cards to the employer, or release the names of the employees who have signed
them, or indicate the number of cards submitted by the union. The employer may,
nonetheless, challenge this showing of interest by claiming that the signatures
on the cards are not genuine, or that they have been tainted by supervisory
involvement in the union’s campaign, or that the union has understated the
number of employees in the unit that it seeks to represent. Then the Board will
conduct an administrative investigation into those allegations. If the Board
finds that any of these cards are invalid for any reason it will typically
allow the union a brief period of time to submit however many cards are
necessary to meet its thirty percent standard. Optionally, a union that has
gained over 50% of employees petitioning for representation can form by card
check election. An employer currently can refuse to accept the results of a
card check election and require a secret ballot election. Under the proposed
Employee Free Choice Act an employer challenging a card check election would be
required to assert that employee signatures were gathered using illegal means,
such as coercion. This would be a return to the NLRB's Joy Silk Doctrine, which
was in effect from 1949 to 1966. Processing the petition. If the union has made
this threshold showing of support, then the Board will attempt to work out an
agreement between the parties for the scheduling of an election. The employer
can, however, insist on a hearing to challenge the appropriateness of the unit
or to raise other issues. The NLRB will only hold an election in a unit that it
finds to be appropriate. This issue may arise in different forms: as an
example, if a union seeks to represent workers at one facility out of several
that an employer operates in a particular locale, the Board will have to
determine whether the single facility unit is an appropriate one. The same
issue might arise within a single site: the union may seek to represent only
one group of employees, such as truck drivers, while the employer may claim
that the only appropriate unit is a wider one, such as truck drivers, shipping
and receiving employees, and warehouse employees. While the NLRB has developed
detailed rules governing what units are appropriate in health care
institutions, it takes a more ad hoc approach in other cases, relying on a
collection of factors that the Board labels its “community of interest”
standard. The Board typically favors broader units over smaller ones,
particularly if the union is seeking the broader unit. If a rival union is
petitioning for a smaller unit contained within the larger one sought by the
petitioning union, as for example in the case in which one union seeks to
represent a “wall to wall” unit of all production and maintenance employees
in a unit, while another seeks to represent only the skilled trades employees
in the maintenance department, the Board may either direct a “Globe”
election, in which the craft employees are allowed to vote for inclusion or
exclusion as a group in the larger unit, then offered a choice of voting for or
against union representation in whatever unit they have voted for. The Board
may also need to determine if a particular individual may be included in the
unit. Some individuals, such as independent contractors, supervisors, and
agricultural employees, are not “employees” for purposes of the NLRA and
may not be included in any unit. Other employees, such as guards, as defined in
the Act, may not be included in the same unit as the employees they watch over
or represented by the same union that represents those rank and file employees;
the Board takes a similar approach toward “confidential employees”, who
have special access to confidential employer information relating to the
employer’s labor relations policies. Other employees, such as professional
employees, may only be included in the same unit as non-professional employees
if they are allowed to vote as a separate group for or against inclusion. The
Board also excludes temporary employees and, unless both employers agree, the
employees of subcontractors and temporary agencies who work alongside the
employees of the primary employer. The employer must ordinarily raise these
issues before the election is scheduled; it cannot later refuse to bargain on
the theory that the unit is inappropriate on grounds it did not make in a
timely manner. That rule does not, on the other hand, bar the employer from
later challenging an individual employee’s ballot on the ground that he or
she is not an employee within the meaning of the Act, as for example in the
case of a supervisor. The Board will also allow other unions that claim an
interest in representing any or all of the employees in the unit to intervene
at this time. If a union already represents any of these employees, then it
will be made a party to the case without the need to make any showing of
interest; in other cases the Board requires that an outside union produce at
least a thirty percent showing of interest in order to argue for a different
bargaining unit, a ten percent showing of interest to participate in any
hearing, and a single authorization card if all the union seeks is to be
included as a choice on the ballot. The Board will not ordinarily hold an
election if the employees in the unit are currently covered by a collective
bargaining agreement. The Board will relax its “contract bar” rules,
however, in those cases in which the agreement is for more than three years, in
which case an election petition by an outside union filed after the third
anniversary will be timely. The Board also permits petitions filed during a
“window period”, a one month period beginning ninety days before the
expiration of the old agreement and ending sixty days before expiration. The
Board has developed a complex set of rules governing premature extensions of
collective bargaining agreements to enforce its contract bar rule. The Board is
also barred by statute from holding an election in a unit if it has held a
valid election in that unit in the last twelve months. This rule does not,
however, prevent the Board from requiring a rerun election if it determines
that the election was invalid, either because of the conduct of the parties or
other reasons. The Board can also conduct an election in a larger unit than the
earlier unit and allow employees who voted in the previous election to vote in
the second one. If the parties do not stipulate to an election, then the
Regional Director of the NLRB will direct an election to be held. There is no
automatic right to appeal from the Regional Director’s decision, although an
aggrieved party can request the NLRB to review the Regional Director’s
decision. Such requests for review are rarely granted; even when they are, the
Board typically conducts the election as scheduled, impounding the ballots
until the Board rules on the request for review. The Board requires an employer
to provide the petitioning union with an “Excelsior list,” which should
contain the names and addresses of all unit employees, within ten days of the
direction of an election. “Laboratory conditions”. The Board will suspend
the processing of an election petition if a “blocking charge” is filed,
that is an unfair labor practice charge that, on its face, alleges unlawful
conduct that, if true, might interfere with employees’ ability to make a free
and uncoerced choice of representative, reflecting the fundamental rights
defined in "NLRA" section 7. The Region investigates these charges on an
expedited basis, the Regional Director may make a preliminary decision as to
whether the charge has merit and, if it does, is likely to affect the election.
The Regional Director’s decision to block or not block an election is not
appealable. A party filing a charge that might otherwise constitute a blocking
charge can formally request the Region to proceed with the petition,
notwithstanding the charge, by filing a request to proceed. There is one
exception to this rule: the Regional Director always suspends the processing of
an election petition to investigate a charge that an employer has unlawfully
supported or dominated a labor organization, in violation of "NLRA" section 8
(a)(2) or "USC" section 158 These issues may also arise after the election,
when the losing party asks that the election be set aside by filing objections
to conduct that may have affected the election. Just what sort of conduct may
justify overturning an election result depends on the facts of each case and
the membership of the NLRB itself at the time it decides the case; while the
Board has established some principles that have remained valid for decades, in
other areas it has changed its policies radically, often as a result in changes
in the ideological makeup of the Board following changes in the party that
holds the White House, in the sequence of holdings discussed below. The
employer has the right under the First Amendment to express its support for or
opposition to unionization. The permissible expression must not threaten
reprisals or promise employee benefits contingent on the outcome of the
election. The NLRA states that such “views, arguments, or opiniondo not rise
to the level of an unfair labor practice in s.8(c). The line between mere
expression of opinion and interference or threat is a difficult one to draw
with any precision and has given rise to thousands of NLRB decisions on the
subject. For example, a statement by an employer that, to an outsider, may
sound like a simple factual prediction(regarding conditions that may occur if
the union wins the election), may be taken as a threat when received by an
employee whose livelihood depends upon his relationship to that employer. The
NLRB considers a number of factors in deciding whether a particular tactic by
an employer or a union destroyed the “Laboratory_Conditions” that it has
tried to maintain in election campaigns of this sort. The Board will not
consider events, no matter how serious, that occurred before the date that the
union filed its petition nor, as a matter of common sense, events that occurred
after the election. While conduct that violates the employees’ s.7 rights,
such as the discriminatory discharge of a union activist or threats to close
the company if the union wins the election, will often be enough to require the
holding of a second election, even the most egregious violations of the Act may
not be enough to require a rerun election if they were so isolated that they
did not have a perceptible impact on the outcome of the election. On the other
hand, conduct that does not violate the Act, but which may affect the
"atmosphere" in which the election is held, such as campaigning in the polling
area on the day of the election or holding “captive audience” meetings that
employees are required to attend in the twenty-four hours before the election,
had been determined to be sufficient basis to overturn the election. Similarly,
misconduct by others, such as the NLRB personnel conducting the election or
third parties, including local newspapers or chambers of commerce, have gone
both ways: timing of distribution of an editorial that associated unions with
racial-equality organizations in a local, small town, southern newspaper, when
the union lost the election in pre-Civil Rights Georgia or when a Japanese
businessman’s editorial criticizing the American workforce (and the union won
the election at a Japanese-owned company) have justified setting aside an
election; but it has also been held that "one incident" is not sufficient for
religious or racial hatred to violate the election standard. Midland National
Life Insurance Co. is a current holding that reflects the Board’s
oscillations along White House political lines. This case involved an employer
distributing anti-union campaign literature to its employees with their
paychecks. The literature included false impressions and other misleading
information. The union learned of the document the next morning, 3½ hours
before polling. In this 1982 case, the Board decided that the election
standards were not lowered to a level that "...impaired the free and informed
atmosphere requisite to an untrammeled expression of choice by the
employees.” (Midland, above.) In the early 1950s the Board began considering
whether employees were “deceived as to the source of the campaign propaganda
by trickery or fraud, and that they could therefore neither recognize nor
evaluate propaganda for what it was, the Board set aside the election (Midland,
above). Later the Board “refined its standard” in Liberal Market refusing
to consider the truth or falsity of campaign propaganda, but measured the
degree to which employees’ free choice was impacted by misleading
information. For the next seven years, the Board held the “intent to mislead"
as an element of the standard” for setting aside an election. The next
refinement of the standard occurred in 1962, when, in Hollywood Ceramics, the
Board required the “misrepresentation or campaign trickery to involve (1) a
substantial departure from the truth, (2)at a time which prevents the other
party [...] from making an effective reply, so that the misrepresentation,
which (3) deliberate or not, may (4) reasonably be expected to have a (5)
significant impact on the election.” (Numbers added to emphasize elements to
be evaluated.) Fifteen years later, in Shopping Kart Food Market, Inc., a new
administration brought in a board that effectively overruled Hollywood
Ceramics, stating that it would “recognize and rely on the employees as
mature individuals who are capable of recognizing campaign propaganda for what
it is and discounting it” and "effectively" negating the possibility of
policing campaigns. Thus, the Board would set aside an election tainted by
misrepresentation only when was involved. When the Board changed under the next
White House administration, the Board returned to its policy of insuring fair
election under General Knit. Another administrative change coincided with the
holding in Midland (above) and the Board’s requiring forgery to invoke the
Board’s oversight in a tainted election. However, through all these diametric
holdings, the Board has never disowned its responsibility to maintain
“Laboratory Conditions”; instead, it wavered on the degree to which those
conditions will reflect the real world of heated employee representation
elections. Conducting the election, counting the ballots and certifying the
results. The NLRB usually conducts elections at the workplace, setting up a
polling area where employees can cast ballots. Each party to the election is
allowed a number of observers, depending on the size of the unit. The starting
or ending times of the election will depend on the nature of the employer’s
business; if the employer operates more than two shifts the Board will
typically schedule separate polling times to allow employees to vote as they
arrive for and leave from work. The Board less often conducts elections by mail
ballot, usually in cases in which workers are widely dispersed. Observers may
challenge the ballots of employees who one side or the other claims are not
members of the bargaining unit or not eligible to vote for any other reason.
The NLRB will challenge the ballot of any voter whose name does not appear on
the list supplied by the employer. Those challenged ballots are held separately
to be counted after a hearing officer determines, following a post-election
hearing, that the individual’s vote should be counted. Even then the Board
may not make any determination on this issue or counted any challenged ballots
if the number of such ballots is too small to affect the outcome of the
election. A party that wishes to protest the outcome of the election must file
objections within seven days after the election. The Regional Director
determines, after an investigation, whether any of the charges have enough
merit to justify a hearing into them. The hearing officer conducting that
hearing will also resolve any challenges to individual employees’ ballots if
they are sufficient to affect the outcome of the election. If a party has also
filed unfair labor practice charges based on the conduct it claims made a fair
election impossible, the hearing on its objections will be held before the
Administrative Law Judge before him any such unfair labor practice charges are
tried. Legal challenges to the results. While the Board will hear a party’s
appeal from a decision rejecting its objections to an election, there is no
right to judicial review of the NLRB’s decision. The ostensible purpose of
this denial of direct judicial review is to expedite the determination of
questions concerning union representation. In practice, however, the lack of
judicial review often produces the opposite result. An employer that wants to
challenge the Board’s certification of a union in court must engage in what
is referred to as a “technical refusal to bargain” in order to draw an
unfair labor practice charge against it under Section 8(a)(5) of the Act. The
General Counsel of the NLRB will typically file an unfair labor practice
complaint against it for refusing to bargain, at which point the employer can
then raise the same objections to the election that it raised earlier as a
defense to the unfair labor practice charges against it. While the Board will
almost always reject these objections on the ground that they have already been
ruled upon, this enables the employer to raise these objections in the
appellate court proceedings concerning the Board’s decision in the unfair
labor practice case. The employer runs certain risks in engaging in a technical
refusal to bargain; among other things, it may be liable to employees if it
makes changes in their terms and conditions of employment without bargaining
with the union. However, because the General Counsel of the NLRB rarely seeks
injunctive relief in cases of this sort, an employer that wants to take the
risk of liability and believes it can withstand a strike can delay bargaining
with a union for years after it has won the election. Unions can also seek
judicial review of unfavorable election results by picketing for recognition in
the hope of drawing a charge under Section 8(b)(7) of the Act. There is a
narrow exception to this general rule under which a party to a representation
case can seek injunctive relief directly in the federal courts to prevent the
NLRB from holding an election in defiance of an express statutory limitation,
e.g., failing to hold a separate self-determination election for professional
employees. These cases are exceptionally infrequent. Bargaining orders. The
NLRB also has the power to order an employer to bargain with the union, even
though the union has not won an election, as a remedy for egregious unfair
labor practices by the employer. Such orders, commonly known as “Gissel
orders” after the United States Supreme Court case that authorized them, may
only be issued if the union can show that it once had majority support and that
the employer’s unlawful conduct destroyed that support. The Board has
identified a number of “hallmark” violations, such as threats to close the
operation made by an authoritative member of management and disseminated widely
through the workforce, that will support a Gissel order. The appellate courts
have been less receptive to these orders and have frequently refused to enforce
them on a number of grounds, e.g., that employee turnover in the years while
the charge was being litigated makes a bargaining order inappropriate.
Successorship. An employer may also be ordered to bargain with a union, even
though the union has not been certified as the representative of any of its
employees, if it is the successor to an employer that was obliged to bargain
with the union. Successorship requires (1) that the new employer draw a
majority of its workforce from the bargaining unit the union previously
represented, (2) that the new employer be engaged in the same general line of
business as its predecessor, and (3) that the bargaining unit has not been
changed so drastically in the transfer of the business from the old to the new
employer that it is no longer an appropriate one. It is not necessary to show
that the new employer bought the predecessor’s business in order to prove
successorship; an employer that does nothing more than buy the assets of
another company, or a competitor that supplants another employer by
underbidding it, can still be a successor if it draws most of its workforce
from the old bargaining unit and remains in the same general line of business.
In addition, an employer may be a successor, even if it does not hire any of
its predecessor’s employees, if it refused to hire them because of their
union membership or activities. Decertification elections. Employees
represented by a union can also petition to decertify the union. They must also
produce evidence that at least thirty percent of the unit supports
decertification and are bound by the same “contract bar” rules as an
outside union would be. The only appropriate bargaining unit for a
decertification election is the currently existing unit, whether it is one
created by the NLRB or one created or modified by the parties through
collective bargaining. Decertification elections are also subject to the same
rules concerning improper campaign conduct as elections initiated by a union.
Decertification can also occur if the employer received substantial evidence
that the union no longer has the support of a majority of the bargaining unit.
Typically, this is accomplished through giving a petition, signed by a majority
of the bargaining unit, to a member of Management. Decertification without
elections. The Federal Labor Relations Authority may strip a union of its right
to represent workers, as it happened in the 1981 air traffic controllers
strike. Employer petitions. Employers may petition for an election if a union
has demanded recognition, but has not petitioned for an election itself. A
unionized employer may also ask the Board to hold an election to determine
whether its employees want to continue to be represented by their union; it
must show that it has a good faith uncertainty as to the union’s majority
status. Voluntary recognition and accretion. It is lawful for an employer to
recognize a union, without going through an NLRB-conducted election, so long as
the union has proof of support from more than half of the employees in the
bargaining unit. That proof may not be valid, however, if the employer has
given unlawful assistance to the union in collecting those cards or if another
union has filed a petition seeking to represent these employees before the
employer grants recognition. In addition, new employees may be added to an
existing unit without the need for either an election or proof of majority
support if they share such an overwhelming community of interest with the
employees in the existing unit that they could not be represented separately.
As an example, a new department in a factory in which a union represents all of
the production and maintenance employees in a “wall to wall” unit is likely
to be accreted to that unit. The NLRB will not accrete employees to an existing
unit, however, if they have been historically excluded from the unit, no matter
how strong the community of interest might be; in that case the union must
obtain proof of majority support to add them to the unit. Modifying the unit or
amending the certification. The Board will also entertain petitions to resolve
disputes whether individuals in a new classification should be added to or
remain within the unit. The Board will not, on the other hand, modify the clear
language of a collective bargaining agreement or the parties’ established
practice that either includes or excludes such employees. The Board can also
amend a certification. This is usually done for technical reasons: to reflect
the change in name of either the union or the employer, or a union’s
affiliation with another union, or a change in location of the work covered by
the certification.
