No Border network The No Border Network (In the United Kingdom also called "No
Borders Network" or "Noborders Network") refers to loose associations of
autonomous organisations, groups, and individuals in Western Europe, Central
Europe, Eastern Europe and beyond. They support freedom of movement and resist
human migration control by coordinating international border camps,
demonstrations, direct actions, and anti-deportation campaigns. The Western
European network opposes what they see as increasingly restrictive
harmonisation of asylum and immigration policy in Europe, working to build
alliances among migrant laborers and refugees. Common slogans within the
Network include, "No Border, No Nation, Stop Deportations!" "Freedom of
Movement, Freedom of Residence: Right to Come, Right to Go, Right to Stay!",
"No one is illegal" and "Papers for All or No Papers at All!" No Border Network
has existed since 1999, and its website since 2000. The No Borders Network in
the United Kingdom exists since 2006, with local groups in 11 cities. No Border
Camps. Groups from the No Border network have been involved in organising a
number of protest camps (called "No Border Camps" or sometimes "Border Camps"),
e.g. in Strasbourg, France (2002), in Frassanito, Italy (2003), Gatwick Airport
(2007), United Kingdom, at Patras, Greece, in Calais, France (2009), Lesvos,
Greece (2009), Brussels (2010) and Siva Reka, Bulgaria in September 2011.
Activities. In the month of April 2006, the network held several protests
notably outside the Detention centres at Harmondsworth and Colnbrook. On 7
October 2006, an internationally co-ordinated 'Transnational Day of Action
Against Migration Controls' of which the No Border Network was the central
part, saw protests across the world. On 18 December 2007, to coincide with the
UN International Migrants Day, the network carried out a co-ordinated blockade
of Border and Immigration Agency (now UK Border Agency) offices in Bristol,
Portsmouth, Newcastle and Glasgow to prevent dawn raids by immigration officers
from taking place. This form of action has been repeated across the UK by the
network several times since. On 24 October 2008, Phil Woolas, UK Minister of
State for Borders and Immigration was subject to a pieing by No Borders
activists following his controversial comments on population control. The
Network has also held demonstrations against ID cards, the International
Organisation for Migration, and against arms companies, linking conflict and
refugees. In February 2010 No Borders groups from the UK and France opened a
large centre for refugees sleeping rough in Calais, France, under the name
"Kronstadt Hangar".
