Nobel Memorial Prize in Economic Sciences The Nobel Memorial Prize in Economic
Sciences, commonly referred to as the Nobel Prize in Economics, but officially
the Sveriges Riksbank Prize in Economic Sciences in Memory of Alfred Nobel (),
is an award for outstanding contributions to the field of economics, generally
regarded as one of the most prestigious awards for that field. Although not one
of the Nobel Prizes established by the will of Alfred Nobel in 1895, it is
consistently identified with them. The Prize in Economics, as it is referred to
by the Nobel Foundation, was established and endowed by Sweden's central bank
Sveriges Riksbank, in 1968 on the occasion of the bank's 300th anniversary, in
memory of Alfred Nobel. Like the Nobel Laureates in Chemistry and Physics,
Laureates in Economics are selected by the Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences,
and a Prize Committee similar to the Nobel Committees is used. It was first
awarded in 1969 to the Dutch and Norwegian economists Jan Tinbergen and Ragnar
Frisch, "for having developed and applied dynamic models for the analysis of
economic processes." Funding of the Prize. An endowment "in perpetuity" from
Sveriges Riksbank pays the Nobel Foundation's administrative expenses
associated with the prize and funds the monetary component of the award. Since
2001, the monetary portion of the Prize in Economics has totalled 10Â million
Swedish kronor (during January 2008, approx. US$1.6Â million; 1.1Â million
Euro). This is equivalent to the amount given for the original Nobel Prizes.
Since 2006, Sveriges Riksbank has given the Nobel Foundation an annual grant of
6.5 million Swedish kronor (in January 2008, approx. US$1Â million; 0.7
millionÂ Euro) for its administrative expenses associated with the prize as
well as 1 million Swedish kronor (until the end of 2008) to include information
about the prize in the Nobel Foundation's internet webpage. Relation to the
Nobel Prizes. The Prize in Economics is not one of the original Nobel Prizes
created by the will of Alfred Nobel. However, the nomination process, selection
criteria, and awards presentation of the Prize in Economic Sciences are
performed in a manner similar to that of the Nobel Prizes. The Prize is awarded
by the Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences "in accordance with the rules
governing the award of the Nobel Prizes instituted through his Nobel's will",
which stipulates that the prize be awarded annually to "those who ... shall
have conferred the greatest benefit on mankind". The Sveriges Riksbank Prize in
Economic Sciences in Memory of Alfred Nobel is the only non-Nobel prize that
has ever been associated officially with the Nobel Foundation. Award nomination
and selection process. According to its official website, the Royal Swedish
Academy of Sciences "administers a researcher exchange with academies in other
countries and publishes six scientific journals. Every year the Academy awards
the Nobel Prizes in Physics and Chemistry, the Bank of Sweden Prize in Economic
Sciences in Memory of Alfred Nobel, the Crafoord Prize and a number of other
large prizes". Each September the Academy's Economics Prize Committee, which
consists of five elected members, "sends invitations to thousands of
scientists, members of academies and university professors in numerous
countries, asking them to nominate candidates for the Prize in Economics for
the coming year. Members of the Academy and former laureates are also
authorised to nominate candidates." All proposals and their supporting evidence
must be received before February 1. The proposals are reviewed by the Prize
Committee and specially appointed experts. Before the end of September, the
committee chooses potential laureates. If there is a tie, the chairman of the
committee casts the deciding vote. Next, the potential laureates must be
approved by the Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences. Members of the Ninth Class
(the social sciences division) of the Academy vote in mid-October to determine
the next laureate or laureates of the Prize in Economics. As with the Nobel
Prizes, no more than three people can share the prize for a given year; they
must still be living at the time of the Prize announcement in October; and
information about Prize nominations cannot be disclosed publicly for 50 years.
Like the Nobel Laureates in Physics, Chemistry, Physiology or Medicine, and
Literature, each Laureate in Economics receives a diploma, gold medal, and
monetary grant award document from the King of Sweden at the annual Nobel Prize
Award Ceremony in Stockholm, on the anniversary of Nobel's death (December 10).
Changes to the prize. Sylvia Nasar wrote in her book "A Beautiful Mind" that in
February 1995, after acrimony pertaining to the awarding of the 1994 Prize in
Economics to John Forbes Nash, the Prize in Economics was redefined as a prize
in social science. This makes it available to researchers in such topics as
political science, psychology, and sociology. Moreover, the composition of the
Economics Prize Committee changed to include two non-economists. This has not
been confirmed by the Economics Prize Committee. The members of the 2007
Economics Prize Committee contradict Nasar's claim since the secretary and 4 of
the 5 members are professors of economics. In 1978, Herbert A. Simon, whose PhD
was in political science, became the first non-economist to win the prize.
Controversies and criticisms. Some critics argue that the prestige of the Prize
in Economics derives in part from its association with the Nobel Prizes, an
association that has often been a source of controversy. Among them is the
Swedish human rights lawyer Peter Nobel, a great-grandson of Ludvig Nobel.
Nobel criticizes the awarding institution of misusing his family's name, and
states that no member of the Nobel family has ever had the intention of
establishing a prize in economics. According to Samuel Brittan of the Financial
Times, both former Swedish minister of finance Kjell-Olof Feldt and Gunnar
Myrdal wanted the prize abolished, saying "Myrdal rather less graciously wanted
the prize abolished because it had been given to such reactionaries as Hayek
(and afterwards Milton Friedman)." In his speech at the 1974 Nobel Banquet
Friedrich Hayek stated that if he had been consulted whether to establish a
Nobel Prize in economics he would "have decidedly advised against it" primarily
because "the Nobel Prize confers on an individual an authority which in
economics no man ought to possess... This does not matter in the natural
sciences. Here the influence exercised by an individual is chiefly an influence
on his fellow experts; and they will soon cut him down to size if he exceeds
his competence. But the influence of the economist that mainly matters is an
influence over laymen: politicians, journalists, civil servants and the public
generally." Critics cite the apparent snub of Joan Robinson as evidence of the
Committee's bias towards mainstream economics, though heterodox economists like
Friedrich Hayek (Austrian School) and Ronald Coase (associated with New
institutional economics) have won. Milton Friedman was awarded the 1976 prize
in part for his work on monetarism. Awarding the prize to Friedman caused
international protests by the left, Friedman was accused of supporting the
military dictatorship in Chile, because of the relation of economists of the
University of Chicago to Pinochet and a controversial six-day trip he took to
Chile during March 1975 (less than two years after the coup which deposed the
democratically elected president Salvador Allende). Friedman himself answered,
that he never was an adviser of the dictatorship, only gave some lectures and
seminars on inflation and met with many officials including the dictator
Augusto Pinochet in Chile. Four Nobel Prize laureatesGeorge Wald, Linus
Pauling, David Baltimore and Salvador Luriawrote letters to the "New York
Times" protesting the award in October 1976. The 1994 prize to John Forbes Nash
caused controversy within the prize's selection committee because of his
history of mental illness and alleged anti-Semitism. The controversy resulted
in a change to the rules governing the committee during 1994. Previously,
members of the Economics Prize Committee members did not have any limit to
their term of service; they now serve for three years. The 2005 prize to Robert
Aumann was criticized by European press due to his alleged use of his research
of game theory to justify his stance against the dismantling of Israeli
settlements from occupied territories. All Nobel Laureates are supposed to have
conferred the "greatest benefit on mankind". For the recipient of the Prize in
Economic Sciences in Memory of Alfred Nobel however there is no such
prerequisite. Laureates. The first prize in economics was awarded in 1969 to
Ragnar Frisch and Jan Tinbergen "for having developed and applied dynamic
models for the analysis of economic processes". Until 2009, all laureates in
economics had been men. In 2009, Elinor Ostrom became the first woman to be
awarded the prize. All five Nobel Prizes had previously been awarded at some
time to a woman. As of 2008, about 60% of laureates have been US citizens (by
birth or by naturalisation), with only four laureates being from outside the US
or Western Europe (Arthur Lewis, Leonid Kantorovich, Amartya Sen and Robert
Mundell).
