Nomination rules Nomination rules in elections regulate the conditions under
which a candidate or political party is entitled to stand for election. The
criteria to stand as a candidate depends on the individual legal system,
however they may include the age of a candidate, citizenship, endorsement by a
political party and profession. Laws restrictions, such as competence or moral
aptitude, can be used in a discriminatory manner. Restrictive and
discriminatory nomination rules can impact the civil rights of candidates,
political parties and voters. In some jurisdictions a candidate or party must
not only be nominated but also has to pass separate rules in order to be listed
on the ballot paper. In the United States this is called "ballot access".
Nomination rules in Australia. Australia Nomination rules in Canada. Candidates
in elections to the House of Commons must obtain a number of signatures from
the riding they are standing in - either 50 or 100 depending on the riding.
They must also pay a deposit of CAD $1000, which can be reclaimed only if the
candidate's official agent submits the Candidate's Electoral Campaign Return
and related documents to the Chief Electoral Officer and unused official tax
receipts to the returning officer within the time prescribed. Nomination rules
in elections to the European Parliament. EU member states may set their own
rules on ballot access in elections to the European Parliament. In Denmark,
Germany, Greece, Estonia, the Netherlands, Sweden, and the Czech Republic,
candidates must be nominated by political parties. In the other member states,
a specified number of signatures is needed. In the Netherlands and the United
Kingdom, a deposit is required as well as signatures. In the Republic of
Ireland, candidates may be nominated either by a registered political party or
by 60 members of the relevant electorate. Nomination rules in France.
Candidates for the office of President of the Republic require 500 signatures
of elected individuals (mayors, MPs, regional councillors). Nomination rules in
Sweden. Candidates for election to the European Parliament, the Riksdag, county
councils or municipal councils stand on the ballots of their respective
parties. Parties can have one or several lists. The so-called "free right of
nomination" ("fri nomineringsrätt") means that if a party has not protected
its party label, anyone can set up a ballot for that party. This means that
people could be elected for a party who do not have the support of the people
behind the party. To avoid this, the party must apply for a protected label.
There are no regulations for how a party whose party label isn't protected must
be organised. Forming a party or running in the election is thus comparatively
easy, and there have been occasions where a single individual has put up dozens
of different ballots with various more or less frivolous names and himself as
the only candidate. Parties pay for their own ballots unless they have received
more than 1 percent of the vote in one of the last two Riksdag elections, in
which case the Elections Authority pays. (Further, parties that have received
more than 1 percent of the vote in one of the last two elections to the
European Parliament get their ballots paid for in European elections as well.)
The Elections Authority makes sure, however, that there are blank ballots where
voters can write in the name of the party they want to vote for. To be given a
protected label, a party must have a constitution, a board, and must decide on
its name and on applying for protected label status with the Swedish Central
Elections Authority. It must also appoint someone to act on its behalf when
presenting the application to the Elections Authority. These decisions must be
laid down in a protocol. It must also require a number of signatures from
eligible voters: 50 for municipal elections, 150 for county council elections,
and 1,500 for elections to the Riksdag or the European Parliament. Finally, the
name of the party must not be too close to the name of an already protected
party label in order to avoid confusion. A party with a protected label is
protected against ballots with party labels that are confusingly similar to the
party's own, or ballots with other candidates than those the party reports.
(This does not hold for other areas than the one where the party is running -
hence there can be and there are completely separate parties with the same name
in different municipalities and county councils.) In return, it must ensure
that its candidates have agreed in writing to run for the party. Nomination
rules in the United Kingdom. The following are the basic nomination rules for
an individual candidate (whether Independent, or associated with a political
party). To use a party name (and logo) a candidate must be authorised by a
registered political party, or else they may stand as 'Independent' or with no
description. A candidate for election to the United Kingdom Parliament,
Scottish Parliament, Welsh Assembly or Northern Ireland assembly requires the
signed assent of ten registered electors, plus a deposit of £500 which is
forfeited if the candidate wins less than 5% of the vote. A list of candidates
for election in a European Parliament constituency does not require the assent
of any electors but must pay a deposit of £5,000, which is forfeited if that
list wins less than 2.5% of the vote. A candidate for local government office
does not need to pay a deposit (except for mayoral elections, for which the
deposit is £500), but needs the assent of either two registered electors (for
parish or town elections) or ten registered electors (for all other local
elections). Nomination rules in the United States of America. "See: Ballot
access."
