Non-interventionism Nonintervention or non-interventionism is a foreign policy
which holds that political rulers should avoid alliances with other nations,
but still retain diplomacy, and avoid all wars not related to direct self-
defense. This is based on the grounds that a state should not interfere in the
internal politics of another state, based upon the principles of state
sovereignty and self-determination. A similar phrase is "strategic
independence". Historical examples of supporters of non-interventionism are US
Presidents George Washington and Thomas Jefferson, who both favored
nonintervention in European Wars while maintaining free trade. Other proponents
include United States Senator Robert Taft and United States Congressman Ron
Paul. Nonintervention is distinct from, and often confused with isolationism,
the latter featuring economic nationalism (protectionism) and restrictive
immigration. Proponents of non-interventionism distinguish their policies from
isolationism through their advocacy of more open national relations, to include
diplomacy and free trade. Non-interventionism is a policy in government only
and thus does not exclude non-governmental intervention by organizations such
as Amnesty International. Overview. The concept of nonintervention can be
viewed to have emerged from the system of sovereign nation states established
by the Peace of Westphalia of 1648. The concept of state sovereignty states
that within the territory of a political entity the state is the supreme power,
and as such no state from without the territory can intervene, militarily or
otherwise, with the internal politics of that state. The full theoretical
underpinning of the norm of non-intervention is best discussed through
analyzing the principles of sovereignty and the right of political communities
to self-determination. History. The norm of non-intervention has dominated the
majority of international relations, and can be seen to have been one of the
principal motivations for the U.S.'s initial non-intervention into World Wars I
and II, and the non-intervention of the 'liberal' powers in the Spanish Civil
War (see "Non-Intervention Committee"), despite the intervention of Germany and
Italy. The norm was then firmly established into international law as one of
central tenets of the UN Charter, which established non-intervention as one of
the key principles which would underpin the emergent post-WWII peace. This
however was somewhat optimistic as the advent of the Cold War led to massive
interventions in the domestic politics of a vast number of developing countries
among varying pretexts of 'containment' and 'global socialist revolution'.
Through the adoption of such pretexts and the establishment that such
interventions were to prevent a threat to 'international peace and security'
allowed intervention under Chapter VII of the UN Charter (not to mention the
impotence of the UN during the Cold War due to both the U.S. and USSR holding
veto power in the United Nations Security Council). Nonintervention by country.
New Zealand. In recent years New Zealand has become largely non-
interventionist. No military support, apart from medical, was given for the
first Gulf war although SAS troops were provided for the war in Afghanistan.
Engineers were provided in Iraq after conventional hostilities in the war had
ceased. In the Pacific Islands, New Zealand has been involved in humanitarian
interventions in the Solomon Islands and East Timor. However, those
interventions were non-coercive interventions at the request of the nation
being intervened upon. These activities are known as 'peace keeping'.
Switzerland. Switzerland has long been known for its policy of defensively
armed neutrality. Decline of non-intervention. In the post-cold war era, it can
however be seen that new emergent norms of humanitarian intervention are
superseding the norm of non-intervention. This is based upon the argument that
while sovereignty gives rights to states, it also comes with a responsibility
to protect its citizens, an argument based upon social contract theory. Under
this ideal, states can be justified in intervening within other states if that
state is failing to protect (or if it is actively involved in harming) its
citizens. This has justified UN sanctioned interventions in Northern Iraq in
1991 to protect the Kurds and in Somalia in the absence of state power.
However, after the US Black Hawk Down event the US refused to intervene in
Rwanda or Haiti. This argument was also used (with strong opposition from
Russia and China) to justify NATO intervention in Kosovo and more recently in
Libya. This new norm of humanitarian intervention is far from fully formed, as
in all of the UN sanctioned cases the arguments were further couched in Chapter
VII threats to international peace and security. This new emergent norm appears
to only justify the action of states "if they want to act", and does not create
a "duty" of states to intervene.
