Nonviolence Nonviolence has two (closely related) meanings: (1) It can refer,
first, to a general philosophy of abstention from violence because of moral or
religious principle (e.g. "She believes in nonviolence."), or (2) it can refer
to the behaviour of people using nonviolent action (e.g. "The demonstrators
maintained their nonviolence.") Much of the general philosophy of nonviolence
has 'active' or 'activist' elements, in that they accept the need for a means
of struggle to achieve political and social change. Thus, for example, the
Gandhian "ahimsa" is a philosophy and strategy for social change that rejects
the use of violence, but at the same time sees nonviolent action (also called
civil resistance) as an alternative to passive acceptance of oppression or
armed struggle against it. In general, advocates of an activist philosophy of
nonviolence use diverse methods in their campaigns for social change, including
critical forms of education and persuasion, mass noncooperation civil
disobedience and nonviolent direct action and social, political, cultural and
economic forms of intervention. In modern times, nonviolent methods of action
have been a powerful tool for social protest and revolutionary social and
political change. There are many examples of their use. Fuller surveys may be
found in the entries on civil resistance, nonviolent resistance and nonviolent
revolution. Here certain movements particularly influenced by a philosophy of
nonviolence should be mentioned, including Mahatma Gandhi leading a decades-
long nonviolent struggle against British rule in India, which eventually helped
India win its independence in 1947, Martin Luther King's and James Bevel's
adoption of Gandhi's nonviolent methods in the struggle to win civil rights for
African Americans, and César Chávez's campaigns of nonviolence in the 1960s
to protest the treatment of farm workers in California. The 1989 "Velvet
Revolution" in Czechoslovakia that saw the overthrow of the Communist
government is considered one of the most important of the largely nonviolent
Revolutions of 1989. Most recently the nonviolent campaigns of Leymah Gbowee
and the women of Liberia were able to achieve peace after a 14-year civil war.
This story is captured in a 2008 documentary film Pray the Devil Back to Hell.
In an essay, "To Abolish War," evolutionary biologist Judith Hand advocated the
use of nonviolent direct action to dismantle the global war machine. The term
"nonviolence" is often linked with or even used as a synonym for pacifism;
however, the two concepts are fundamentally different. Pacifism denotes the
rejection of the use of violence as a personal decision on moral or spiritual
grounds, but does not inherently imply any inclination toward change on a
sociopolitical level. Nonviolence, on the other hand, is most often associated
with the intent to achieve social or political change. Indeed, the desire to
pursue change effectively may be a reason for the rejection of violence. Also,
a person may advocate nonviolence in a specific context while advocating
violence in other contexts. October 2, the birthday of Mahatma Gandhi is
observed as International Day of Non-Violence. Forms. Advocates of non-violence
believe cooperation and consent are the roots of political power: all regimes,
including bureaucratic institutions, financial institutions, and the armed
segments of society (such as the military and police); depend on compliance
from citizens. On a national level, the strategy of nonviolence seeks to
undermine the power of rulers by encouraging people to withdraw their consent
and cooperation. The forms of nonviolence draw inspiration from both religious
or ethical beliefs and political analysis. Religious or ethically based
nonviolence is sometimes referred to as "principled," "philosophical," or
"ethical" nonviolence, while nonviolence based on political analysis is often
referred to as "tactical," "strategic," or "pragmatic" nonviolence. Commonly,
both of these dimensions may be present within the thinking of particular
movements or individuals. Philosophical. Love of the enemy, or the realization
of the humanity of all people, is a fundamental concept of "philosophical"
nonviolence. The goal of this type of nonviolence is not to defeat the enemy,
but to win them over and create love and understanding between all. According
to Mark Kurlansky, "all religions discuss the power of nonviolence and the evil
of violence." Such principles or tenets can be found in each of the major
Indian religious traditions (Hinduism, Buddhism, Jainism) as well as in the
major Abrahamic religious traditions (Judaism, Christianity). The Chandogya
Upanishad, which is part of the Upanishads, one of the principal scriptures of
Hinduism that dates to the 8th or 7th century BCE, bars violence against "all
creatures" ("sarva-bhuta") and establishes nonviolence as a code of conduct for
Hindus. Examples of nonviolence found in religion and spirituality include the
Sermon on the Mount in which Jesus urges his followers to "love thine enemy,"
in the Taoist concept of "wu-wei", or effortless action, in the philosophy of
the martial art Aikido, in the Buddhist principle of "metta", or loving-
kindness towards all beings, in the principle of "ahimsa", or nonviolence
toward any being, shared by Buddhism, Jainism and Hinduism. Additionally, focus
on both nonviolence and forgiveness of sin can be found in the story of Abel in
the Qur'an; liberal movements within Islam have consequently used this story to
promote Jewish ideals of nonviolence. Nonviolence is also part of modern pagan
traditions. American author Henry David Thoreau (1817–1862) had a major
impact on the philosophy of nonviolence. Leo Tolstoy, Mohandas Gandhi and
Martin Luther King Jr. were influenced by Thoreau. Pragmatic. The fundamental
concept of "pragmatic" (or "tactical" or "strategic") nonviolence is to create
a social dynamic or political movement that can effect social change without
necessarily winning over those who wish to maintain the status quo. In modern
industrial democracies, nonviolence has been used extensively by political
sectors without mainstream political power such as labor, peace, environment
and women's movements. Lesser known is the role that nonviolence has played and
continues to play in undermining the power of repressive political regimes in
the developing world and the former eastern bloc. Susan Ives emphasizes this
point by quoting Walter Wink: As a technique for social struggle, nonviolence
has been described as "the politics of ordinary people", reflecting its
historically mass-based use by populations throughout the world and history.
Perhaps the first instance of a nonviolent campaign with major political impact
was the March 1 Movement in Korea, which was a catalyst for the establishment
of the Provisional Government of the Republic of Korea in Shanghai in April
1919 and influenced nonviolent resistance in India and many other countries.
Struggles most often associated with nonviolence are the non-cooperation
campaign for Indian independence led by Mohandas Karamchand Gandhi, the
movement to attain civil rights for African Americans, led by Rev. Dr Martin
Luther King and James Bevel, and the People Power Revolution in the
Philippines. Also of primary significance is the notion that just means are the
most likely to lead to just ends. When Gandhi said that "the means may be
likened to the seed, the end to a tree," he expressed the philosophical kernel
of what some refer to as "prefigurative politics". Martin Luther King, a
student of Gandhian nonviolent resistance, concurred with this tenet,
concluding that "nonviolence demands that the means we use must be as pure as
the ends we seek." Proponents of nonviolence reason that the actions taken in
the present inevitably re-shape the social order in like form. They would
argue, for instance, that it is fundamentally irrational to use violence to
achieve a peaceful society. People have come to use nonviolent methods of
struggle from a wide range of perspectives and traditions. A landless peasant
in Brazil may nonviolently occupy a parcel of land for purely practical
motivations. If they do not, the family will starve. A Buddhist monk in
Thailand may "ordain" trees in a threatened forest, drawing on the teachings of
Buddha to resist its destruction. A waterside worker in England may go on
strike in socialist and union political traditions. All the above are using
nonviolent methods but from different standpoints. Likewise, secular political
movements have utilized nonviolence, either as a tactical tool or as a
strategic program on purely pragmatic and strategic levels, relying on its
political effectiveness rather than a claim to any religious, moral or ethical
worthiness. Respect or love for opponents also has a pragmatic justification,
in that the technique of separating the deeds from the doers allows for the
possibility of the doers changing their behavior, and perhaps their beliefs.
Martin Luther King said, "Nonviolence means avoiding not only external physical
violence, but also internal violence of spirit. You not only refuse to shoot a
man, but you refuse to hate him." Finally, the notion of "Satya", or truth, is
central to the Gandhian conception of nonviolence. Gandhi saw truth as
something that is multifaceted and unable to be grasped in its entirety by any
one individual. All carry pieces of the truth, he believed, but all need the
pieces of others’ truths in order to pursue the greater truth. This led him
to believe in the inherent worth of dialogue with opponents, in order to
understand motivations. On a practical level, the willingness to listen to
another's point of view is largely dependent on reciprocity. In order to be
heard by one's opponents, one must also be prepared to listen. Nonviolence has
obtained a level of institutional recognition and endorsement at the global
level. On November 10, 1998, the United Nations General Assembly proclaimed the
first decade of the 21st century and the third millennium, the years 2001 to
2010, as the International Decade for the Promotion of a Culture of Peace and
Non-Violence for the Children of the World. Living. For many, practicing
nonviolence goes deeper than withholding from violent behavior or words. It
means caring in one's heart for everyone, even those with whom one strongly
disagrees. For some, this principle entails a commitment to restorative or
transformative justice and prison abolition. By extrapolation comes the
necessity of caring for those who are not practicing nonviolence, who are
violent. Of course no one can simply will themselves to have such care, and
this is one of the great personal challenges posed by nonviolence - once one
believes in nonviolence in theory, how can the person live it? It requires an
opening of the heart and mind to all of existence, and a deep love for all that
is. Because we are all interconnected, to love oneself is to love everyone; to
hate another is to hate oneself. Because violence is learned, it is necessary
to unlearn violence by practising love and compassion at every possible
opportunity. Respect. Nonviolence, for many, involves a respect and reverence
for all sentient and non-sentient beings. This might include abolitionism, the
practice of not eating animal flesh (vegetarianism or veganism), spiritual
practices of non-harm to all beings and caring for the rights of all beings.
Mohandas Gandhi, James Bevel, and other nonviolent proponents advocated
vegetarianism as part of their nonviolent philosophy. Buddhists extend this
respect for life to animals, plants, and even minerals. Methods. Nonviolent
action generally comprises three categories: "Acts of Protest and Persuasion",
"Noncooperation", and "Nonviolent Intervention". Acts of protest. Nonviolent
acts of protest and persuasion are symbolic actions performed by a group of
people to show their support or disapproval of something. The goal of this kind
of action is to bring public awareness to an issue, persuade or influence a
particular group of people, or to facilitate future nonviolent action. The
message can be directed toward the public, opponents, or people affected by the
issue. Methods of protest and persuasion include speeches, public
communications, petitions, symbolic acts, art, processions (marches), and other
public assemblies. Noncooperation. Noncooperation involves the purposeful
withholding of cooperation or the unwillingness to initiate in cooperation with
an opponent. The goal of noncooperation is to halt or hinder an industry,
political system, or economic process. Methods of noncooperation include labor
strikes, economic boycotts, civil disobedience, sex strike, tax refusal, and
general disobedience. Nonviolent intervention. Compared with protest and
noncooperation, nonviolent intervention is a more direct method of nonviolent
action. Nonviolent intervention can be used defensively—for example to
maintain an institution or independent initiative—or offensively- for
example, to drastically forward a nonviolent struggle into the opponent's
territory. Intervention is often more immediate and effective than the other
two methods, but is also harder to maintain and more taxing to the participants
involved. Gene Sharp, a political scientist and nonviolence activist, has
written extensively about methods of nonviolence. In his book "Waging
Nonviolent Struggle" he describes 198 methods of nonviolent action. In early
Greece, Aristophanes' Lysistrata gives the fictional example of women
withholding sexual favors from their husbands until war was abandoned. Other
methods of intervention include occupations (sit-ins), blockades, fasting
(hunger strikes), truck cavalcades, and dual sovereignty/parallel government.
Tactics must be carefully chosen, taking into account political and cultural
circumstances, and form part of a larger plan or strategy. Successful
nonviolent cross-border intervention projects include the Guatemala
Accompaniment Project, Peace Brigades International and Christian Peacemaker
Teams. Developed in the early 1980s, and originally inspired by the Gandhian
Shanti Sena, the primary tools of these organizations have been nonviolent
protective accompaniment, backed up by a global support network which can
respond to threats, local and regional grassroots diplomatic and peacebuilding
efforts, human rights observation and witnessing, and reporting. Another
powerful tactic of nonviolent intervention invokes public scrutiny of the
oppressors as a result of the resisters remaining nonviolent in the face of
violent repression. If the military or police attempt to repress nonviolent
resisters violently, the power to act shifts from the hands of the oppressors
to those of the resisters. If the resisters are persistent, the military or
police will be forced to accept the fact that they no longer have any power
over the resisters. Often, the willingness of the resisters to suffer has a
profound effect on the mind and emotions of the oppressor, leaving them unable
to commit such a violent act again. Revolution. Certain individuals (Barbara
Deming, Danilo Dolci, Devere Allen etc.) and party groups (e.g. Committees of
Correspondence for Democracy and Socialism, Pacifist Socialist Party or War
Resisters League) have advocated nonviolent revolution as an alternative to
violence as well as elitist reformism. This perspective is usually connected to
militant anti-capitalism. Many leftist and socialist movements have hoped to
mount a "peaceful revolution" by organizing enough strikers to completely
paralyze the state and corporate apparatus, allowing workers to re-organize
society along radically different lines. Some have argued that a relatively
nonviolent revolution would require fraternisation with military forces.
Criticism. Leon Trotsky, Frantz Fanon, Subhas Chandra Bose, and Ward Churchill
and Malcolm X were fervent critics of nonviolence, arguing variously that
nonviolence and pacifism are an attempt to impose the morals of the bourgeoisie
upon the proletariat, that violence is a necessary accompaniment to
revolutionary change, or that the right to self-defense is fundamental. George
Orwell argued that the nonviolent resistance strategy of Gandhi could be
effective in countries with "a free press and the right of assembly", which
could make it possible to "not merely to appeal to outside opinion, but to
bring a mass movement into being, or even to make your intentions known to your
adversary"; however, he was skeptical of Gandhi's approach being effective in
the opposite sort of circumstances. Reinhold Niebuhr similarly affirmed
Gandhi's approach while criticizing aspects of it. He argued that "advantage of
non-violence as a method of expressing moral goodwill lies in the fact that it
protects the agent against the resentments which violent conflict always
creates in both parties to a conflict, and it proves this freedom of resentment
and ill-will to the contending party in the dispute by enduring more suffering
than it causes." However, Niebuhr also held "[the differences between violent
and non-violent methods of coercion and resistance are not so absolute that it
would be possible to regard violence as a morally impossible instrument of
social change." Jackson, George. Soledad Brother: The Prison Letters of George
Jackson. Lawrence Hill Books, 1994. ISBN 1-55652-230-4 Lance Hill criticizes
nonviolence as a failed strategy and argues that black armed self-defense and
civil violence motivated civil rights reforms more than peaceful appeals to
morality and reason (see Lance Hill's "Deacons for Defense"). In his book "How
Nonviolence Protects the State", anarchist Peter Gelderloos criticizes
nonviolence as being ineffective, racist, statist, patriarchal, tactically and
strategical inferior to militant activism, and deluded. Gelderloos claims that
traditional histories whitewash the impact of nonviolence, ignoring the
involvement of militants in such movements as the Indian independence movement
and the Civil Rights movement and falsely showing Gandhi and King as being
their respective movement's most successful activist. He further argues that
nonviolence is generally advocated by privileged white people who expect
"oppressed people, many of whom are people of color, to suffer patiently under
an inconceivably greater violence, until such time as the Great White Father is
swayed by the movement's demands or the pacifists achieve that legendary
'critical mass.'" The efficacy of nonviolence was also challenged by some anti-
capitalist protesters advocating a "diversity of tactics" during street
demonstrations across Europe and the US following the anti-World Trade
Organization protests in Seattle, Washington in 1999. American feminist writer
D. A. Clarke, in her essay "A Woman With A Sword," suggests that for
nonviolence to be effective, it must be "practiced by those who could easily
resort to force if they chose." This argument reasons that nonviolent tactics
will be of little or no use to groups that are traditionally considered
incapable of violence, since nonviolence will be in keeping with people's
expectations for them and thus go unnoticed. Such is the principle of "dunamis"
(from the Greek: δύνάμις or, restrained power).
