Norberto Bobbio Norberto Bobbio (; October 18, 1909 – January 9, 2004) was an
Italian philosopher of law and political sciences and a historian of political
thought. He also wrote regularly for the Turin-based daily "La Stampa". Bobbio
was a liberal socialist in the tradition of Piero Gobetti, Carlo Rosselli,
Guido Calogero, and Aldo Capitini. He was also strongly influenced by Hans
Kelsen and Vilfredo Pareto. Life and views. Bobbio was born into what his
"Guardian" obituary described as "...a relatively wealthy, middle-class Turin
family" whose sympathies Bobbio would later characterize as "philo-fascist,
regarding fascism as a necessary evil against the supposedly greater danger of
Bolshevism". In high school he met Vittorio Foa, Leone Ginzburg and Cesare
Pavese, and at university he became a friend of Alessandro Galante Garrone. In
1942, under the Fascist regime of Benito Mussolini and during World War II,
Bobbio joined the then illegal radical liberal party Partito d'Azione ("Party
of Action") and was briefly imprisoned in 1943 and 1944. He ran unsuccessfully
in the 1946 Constituent Assembly of Italy elections. With the party's failure
in a post-war Italy dominated by the Christian Democrats, Bobbio left electoral
politics and focused back in academia. A strong advocate of the rule of law,
the separation of powers, and the limitation of powers, he was a socialist, but
opposed to what he perceived as the anti-democratic, authoritarian elements in
most of Marxism. He was a strong partisan of the "Historic Compromise" between
the Italian Communist Party and the Christian Democrats, and a fierce critic of
Silvio Berlusconi. Bobbio died in Turin, the same city in which he was born and
lived most of his life. Academic career and honors. Bobbio studied Philosophy
of Law with Gioele Solari; he later taught this curriculum in Camerino, Siena,
Padua, and ultimately back in Turin as Solari's successor in 1948; from 1972 to
1984, he had a chair in the newly created faculty of political science in
Turin. He was a National Associate of the Lincean Academy and longtime director
(together with Nicola Abbagnano) of the "Rivista di Filosofia". He became a
Corresponding Associate of the British Academy in 1966; in 1979 he was
nominated as Senator-for-life by Italian President Sandro Pertini. Bobbio
received, among others, the Balzan Prize in 1994 (for Law and Political
Science: governments and democracy) and diplomas "honoris causa" from the
Universities of Paris (Nanterre), Madrid (Complutense), Bologna, Chambéry,
Madrid (Carlos III), Sassari, Camerino, Madrid (Autónoma), and Buenos Aires.
To celebrate the Centenary of Norberto Bobbio's birth, it was established a
committee, constituted by more than a hundred Italian and international public
institutions and intellectual figures, which formulated a wide-ranging
programme of activities to promote dialogue and reflection on the thought and
figure of Bobbio, and on the future of democracy, culture and civilisation.
Celebrations were officially opened on January 10, 2009, at the University of
Turin.
