Occidental College Occidental College is a private, co-educational liberal arts
college located in the historical Eagle Rock neighborhood of Los Angeles,
California. Founded in 1887 by clergy and members of the Presbyterian Church,
Occidental College, or, "Oxy" as it is affectionately called by students and
alumni, is one of the oldest liberal arts colleges on the West Coast. Although
no longer formally affiliated with the Presbyterian Church, Occidental still
retains the progressive and egalitarian values of its founders. The Carnegie
Foundation for the Advancement of Teaching selected Occidental as a "community
engagement institution". History. Origin. Occidental College was founded on
April 20, 1887, by a group of Presbyterian clergy, missionaries, and laymen,
including James George Bell. The college’s first term began a year later with
27 men and 13 women students, and tuition of $50 a year. Initially located in
Boyle Heights, the college declined to move to an undeveloped area called
"Westwood" and moved, instead, to a new campus in Los Angeles’ Highland Park
neighborhood in 1898. Despite a strong Presbyterian presence on its campus,
Occidental began to diminish its ties to the church in 1910. In 1912, the
school began construction of a new campus located in Los Angeles’ Eagle Rock
neighborhood. The Eagle Rock campus was to be designed by noted California
Architect Myron Hunt. That same year, Occidental President John Willis Baer
announced the trustees’ decision to convert Oxy into an all-men’s
institution. However, students protested, and the idea was abandoned. Move to
Eagle Rock. Two weeks after Booker T. Washington came to visit Occidental, on
March 27, 1914 — the school’s 25th anniversary — Swan, Fowler, and
Johnson Halls were dedicated at its new Eagle Rock campus. The Eagle Rock
campus covers over , much of which is undeveloped land on a hill known as
“Mt. Fiji.” During World War I in April 1917, the college formed an Army
Corps to aid the war effort. The college opened its Hillside Theatre in 1925,
and a student union in 1928. During World War II, many students left Occidental
to fight in the war. In July 1943, 53 students established a Navy V-12 unit on
campus and left for active duty. 1960-present. In 1962, "Time Magazine"
described Occidental as a little giant in a story about the college’s rise to
national prominence. In 1969, the school opened its first two co-ed
dormitories, and two more followed a year later. On May 6, 1970, the faculty
voted to suspend classes in the wake of the Kent State shootings and
America’s invasion of Cambodia. Subsequently, Oxy students wrote 7,000
letters to Washington D.C., protesting U.S. involvement in the war in Southeast
Asia. The era also inspired positive changes in administration in regards to
ethnic minority rights. The college received grants designed to help equal the
playing field for students traditionally neglected in higher education. This
laid the foundation for a series of actions aiming to continue closing the
access gap for minorities of virtually all categories in the decades to come,
the most important of which was President John Brooks Slaughter's institution
of the college's "mission statement," an organizational declaration around
which the entire college would function and aspire to both academic excellence
and equity. The mission statement was written just 18 months after Slaughter
was appointed President in 1988. In 2007, when "U.S. News and World Report"
ranked Occidental College the 36th best liberal arts college in the country,
tied with Bard College in New York and Whitman College in Washington, the
magazine cited both ethnic and economic diversity as key achievements. In 1979,
Occidental installed "Water Forms II" (see image below), a kinetic fountain
designed by professor George Baker. The fountain is a campus landmark and was
featured prominently in the 1984 film "". During the 1984 Olympic Games, some
track events were held at Occidental’s Patterson Field. By 1986, for the
first time since World War II, women students outnumbered men. Today, the
college is approximately 60 percent female and 40 percent male; roughly
equivalent to the national average. On July 1, 2006, Susan Prager became
Occidental's first female president. She then left her position in 2007 during
the fall term. On July 1, 2009, Jonathan Veitch, formerly dean of The New
School's Eugene Lang College, became Occidental's 15th president, and the first
to be a native Angeleno. Campus. Architect Myron Hunt, who also designed the
Rose Bowl Stadium, designed Oxy's original buildings in a Mediterranean style,
with covered walkways and tile roofs. Currently, there are 12 on-campus
residence halls. The three original buildings of the 1914 campus still stand
today, although seismic concerns have limited them to classrooms and academic
offices. Some buildings, such as the Hameetman Science Center (designed by
Anshen + Allen, 2003), deviates from the original architecture with its large
glass windows and metal balconies (its lobby houses a large Foucault pendulum).
Occidental's newest building, the 278 bed Rangeview Residence Hall, opened in
January 2008 at a cost of a reported 38.8 million dollars and is the first
residence hall built in 25 years. Academics, resources. There are 31 majors
offered on campus and there is a 10:1 student-faculty ratio. The average class
size is 19 students and most students take four class per semester. Student
profile Faculty profile Core program. First-year seminars (eight course hours
in total) are the centerpiece of the Core Program. Students are given a variety
of class choices to fulfill the seminar requirement, and to satisfy the first-
year writing requirement. While the classes range in topic, each is based on a
curriculum of cultural studies. The classes are designed to expose students to
the rigor of college academics and to the four principles of the college
mission—Excellence, Equity, Community, and Service. The Core Program’s
emphasis on global literacy requires students to take a minimum of three
courses that touch on at least three of the following geographical areas:
Africa and the Middle East; Asia and the Pacific; Europe; Latin America; the
United States; and Intercultural. Students are also required to demonstrate
proficiency in writing and in a foreign language and take courses in the fine
arts and in the sciences, mathematics, or other courses that address formal
methods of reasoning. The final portion of the Core Program requires students
to pass a senior comprehensive examination in their chosen field. Comprehensive
examinations may include seminars, creative projects, fieldwork, oral exams,
theses, or field research projects. Majors. Students can choose from a wide
range of majors, double major, or major and minor at Occidental. Exchange and
Cooperative Joint Degree Programs. California Institute of Technology (Caltech)
and Columbia University. Students at Occidental can take courses at the
California Institute of Technology in nearby Pasadena free of charge. In
addition, a 3-2 engineering program allows qualified students the opportunity
to study at Occidental for three years, completing their undergraduate
experience with an additional two years either at Caltech or Columbia
University. At the end of the five years, the student receives two degrees, a
Bachelor of Arts in the Combined Plan from Occidental and a Bachelor of Science
in the selected field of engineering from the engineering school. Art Center
College of Design. Art majors at Occidental College can take courses at the Art
Center College of Design in Pasadena, one of the country’s top-ranked art
schools. The program is not open to first-year students, but as with the
Caltech exchange program, students receive full course credit. No additional
tuition payments are required. Columbia University School of Law. With a
competitive GPA and LSAT scores, Columbia Law School admits students upon
completion of their junior year at Occidental into its Accelerated
Interdisciplinary Program in Legal Education. Admittance to the program enables
students to earn a bachelor’s degree from Occidental and a law degree from
Columbia in six years. Keck Graduate Institute. Students who are interested in
biotechnology and who become a biochemistry major maintaining a 3.2 GPA in the
necessary courses, will be guaranteed admission to the Keck master’s in
bioscience program. The Keck Graduate Institute is part of the Claremont
Colleges consortium. Reputation and rankings. In "U.S. News and World Report"'s
2012 rankings of American liberal arts colleges, Occidental is tied with
Connecticut College and Trinity College for 37th among liberal arts colleges.
Since 1908, Occidental has graduated 10 Rhodes Scholars. The 2007 "Princeton
Review" describes Occidental as having a “rising star quality” and notes
that Occidental’s professors have been called “top quality.” The 2006
edition of "America's Best Value Colleges" by the Princeton Review noted that
the college “is committed to recruiting top students regardless of their
financial background.” The "College Prowler" says that people “look at
Occidental degrees very highly,” but that Occidental often does not receive
the attention it deserves. Athletics. Occidental is one of the five schools
that founded the Southern California Intercollegiate Athletic Conference
(SCIAC) in 1915 and is currently a member of the SCIAC and NCAA Division III.
Occidental features 21 varsity sports teams and a program of club sports and
intramural competition. Approximately 25 percent of the student body
participates in a varsity sports program. During the 2006–2007 athletic
season, the Tiger’s cross country, American football and basketball teams
were Southern California Intercollegiate Athletic Conference champions. The
school’s Blackshirts Rugby union team was also league champion for the first
time in five years. In 2011, Jeremy Castro ('99) and Patrick Guthrie ('86)
steered the squad to a NSCRO final falling to Longwood University 36-27 in
Virginia Beach, VA. In addition the college boasts a competitive and growing
elite dance team that also performs at every home football and basketball game.
In 1982, the Occidental College football team had the rare opportunity for
national prominence when, due to the NFL football strike, their game with San
Diego was broadcast on national television. Famous Occidental College Tigers
include NFL Coach Jim Mora Sr., Former NFL player Vance Mueller, and 2011 U.S.
Sr. Open Champion Olin Browne. Notable faculty. Many Occidental faculty have
received awards and honors over time, and some have held prominent positions in
government and the private sector. Greek Life. Occidental College's Greek
Council consists of 8 members: sororities Alpha Lambda Phi Alpha, Delta Omicron
Tau, Kappa Alpha Theta and Sigma Lambda Gamma, and fraternities Kappa Alpha
Psi, Phi Kappa Psi, Sigma Alpha Epsilon, and Zeta Tau Zeta (co-ed). Dorm Life.
For the first three years at Occidental, all students are required to live on
campus; as a senior, it is an option. Freshmen do not get to choose where they
live; res-ed life arranges housing by pairing students based on a short form
students fill in the summer before they arrive on campus. The Occidental
College dorm life consists of 13 co-ed residential housing. As a first year,
students have the option of living in Newcomb Hall, Chilcott Hall, Braun Hall,
and Stewart-Cleland Hall (commonly known as Stewie). After a student's first
year, he or she can choose to live in a number of dorms that house sophomores,
juniors, and seniors; one-third of all these halls are reserved for each grade.
These dorms include Bell-Young Hall, Wylie Hall, Erdman Hall, Haines Hall,
Rangeview Hall and Stearns Hall. All residence halls are smoke-free, have a
computer lab for use, laundry facilities, meeting/gathering space (common
room), and are equipped with DIREC TV in that lounge. There are also themed-
living communities which consist of the Multicultural Hall known as Pauley
(open to all years), the Women's Center (Berkus House), the E. Norris Hall, the
Pet House (where currently students get to live with a dog), and the Food
Justice house. The items supplied in each dorm room are a bed frame/mattress, a
desk, a desk chair, a dresser, a microfridge, and a microwave. Campus Dining.
Occidental's main dining facility is The Marketplace, which is located in the
Johnson Student Center. The Tiger Cooler, an espresso bar and cafe is also
popular among students. Faculty, students, staff, and visitors can also grab
drinks and pastries at The Green Bean Coffee Lounge and Coffee Cart. Vending
machines are also available. The Marketplace. Students can dine in the facility
(in the cafeteria or outside in the patio) or grab food to go. Eco-friendly
containers called Eco-Clamshells are offered to Occidental students, faculty
and staff to reduce plastic waste. Furthermore, all food scraps and paper waste
are recycled by a company. There are different food stations including the
grill, homestyle, and the pasta station. Organic and local fruit is offered. On
Mondays a "Meatless Monday" meal is offered. The Tiger Cooler. This espresso
bar and cafe is located in Samuelson Pavilion. Many students work there, either
at the counter or at the grill taking one or multiple shifts. Pizza, burgers,
sandwiches, salads, sushi, assorted pastries, Fosselman's ice cream, frozen
yogurt, smoothies, espresso coffee drinks and other beverages are offered.
Packaged snacks are also available. It is open until 11: 45 P.M. Monday-
Thursday and until 2 A.M. Fridays and Saturdays. Pizza delivery can be
requested as well. The Coffee Cart. It is located in Rangeview. Coffee, tea,
and snacks are available along with organic options that are not sold elsewhere
on campus. The Green Bean Coffee Lounge. Also located in the Johnson Student
Center, this facility is student-run and was recently added by student request.
Traditions. At the beginning of every school year, freshmen participate in
Convocation, a formal ceremony welcoming new students to the College in which
the faculty wear their full academic regalia and students don robes. Students
process from the Academic Quad to Thorne Hall as Faculty line their path,
cheering for them. Students are often thrown into the Lucille Gilman Memorial
Fountain on their birthday Founders day is celebrated April 20th, the day in
1887 when Occidental's incorporation papers were officially signed by the
California Secretary of State Film and television at Occidental. Occidental’s
campus, architecture, and proximity to Hollywood have made it a desired
location for a number of film and television productions. TV credits include:
