Ochlocracy Ochlocracy (, "okhlokratía"; ) or mob rule is government by mob or
a mass of people, or the intimidation of legitimate authorities. As a
pejorative for majoritarianism, it is akin to the Latin phrase mobile vulgus
meaning "the fickle crowd", from which the English term "mob" was originally
derived in the 1680s. Ochlocracy ("rule of the general populace") is democracy
("rule of the people") spoiled by demagoguery, "tyranny of the majority" and
the rule of passion over reason, just like oligarchy ("rule of a few") is
aristocracy ("rule of the best") spoiled by corruption, and tyranny is monarchy
spoiled by lack of virtue. Ochlocracy is synonymous in meaning and usage to the
modern, informal term "," which emerged from a much more recent colloquial
etymology. Terminology. The term appears to have been coined by Polybius in his
"Histories" (6.4.6). He uses it to name the 'pathological' version of popular
rule in opposition to the good version, which he refers to as democracy. There
are numerous mentions of the word "ochlos" in the Talmud (where "ochlos" refers
to anything from "mob," "populace" to "armed guard"), as well as in Rashi, a
Jewish commentary on the Bible. The word is recorded in English since 1584,
derived from the French "ochlocratie" (1568), which stems from the original
Greek "okhlokratia", from "okhlos" "mob" and "kratos" "rule, power, strength"
In ancient Greek political thought ochlocracy was considered as one of the
three "bad" forms of government (tyranny, oligarchy and ochlocracy) as opposed
to the three "good" forms of government (monarchy, aristocracy and democracy).
The distinction between "good" and "bad" was made according to whether the
government form would act in the interest of the whole community ("good") or
the exclusive interests of a group or individual at the expense of justice
("bad"). An ochlocrat is one who is an advocate or partisan of ochlocracy. It
can also be used as an adjective (ochlocratic or ochlocratical). The threat of
"mob rule" to a democracy is restrained by ensuring that the rule of law
protects minorities or individuals against short-term demagoguery or moral
panic. Though considering how laws in a democracy are established or repealed
by the majority, the rule of law's protection of minorities is questionable.
Mobs in history. Historians often comment on mob rule as a factor in the rise
of Rome and its maintenance, as the city of Rome itself was large—between
100,000 and 250,000 citizens—while the aristocracy and even military was very
small by comparison to the citizenry. Lapses in this control often led to loss
of power, or even the loss of heads, of officials—most notably in the reign
of Commodus when Cleander unwisely used the Praetorian Guard against a mob
which had come to call for his head. As Edward Gibbon relates it, This followed
a previous incident in which the legions of Britain had demanded and received
the death of Perennis, the prior administrator. The mob thus realized that it
had every chance of success. The Salem Witch Trials, in which the unified
belief of the townspeople overpowered the logic of the law, has also been cited
as an example of mob rule. In 1837, Abraham Lincoln wrote about lynching and
"the increasing disregard for law which pervades the country—the growing
disposition to substitute the wild and furious passions in lieu of the sober
judgment of courts, and the worse than savage mobs for the executive ministers
of justice." Mobs used to affect policy. The modern theories of civil
disobedience and "satyagraha" can be differentiated from "mob rule" and its
mechanics, as these approaches forego the use of violence and force that the
mob of ancient times employed. Traditional non-violent protest theory holds
that if the demonstrators are restrained and do not do any violence, yet refuse
to back down, then they could conceivably win, as they either will be joined by
the forces they face, be allowed to defy the law or government openly and
peacefully, or be physically attacked, struck down, and made into powerful
moral symbols of the lengths to which the agents of the state will go to
enforce its laws. However, police forces around the world have become adept at
making such gatherings irrelevant by limiting them to areas, in some cases
dubbed "free speech zones," sufficiently separate from the object of their
discontent, the rest of the public, and the media, to make them easily ignored.
Permitting requirements in many jurisdictions effectively make demonstrations
without advance police permission illegal. Various efforts to increase
demonstrators' communal intelligence and mobility using cell phone networks and
bicycles have been employed to circumvent crowd control and marginalizing
techniques. Flash mobs and Critical Mass style "bike block" actions are
examples experimented with, with mixed results, notably during the 2004
Republican National Convention. Modern theory concludes that since Roman
guards, facing crucifixion for disobedience, could be swayed by mobs, it is
also possible to sway modern police, even in a police state. The 1986 EDSA
Revolution in the Philippines, the Velvet Revolution in former Czechoslovakia,
and the resistance to the attempted military coup in the Soviet Union in 1991
that led to the dissolution of that state, are situations where it is possible
that it was the "mob" which won the day due to defections by authority. The use
of political pressure put on by a large amassed group of people was also
frequently demonstrated in the Arab Spring, which contributed to swift
political change in countries as Tunisia, Egypt, and Libya.
