Workplace politics politics, sometimes referred to as office politics or
organizational politics is "the use of one's individual or assigned power
within an employing organization for the purpose of obtaining advantages beyond
one's legitimate authority. Those advantages may include access to tangible
assets, or intangible benefits such as status or pseudo-authority that
influences the behavior of others. Both individuals and groups may engage in
Office Politics." Office politics has also been described as "simply how power
gets worked out on a practical, day-to-day basis." Gossip. Office politics
differs from office gossip in that people participating in office politics do
so with the objective of gaining advantage, whereas gossip can be a purely
social activity. However, the activities are related. Office gossip is often
used by an individual to place themselves at a point where they can control the
flow of information and therefore gain maximum advantage. Office politics also
refers to the way co-workers act among each other. It can be either positive or
negative ("i.e." co-operate or compete). Manipulation. At the root of office
politics is the issue of manipulation which can happen in any relationship
where one or more of the parties involved use indirect means to achieve their
goals. In the workplace, where resources are limited, individuals have an
incentive to achieve their goals at the expense of their colleagues. For
example, if six people apply for one promotion, they might expect the selection
to be made purely on merit. Where one of the people believes that this would
put them at a disadvantage, they may use other means of coercion or influence
to put themselves into an advantageous position. When the people being
manipulated begin to talk to each other directly, or when other evidence comes
to light such as financial results, the manipulator will have an explanation
ready but will already be planning their exit, because they would rather stay
in control than face a revelation which exposes their behaviour. Aims. The aims
of office politics or manipulation in the workplace are not always increased
pay or a promotion. Often, the goal may simply be greater power or control for
its own end; or to disrepudiate a competitor. While office politics do not
necessarily aim at selfish gains - they can be a means towards outcomes which
are corporate and benefit the company, not the individual - a 'manipulator'
will often achieve career or personal goals by co-opting as many colleagues as
possible into their plans, strengthening their own position by ensuring that
they will be the last person to be accused of any wrongdoing, because they ally
themselves with everyone, changing sides to suit their own personal, hidden
agenda. Issues. Office politics is a major issue in business because the
individuals who manipulate their working relationships consume time and
resources for their own gain at the expense of the team or company. In addition
to this problem, the practice of office politics can have an even more serious
effect on major business processes such as strategy formation, budget setting,
performance management, and leadership. This occurs because when individuals
are playing office politics, it interferes with the information flow of a
company. Information can be distorted, misdirected, or suppressed, in order to
manipulate a situation for short-term personal gain. Games. One way of
analysing office politics in more detail is to view it as a series of games.
These games can be analysed and described in terms of the type of game and the
payoff. Interpersonal games are games that are played between peers (for
example the game of "No Bad News" where individuals suppress negative
information, and the payoff is not risking upsetting someone); leadership games
are played between supervisor and employee (for example the game of "Divide and
Conquer" where the supervisor sets his employees against each other, with the
payoff that none threatens his power base); and budget games are played with
the resources of an organisation (for example the game of "Sandbagging" where
individuals negotiate a low sales target, and the payoff is a bigger bonus).
