Okun's law In economics, Okun's law (named after Arthur Melvin Okun) is an
empirically observed relationship relating unemployment to losses in a
country's production. The "gap version" states that for every 1% increase in
the unemployment rate, a country's GDP will be at an additional roughly 2%
lower than its potential GDP. The "difference version" describes the
relationship between quarterly changes in unemployment and quarterly changes in
real GDP. The stability and usefulness of the law has been disputed. The name
refers to economist Arthur Okun who proposed the relationship in 1962.
Imperfect relationship. Okun's law is more accurately called "Okun's rule of
thumb" because it is primarily an empirical observation rather than a result
derived from theory. Okun's law is approximate because factors other than
employment (such as productivity) affect output. In Okun's original statement
of his law, a 3% increase in output corresponds to a 1% decline in the rate of
unemployment; a .5% increase in labor force participation; a .5% increase in
hours worked per employee; and a 1% increase in output per hours worked (labor
productivity). Okun's law states that a one point increase in the unemployment
rate is associated with two percentage points of negative growth in real GDP.
The relationship varies depending on the country and time period under
consideration. The relationship has been tested by regressing GDP or GNP growth
on change in the unemployment rate. Martin Prachowny estimated about a 3%
decrease in output for every 1% increase in the unemployment rate. However, he
argued that the majority of this change in output is actually due to changes in
factor other than unemployment, such as capacity utilization and hours worked.
Holding these other factors constant reduces the association between
unemployment and GDP to around 0.7% for every 1% change in the unemployment
rate (Prachowny 1993). The magnitude of the decrease seems to be declining over
time in the United States. According to Andrew Abel and Ben Bernanke, estimates
based on data from more recent years give about a 2% decrease in output for
every 1% increase in unemployment (Abel and Bernanke, 2005). There are several
reasons why GDP may increase or decrease more rapidly than unemployment
decreases or increases. As unemployment increases, One implication of Okun's
law is that an increase in labor productivity or an increase in the size of the
labor force can mean that real net output grows without net unemployment rates
falling (the phenomenon of "jobless growth") Mathematical statements. In the
United States since 1955 or so, the value of c has typically been around 2 or
3, as explained above. The gap version of Okun's law, as shown above, is
difficult to use in practice because formula_2 and formula_4 can only be
estimated, not measured. A more commonly used form of Okun's law, known as the
difference or growth rate form of At the present time in the United States, k
is about 3% and c is about 2, so the equation may be written The graph at the
top of this article illustrates the growth rate form of Okun's law, measured
quarterly rather than annually. Derivation of the growth rate form of Okun's
law. Taking annual differences on both sides, we obtain Putting both numerators
over a common denominator, we obtain Multiplying the left hand side by
formula_20, which is approximately equal to 1, we obtain We assume that
formula_23, the change in the natural rate of unemployment, is approximately
equal to 0. We also assume that formula_24, the growth rate of full-employment
output, is approximately equal to its average value, formula_14. So we finally
obtain
