Old Right (United States) The Old Right is a branch of American conservatism
that was most active in the early 20th Century and opposed both New Deal
domestic programs of the 1930s and U.S. entry into World War I and World War
II. Many members of this faction were associated with the Republicans of the
interwar years led by Robert Taft and Herbert Hoover. Some were Democrats. They
were called the "Old Right" to distinguish them from their New Right
successors, such as Barry Goldwater, who came to prominence in the 1950s and
1960s and favored an interventionist foreign policy to battle international
communism. Many members of the Old Right favored laissez faire classical
liberalism; some were business-oriented conservatives; others were ex-radicals
who moved sharply to the right, like the novelist John Dos Passos; still
others, like the Southern Agrarians, were traditionalists who dreamed of
restoring a premodern communal society. The Old Right "per se" has faded as an
organized movement, but many similar ideas are found amongst paleoconservatives
and paleolibertarians. Views. The Old Right emerged in opposition to the New
Deal of Franklin D. Roosevelt. Hoff says, "moderate Republicans and leftover
Republican Progressives like Hoover composed the bulk of the Old Right by 1940,
with a sprinkling of former members of the Farmer-Labor party, Non-Partisan
League, and even a few midwestern prairie Socialist." By 1937 they formed a
Conservative coalition that controlled Congress until 1964. They were
consistently non-interventionist and opposed entering WWII, a position
exemplified by the America First Committee. Later, most opposed U.S. entry into
NATO and intervention in the Korean War. "In addition to being staunch
opponents of war and militarism, the Old Right of the postwar period had a
rugged and near-libertarian honesty in domestic affairs as well." Jeff
Riggenbach argues that some members of the Old Right were actually classical
liberals and "were accepted members of the 'Left' before 1933. Yet, without
changing any of their fundamental views, all of them, over the next decade,
came to be thought of as exemplars of the political 'Right. Southern Agrarians.
Paul V. Murphy, "The Rebuke of History: The Southern Agrarians and American
Conservative Thought" (2001) pp. 5, 24 Legacy. Paleoconservatives and
paleolibertarians are often considered the successors and torchbearers of the
Old Right view in the late 20th century and the 21st century. Both of these
groups often rally behind Old Right slogans such as "America First" while
sharing similar views to the Old Right opposition to the New Deal. Recently,
the ideas of the Old Right have seen a resurgence due to the presidential
campaign of Ron Paul.
