Oligarchy Oligarchy (; ) is a form of power structure in which power
effectively rests with a small number of people. These people could be
distinguished by royalty, wealth, family ties, education, corporate, or
military control. Such states are often controlled by a few prominent families
who pass their influence from one generation to the next. Throughout history,
oligarchies have been tyrannical (relying on public servitude to exist) or
relatively benign. Aristotle pioneered the use of the term as a synonym for
rule by the rich, for which the exact term is plutocracy, but "oligarchy" is
not always a rule by wealth, as oligarchs can simply be a privileged group, and
do not have to be connected by bloodlines as in a monarchy. History. Especially
during the Fourth Century BC, after the restoration of democracy from
oligarchical coups, the Athenians used the drawing of lots for selecting
government officers in order to counteract what the Athenians acutely saw as a
tendency toward oligarchy in government if a professional governing class were
allowed to use their skills for their own benefit. They drew lots from large
groups of adult volunteers as a selection technique for civil servants
performing judicial, executive, and administrative functions (archai, boulē,
and hēliastai). They even used lots for very important posts, such as judges
and jurors in the political courts (nomothetai), which had the power to
overrule the Assembly. Manifestations. Forms of government and other political
structures associated with oligarchy can include aristocracy, meritocracy,
military junta, plutocracy, stratocracy, technocracy, theocracy and timocracy.
Corporate oligarchy. Corporate oligarchy is a form of power, governmental or
operational, where such power effectively rests with a small, elite group of
inside individuals, sometimes from a small group of educational institutions,
or influential economic entities or devices, such as banks, commercial
entities, lobbyists that act in complicity with, or at the whim of the
oligarchy, often with little or no regard for constitutionally protected
prerogative. Monopolies are sometimes granted to state-controlled entities,
such as the Royal Charter granted to the East India Company, or privileged
bargaining rights to unions (labor monopolies) with very partisan political
interests. Today's multinational corporations function as corporate oligarchies
with influence over democratically elected officials. Political theory. Robert
Michels believed that any political system eventually evolves into an
oligarchy. He called this the "iron law of oligarchy". According to this school
of thought, many modern democracies should be considered as oligarchies. In
these systems, actual differences between viable political rivals are small,
the oligarchic elite impose strict limits on what constitutes an acceptable and
respectable political position, and politicians' careers depend heavily on
unelected economic and media elites. Thus the popular phrase: there is only one
political party, the incumbent party. Specific examples. European Union. Some
examples would include the European Union which, while it does not hold much
political sway on a national level; has the authority to dictate some laws of
member nations and impose norms and policies that may not have been voted for
by national referendum. Given that the leadership of the EU is subject to a
particularly low voter turnout, it may be termed an oligarchy of the European
Council members. The political relations between members, who would normally
display a broad array of responses and policies in a democratic system are
repetitive and contingent. and at the other by the gentleness of influence and
persuasion. Soviet Union. Another example would be the former Soviet Union
where only members of the Communist Party were allowed to vote or hold office
Since the collapse of the Soviet Union on 31 December 1991, privately owned
Russia-based multinational corporations, including producers of petroleum,
natural gas, and metal have, in the view of some analysts, become oligarchs. In
May 2004, the Russian edition of Forbes identified 36 of these oligarchs as
being worth at least $1 billion. South Africa. A modern example of oligarchy
could be seen in South Africa during the twentieth century. Here, the basic
characteristics of oligarchy are particularly easy to observe, since the South
African form of oligarchy was based on race. After the Second Boer War, a tacit
agreement or understanding was reached between English- and Afrikaans-speaking
whites. Together, they made up about twenty percent of the population, but this
small percentage ruled the vast non-white and mixed-race population. Whites had
access to virtually all the educational and trade opportunities, and they
proceeded to deny this to the black majority even further than before. Although
this process had been going on since the mid-17th- 18th century, after 1948 it
became official government policy and became known worldwide as apartheid. This
lasted until the arrival of democracy in South Africa in 1994, punctuated by
the transition to a democratically-elected government dominated by the black
majority. United States. Some contemporary authors have characterized the
United States' current state of affairs as being oligarchic in nature. Simon
Johnson wrote that "the reemergence of an American financial oligarchy is quite
recent," a structure which he delineated as being the "most advanced" in the
world. Jeffrey A. Winters argues that "oligarchy and democracy operate within a
single system, and American politics is a daily display of their interplay."
Bernie Sanders (I-VT) opined in a 2010 "The Nation" article that an "upper-
crust of extremely wealthy families are hell-bent on destroying the democratic
vision of a strong middle-class which has made the United States the envy of
the world. In its place they are determined to create an oligarchy in which a
small number of families control the economic and political life of our
country." United States political and finance industry leadership has recently
been dominated by people associated with Harvard and Yale. All nine members of
the current Supreme Court attended Harvard or Yale law schools. The last member
appointed to the court who was not a former student at one of those two
institutions was Sandra Day O'Connor, appointed by the newly elected President
Ronald Reagan in 1981. Reagan was also the last United States President who did
not attend either Harvard or Yale. In fiction. A well-known fictional oligarchy
is represented by the Party in George Orwell's novel "Nineteen Eighty-Four".
The socialists in the Jack London novel "The Iron Heel' fight a rebellion
against the oligarchy ruling in the United States. Authors. Prolific authors on
the subject of oligarchy include Vilfredo Pareto, Gaetano Mosca, Thomas R. Dye,
Robert Michels, Plato, Webster Tarpley, and Ioannes Zwetsch.
