Oligopoly An oligopoly is a market form in which a market or industry is
dominated by a small number of sellers (oligopolists). Because there are few
sellers, each oligopolist is likely to be aware of the actions of the others.
The decisions of one firm influence, and are influenced by, the decisions of
other firms. Strategic planning by oligopolists needs to take into account the
likely responses of the other market participants. Etymology. The word is
derived, by analogy with "monopoly", from the Greek ὀλίγοι ("oligoi")
"few" + πωλεῖν ("polein") "to sell". Description. Oligopoly is a common
market form. As a quantitative description of oligopoly, the four-firm
concentration ratio is often utilized. This measure expresses the market share
of the four largest firms in an industry as a percentage. For example, as of
fourth quarter 2008, Verizon, AT&T, Sprint, and T-Mobile together control 89%
of the US cellular phone market. Oligopolistic competition can give rise to a
wide range of different outcomes. In some situations, the firms may employ
restrictive trade practices (collusion, market sharing etc.) to raise prices
and restrict production in much the same way as a monopoly. Where there is a
formal agreement for such collusion, this is known as a cartel. A primary
example of such a cartel is OPEC which has a profound influence on the
international price of oil. Firms often collude in an attempt to stabilize
unstable markets, so as to reduce the risks inherent in these markets for
investment and product development. There are legal restrictions on such
collusion in most countries. There does not have to be a formal agreement for
collusion to take place (although for the act to be illegal there must be
actual communication between companies)–for example, in some industries there
may be an acknowledged market leader which informally sets prices to which
other producers respond, known as price leadership. In other situations,
competition between sellers in an oligopoly can be fierce, with relatively low
prices and high production. This could lead to an efficient outcome approaching
perfect competition. The competition in an oligopoly can be greater when there
are more firms in an industry than if, for example, the firms were only
regionally based and did not compete directly with each other. Thus the welfare
analysis of oligopolies is sensitive to the parameter values used to define the
market's structure. In particular, the level of dead weight loss is hard to
measure. The study of product differentiation indicates that oligopolies might
also create excessive levels of differentiation in order to stifle competition.
Characteristics. Profit maximisation conditions: An oligopoly maximizes profits
by producing where marginal revenue equals marginal costs. Ability to set
price: Oligopolies are price setters rather than price takers. Entry and exit:
Barriers to entry are high. The most important barriers are economies of scale,
patents, access to expensive and complex technology, and strategic actions by
incumbent firms designed to discourage or destroy nascent firms. Additional
sources of barriers to entry often result from government regulation favoring
existing firms making it difficult for new firms to enter the market. Number of
firms: "Few" – a "handful" of sellers. There are so few firms that the
actions of one firm can influence the actions of the other firms. Long run
profits: Oligopolies can retain long run abnormal profits. High barriers of
entry prevent sideline firms from entering market to capture excess profits.
Product differentiation: Product may be homogeneous (steel) or differentiated
(automobiles). Perfect knowledge: Assumptions about perfect knowledge vary but
the knowledge of various economic factors can be generally described as
selective. Oligopolies have perfect knowledge of their own cost and demand
functions but their inter-firm information may be incomplete. Buyers have only
imperfect knowledge as to price, cost and product quality. Interdependence: The
distinctive feature of an oligopoly is interdependence. Oligopolies are
typically composed of a few large firms. Each firm is so large that its actions
affect market conditions. Therefore the competing firms will be aware of a
firm's market actions and will respond appropriately. This means that in
contemplating a market action, a firm must take into consideration the possible
reactions of all competing firms and the firm's countermoves. It is very much
like a game of chess or pool in which a player must anticipate a whole sequence
of moves and countermoves in determining how to achieve his objectives. For
example, an oligopoly considering a price reduction may wish to estimate the
likelihood that competing firms would also lower their prices and possibly
trigger a ruinous price war. Or if the firm is considering a price increase, it
may want to know whether other firms will also increase prices or hold existing
prices constant. This high degree of interdependence and need to be aware of
what the other guy is doing or might do is to be contrasted with lack of
interdependence in other market structures. In a PC market there is zero
interdependence because no firm is large enough to affect market price. All
firms in a PC market are price takers, information which they robotically
follow in maximizing profits. In a monopoly there are no competitors to be
concerned about. In a monopolistically competitive market each firm's effects
on market conditions is so negligible as to be safely ignored by competitors.
Non-Price Competition: Oligopolies tend to compete on terms other than price.
Loyalty schemes, advertisement, and product differentiation are all examples of
non-price competition. Modeling. There is no single model describing the
operation of an oligopolistic market. The variety and complexity of the models
is because you can have two to 10 firms competing on the basis of price,
quantity, technological innovations, marketing, advertising and reputation.
Fortunately, there are a series of simplified models that attempt to describe
market behavior under certain circumstances. Some of the better-known models
are the dominant firm model, the Cournot-Nash model, the Bertrand model and the
kinked demand model. Dominant firm model. In some markets there is a single
firm that controls a dominant share of the market and a group of smaller firms.
The dominant firm sets prices which are simply taken by the smaller firms in
determining their profit maximizing levels of production. This type of market
is practically a monopoly and an attached perfectly competitive market in which
price is set by the dominant firm rather than the market. The demand curve for
the dominant firm is determined by subtracting the supply curves of all the
small firms from the industry demand curve. After estimating its net demand
curve (market demand less the supply curve of the small firms) the dominant
firm maximizes profits by following the normal p-max rule of producing where
marginal revenue equals marginal costs. The small firms maximize profits by
acting as PC firms–equating price to marginal costs. Cournot-Nash model. The
Cournot-Nash model is the simplest oligopoly model. The model assumes that
there are two “equally positioned firms”; the firms compete on the basis of
quantity rather than price and each firm makes an “output decision assuming
that the other firm’s behavior is fixed.” The market demand curve is
assumed to be linear and marginal costs are constant. To find the Cournot-Nash
equilibrium one determines how each firm reacts to a change in the output of
the other firm. The path to equilibrium is a series of actions and reactions.
The pattern continues until a point is reached where neither firm desires “to
change what it is doing, given how it believes the other firm will react to any
change.” The equilibrium is the intersection of the two firm’s reaction
functions. The reaction function shows how one firm reacts to the quantity
choice of the other firm. For example, assume that the firm 1’s demand
function is P = (M - Q2) - Q1 where Q2 is the quantity produced by the other
firm and Q1 is the amount produced by firm 1, and M=60 is the market. Assume
that marginal cost is CM=12. Firm 1 wants to know its maximizing quantity and
price. Firm 1 begins the process by following the profit maximization rule of
equating marginal revenue to marginal costs. Firm 1’s total revenue function
is RT = Q1 P= Q1(M - Q2 - Q1) = M Q1- Q1 Q2 - Q12. The marginal revenue
function is formula_1. Equation 1.1 is the reaction function for firm 1.
Equation 1.2 is the reaction function for firm 2. To determine the Cournot-Nash
equilibrium you can solve the equations simultaneously. The equilibrium
quantities can also be determined graphically. The equilibrium solution would
be at the intersection of the two reaction functions. Note that if you graph
the functions the axes represent quantities. The reaction functions are not
necessarily symmetric. The firms may face differing cost functions in which
case the reaction functions would not be identical nor would the equilibrium
quantities. Bertrand model. The Bertrand model is essentially the Cournot-Nash
model except the strategic variable is price rather than quantity. The only
Nash equilibrium is PA = PB = MC. Neither firm has any reason to change
strategy. If the firm raises prices it will lose all its customers. If the firm
lowers price P < MC then it will be losing money on every unit sold. The
Bertrand equilibrium is the same as the competitive result. Each firm will
produce where P = marginal costs and there will be zero profits.. A
generalization of the Bertrand model is the Bertrand-Edgeworth Model that
allows for capacity constraints and more general cost functions. Kinked demand
curve model. According to this model, each firm faces a demand curve kinked at
the existing price. The conjectural assumptions of the model are; if the firm
raises its price above the current existing price, competitors will not follow
and the acting firm will lose market share and second if a firm lowers prices
below the existing price then their competitors will follow to retain their
market share and the firm's output will increase only marginally. If the
assumptions hold then: The gap in the marginal revenue curve means that
marginal costs can fluctuate without changing equilibrium price and quantity.
Thus prices tend to be rigid. Examples. In industrialized economies, barriers
to entry have resulted in oligopolies forming in many sectors, with
unprecedented levels of competition fueled by increasing globalization. Market
shares in an oligopoly are typically determined by product development and
advertising. For example, there are now only a small number of manufacturers of
civil passenger aircraft, though Brazil (Embraer) and Canada (Bombardier) have
participated in the small passenger aircraft market sector. Oligopolies have
also arisen in heavily-regulated markets such as wireless communications: in
some areas only two or three providers are licensed to operate. Demand curve.
In an oligopoly, firms operate under imperfect competition. With the fierce
price competitiveness created by this sticky-upward demand curve, firms use
non-price competition in order to accrue greater revenue and market share.
"Kinked" demand curves are similar to traditional demand curves, as they are
downward-sloping. They are distinguished by a hypothesized convex bend with a
discontinuity at the bend–"kink". Thus the first derivative at that point is
undefined and leads to a jump discontinuity in the marginal revenue curve.
Classical economic theory assumes that a profit-maximizing producer with some
market power (either due to oligopoly or monopolistic competition) will set
marginal costs equal to marginal revenue. This idea can be envisioned
graphically by the intersection of an upward-sloping marginal cost curve and a
downward-sloping marginal revenue curve (because the more one sells, the lower
the price must be, so the less a producer earns per unit). In classical theory,
any change in the marginal cost structure (how much it costs to make each
additional unit) or the marginal revenue structure (how much people will pay
for each additional unit) will be immediately reflected in a new price and/or
quantity sold of the item. This result does not occur if a "kink" exists.
Because of this jump discontinuity in the marginal revenue curve, marginal
costs could change without necessarily changing the price or quantity. The
motivation behind this kink is the idea that in an oligopolistic or
monopolistically competitive market, firms will not raise their prices because
even a small price increase will lose many customers. This is because
competitors will generally ignore price increases, with the hope of gaining a
larger market share as a result of now having comparatively lower prices.
However, even a large price decrease will gain only a few customers because
such an action will begin a price war with other firms. The curve is therefore
more price-elastic for price increases and less so for price decreases. Firms
will often enter the industry in the long run.
