On Liberty On Liberty is a philosophical work by British philosopher John
Stuart Mill, originally intended as a short essay. The work, published in 1859,
applies Mill's ethical system of utilitarianism to society and the state. Mill
attempts to establish standards for the relationship between authority and
liberty. He emphasizes the importance of individuality which he conceived as a
prerequisite to the higher pleasures—the summum bonum of Utilitarianism.
Furthermore, Mill criticized the errors of past attempts to defend
individuality where, for example, democratic ideals resulted in the "tyranny of
the majority". Among the standards established in this work are Mill's three
basic liberties of individuals, his three legitimate objections to government
intervention, and his two maxims regarding the relationship of the individual
to society "which together form the entire doctrine of [Mill's] Essay." "On
Liberty" was a greatly influential and well received work though it did not go
without criticism. Some attacked it for its apparent discontinuity with
Utilitarianism, while others criticized its vagueness. The ideas presented in
"On Liberty" have remained the basis of much liberal political thought. It has
remained in print continuously since its initial publication. To this day, a
copy of "On Liberty" is passed to the president of the British Liberal
Democrats as a symbol of office. Mill's marriage to his wife Harriet greatly
influenced the concepts in "On Liberty", which was largely finished prior to
her death, and published shortly after she died. Composition. According to
Mill's Autobiography, "On Liberty" was first conceived as a short essay in
1854. As the ideas developed, the essay was expanded, rewritten and
"sedulously" corrected by Mill and his wife, Harriet Taylor. Mill, after
suffering a mental breakdown and eventually meeting and subsequently marrying
Harriet, changed many of his beliefs on moral life and women's rights. Mill
states that "On Liberty" "was more directly and literally our joint production
than anything else which bears my name." The final draft was nearly complete
when his wife died suddenly in 1858. Mill suggests that he made no alterations
to the text at this point and that one of his first acts after her death was to
publish it and to "consecrate it to her memory." The composition of this piece
was also indebted to the work of the German thinker Wilhelm von Humboldt,
especially his essay "On the Limits of State Action". Finally published in
1859, "On Liberty" was one of Mill's two most influential books (the other
being "Utilitarianism"). Overview. Introduction. John Stuart Mill opens his
essay by discussing the historical "struggle between authority and liberty,"
describing the tyranny of government, which, in his view, needs to be
controlled by the liberty of the citizens. He divides this control of authority
into two mechanisms: necessary rights belonging to citizens, and the
"establishment of constitutional checks by which the consent of the community,
or of a body of some sort, supposed to represent its interests, was made a
necessary condition to some of the more important acts of the governing power".
Because society was—in its early stages—subjected to such turbulent
conditions (i.e. small population and constant war), it was forced to accept
rule "by a master." However, as mankind progressed, it became conceivable for
the people to rule themselves. Mill admits that this new form of society seemed
immune to tyranny because "there was no fear of tyrannizing over self." Despite
the high hopes of the Enlightenment, Mill argues that the democratic ideals
were not as easily met as expected. First, even in democracy, the rulers were
not always the same sort of people as the ruled. Second, there is a risk of a
"tyranny of the majority" in which the many oppress the few who, according to
democratic ideals, have just as much a right to pursue their legitimate ends.
Mill 1859, pp. 14–15 Mill clarifies that this standard is solely based on
utility. Therefore, when it is not useful, it may be ignored. For example,
according to Mill, children and "barbarian" nations are benefitted by limited
freedom. Just despots, such as Charlemagne and Akbar the Great, were
historically beneficial to people not yet fit to rule themselves. While Mill
admits that these freedoms could—in certain situations—be pushed aside, he
claims that in contemporary and civilized societies there is no justification
for their removal. Of the liberty of thought and discussion. Mill 1859, p. 72
Mill spends a large portion of the chapter discussing implications of and
objections to the policy of never suppressing opinions. In doing so, Mill
explains his opinion of Christian ethics, arguing that, while they are
praiseworthy, they are incomplete on their own. Therefore, Mill concludes that
suppression of opinion based on belief in infallible doctrine is dangerous.
Among the other objections Mill answers, is the objection that the truth will
necessarily survive persecution and that society need only teach the grounds
for truth, not the objections to it. On the limits to the authority of society
over the individual. In the fourth chapter, J.S. Mill explains a system in
which a person can discern what aspects of life should be governed by the
individual and which by society. Generally, he holds that a person should be
left as free to pursue his own interests as does not harm the interests of
others. In such a situation, "society has jurisdiction over person's conduct."
He rejects the idea that this liberty is simply for the purpose of allowing
selfish indifference. Rather, he argues that this liberal system will bring
people to the good more effectively than physical or emotional coercion. This
principle leads him to conclude that a person may, without fear of just
punishment, do harm to himself through vice. Governments, he claims, should
only punish a person for neglecting to fulfill a duty to others (or causing
harm to others), not the vice that brought about the neglect. J.S. Mill spends
the rest of the chapter responding to objections to his maxim. He notes the
objection that he contradicts himself in granting societal interference with
youth because they are irrational but denying societal interference with
certain adults though they act irrationally. Mill first responds by restating
the claim that society ought to punish the harmful consequences of the
irrational conduct, but not the irrational conduct itself which is a personal
matter. Furthermore, he notes the societal obligation is not to ensure that
each individual is moral throughout adulthood. Rather, he states that, by
educating youth, society has the opportunity and duty to ensure that a
generation, as a whole, is generally moral. Where some may object that there is
justification for certain religious prohibitions in a society dominated by that
religion, he argues that members of the majority ought make rules which they
would accept should they have been the minority. He states, "unless we are
willing to adopt the logic of persecutors, and say that we may persecute others
because we are right, and that they must not persecute us because they are
wrong, we must beware of admitting a principle of which we should resent as a
gross injustice the application to ourselves." In saying this, he references an
earlier claim that moral and religion cannot be treated in the same light as
math because morals and religion are vastly more complex. Just as with living
in a society which contains immoral people, Mill points out that agents who
find another's conduct depraved do not have to socialize with the other, merely
refrain from impeding their personal decisions. While Mill general opposes the
religiously motivated societal interference, he admits that it is conceivably
permissible for religiously motivated laws to prohibit the use of what no
religion obligates. For example, a Muslim state could feasibly prohibit pork.
However, Mill still prefers a policy of society minding its own business.
Applications. Mill 1859, p. 130 Economy. Mill first applies these principles to
the economy. He concludes that free markets are preferable to those controlled
by governments. While it may seem, because "trade is a social act," that the
government ought intervene in the economy, Mill argues that economies function
best when left to their own devices. Therefore, because government
intervention, though theoretically permissible, would be counterproductive.
Later, he attacks government run economies as "despotic." He believes that if
the government ran the economy, then all people would aspire to be part of a
bureaucracy which had no incentive to further the interests of any but itself.
Preventing harm. Next Mill investigates in what ways a person may try to
prevent harm. He first admits that a person should not wait for injury to
happen, but ought try to prevent it. Second, he states that agents must
consider whether that which can cause injury can cause injury exclusively. He
gives the example of selling poison. Poison can cause harm. However, he points
out that poison can also be used for good. Therefore, selling poison is
permissible. Yet, due to the risk entailed in selling poison or like products
(e.g. alcohol), he sees no danger to liberty to require warning labels on the
product. Again, Mill applies his principle. He considers the right course of
action when an agent sees a person about to cross a condemned bridge without
being aware of the risk. Mill states that because the agent presumably has
interest in not crossing a dangerous bridge (i.e. if he knew the facts
concerned with crossing the bridge, he would not desire to cross the bridge),
it is permissible to forcibly stop the person from crossing the bridge. He
qualifies the assertion stating that, if the means are available, it is better
to warn the unaware person. With regard to taxing to deter agents from buying
dangerous products, he makes a distinction. He states that to tax solely in
order to deter purchases is impermissible because prohibiting personal actions
is impermissible and "very increase of cost is a prohibition, to those whose
means do not come up to the augmented price." However, because a government
must tax to some extent in order to survive, it may choose to take its taxes
from what it deems most dangerous. Repeat offenses to public through private
action. Mill expands upon his principle of punishing the consequences rather
than the personal action. He argues that a person who is empirically prone to
act violently (i.e. harm society) from drunkenness (i.e. a personal act) should
be uniquely restricted from the drinking. He further stipulates that repeat
offenders should be punished more than first time offenders. Encouraging vice.
On the subject of fornication and gambling, Mill has no conclusive answer,
stating, "here are arguments on both sides." He suggests that while the actions
might be "tolerated" in private, promoting the actions (i.e. being a pimp or
keeping a gambling house) "should not be permitted." He reaches a similar
conclusion with acts of indecency, concluding that public indecency is
condemnable. Suicide and divorce. Mill continues by addressing the question of
social interference in suicide. He states that the purpose of liberty is to
allow a person to pursue their interest. Therefore, when a person intends to
terminate their ability to have interests it is permissible for society to step
in. In other words, a person does not have the freedom to surrender their
freedom. To the question of divorce, Mill argues that marriages are one of the
most important structures within society; however, if a couple mutually agrees
to terminate their marriage, they are permitted to do so because society has no
grounds to intervene in such a deeply personal contract. Education. Mill
believes that government run education is an evil because it would destroy
diversity of opinion for all people to be taught the curriculum developed by a
few. The less evil version of state run schooling, according to Mill, is that
which competes against other privately run schools. In contrast, Mill believes
that governments ought to require and fund private education. He states that
they should enforce mandatory education through minor fines and annual
standardized testing which tested only uncontroversial fact. He goes on to
emphasize the importance of a diverse education which teaches opposing views
(e.g. Kant and Locke). He concludes by stating that it is legitimate for states
to forbid marriages unless the couple can prove that they have "means of
supporting a family" through education and other basic necessities. Conclusion.
Mill 1859, p. 161 Reception. Though "On Liberty" garnered adverse criticism, it
was largely received as an important work of literature for its ideas and
accessibility. Denise Evans and Mary L. Onorato summarize the reception of "On
Liberty", stating, "ritics regard his essay "On Liberty" as a seminal work in
the development of British liberalism. Enhanced by his powerful, lucid, and
accessible prose style, Mill's writings on government, economics, and logic
suggest a model for society that remains compelling and relevant." As one sign
of the books importance, a copy of "On Liberty" is the symbol of office for the
president of the Liberal Democrat Party in England. Contradiction to
Utilitarianism. This claim seems to go against the principle of Utilitarianism
that it is permissible that one should be harmed so that the majority could
benefit. Nigel Warburton argues that Mill is likely too optimistic about the
outcome of free speech. Warburton claims that there are situations in which it
would cause more happiness to suppress truth than to permit it. For example, if
a scientist discovered a comet about to kill the planet in a matter of weeks,
it may cause more happiness to suppress the truth than to allow society to
discover the impending danger. While David Brink concedes that Mill's
apparently categorical appeal to rights seems to contradict Utilitarianism, he
points out that Mill does not believe rights are truly categorical because
Mill—when necessary—opposing unrestrained liberty (e.g. offensive public
exposure). Narrow focus. Some thinkers have criticized Mill's writing for its
apparent narrow or unclear focus in several areas. Mill makes clear that he
only considers adults in his writing failing to account for how irrational
members of society, such as children, ought to be treated. Yet, Mill's theory
relies upon the proper upbringing of children. Plank has asserted that Mill
fails to account for physical harm, solely concerning himself with spiritual
wellbeing. He also argues that, while much of Mill's theory depends upon a
distinction between private and public harm, Mill seems not to have provided a
clear focus on or distinction between the private and public realms. Religious
criticism. Nigel Warburton states that though Mill encourages religious
tolerance, because he does not speak from the perspective of a specific
religion, some claim that he does not account for what certain religious
beliefs would entail when governing a society. Some religions believe that they
have a God given duty to enforce religious norms. For them, it seems impossible
for their religious beliefs to be wrong, i.e. the beliefs are infallible.
Therefore, according to Warburton, Mill's principle of total freedom of speech
may not apply. Vague conception of harm. The harm principle is central to the
principles in On Liberty. Nigel Warburton says that Mill appears unclear about
what constitutes harm. Early in the book, he claims that simply being offensive
does not constitute harm. Later, he writes that certain acts which are
permissible and harmless in private are worthy of being prohibited in public.
This seems to contradict his earlier claim that merely offensive acts do not
warrant prohibition because, presumably, the only harm done by a public act
which is harmless in private is that it is offensive. Warburton notes that some
people argue that morality is the basis of society, and that society is the
basis of individual happiness. Therefore, if morality is undermined, so is
individual happiness. Hence, since Mill claims that governments ought to
protect the individual's ability to seek happiness, governments ought to
intervene in the private realm to enforce moral codes.
