One People's Project One Peoples Project (OPP) is an organization founded in
2000 to monitor and publish information about alleged racist and far right
groups and individuals, mostly in the United States. Its most prominent members
are Daryle Lamont Jenkins, its founder, and Joshua Hoyt, who joined the group
in 2002. OPP originated from a July 4, 2000 protest against a Nationalist
Movement rally in Morristown, New Jersey that was billed as "Independence from
Affirmative-Action Day". The counter-demonstration was called the "One People's
Rally". Three hundred anti-racist protesters turned out to face nine supporters
of the Nationalist Movement. At the time, Jenkins was a member of the New
Brunswick, New Jersey-based group New Jersey Freedom Organization (NJFO).
Originally named One People's Coalition, with Jenkins as its spokesperson, the
group researched and published information about the Nationalist Movement's
awards ceremony at the Manville Veterans of Foreign Wars hall. This led to the
cancellation of the event. Over the next year, the renamed One People's Project
broadened their focus, to publish information on their website about American
conservatives, ranging from the mainstream to far right. In November 2001, OPP
began focusing heavily on white supremacist groups that were attempting to take
advantage of the September 11, 2001 attacks. The most notable of these groups
was the Hillsboro, West Virginia-based National Alliance. OPP has published
phone numbers, home addresses and workplace addresses of individuals they have
identified as being far right and/or racist. While this practice has invited
criticism by those who say that it can incite others to violence, the group has
defended this practice as using the same free speech rights that anti-abortion
activists use when they do the same to abortion providers. On July 28, 2007,
when a rally was organized to support a plan by the mayor of Morristown, New
Jersey, to deputize law enforcement officials to enforce immigration laws via
the Immigration and Nationality Act, OPP posted a notice on their website
calling the event an "anti-immigrant rally", although the organizer described
it as a rally against illegal immigration. After the rally, the OPP website
included the following statement: "don't think anyone is going to lose any
sleep over people chanting during the anti-immigrant side's salute to the flag,
Nazis getting slapped around a bit or the pain Robb Pearson & Co. feel over
being called racist all the time." According to the OPP website, all charges
were dropped when one of those supporters was also charged for his role in the
fight, and an agreement was reached. In 2011, David Yeagley filed a lawsuit
against Jenkins and OPP for participating in actions that allegedly led to the
cancellation of an American Renaissance conference in 2010, where he was
supposed to speak. According to Yeagley’s lawsuit, OPP and others contacted
hotels hosting the conference, “threatening, murder, violence and other forms
of retribution” should the event take place. The hotels have never confirmed
that this happened, and no charges have been laid. OPP has played a role in
reforming several neo-Nazis, most notably a member of the Vinlander Social Club
who left his beliefs behind with the help of Jenkins and, with further help
from the Southern Poverty Law Center, was able to get a massive amount of
tattoos removed from his face and hands. This was the subject of the MSNBC
documentary "Erasing Hate". OPP has also been featured on other television
programs, such as the "Montel Williams Show", "A Current Affair", and in
newspaper articles. It has also been mentioned in Gwen Ifill's book, "The
Breakthrough".
