Open government Open government is the governing doctrine which holds that
citizens have the right to access the documents and proceedings of the
government to allow for effective public oversight. In its broadest
construction it opposes reason of state and other considerations, which have
tended to legitimize extensive state secrecy. The origins of open government
arguments can be dated to the time of the European Enlightenment: to debates
about the proper construction of a then nascent democratic society. Among
recent developments is the theory of open source governance, which advocates
the application of the free software movement to democratic principles,
enabling interested citizens to get more directly involved in the legislative
process. History. In the West, the idea that government should be open to
public scrutiny and susceptible to public opinion dates back at least to the
time of the Enlightenment, when many "philosophes" made an attack on absolutist
doctrine of state secrecy, a core part of their intellectual project. The
passage of formal legislative instruments to this end can also be traced to
this time with Sweden, for example, (which then included Finland as a Swedish-
governed territory) enacting free press legislation as part of its constitution
(Freedom of the Press Act, 1766). This approach, and that of the "philosophes"
more broadly, is strongly related to recent historiography on the eighteenth-
century public sphere. Influenced by Enlightenment thought, the revolutions in
America (1776) and France (1789), freedom of the press enshrined provisions and
requirements for public budgetary accounting and freedom of the press in
constitutional articles. In the nineteenth century, attempts by Metternichean
statesmen to row back on these measures were vigorously opposed by a number of
eminent liberal politicians and writers, Bentham, Mill and Acton prominent
among the latter. Open government is widely seen to be a key hallmark of
contemporary democratic practice and is often linked to the passing of freedom
of information legislation. Scandinavian countries claim to have adopted the
first freedom of information legislation, dating the origins of its modern
provisions to the eighteenth century and Finland continuing the presumption of
openness after gaining independence in 1917, passing its Act on Publicity of
Official Documents in 1951 (superseded by new legislation in 1999). The United
States passed its Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) in 1966, FOIAs, Access to
Information Acts (AIAs) or equivalent laws were passed in Denmark and Norway in
1970, France and The Netherlands in 1978, Australia, Canada and New Zealand in
1982, Hungary in 1992, Ireland and Thailand in 1997, South Korea in 1998, the
United Kingdom in 2000, Japan and Mexico in 2002, India and Germany in 2005.
Content. Transparency in government is often credited with generating
government accountability. Transparency often allows citizens of a democracy to
control their government, reducing government corruption, bribery and other
malfeasance. Some commentators contend that an open, transparent government
allows for the dissemination of information, which in turn helps produce
greater knowledge and societal progress. The contemporary doctrine of open
government finds its strongest advocates in those non-governmental
organisations keen to counter what they see as the inherent tendency of
government to lapse, whenever possible, into secrecy. Prominent among these
NGOs are bodies like "Transparency International" or the "Open Society
Institute". They advocate the implementation of norms of openness and
transparency across the globe and argue that such standards are vital to the
ongoing prosperity and development of democratic societies. Advocates of open
government often argue that civil society, rather than government legislation,
offers the best route to more transparent administration. They point to the
role of whistleblowers reporting from inside the government bureaucracy
(individuals like Daniel Ellsberg or Paul van Buitenen). They argue that an
independent and inquiring press, printed or electronic, is often a stronger
guarantor of transparency than legislative checks and balances. Along with an
interest in providing more access to information goes a corresponding concern
for protecting citizens' privacy so they are not exposed to "adverse
consequences, retribution or negative repercussions" from information provided
by governments. A relatively new vision for the implementation of open
government is coming from the municipal sector. In a similar fashion to
grassroot movements, open government technology expert Tobias SK Cichon
postulates [http://codigigo.blogspot.com] that the swarming pressure of small
local governments using technology to implement open government solutions will
lead to similar adoptions by larger municipalities and eventually state,
provincial and federal level changes. Public and private sector platforms
provide an avenue for citizens to engage while offering access to transparent
information that citizens have come to expect. Numerous organizations have
worked to consolidate resources for citizens to access government (local, state
and federal) budget spending, stimulus spending, lobbyist spending, legislative
tracking, and more. Despite the obvious and undeniable benefits that come from
increased government transparency, a number of scholars have questioned the
moral certitude behind much transparency advocacy, questioning the foundations
upon which advocacy rests. They have also highlighted how transparency can
support certain neoliberal imperatives. Clare Birchall in a special issue of
the journal, Theory, Culture and Society, examined the opposition between
secrecy and transparency to question common understandings of this
relationship.
