Operations research Operations research, or operational research in British
usage, is a discipline that deals with the application of advanced analytical
methods to help make better decisions. It is often considered to be a sub-field
of mathematics. The terms management science and decision science are sometimes
used as more modern-sounding synonyms. Employing techniques from other
mathematical sciences, such as mathematical modeling, statistical analysis, and
mathematical optimization, operations research arrives at optimal or near-
optimal solutions to complex decision-making problems. Because of its emphasis
on human-technology interaction and because of its focus on practical
applications, operations research has overlap with other disciplines, notably
industrial engineering and operations management, and draws on psychology and
organization science. Operations Research is often concerned with determining
the maximum (of profit, performance, or yield) or minimum (of loss, risk, or
cost) of some real-world objective. Originating in military efforts before
World War II, its techniques have grown to concern problems in a variety of
industries. Overview. Operational research (OR) encompasses a wide range of
problem-solving techniques and methods applied in the pursuit of improved
decision-making and efficiency, such as simulation, mathematical optimization,
queueing theory and other stochastic-process models, Markov decision processes,
econometric methods, data envelopment analysis, neural networks, expert
systems, decision analysis, and the analytic hierarchy process. Nearly all of
these techniques involve the construction of mathematical models that attempt
to describe the system. Because of the computational and statistical nature of
most of these fields, OR also has strong ties to computer science and
analytics. Operational researchers faced with a new problem must determine
which of these techniques are most appropriate given the nature of the system,
the goals for improvement, and constraints on time and computing power.
History. As a formal discipline, operational research originated in the efforts
of military planners during World War II. In the decades after the war, the
techniques began to be applied more widely to problems in business, industry
and society. Since that time, operational research has expanded into a field
widely used in industries ranging from petrochemicals to airlines, finance,
logistics, and government, moving to a focus on the development of mathematical
models that can be used to analyse and optimize complex systems, and has become
an area of active academic and industrial research. Historical origins. In the
World War II era, operational research was defined as "a scientific method of
providing executive departments with a quantitative basis for decisions
regarding the operations under their control." Other names for it included
operational analysis (UK Ministry of Defence from 1962) and quantitative
management. Prior to the formal start of the field, early work in operational
research was carried out by individuals such as Charles Babbage. His research
into the cost of transportation and sorting of mail led to England's universal
"Penny Post" in 1840, and studies into the dynamical behaviour of railway
vehicles in defence of the GWR's broad gauge. Percy Bridgman brought
operational research to bear on problems in physics in the 1920s and would
later attempt to extend these to the social sciences. The modern field of
operational research arose during World War II. Modern operational research
originated at the Bawdsey Research Station in the UK in 1937 and was the result
of an initiative of the station's superintendent, A. P. Rowe. Rowe conceived
the idea as a means to analyse and improve the working of the UK's early
warning radar system, Chain Home (CH). Initially, he analysed the operating of
the radar equipment and its communication networks, expanding later to include
the operating personnel's behaviour. This revealed unappreciated limitations of
the CH network and allowed remedial action to be taken. Scientists in the
United Kingdom including Patrick Blackett (later Lord Blackett OM PRS), Cecil
Gordon, C. H. Waddington, Owen Wansbrough-Jones, Frank Yates, Jacob Bronowski
and Freeman Dyson, and in the United States with George Dantzig looked for ways
to make better decisions in such areas as logistics and training schedules.
After the war it began to be applied to similar problems in industry. Second
World War. During the Second World War close to 1,000 men and women in Britain
were engaged in operational research. About 200 operational research scientists
worked for the British Army. Patrick Blackett worked for several different
organizations during the war. Early in the war while working for the Royal
Aircraft Establishment (RAE) he set up a team known as the "Circus" which
helped to reduce the number of anti-aircraft artillery rounds needed to shoot
down an enemy aircraft from an average of over 20,000 at the start of the
Battle of Britain to 4,000 in 1941. In 1941 Blackett moved from the RAE to the
Navy, after first working with RAF Coastal Command, in 1941 and then early in
1942 to the Admiralty. Blackett's team at Coastal Command's Operational
Research Section (CC-ORS) included two future Nobel prize winners and many
other people who went on to be pre-eminent in their fields. They undertook a
number of crucial analyses that aided the war effort. Britain introduced the
convoy system to reduce shipping losses, but while the principle of using
warships to accompany merchant ships was generally accepted, it was unclear
whether it was better for convoys to be small or large. Convoys travel at the
speed of the slowest member, so small convoys can travel faster. It was also
argued that small convoys would be harder for German U-boats to detect. On the
other hand, large convoys could deploy more warships against an attacker.
Blackett's staff showed that the losses suffered by convoys depended largely on
the number of escort vessels present, rather than on the overall size of the
convoy. Their conclusion, therefore, was that a few large convoys are more
defensible than many small ones. While performing an analysis of the methods
used by RAF Coastal Command to hunt and destroy submarines, one of the analysts
asked what colour the aircraft were. As most of them were from Bomber Command
they were painted black for nighttime operations. At the suggestion of CC-ORS a
test was run to see if that was the best colour to camouflage the aircraft for
daytime operations in the grey North Atlantic skies. Tests showed that aircraft
painted white were on average not spotted until they were 20% closer than those
painted black. This change indicated that 30% more submarines would be attacked
and sunk for the same number of sightings. Other work by the CC-ORS indicated
that on average if the trigger depth of aerial-delivered depth charges (DCs)
were changed from 100 feet to 25 feet, the kill ratios would go up. The reason
was that if a U-boat saw an aircraft only shortly before it arrived over the
target then at 100 feet the charges would do no damage (because the U-boat
wouldn't have had time to descend as far as 100 feet), and if it saw the
aircraft a long way from the target it had time to alter course under water so
the chances of it being within the 20-foot kill zone of the charges was small.
It was more efficient to attack those submarines close to the surface when the
targets' locations were better known than to attempt their destruction at
greater depths when their positions could only be guessed. Before the change of
settings from 100 feet to 25 feet, 1% of submerged U-boats were sunk and 14%
damaged. After the change, 7% were sunk and 11% damaged. (If submarines were
caught on the surface, even if attacked shortly after submerging, the numbers
rose to 11% sunk and 15% damaged). Blackett observed "there can be few cases
where such a great operational gain had been obtained by such a small and
simple change of tactics". Bomber Command's Operational Research Section (BC-
ORS), analysed a report of a survey carried out by RAF Bomber Command. For the
survey, Bomber Command inspected all bombers returning from bombing raids over
Germany over a particular period. All damage inflicted by German air defences
was noted and the recommendation was given that armour be added in the most
heavily damaged areas. This recommendation was not adopted because the fact
that the aircraft returned with these areas damaged indicated these areas were
NOT vital, and adding armor weight to non-vital areas where damage is
acceptable negatively affects aircraft performance. Their suggestion to remove
some of the crew so that an aircraft loss would result in fewer personnel loss
was also rejected by RAF command. Blackett's team made the logical
recommendation that the armour be placed in the areas which were completely
untouched by damage in the bombers which returned. They reasoned that the
survey was biased, since it only included aircraft that returned to Britain.
The untouched areas of returning aircraft were probably vital areas, which, if
hit, would result in the loss of the aircraft. When Germany organised its air
defences into the Kammhuber Line, it was realised by the British that if the
RAF bombers were to fly in a bomber stream they could overwhelm the night
fighters who flew in individual cells directed to their targets by ground
controllers. It was then a matter of calculating the statistical loss from
collisions against the statistical loss from night fighters to calculate how
close the bombers should fly to minimise RAF losses. The "exchange rate" ratio
of output to input was a characteristic feature of operational research. By
comparing the number of flying hours put in by Allied aircraft to the number of
U-boat sightings in a given area, it was possible to redistribute aircraft to
more productive patrol areas. Comparison of exchange rates established
"effectiveness ratios" useful in planning. The ratio of 60 mines laid per ship
sunk was common to several campaigns: German mines in British ports, British
mines on German routes, and United States mines in Japanese routes. Operational
research doubled the on-target bomb rate of B-29s bombing Japan from the
Marianas Islands by increasing the training ratio from 4 to 10 percent of
flying hours; revealed that wolf-packs of three United States submarines were
the most effective number to enable all members of the pack to engage targets
discovered on their individual patrol stations; revealed that glossy enamel
paint was more effective camouflage for night fighters than traditional dull
camouflage paint finish, and the smooth paint finish increased airspeed by
reducing skin friction. On land, the operational research sections of the Army
Operational Research Group (AORG) of the Ministry of Supply (MoS) were landed
in Normandy in 1944, and they followed British forces in the advance across
Europe. They analysed, among other topics, the effectiveness of artillery,
aerial bombing, and anti-tank shooting. After World War II. With expanded
techniques and growing awareness of the field at the close of the war,
operational research was no longer limited to only operational, but was
extended to encompass equipment procurement, training, logistics and
infrastructure. Problems addressed with operational research. Operational
research is also used extensively in government where evidence-based policy is
used. Management science. In 1967 Stafford Beer characterized the field of
management science as "the business use of operations research". However, in
modern times the term management science may also be used to refer to the
separate fields of organizational studies or corporate strategy. Like
operational research itself, management science (MS) is an interdisciplinary
branch of applied mathematics devoted to optimal decision planning, with strong
links with economics, business, engineering, and other sciences. It uses
various scientific research-based principles, strategies, and analytical
methods including mathematical modeling, statistics and numerical algorithms to
improve an organization's ability to enact rational and meaningful management
decisions by arriving at optimal or near optimal solutions to complex decision
problems. In short, management sciences help businesses to achieve their goals
using the scientific methods of operational research. The management
scientist's mandate is to use rational, systematic, science-based techniques to
inform and improve decisions of all kinds. Of course, the techniques of
management science are not restricted to business applications but may be
applied to military, medical, public administration, charitable groups,
political groups or community groups. Management science is concerned with
developing and applying models and concepts that may prove useful in helping to
illuminate management issues and solve managerial problems, as well as
designing and developing new and better models of organizational excellence.
The application of these models within the corporate sector became known as
Management science. Societies and journals. The International Federation of
Operational Research Societies (IFORS) is an umbrella organization for
operational research societies worldwide, representing approximately 50
national societies including those in the US, UK, France, Germany, Canada,
Australia, New Zealand, Philippines, India, Japan and South Africa (ORSSA). The
constituent members of IFORS form regional groups, such as that in Europe.
Other important operational research organizations are Simulation
Interoperability Standards Organization (SISO) and Interservice/Industry
Training, Simulation and Education Conference (I/ITSEC) In 2004 the US-based
organization INFORMS began an initiative to market the OR profession better,
including a website entitled "The Science of Better" which provides an
introduction to OR and examples of successful applications of OR to industrial
problems. This initiative has been adopted by the Operational Research Society
in the UK, including a website entitled "Learn about OR".
