Opposition to immigration Opposition to immigration exists in most nation-
states with immigration, and has become a significant political issue in many
countries. Immigration in the modern sense refers to movement of people from
one nation-state to another, where they are not citizens. It is important to
distinguish between legal and illegal immigration in considering opposition to
immigration. Illegal immigration is immigration in contravention of a nation's
immigration laws, and is a particular problem in many Western nations and
Australia. The principal concerns expressed by those opposed to immigration
are: economic costs (job competition and education and social services
burdens); negative environmental impact from accelerated population growth;
increased crime rate (immigrants tend to have higher crime rate than domestic
population - see immigration and crime) and, in some cases, the distortion of
the national identity. In addition, when the immigration is illegal, opposition
is focused on the economic and environmental costs and the violation of the
receiving nation's law. In cases such as the United States, where illegal
immigration since the 1986th amnesty has resulted in an estimated 10-20 million
illegal immigrants, the issue of failure of the rule of law itself is
implicated. In countries where the majority of the population is of immigrant
descent, such as the United States, opposition to immigration sometimes takes
the form of nativism targeted primarily at 'first-generation' immigrants. Major
anti-immigration arguments. The national identity of a nation-state is
reflected in claims regarding ethnicity: the immigrants fail to assimilate into
the original population, and replace its culture with their own. This argument
is based on maintaining the rule of the original ethnic group. National unity
arguments emphasise language use and isolation: the immigrants "isolate
themselves in their own communities and refuse to learn the local language".
Economic arguments concentrate on competition for employment, and the burdens
that many immigrants impose on social welfare systems and public schools.
Illegal immigrants are often poor and uneducated, and frequently work in jobs
for which income is not reported, thereby returning little to the receiving
nation's economy through taxes. Another argument against immigration is that it
deprives the countries of origin of badly-needed skilled workers--the "brain
drain". Arguments from immigrant criminality points out that crime rate tends
to be higher among immigrant populations, thus high immigration would lead to
increased crime. The Handbook of Crime Correlates (2009), a review of studies
of correlates with crime, states that most studies on immigrants have found
higher rates of crime compared to domestic population. For example, the
incidence of felonies among immigrants in Oslo from Kosovo, Morocco, Somalia,
Iraq, Iran and Chile reached more than 2% in all these groups. In comparison,
the incidence in the non-immigrant population was about 0.7%. Environmental
arguments include the increased consumption of scarce resources and
overpopulation. Australia. A sparsely-populated continental nation with a
predominantly European population, Australia has long feared being overwhelmed
by the heavily-populated Asian countries to its north. The standard policy
after 1900 was "White Australia" which encouraged immigration from Britain, was
suspicious of immigrants from Germany and elsewhere in Europe, and which was
quite hostile to immigrants from Asia or the Pacific islands. After World War
II, most Australians agreed that the country must "populate or perish".
Immigration brought people from traditional sources such as the British Isles
along with, for the first time, large numbers of Southern and Central
Europeans. The abolition of the so-called 'White Australia policy' during the
early 1970s led to a significant increase in immigration from Asian and other
non-European countries. In the 1996 election Pauline Hanson was elected to the
federal seat of Oxley. In her controversial maiden speech to the House of
Representatives, she expressed her concern that Australia "was in danger of
being swamped by Asians". This message exposed a population deeply divided on
the issue of immigration, especially from non-Western countries. Hanson went on
to form the One Nation Party, which subsequently won nearly one quarter of the
vote in Queensland state elections. The name "One Nation" was meant to signify
national unity, in contrast to what Hanson claimed to see as an increasing
division in Australian society caused by government policies favouring migrants
(multiculturalism) and indigenous Australians. Some Australians reacted angrily
to One Nation, as Hanson was subjected to water balloons filled with urine at
public speeches, ridiculed in the media, and received so many death threats she
filmed a "good-bye video" in the case of her assassination. She was imprisoned
by the government on political corruption charges, which were dropped after her
imprisonment, despite receiving no compensation. Europe. Strong immigration is
one of the central political issues in many European countries, and
increasingly also at European Union level. The anti-immigration perspective is
predominantly nationalist and cultural, rather than economic or
environmentalist. European nationalists see multiculturalism as threatening the
existence of their indigenous cultures. The issue is complicated by the fact
that many immigrants in western Europe are poor, working class Muslims from
Turkey, Pakistan and Northern Africa. Prominent European opponents of
immigration include Jörg Haider, Jean-Marie Le Pen, and the assassinated Pim
Fortuyn. In France, the National Front opposes immigration. In the UK the
British National Party have made opposition to immigration one of their central
policies. Major media, political parties, and a large share of the public see
the possibility of anti-immigrant sentiment due to the 2005 civil unrest in
France. Opposition to high levels of legal immigration is associated with many
right-wing groups in Europe. Expression of these views is often considered
racist and sometimes even a criminal offense under anti-discrimination
statutes, and there are frequent calls for stiffer sentences for xenophobia in
many European countries and by the European Union. Spain. A January 2004 survey
by Spanish newspaper "El País" showed that the "majority" of Spaniards believe
immigration was too high. Small Neo-fascist parties, such as Movimiento Social
Español, openly campaign using nationalist or anti-immigrant rhetoric.
Portugal. Portugal was long a dictatorship, and had little immigration until a
sudden influx in the 1970s, as ex-colonists returned. Today there are Lisbon-
born Africans. Rural areas have just recently begun to see many new arrivals.
The country has right-wing parties that support curbs in immigration quotas.
Any resident of a Portuguese-speaking country is free to live and work in
Portugal, and vice-versa. In recent years, the growth of the Portuguese far-
right "National Renewal Party", known as PNR, has targeted the immigration and
ethnic minorities issues. Japan. The movement for Japanese cultural isolation,
"sakoku" (), arose in Edo Period Japan, in response to the strong influence of
Chinese culture. The study of (ancient) Japanese literature and culture was
called "kokugaku" ( "country study"). As of now there has been a push to
increase immigration due to the countries faltering economy.[http://
online.wsj.com/article/SB10001424052748704526504575634151044954866.html]
Mexico. In Mexico, during the first eight months of 2005, more than 120,000
people from Central America were deported to their countries of origin. This is
a much higher number than the people deported in the same period in 2002, when
only 1 person was deported in the entire year. Many women from countries in the
Commonwealth of Independent States (most of former USSR), Asia and Central and
South America are offered jobs at table dance establishments in large cities
throughout the country, causing the National Institute of Migration (INM) in
Mexico to raid strip clubs and deport foreigners who work without the proper
documentation. Mexico has very strict laws pertaining to both illegal and legal
immigrants. The Mexican constitution restricts non-citizens or foreign-born
persons from participating in politics, holding office, acting as a member of
the clergy, or serving on the crews of Mexican-flagged ships or airplanes.
Certain legal rights are waived, such as the right to a deportation hearing or
other legal motions. In cases of flagrante delicto, any person may make a
citizen's arrest on the offender and his accomplices, turning them over without
delay to the nearest authorities. Many immigration restrictionists in the
United States have accused the Mexican government of hypocrisy in its
immigration policy, noting that while the Government of Mexico and Mexican
Americans are demanding looser immigration laws in the United States and oppose
the 2010 Arizona Immigration Bill, at the same time Mexico is keeping even
tighter restrictions than the Arizona law on immigration into Mexico from
Central America and other places. United States. In the United States,
opposition to immigration has a long history, starting in the late 1790s, in
reaction to an influx of political refugees from France and Ireland. After
passage of the Alien and Sedition Acts in 1798, opposition receded. Nativism
first gained a name and affected politics in mid-19th century United States
because of the large inflows of immigrants from cultures that were markedly
different from the existing White Anglo-Saxon Protestant culture. Nativists
objected primarily to Roman Catholics, especially Irish Americans. Nativist
movements included the American Party of the mid-19th Century (formed by
members of the Know-Nothing movement), the Immigration Restriction League of
the early 20th Century, and the anti-Asian movements in the west, resulting in
the Chinese Exclusion Act and the so-called "Gentlemen's Agreement" aimed at
the Japanese. Immigration became a major issue again from the 1990s, with
burgeoning illegal immigration, particularly in the Southwest The Immigration
Reform and Control Act of 1986 provided an amnesty described as the amnesty to
end amnesties was passed in 1986 but had no lasting impact on the flow of
illegal immigrants. Labor unions. The American Federation of Labor (AFL), a
coalition of labor unions formed in the 1880s, vigorously opposed unrestricted
immigration from Europe for moral, cultural, and racial reasons. The issue
unified the workers who feared that an influx of new workers would flood the
labor market and lower wages. Nativism was not a factor because upwards of half
the union members were themselves immigrants or the sons of immigrants from
Ireland, Germany and Britain. However, nativism was a factor when the AFL even
more strenuously opposed all immigration from Asia because it represented (to
its Euro-American members) an alien culture that could not be assimilated into
American society. The AFL intensified its opposition after 1906 and was
instrumental in passing immigration restriction bills from the 1890s to the
1920s, such as the 1921 Emergency Quota Act and the Immigration Act of 1924,
and seeing that they were strictly enforced. Mink (1986) concludes that the
link between the AFL and the Democratic Party rested in part on immigration
issues, noting the large corporations, which supported the Republicans, wanted
more immigration to augment their labor force.
