Orange Revolution The Orange Revolution () was a series of protests and
political events that took place in Ukraine from late November 2004 to January
2005, in the immediate aftermath of the run-off vote of the 2004 Ukrainian
presidential election which was claimed to be marred by massive corruption,
voter intimidation and direct electoral fraud. Kiev, the Ukrainian capital, was
the focal point of the movement's campaign of civil resistance, with thousands
of protesters demonstrating daily. Nationwide, the democratic revolution was
highlighted by a series of acts of civil disobedience, sit-ins, and general
strikes organized by the opposition movement. The protests were prompted by
reports from several domestic and foreign election monitors as well as the
widespread public perception that the results of the run-off vote of 21
November 2004 between leading candidates Viktor Yushchenko and Viktor
Yanukovych were rigged by the authorities in favor of the latter. The
nationwide protests succeeded when the results of the original run-off were
annulled, and a revote was ordered by Ukraine's Supreme Court for 26 December
2004. Under intense scrutiny by domestic and international observers, the
second run-off was declared to be "fair and free". The final results showed a
clear victory for Yushchenko, who received about 52% of the vote, compared to
Yanukovych's 44%. Yushchenko was declared the official winner and with his
inauguration on 23 January 2005 in Kiev, the Orange Revolution ended. In 2010,
Viktor Yanukovych was declared winner of the following presidential election
said to have been conducted fairly by the Central Election Commission (CEC) and
international observers. Prelude. Late 2002 Viktor Yushchenko (Our Ukraine),
Oleksandr Moroz (Socialist Party of Ukraine), Petro Symonenko (Communist Party
of Ukraine) and Yulia Tymoshenko (Yulia Tymoshenko Bloc) issued a joint
statement concerning "the beginning of a state revolution in Ukraine". The
communist stepped out of the alliance, Symonenko was against a single candidate
from the alliance in the Ukrainian presidential election 2004, but the other
three parties remained allies (until July 2006). In the Autumn of 2001 both
Tymoshenko and Yushchenko had broached at creating such a coalition. On 2 July
2004 Our Ukraine and the Yulia Tymoshenko Bloc established the "Force of the
people", a coalition which aimed to stop "the destructive process that has, as
a result of the incumbent authorities, become a characteristic for Ukraine", at
the time President Leonid Kuchma and Prime Minister Viktor Yanukovych were the
incumbent authorities in Ukraine. The pact included a promise by Viktor
Yushchenko to nominate Tymoshenko as Prime Minister if Yushchenko won the
October 2004 presidential election. This 2004 presidential election in Ukraine
eventually featured two main candidates. One was sitting Prime Minister Viktor
Yanukovych, largely supported by Leonid Kuchma (the outgoing President of
Ukraine who already served two terms in the office and was precluded from
running himself due to the constitutional term limits), and the opposition
candidate Viktor Yushchenko, leader of the Our Ukraine faction in the Ukrainian
parliament and a former Prime Minister (1999–2001). The election was held in
a highly charged atmosphere, with the Yanukovych team and the outgoing
president's administration using their control of the government and state
apparatus for intimidation of Yushchenko and his supporters. In September 2004,
Yushchenko suffered dioxin poisoning under mysterious circumstances. While he
survived and returned to the campaign trail, the poisoning undermined his
health and altered his appearance dramatically (his face remains disfigured by
the consequences to this day). The two main candidates were neck and neck in
the first-round vote held on 31 October 2004, collecting 39.32% (Yanukovych)
and 39.87% (Yushchenko) of the vote cast. The candidates that came third and
fourth collected much less: Oleksandr Moroz of the Socialist Party of Ukraine
and Petro Symonenko of the Communist Party of Ukraine received 5.82% and 4.97%,
respectively. Since no candidate carried more than 50% of the cast ballots, a
run-off vote between two leading candidates was mandated by Ukrainian law.
Later: after the run-off was announced, Oleksandr Moroz threw his support
behind Viktor Yushchenko. The Progressive Socialist Party's Natalia Vitrenko,
who won 1.53% of the vote, endorsed Yanukovych, who hoped for Petro Simonenko's
endorsement but did not receive it. In the wake of the first round of the
election many complaints regarding voting irregularities in favor of the
government supported Yanukovych were raised. However, as it was clear that
neither nominee was close enough to collecting an outright majority in the
first round, challenging the initial result would not have affected the final
outcome of the election. As such the complaints were not actively pursued and
both candidates concentrated on the upcoming run-off scheduled for 21 November.
Pora! activists were arrested in October 2004, but the release of many (on what
was reported President Kuchma's personal order) gave growing confidence to the
opposition. "Orange" was originally adopted by the Yushchenko's camp as the
signifying color of his election campaign. Later the color gave name to an
entire series of political terms, such as "the Oranges" ("Pomaranchevi" in
Ukrainian) for his political camp and supporters. At the time when the mass
protests grew, and especially when they brought about political change in the
country, the term "Orange Revolution" came to represent the entire series of
events. In view of the success of using color as a symbol to mobilize
supporters, the Yanukovych camp chose blue for themselves. File:Ukraine
Presidential Oct 2004 Vote (Yushchenko).png|Viktor Yushchenko (First round) -
percentage of total national vote File:Ukraine Presidential Oct 2004 Vote
(Yanukovych).png|Viktor Yanukovych (First round) - percentage of total national
vote File:Ukraine Presidential Nov 2004 Vote (Yushchenko).png|Viktor Yushchenko
(Second round) - percentage of total national vote File:Ukraine Presidential
Nov 2004 Vote (Yanukovych).png|Viktor Yanukovych (Second round) - percentage of
total national vote  Protests. Protests began on the eve of the second round of
voting, as the official count differed markedly from exit poll results which
gave Yushchenko up to an 11% lead, while official results gave the election win
to Yanukovych by 3%. While Yanukovych supporters have claimed that Yushchenko's
connections to the Ukrainian media explain this disparity, the Yushchenko team
publicized evidence of many incidents of electoral fraud in favor of the
government-backed Yanukovych, witnessed by many local and foreign observers.
These accusations were reinforced by similar allegations, though at a lesser
scale, during the first presidential run of 31 October. The Yushchenko campaign
publicly called for protest on the dawn of election day, 21 November 2004, when
allegations of fraud began to spread. Beginning on 22 November 2004, massive
protests started in cities across Ukraine: the largest, in Kiev's Maidan
Nezalezhnosti "(Independence Square)", attracted an estimated 500,000
participants, who on 23 November 2004, peacefully marched in front of the
headquarters of the Verkhovna Rada, the Ukrainian parliament, many wearing
orange or carrying orange flags, the color of Yushchenko's campaign coalition.
One of the most prominent activists of that time was Paraska Korolyuk,
subsequently bestowed with the Order of Princess Olga. The local councils in
Kiev, Lviv, and several other cities passed, with the wide popular support of
their constituency, a largely symbolic refusal to accept the legitimacy of the
official election results, and Yushchenko took a symbolic presidential oath.
This "oath" taken by Yushchenko in half-empty parliament chambers, lacking the
quorum as only the Yushchenko-leaning factions were present, could not have any
legal effect. But it was an important symbolic gesture meant to demonstrate the
resolve of the Yushchenko campaign not to accept the compromised election
results. In response, Yushchenko's opponents denounced him for taking an
illegitimate oath, and even some of his moderate supporters were ambivalent
about this act, while a more radical side of the Yushchenko camp demanded him
to act even more decisively. Some observers argued that this symbolic
presidential oath might have been useful to the Yushchenko camp should events
have taken a more confrontational route. In such a scenario, this "presidential
oath" Yushchenko took could be used to lend legitimacy to the claim that he,
rather than his rival who tried to gain the presidency through alleged fraud,
was a true commander-in-chief authorized to give orders to the military and
security agencies. At the same time, local officials in Eastern and Southern
Ukraine, the stronghold of Viktor Yanukovych, started a series of actions
alluding to the possibility of the breakup of Ukraine or an extra-
constitutional federalization of the country, should their candidate's claimed
victory not be recognized. Demonstrations of public support for Yanukovych were
held throughout Eastern Ukraine and some of his supporters arrived in Kiev. In
Kiev the pro-Yanukovych demonstrators were far outnumbered by Yushchenko
supporters, whose ranks were continuously swelled by new arrivals from many
regions of Ukraine. The scale of the demonstrations in Kiev was unprecedented.
By many estimates, on some days they drew up to one million people to the
streets, in freezing weather. During the protests, a man died after suffering a
heart attack. Political developments. Although Yushchenko entered into
negotiations with outgoing President Leonid Kuchma in an effort to peacefully
resolve the situation, the negotiations broke up on 24 November 2004.
Yanukovych was officially certified as the victor by the Central Election
Commission, which itself was allegedly involved in falsification of electoral
results by withholding the information it was receiving from local districts
and running a parallel illegal computer server to manipulate the results. The
next morning after the certification took place, Yushchenko spoke to supporters
in Kiev, urging them to begin a series of mass protests, general strikes and
sit-ins with the intent of crippling the government and forcing it to concede
defeat. In view of the threat of illegitimate government acceding to power,
Yushchenko's camp announced the creation of the "Committee of National
Salvation" which declared a nationwide political strike. On 1 December 2004,
the Verkhovna Rada passed a resolution that strongly condemned pro-separatist
and federalization actions, and passed a non-confidence vote in the Cabinet of
Ministers of Ukraine, a decision Prime Minister Yanukovych refused to
recognize. By the Constitution of Ukraine, the non-confidence vote mandated the
government's resignation, but the parliament had no means to enforce a
resignation without the co-operation of Prime Minister Yanukovych and outgoing
President Kuchma. On 3 December 2004, Ukraine's Supreme Court finally broke the
political deadlock. The court decided that due to the scale of the electoral
fraud it became impossible to establish the election results. Therefore, it
invalidated the official results that would have given Yanukovych the
presidency. As a resolution, the court ordered a revote of the run-off to be
held on 26 December 2004. This decision was seen as a victory for the
Yushchenko camp while Yanukovych and his supporters favored a rerun of the
entire election rather than just the run-off, as a second-best option if
Yanukovych was not awarded the presidency. On 8 December 2004 the parliament
amended laws to provide a legal framework for the new round of elections. The
parliament also approved the changes to the Constitution, implementing a
political reform backed by outgoing President Kuchma as a part of a political
compromise between the acting authorities and opposition. In November 2009
Yanukovych stated that although his victory in the elections was "taken away",
he gave up this victory in order to avoid bloodshed. "I didn't want mothers to
lose their children and wives their husbands. I didn't want dead bodies from
Kyiv to flow down the Dnipro. I didn't want to assume power through bloodshed."
Re-run election. The 26 December revote was held under intense scrutiny of
local and international observers. The preliminary results, announced by the
Central Election Commission on 28 December, gave Yushchenko and Yanukovych
51.99% and 44.20% of the total vote which represented a change in the vote by
+5.39% to Yushchenko and -5.27% from Yanukovych respectively when compared to
the November poll. The Yanukovych team attempted to mount a fierce legal
challenge to the election results using both the Ukrainian courts and the
Election Commission complaint procedures. However, all their complaints were
dismissed as without merit by both the Supreme Court of Ukraine and the Central
Election Commission. On 10 January 2005 the Election Commission officially
declared Yushchenko as the winner of the presidential election with the final
results falling within 0.01% of the preliminary ones. This Election Commission
announcement cleared the way for Yushchenko's inauguration as the President of
Ukraine. The official ceremony took place in the Verkhovna Rada building on 23
January 2005 and was followed by the "public inauguration" of the newly sworn
President at Maidan Nezalezhnosti ("Independence Square") in front of hundreds
of thousands of his supporters. This event brought the Ukrainian Orange
Revolution to its peaceful conclusion. File:Ukraine Presidential Dec 2004 Vote
(Yushchenko).png|Viktor Yushchenko (Final round) - percentage of total national
vote File:Ukraine Presidential Dec 2004 Vote (Yanukovych).png||Viktor
Yanukovych (Final round) - percentage of total national vote  Role of Ukrainian
intelligence and security agencies. According to one version of events
recounted by "The New York Times", Ukrainian security agencies played an
unusual role in the Orange Revolution, with a KGB successor agency in the
former Soviet state providing qualified support to the political opposition. As
per the paper report, on 28 November 2004 over 10,000 MVS (Internal Ministry)
troops were mobilized to put down the protests in Independence Square in Kiev
by the order of their commander, Lt. Gen. Sergei Popkov. The SBU (Security
Service of Ukraine, a successor to the KGB in Ukraine) warned opposition
leaders of the crackdown. Oleksander Galaka, head of GUR (military
intelligence) made calls to "prevent bloodshed". Col. Gen. Ihor Smeshko (SBU
chief) and Maj. Gen. Vitaly Romanchenko (military counter-intelligence chief)
both claimed to have warned Popkov to pull back his troops, which he did,
preventing bloodshed. In addition to the desire to avoid bloodshed, the "New
York Times" article suggests that "siloviki", as the security officers are
often called in the countries of the former Soviet Union, were motivated by
personal aversion to the possibility of having to serve President Yanukovych,
who was in his youth convicted of robbery and assault and had alleged
connection with corrupt businessmen, especially if he were to ascend to the
presidency by fraud. The personal feelings of Gen. Smeshko towards Yanukovych
may also have played a role. Additional evidence of Yushchenko's popularity and
at least partial support among the SBU officers is shown by the fact that
several embarrassing proofs of electoral fraud, including incriminating wiretap
recordings of conversations among the Yanukovych campaign and government
officials discussing how to rig the election, were provided to the Yushchenko
camp. These conversations were likely recorded and provided to the opposition
by sympathizers in the Ukrainian Security Services. Involvement of outside
forces. Many analysts believe the Orange Revolution was built on a pattern
first developed in the ousting of Slobodan Milošević in Serbia four years
earlier, and continuing with the Rose Revolution in Georgia. Each of these
victories, though apparently spontaneous, was the result of extensive
grassroots campaigning and coalition-building among the opposition. Each
included election victories followed up by public demonstrations, after
attempts by the incumbent to hold onto power through electoral fraud. Each of
these social movements included extensive work by student activists. The most
famous of these was Otpor, the youth movement that helped bring in Vojislav
Koštunica. In Georgia the movement was called Kmara. In Ukraine the movement
has worked under the succinct slogan Pora ("It's Time"). Chair of Georgian
Parliamentary Committee on Defense and Security Givi Targamadze, former member
of the Georgian Liberty Institute, as well as some members of Kmara, were
consulted by Ukrainian opposition leaders on techniques of nonviolent struggle.
Georgian rock bands Zumba, Soft Eject and Green Room, which earlier had
supported the Rose Revolution, organized a solidarity concert in central Kiev
to support Yushchenko’s cause in November 2004. Activists in each of these
movements were funded and trained in tactics of political organization and
nonviolent resistance by a coalition of Western pollsters and professional
consultants funded by a range of Western government and non-government
agencies. According to "The Guardian", these include the U.S. State Department
and USAID along with the National Democratic Institute for International
Affairs, the International Republican Institute, the NGO Freedom House and
George Soros's Open Society Institute. The National Endowment for Democracy, a
foundation supported by the U.S. government, has supported non-governmental
democracy-building efforts in Ukraine since 1988. Writings on nonviolent
struggle by Gene Sharp formed the strategic basis of the student campaigns.
Former president Leonid Kravchuk accused Russian oligarch, Boris Berezovsky, of
financing Yushchenko's campaign, and provided copies of documents showing money
transfers from companies he said are controlled by Berezovsky to companies
controlled by Yuschenko's official backers. Berezovsky has confirmed that he
met Yushchenko's representatives in London before the election, and that the
money was transferred from his companies, but he refused to confirm or deny
that the companies that received the money were used in Yushchenko's campaign.
Financing of election campaigns by foreign citizens is illegal in Ukraine.
According to BBC's "The Russian Godfathers", Berezovsky poured millions of
dollars into sustaining the spontaneous demonstrations and was in daily contact
with the key opposition leaders. The election was marred by claims that
"Western PR consultants had helped orchestrate this rebellion". On the other
hand, Russia's involvement in the election was more direct and heavily on the
side of Prime Minister Yanukovych. The extent of this involvement is still
contested but some facts are indisputable such as multiple meetings between
Russian president Vladimir Putin, Kuchma and Yanukovych before and during the
elections. Putin repeatedly congratulated Yanukovych while the results were
still contested, which was soon to embarrass both parties. Yanukovych received
a much more preferential treatment in Russian media, and was surrounded by
Russian consultants known to be close to the Kremlin throughout the election
cycle. During the protests Russian media portrayed the Ukrainian protesters as
irresponsible, led astray by Western agents. In a poll held in November 2005,
54% of the Russian respondents believed the Orange Revolution was "A power
struggle between different groups of politicians and oligarchs". Internet
usage. Throughout the demonstrations, Ukraine's emerging Internet usage
(facilitated by news sites which began to disseminate the Kuchma tapes) was an
integral part of the orange revolutionary process. It has even been suggested
that the Orange Revolution was the first example of an Internet-organized mass
protest. Analysts believe that the Internet and mobile phones allowed an
alternative media to flourish that was not subject to self-censorship or overt
control by President Kuchma and his allies and pro-democracy activists (such as
Pora!) were able to use mobile phones and the Internet to coordinate election
monitoring and mass protests. 2004 Ukrainian constitutional changes. As part of
the Orange Revolution, the Ukrainian constitution was changed to shift powers
from the presidency to the parliament. This was Oleksandr Moroz's price for his
decisive role in winning Yushchenko the presidency. The Communists also
supported these measures. These came into effect in 2006 during which
Yanukovych's Party of Regions won the parliamentary election, creating a
coalition government with the Socialists and the Communists under his
leadership. As a result, President Viktor Yushchenko had to deal with a
powerful Prime Minister Viktor Yanukovych who had control of many important
portfolios. His premiership ended in late 2007 after Yushchenko had succeeded
in his months-long attempt to dissolve parliament. After the election,
Yanukovych's party again was the largest, but Tymoshenko's finished far ahead
of Yushchenko's for second place. The Orange parties won a very narrow
majority, permitting a new government under Tymoshenko, but Yushchenko's
political decline continued to his poor showing in the 2010 presidential
election. On 1 October 2010, the Constitutional Court of Ukraine overturned the
2004 amendments, considering them unconstitutional. 2010 presidential election.
A Circuit administrative court in Kiev forbade mass actions at Maidan
Nezalezhnosti from 9 January 2010 to 5 February 2010. The Mayor`s office had
requested this in order to avoid “nonstandard situations” during the
aftermath of the 2010 presidential election. Apparently (in particular) the
Party of Regions, All-Ukrainian Union "Fatherland" and Svoboda had applied for
a permit to demonstrate there. Incumbent President Viktor Yushchenko got 5,5%
of votes during the election. “Ukraine is a European democratic country”,
said Yushchenko in a sort of political will at the polling station. “It is a
free nation and free people.” According to him, this is one of the great
achievements of the Orange Revolution. In the 2010 presidential election Viktor
Yanukovych was declared the winner which was labeled by some Yanukovych
supporters as "An end to this Orange nightmare". Immediately after his election
Yanukovych promised to "clear the debris of misunderstanding and old problems
that emerged during the years of the Orange power". According to influential
Party of Regions member Rinat Akhmetov the ideals of the Orange Revolution won
at the 2010 election "We had a fair and democratic independent election. The
entire world recognized it, and international observers confirmed its results.
That's why the ideals of the Orange Revolution won”. According to Yulia
Tymoshenko the 2010 elections was a missed "chance to become a worthy member of
the European family and to put an end to the rule of the oligarchy". Legacy.
President Viktor Yushchenko decreed in 2005 22 November (the starting day of
the Orange Revolution) the non-public holiday "Day of Freedom". This date was
moved to and 22 January (merged with Unification Day) by President Viktor
Yanukovych late December 2011. President Yanukovych stated he moved "Day of
Freedom" because of “numerous appeals from the public”. Outright vote
rigging diminished after the 2004 presidential election. No officials involved
in the 2004 elections that preceded the Orange Revolution were convicted for
election fraud. Outside Ukraine. During Alexander Lukashenko's inauguration
(ceremony) as President of Belarus of 22 January 2011 Lukashenko vowed that
Belarus would never have its own version of the Orange Revolution and Georgia's
2003 Rose Revolution. In the aftermath of the 2011 South Ossetian presidential
election (in December 2011) and during the protests following the 2011 Russian
elections (also in December 2011) the Ambassador of South Ossetia to the
Russian Federation Dmitry Medoyev and Russian Prime Minister Vladimir Putin and
Putin's supporters named the Orange Revolution an infamous foreknowledge for
their countries; a 4 February 2012 rally in favor of Putin was named the "anti-
Orange protest". Putin also claimed that the organizers of the Russian protests
in December 2011 were former (Russian) advisors to Yushchenko during his
presidency and were transferring the Orange Revolution to Russia.
