Originalism In the context of United States constitutional interpretation,
originalism is a principle of interpretation that tries to discover the
original meaning or intent of the constitution. It is based on the principle
that the judiciary is not supposed to create, amend or repeal laws (which is
the realm of the legislative branch) but only to uphold them. The term
originated in the 1980s but the concept is a formalist theory of law and a
corollary of textualism. Today, originalism is popular among political
conservatives in the U.S., and is most prominently associated with Antonin
Scalia, Clarence Thomas and Robert Bork. However, some liberals, such as
Justice Hugo Black and Akhil Amar, have also subscribed to the theory. Both of
these theories share the view that there is an authority, contemporaneous with
a constitution's or statute's ratification, which should govern its
interpretation; the divisions relate to what exactly that authority is: the
intentions of the authors or the ratifiers, or the original meaning of the
text. The primary alternative to originalism is most commonly described as the
Living Constitution; this is the theory that the Constitution was written in
flexible terms whose meaning is dynamic. Differentiated from strict
constructionism. It is often asserted that "originalism" is synonymous with
"strict constructionism". Both theories are associated with textualist and
formalist schools of thought, but there are pronounced differences between
them. Justice Scalia differentiates the two by pointing out that, unlike an
originalist, a strict constructionist would not acknowledge that "he uses a
cane" means "he walks with a cane" (because, strictly speaking, this is not
what "he uses a cane" means). Scalia has averred that he is "not a strict
constructionist, and no-one ought to be"; he goes further, calling strict
constructionism "a degraded form of textualism that brings the whole philosophy
into disrepute". Originalism is a theory of "interpretation", not
"construction". However, this distinction between "interpretation" and
"construction" is controversial and is rejected by many nonoriginalists as
artificial. As Scalia has said, "the Constitution, or any text, should be
interpreted strictly [nor sloppily; it should be interpreted reasonably"; once
originalism has told a Judge what the provision of the Constitution means, they
are bound by that meaning—but the business of Judging is not simply to know
what the text means (interpretation), but to take the law's necessarily general
provisions and apply them to the specifics of a given case or controversy
(construction). In many cases, the meaning might be so specific that no
discretion is permissible, but in many cases, it is still before the Judge to
say what a reasonable interpretation might be. A judge could, therefore, be
both an originalist "and" a strict constructionist—but he is not one by
virtue of being the other. To put the difference more explicitly, both schools
take the plain meaning of the text as their starting point, but have different
approaches that can best be illustrated with a fictitious example. Suppose that
the Constitution contained (which it obviously does not) a provision that a
person may not be ""subjected to the punishments of hanging by the neck,
beheading, stoning, pressing, or execution by firing squad"". A strict
constructionist would interpret that clause to mean that the "specific"
punishments mentioned above were unconstitutional, but that other forms of
capital punishment were permissible. For a strict constructionist, the
specific, strict reading of the text is the beginning and end of the inquiry.
For an originalist, however, the text is the "beginning" of the inquiry, and
two originalists might reach very different results, not only from the strict
constructionist, but from each other. "Originalists can reach different results
in the same case" ("see" What originalism is not — originalism is not always
an answer in and of itself, "infra"); one originalist might look at the context
in which the clause was written, and might discover that the punishments listed
in the clause were the "only" forms of capital punishment in use at that time,
and the only forms of capital punishment that had "ever" been used at the time
of ratification. An originalist might therefore conclude that capital
punishment "in general", including those methods for it invented since
ratification, such as the electric chair, are "not" constitutional. Another
originalist may look at the text and see that the writers created a list. He
would assume that the Congress intended this to be an exhaustive list of
objectionable executions. Otherwise, they would have banned capital punishment
as a whole, instead of listing specific means of punishment. He would rule that
other forms of execution "are" constitutional. The paragraph above does not
give examples of "original intent" vis a vis "original meaning." Using the
former, the judge would look for the letters and journals of the founders on
the subject of capital punishment. If he found that a majority expressed an
aversion to it, the interpretation would be averse to capital punishment. Using
"original meaning" the judge would look for the frequency of each
contemporaneous form of capital punishment. If any form other than those listed
was extremely rare, the decision could be averse to all capital punishment. If
another form, not listed, was not rare, the decision would have to be in favor
of capital punishment because reasonable persons in 1793 would so interpret the
clause. Forms of originalism. Originalism is actually a family of related
views. Original intent. The "original form of originalism" was known as
intentionalism, or "original intent", and entailed applying laws based on the
subjective intention of its authors. For instance, the authors of the U.S.
Constitution would be the group of Founding Fathers that drafted it. The
intentionalist methodology involves studying the writings of its authors, or
the records of the Philadelphia Convention, for clues as to their intent. There
are two kinds of "intent analysis", reflecting two meanings of the word
"intent". The first, a rule of common law construction during the Founding Era,
is "functional" intent. The second is "motivational" intent. To understand the
difference, one can use the metaphor of an architect who designs a Gothic
church with flying buttresses. The functional intent of flying buttresses is to
prevent the weight of the roof from spreading the walls and causing a collapse
of the building, which can be inferred from examining the design as a whole.
The motivational intent might be to create work for his brother-in-law who is a
flying buttress subcontractor. Using original intent analysis of the first
kind, we can discern that the language of Article III of the U.S. Constitution
was to delegate to Congress the power to allocate original and appellate
jurisdictions, and not to remove some jurisdiction, involving a constitutional
question, from all courts. That would suggest that the decision was wrong in
"Ex Parte McCardle". Original intent evolves. However, a number of problems
inherent in intentionalism, and a fortiori when that theory is applied to the
Constitution: most of the Founders did not leave discussions of what their
intent was in 1787, and while a few did, there is no reason to think that they
should be dispositive of what the rest thought. The theory was challenged in a
string of Law review articles attacking Robert Bork and the intentionalist
process, prior to his abortive Senate confirmation hearing to the Supreme
Court. Specifically, original intent was seen as lacking good answers to three
important questions: whether a diverse group such as the framers even "had" a
single intent; if they "did", whether it could be determined from two
centuries' distance; and whether the framers themselves would have supported
original intent. In response to this, a different strain of originalism,
articulated by (among others) Antonin Scalia, Robert Bork, and Randy Barnett,
came to the fore. This is dubbed original "meaning". Original meaning. Justice
Oliver Wendell Holmes argued that interpreting what was meant by someone who
wrote a law was not trying to "get into his mind" because the issue was "not
what this man meant, but what those words would mean in the mouth of a normal
speaker of English, using them in the circumstances in which they were used."
This is the essential precept of modern Originalism. The most robust and widely
cited form of originalism, "original meaning" emphasizes how the text would
have been understood by a reasonable person in the historical period during
which the constitution was proposed, ratified, and first implemented. For
example, economist Thomas Sowell notes that phrases like "due process" and
"freedom of the press" had a long established meaning in English law, even
before they were put into the Constitution of the United States." Applying this
form involves studying dictionaries and other writings of the time (for
example, Blackstone's "Commentaries on the Laws of England"; see "Matters
rendered moot by originalism", "infra") to establish out what particular terms
meant. See "Methodology", infra). Though there may be no evidence that the
Founding Fathers intended the Constitution to be like a statute, this fact does
not matter under Scalia's approach. Adherence to original meaning is explicitly
divorced from the intent of the Founders; rather, the reasons for adhering to
original meaning derive from other justifications, such as the argument that
the understanding of the ratifiers (the people of the several States at the
time of the adoption of the Constitution) should be controlling, as well as
consequentialist arguments about original meaning's positive effect on rule of
law. Perhaps the clearest example to illustrate the importance of the
difference between original intent and original understanding is to use the
Twenty-seventh Amendment. The Twenty-seventh Amendment was proposed as part of
the Bill of Rights in 1791, but failed to be ratified by the required number of
states for two centuries, eventually being ratified in 1992. An original intent
inquiry would ask what the framers understood the amendment to mean when it was
written; an original meaning inquiry would ask what the plain meaning of the
text was in 1992 when it was eventually ratified. Semantic originalism.
"Semantic-originalism" is Ronald Dworkin's term for the theory that the
original meaning of many statutes implies that those statutes prohibit certain
acts widely considered not to be prohibited by the statutes at the time of
their passages. For example, Scalia and other originalists often claim that the
death penalty is not "cruel and unusual punishment" because at the time of the
Eighth Amendment's passage, it was a punishment believed to be neither cruel
nor unusual. Dworkin and the semantic-originalists assert, however, that if
advances in moral philosophy (presuming that such advances are possible) reveal
that the death penalty is in fact "cruel and unusual", then the original
meaning of the Eighth Amendment implies that the death penalty is
unconstitutional. Those who deny semantic-originalism often retort either by
invoking legal positivism or by arguing that, if it became a widely adopted
jurisprudential theory, semantic-originalism would make it difficult to
determine exactly what the law is at any given time, and thereby make the
pandect "ex post facto" in effect. Discussion. Philosophical underpinnings.
Originalism assumes that "Marbury" is correct: the Constitution is the
"operating charter" granted to government by the people, as per the preamble to
the United States Constitution, and its written nature introduces a certain
discipline into its interpretation. Originalism further assumes that the need
for such a written charter was derived from the perception, on the part of the
Framers, of the abuses of power under the (unwritten) British Constitution,
under which the Constitution was essentially whatever Parliament decided it
should be. In writing out a Constitution which explicitly granted the
government certain authorities, and withheld from it others, and in which power
was balanced between multiple agencies (the Presidency, two chambers of
Congress and the Supreme Court at the national level, and state governments
with similar branches), the intention of the Framers was to restrain
government, originalists argue, and the value of such a document is nullified
if that document's meaning is not fixed. As one author stated, "If the
constitution can mean anything, then the constitution is reduced to
meaninglessness." Function of Constitutional jurisprudence. In "Marbury", Chief
Justice Marshall established that the Supreme Court could invalidate laws which
violated the Constitution (that is, judicial review), which helped establish
the Supreme Court as having its own distinct sphere of influence within the
Federal Government. However, this power was itself balanced with the
requirement that the Court could only invalidate legislation if it was
"unconstitutional". Originalists argue that the modern court no longer follows
this requirement. They argue that—since "U.S. v. Darby", in which Justice
Stone (writing for a unanimous Court) ruled that the Tenth Amendment had no
legal meaning—the Court has increasingly taken to making rulings in which the
Court has determined not what the Constitution "says", but rather, the Court
has sought to determine what is "morally correct" at "this" point in the
nation's history, in terms of "the evolving standards of decency" (and
considering "the context of international jurisprudence"), and then justified
that determination through a "creative reading" of the text. This latter
approach is frequently termed "the Living constitution"; Justice Scalia has
inveighed that "the worst thing about the living constitution is that it will
destroy the constitution". Matters rendered moot by originalism. Originalists
are sharply critical of the use of "the evolving standards of decency" (a term
which first appeared in "Trop v. Dulles") and of reference to the opinions of
courts in foreign countries (excepting treaties to which the United States is a
signatory, per Article II, Section 2, Clause 2 of the United States
Constitution) in Constitutional interpretation. In an originalist
interpretation, if the meaning of the Constitution is static, then any ex post
facto information (such as the opinions of the American people, American
judges, or the judiciaries of any foreign country) is inherently valueless for
interpretation of the meaning of the Constitution, and should not form any part
of constitutional jurisprudence. The Constitution is thus fixed and has
procedures defining how it can be changed. The exception to the use of foreign
law is the English common law, which originalists regard as setting the
philosophical stage for the US Constitution and the American common and civil
law. Hence, an originalist might cite Blackstone's "Commentaries" to establish
the meaning of the term "due process" as it would have been understood at the
time of ratification. What originalism "is not". Originalism is not "the theory
of original intent". As discussed previously, original intent is only one
theory in the Originalist family of theories. Many of the criticisms that are
directed at original intent do not apply to other Originalist theories.
Originalism is not conservatism. It is not accurate to say that originalism
rejects change or that originalists necessarily oppose the use of "the evolving
standards of decency" in determining what the Constitution "ought" to say;
rather, originalism rejects the concept that the courts should consider what
the Constitution "ought" to say but instead rule solely on what it "does" say.
Originalists argue that the business of determining what the Constitution and
the law "ought" to say is within the purview of the Congress, that changes to
the law should come through the legislature, and changes to the constitution
should be made per the amendment process outlined in Article V. Sometimes this
approach yields results that please conservatives (see, for example, Justice
Scalia's dissents in "Roper v. Simmons" or "Romer"), and sometimes it yields
results that do not (see, for example, Justice Scalia's dissents in "BMW v.
Gore" or "Hamdi v. Rumsfeld"). Originalism is not always an answer in and of
itself. Originalism is a means of constitutional "interpretation", not
constitutional "construction"; whenever "to describe case is not to decide it",
it can only serve as a guide for what the Constitution says, not how that text
applies to a given case or controversy. Thus, Originalists can reach different
results in the same case; see, for example, "United States v. Fordice";
"McIntyre"; "Hamdi", "Gonzales v. Raich"; "National Cable & Telecommunications
Assn. v. Brand X Internet Services". According to an article in "The New
Republic", although Scalia admits that Thomas "is really the only justice whose
basic approach to the law is the same as mine", the author contends that
"during the court's 2003–2004 term, Scalia and Thomas voted together in only
73 percent of cases, and six other pairs of justices agreed with each other
more often than Thomas and Scalia did." Pros and cons. Note that several of the
arguments for and against Originalism should be read in conjunction with
alternative views and rebuttals, presented in footnotes.
