Osman Ahmed Osman Osman Ahmed Osman () ‎ (1917–1999) was a famous and
influential Egyptian engineer, contractor, entrepreneur, and politician. Known
commonly as el-mo'alim ("the teacher"), Osman founded the Arab Contractors (the
largest Arab contracting firm between the 1960s and 1980s) and led the Egyptian
effort to build the Aswan Dam. He went on to become the Egyptian Minister of
Housing and Development and later a member of the Egyptian Parliament. Early
life. Osman was born on April 6, 1917, in the town of Ismailia in Egypt. Osman
was born to an impoverished family, whose situation was made worse after his
father died in 1920, when Osman was three years old. His eldest brother,
Mohamed, dropped out of school to provide a steady income to support the
family. As a child, Osman himself often had to work to supply additional
income. Upon completing his schoolwork, Osman moved to Cairo to pursue a degree
in Civil Engineering. Unable to afford tuition, rent, or even public
transportation, Osman improvised: he received a scholarship from Cairo
University, lived with his older sister, and commuted on a bike he had
assembled himself. Osman excelled and graduated in 1940 with a Bachelor's
degree in Civil Engineering. He then returned to his hometown, Ismailia. He
worked with his maternal uncle, an illiterate but savvy contractor, for 18
months. Osman's dream. Osman's dream was to build a large, successful
contracting firm. At the time, all such firms operating in the Middle East were
European. After only 18 months of work experience, Osman founded "Osman Ahmed
Osman, Engineer & Contractor", which would later become the Arab Contractors.
His startup capital was 180 Egyptian Pounds he had saved up from his earlier
job. Osman was the only owner and employee. He operated out of a small one-room
office, and undertook various small projects, such as building small shops and
garages, repairing buildings, etc. With Osman's hard-work, intelligence, and
fantastic organizational skills, the company grew and his operations expanded,
but he struggled to compete with foreign firms for larger-scale projects. He
began to undertake larger projects, such as erecting an all-girls school and a
theater, and eventually expanded his operations to Cairo. Osman's success in
the Arab countries. In 1950, Osman traveled to Saudi Arabia. The Persian Gulf
area was experiencing a huge boom in the construction sector, largely related
to the oil boom. Osman was able to take advantage of this, and within a short
period of time was carrying out multi-million dollar projects in Kuwait, Libya,
Iraq, and the UAE, amassing a great deal of wealth. Osman mentions that in most
of these countries, he found the construction markets dominated by monopolies
and cartels of foreign companies. In 1956, Osman returned to Egypt. By this
time, the Egyptian revolution, led by Gamal Abdel Nasser, had taken place.
Osman returned with a bang, winning a $48 million contract for Nasser's pet
project, the Aswan Dam. However, Osman's entrepreneurial style was not
compatible with Nasser's socialist revolution. Despite this, the Arab
Contractors continue to thrive in Egypt, since Nasser's confrontational
strategy with Israel required construction such as bunkers, airports, missile
silos, etc. In 1961, Nasser's regime fully nationalized the Arab Contractors.
Osman was abroad at the time, and faced a choice of whether to return, or
continue pursuing his wealth abroad. Osman returned to Egypt, claiming that he
felt it his duty to his country and his employees. Osman pledged that the
company would continue to operate at the same level regardless of who it was
owned by, which seemed difficult at the time. Osman had practiced a wage-
incentive program within his company, which would be illegal for any public
sector company. However, after his success at the Aswan Dam project, Nasser
allowed Osman to continue running the company, and a special law was passed to
allow public sector companies, that did a substantial part of their business
abroad (which was the case for the company), to be able to flexibly determine
wages and incentives. Osman thrives under Sadat. Nasser's death in 1970 came as
a shock for the country. However, Osman welcomed Sadat as a breath of fresh
air. Osman and Sadat had been friends for several years. Osman was highly
critical of Nasser's policies and believed that the Egyptian people had paid a
high prices for Nasser's combination of domestic repression and foreign
adventurism. In 1973, Sadat launched the October War. Again, the Arab
Contractors played a role; the company built the ferries that carried Egyptian
forces across the Suez canal. Relationship to the Muslim Brotherhood. Osman was
known to have ties to the Muslim Brotherhood, although he was never a member.
Hassan al-Banna founded the Muslim Brotherhood from the same town Osman grew up
in Ismailia. Al-Banna was an Arabic teacher in the town, and Osman was one of
his students. In his autobiography, Osman declares that he was a member of the
Brotherhood "in spirit" only; he believed in many of the founding principles,
but his devotion to his work and his company kept him from being an actual
member. However, he condemns the "jihaz al sirri" (the "secret apparatus"), an
arm of the Muslim Brotherhood that would later give rise to violent offshoots.
Osman proclaims that youths who channel their frustration towards violence are
"wasting their lives". Osman hired several members of the Muslim Brotherhood in
key positions in his company, often in his overseas offices. In several
situations, he hired members who had been jailed and released, or had fled the
country to avoid suffering that fate. This practice was a source of conflict
between Osman and the government. He claims to have been regularly harassed for
this reason. He was once detained for 24 hours and questioned about "whether or
not he was a member" of the Brotherhood. Osman the politician. Politically,
Osman was a staunch supporter of Anwar Al Sadat. Like Sadat, Osman believed in
free-market principles and open-door policies with trade, with certain
restrictions. He believed that the private sector should be allowed to thrive;
only certain sectors, like utilities, should be public. He denounced Nasser's
socialist agenda as merely a ploy to gain support of the masses. For example,
Nasser guaranteed jobs for all university graduates. Osman said that this
policy was a trick to gain support of the people, but that the policy itself
was not sustainable or practical. In his book, he warns graduates from
accepting the default government position, saying that the government would not
be able to provide such a large number of jobs. Osman argued that the "owner of
any private project is interested in expanding it along with his wealth, and
expansion of the project can only mean increased production and job
opportunities". Like Sadat, Osman also believed that it was in Egypt's (and the
region's) best interest to try and tackle the Israeli-Arab conflict
diplomatically. Osman believed that by doing so, the Arab countries would be
able to win over the rest of the world. Osman accompanied Sadat on his visit to
Israel in 1977 to speak at the Knesset. Osman believed that for developing a
country, business and economic development were a form of national duty far
more important than many political issues. Philosophy and management style.
Despite having no formal managerial training, Osman proved to be an excellent
leader. Osman stressed the importance of keeping employees happy, secure, and
comfortable as a way to increase productivity. Many of these ideas emerged in
the Arab Contractors, but would later be implemented at a national level. For
example, Osman led the first effort in Egypt to set up employee pension funds,
as well as medical insurance. These were first implemented for Arab Contractors
employees, but later expanded to encompass all government employees. Osman felt
that if he could solve day-to-day employee problems, employees would be more
focused on their work and more loyal. Osman would often provide free
transportation, food, and medical care for his employees. During the Aswan Dam
erection, Osman set up a hospital, a school, a park, etc. for the thousands of
employees that were relocated to Aswan. These would later serve as a model for
the Arab Contractors Medical Facility and the Arab Contractors Technical
Institute. Osman believed strongly in the power of personal relationships. In
his autobiography, Osman mentions his belief that a leader must pursue two
types of relationships. Firstly, one must maintain strong and positive
relationships internally, within the company. Also, one must create external
relationships outside the company. Osman believed both could be accomplished by
treating those around him well, and practicing a strong work-ethic. High-
quality work would serve as excellent marketing. Osman was an avid networker,
and practiced his philosophy within the company, within Egypt, and even within
the entire Middle East. Osman maintained personal relationships with officials
(even heads-of-state) in any country in which he operated. Criticism. Critics
of Osman tend to be critics of Sadat, arguing that Osman exploited his close
relationship with Sadat to gain political power and financial success. Osman
and Sadat were known to be close friends, from even before Sadat's presidency.
Osman and Sadat had very similar views, and were neighbors in El Haram Giza.
Osman's eldest son, Mahmoud Osman, married Sadat's youngest daughter, Jihan
(Nana) Al Sadat, further solidifying the tie. Osman, as one of Sadat's close
friends and political allies, was subjected to much criticism, most of which
was ultimately aimed at Sadat. It is said that Osman was the second most
powerful man in Egypt during Sadat's presidency. Defenders of Osman argue that
he amassed most of his wealth during the Nasser presidency, mostly outside of
Egypt (in other Arab countries). In fact, they argue, most of Osman's wealth
was invested in the Arab Contractors, which was nationalized by Nasser. Critics
point out that Osman remained in control of the Arab Contractors, even after
nationalization (a rare occurrence under Nasser's regime), and that he kept key
familial allies and friend in top positions in the company, ultimately
remaining in control, and using that control to leverage other business
endeavors. Later life. Osman died in 1999. He suffered from several medical
conditions in the last decade of his life, include heart problems and
Alzheimer's disease. Legacy. The Arab Contractors still remains one of the
largest construction companies in Egypt. However, its ties to the Osman family
were severed in 2001 when the last member of the family, Ismail Osman, was
removed from his CEO position by the government [http://weekly.ahram.org.eg/
2001/564/ec1.htm]. At the time, the company was suffering severe financial
problems, including a massive debt (the nation as a whole was suffering a
liquidity crisis). Ismail Osman argued that the problems were a result of the
government's refusal to pay its debts to the Arab Contractors, while demanding
more work from the company on government projects: "The government owes us
money, and we owe the banks money, yet the state does not pay us the interest
on our late payments to the banks. It is not the fault of the company. It is
the fault of the overall system." The company still bears the Osman Ahmed Osman
name. The company's football club's stadium was renamed Osman Ahmed Osman
Stadium following his death. One of the main avenues in downtown Ismailia is
named after Osman, in his tribute. The Osman Group is a group of companies
privately owned by members of the Osman family. It was founded in 1974, and
today is owned / run by Osman Ahmed Osman's four sons - Mahmoud, Ibrahim,
Ahmed, and Mohamed - as well as their cousins Mohamed and Amr. The companies
mostly operate in construction-derived areas, but also agriculture, information
technology, etc. Daly TV Show. In Ramadan 2007, a TV series featuring Nour Al-
Sherif was aired on Arabic satellite channels. Many people drew parallels
between the main character of the show (Saad El-Daly), and Osman Ahmed Osman,
but the creators of the show have denied basing that character on Osman. The
Osman family was reportedly unhappy with the show, claiming that the show drew
on Osman's early life and rise from poverty into success, while showing the
main character as a corrupt, greedy, crime-linked tycoon after his success.
External links. services
