Ostracism Ostracism (, "ostrakismos") was a procedure under the Athenian
democracy in which any citizen could be expelled from the city-state of Athens
for ten years. While some instances clearly expressed popular anger at the
victim, ostracism was often used preemptively. It was used as a way of
neutralizing someone thought to be a threat to the state or potential tyrant.
Crucially, ostracism had no relation to the processes of justice. There was no
charge or defense, and the exile was not in fact a penalty; it was simply a
command from the Athenian people that one of their number be gone for ten
years. A modern use developed from the term is to describe informal exclusion
from a group through social rejection. Although the psychology of ostracism
takes this further, where it has been defined as “…any behaviour in which a
group or individual excludes and ignores another group or individual”. This
could therefore be an intentional act or an unintentional one. Procedure. The
name is derived from the "ostraka", (singular "ostrakon ", ὄστρακον),
referring to the pottery sherds that were used as voting tokens. Broken
pottery, abundant and virtually free, served as a kind of scrap paper (in
contrast to papyrus, which was imported from Egypt as a high-quality writing
surface, and was thus too costly to be disposable). Plutarch's evidence for a
quorum of 6,000, on "a priori" grounds a necessity for ostracism also per the
account of Philochorus, accords with the number required for grants of
citizenship in the following century and is generally preferred. The person
nominated had ten days to leave the city. If he attempted to return, the
penalty was death. Notably, the property of the man banished was not
confiscated and there was no loss of status. After the ten years, he was
allowed to return without stigma. It was possible for the assembly to recall an
ostracised person ahead of time; before the Persian invasion of 479 BC, an
amnesty was declared under which at least two ostracised leaders—Pericles'
father Xanthippus and Aristides 'the Just'—are known to have returned.
Similarly, Cimon, ostracised in 461 BC, was recalled during an emergency.
Distinction from other Athenian democratic processes. Ostracism was crucially
different from Athenian law at the time; there was no charge, and no defence
could be mounted by the person expelled. The two stages of the procedure ran in
the reverse order from that used under almost any trial system — here it is
as if a jury are first asked ""Do you want to find someone guilty?"", and
subsequently asked ""Whom do you wish to accuse?"". Equally out of place in a
judicial framework is perhaps the institution's most peculiar feature: that it
can take place at most once a year, and only for one person. In this it
resembles the Greek "pharmakos" or scapegoat — though in contrast,
"pharmakos" generally ejected a lowly member of the community. A further
distinction between these two modes (and one not obvious from a modern
perspective) is that ostracism was an automatic procedure that required no
initiative from any individual, with the vote simply occurring on the wish of
the electorate — a diffuse exercise of power. By contrast, an Athenian trial
needed the initiative of a particular citizen-prosecutor. While prosecution
often led to a counterattack (or was a counterattack itself), no such response
was possible in the case of ostracism as responsibility lay with the polity as
a whole. In contrast to a trial, ostracism generally reduced political tension
rather than increased it. Although ten years of exile would have been difficult
for an Athenian to face, it was relatively mild in comparison to the kind of
sentences inflicted by courts; when dealing with politicians held to be acting
against the interests of the people, Athenian juries could inflict very severe
penalties such as death, unpayably large fines, confiscation of property,
permanent exile and loss of citizens' rights through "atimia". Further, the
elite Athenians who suffered ostracism were rich or noble men who had
connections or "xenoi" in the wider Greek world and who, unlike genuine exiles,
were able to access their income in Attica from abroad. In Plutarch, following
as he does the anti-democratic line common in elite sources, the fact that
people might be recalled early appears to be another example of the
inconsistency of majoritarianism that was characteristic of Athenian democracy.
However, ten years of exile usually resolved whatever had prompted the
expulsion. Ostracism was simply a pragmatic measure; the concept of serving out
the full sentence did not apply as it was a preventative measure, not a
punitive one. One curious window on the practicalities of ostracism comes from
the cache of 190 ostraka discovered dumped in a well next to the acropolis.
From the handwriting they appear to have been written by fourteen individuals
and bear the name of Themistocles, ostracised before 471 BC and were evidently
meant for distribution to voters. This was not necessarily evidence of
electoral fraud (being no worse than modern voting instruction cards), but
their being dumped in the well may suggest that their creators wished to hide
them. If so, these ostraka provide an example of organized groups attempting to
influence the outcome of ostracisms. The two-month gap between the first and
second phases would have easily allowed for such a campaign. There is another
interpretation, however, according to which these ostraka were prepared
beforehand by enterprising businessmen who offered to them for sale to citizens
who could not easily inscribe the desired names for themselves or who simply
wished to save time. The two-month gap is a key feature in the institution,
much as in elections under modern liberal democracies. It first prevented the
candidate for expulsion being chosen out of immediate anger, although an
Athenian general such as Cimon would have not wanted to lose a battle the week
before such a second vote. Secondly, it opened up a period for discussion (or
perhaps agitation), whether informally in daily talk or public speeches before
the Athenian assembly or Athenian courts [#endnote_Oration *]. In this process
a consensus, or rival consensuses, might emerge. Further, in that time of
waiting, ordinary Athenian citizens must have felt a certain power over the
greatest members of their city; conversely, the most prominent citizens had an
incentive to worry how their social inferiors regarded them. Period of
operation. Around twelve thousand political ostraka have been excavated in the
Athenian agora and in the Kerameikos . The second victim, Cleisthenes' nephew
Megacles, is named by 4647 of these, but for a second undated ostracism not
listed above. The known ostracisms seem to fall into three distinct phases: the
480s BC, mid-century 461–443 BC and finally the years 417–415: this matches
fairly well with the clustering of known expulsions, although Themistocles
before 471 may count as an exception. This suggests that ostracism fell in and
out of fashion. The last known ostracism was that of Hyperbolos in circa 417
BC. There is no sign of its use after the Peloponnesian War, when democracy was
restored after the oligarchic coup of the Thirty had collapsed in 403 BC.
However, while ostracism was not an active feature of the 4th-century version
of democracy, it remained; the question was put to the assembly each year, but
they did not wish to hold one. Purpose of ostracism. Because ostracism was
carried out by thousands of people over many decades of an evolving political
situation and culture, it did not serve a single monumental purpose. Still,
observations can be made about outcomes, as well as the initial purpose for
which it was created. The first rash of people ostracised in the decade after
the defeat of the first Persian invasion at Marathon in 490 BC were all related
or connected to the tyrant Peisistratos, who had controlled Athens for 36 years
up to 527 BC. After his son Hippias was deposed with Spartan help in 510 BC,
the family sought refuge with the Persians, and nearly twenty years later
Hippias landed with their invasion force at Marathon. Tyranny and Persian
aggression were paired threats facing the new democratic regime at Athens, and
ostracism was used against both. Tyranny and democracy had arisen at Athens out
of clashes between regional and factional groups organised around politicians,
including Cleisthenes. As a reaction, in many of its features the democracy
strove to reduce the role of factions as the focus of citizen loyalties.
Ostracism, too, may have been intended to work in the same direction: by
temporarily decapitating a faction, it could help to defuse confrontations that
threatened the order of the State. In later decades when the threat of tyranny
was remote, ostracism seems to have been used as a way to decide between
radically opposed policies. For instance, in 443 BC Thucydides son of Milesias
(not to be confused with the historian of the same name) was ostracised. He led
an aristocratic opposition to Athenian imperialism and in particular to
Perikles' building program on the acropolis, which was funded by taxes created
for the wars against Persia. By expelling Thucydides the Athenian people sent a
clear message about the direction of Athenian policy. Similar but more
controversial claims have been made about the ostracism of Cimon in 461 BC. The
motives of individual voting citizens cannot, of course, be known. Many of the
surviving ostraka name people otherwise unattested. They may well be just
someone the submitter disliked, and voted for in moment of private spite. As
such, it may be seen as a secular, civic variant of Athenian curse tablets,
studied in scholarly literature under the Latin name "defixiones", where small
dolls were wrapped in lead sheets written with curses and then buried,
sometimes stuck through with nails for good measure. In one anecdote about
Aristides, known as "the Just", who was ostracised in 482, an illiterate
citizen, not recognising him, came up to ask him to write the name Aristides on
his ostrakon. When Aristides asked why, the man replied it was because he was
sick of hearing him being called "the Just". Perhaps merely the sense that
someone had become too arrogant or prominent was enough to get someone's name
onto an ostrakon. Fall into disuse. The last ostracism, that of Hyperbolos in
or near 415 BC, is elaborately narrated by Plutarch in three separate "lives":
Hyperbolos is pictured urging the people to expel one of his rivals, but they,
Nicias and Alcibiades, laying aside their own hostility for a moment, use their
combined influence to have him ostracised instead. According to Plutarch, the
people then become disgusted with ostracism and abandon the procedure forever.
In part ostracism lapsed as a procedure at the end of the fifth century because
it was replaced by the "graphe paranomon", a regular court action under which a
much larger number of politicians might be targeted, instead of just one a year
as with ostracism, and with greater severity. But it may already have come to
seem like an anachronism as factional alliances organised around important men
became increasingly less significant in the later period, and power was more
specifically located in the interaction of the individual speaker with the
power of the assembly and the courts. The threat to the democratic system in
the late 5th century came not from tyranny but from oligarchic coups, threats
of which became prominent after two brief seizures of power, in 411 by "the
Four Hundred" and in 404 BC by "the Thirty", which were not dependent on single
powerful individuals. Ostracism was not an effective defence against the
oligarchic threat and it was not so used. Analogues. Other cities are known to
have set up forms of ostracism on the Athenian model, namely Megara, Miletos,
Argos and Syracuse. In the last of these it was referred to as "petalismos",
because the names were written on olive leaves. Little is known about these
institutions. Furthermore, pottery sherds identified as "ostraka" have been
found in Chersonesos Taurica, leading historians to the conclusion that a
similar institution existed there as well, in spite of the silence of the
ancient records on that count. A similar modern practice is the recall
election, in which the electoral body removes its representation from an
elected officer. There have also been comparisons drawn in the United Kingdom
with appointment to the European Commission, which has the effect of removing
political figures from the country for a period of years. Notes and references.
Additional ancient references. From Philochorus, "Atthis" Note that the ancient
sources on ostracism are mostly 4th century or much later and often limited to
brief descriptions such as notes by lexicographers. Most of the narrative and
analytical passages of any length come from Plutarch writing five centuries
later and with little sympathy for democratic practices. There are no
contemporary accounts that can take one into the experiences of participants: a
dense account of Athenian democracy can only be made on the basis of the much
fuller sources available in the 4th century, especially the Attic orators,
after ostracism had fallen into disuse. Most of such references are a 4th-
century memory of the institution.
