Outer Continental Shelf The Outer Continental Shelf (OCS) is a peculiarity of
the political geography of the United States. The OCS is the part of the
internationally recognized continental shelf of the United States which does
not fall under the jurisdictions of the individual U.S. states. Definition.
Formally, the OCS is governed by Title 43, Chapter 29 "Submerged Lands",
Subchapter III "Outer Continental Shelf Lands", of the U.S. Code. The term
"outer Continental Shelf" refers to all submerged lands, its subsoil, and
seabed that belong to the United States and are lying seaward and outside of
the states' jurisdiction, the latter defined as the "lands beneath navigable
waters" in Title 43, Chapter 29, Subchapter I, Section 1301. Federal
jurisdiction is defined under accepted principles of public international law.
The seaward limit is defined as the farthest of seaward of the baseline from
which the breadth of the territorial sea is measured or, if the continental
shelf can be shown to exceed 200 nautical miles, a distance not greater than a
line 100 nautical miles from the isobath or a line from the baseline. Outer
Continental Shelf limits greater than 200 nautical miles but less than either
the 2,500-meter isobath plus 100 nmi or 350 nmi are defined by a line seaward
of the foot of the continental slope or by a line seaward of the foot of the
continental slope connecting points where the sediment thickness divided by the
distance to the foot of the slope equals 0.01, whichever is farthest.
Coastlines are emergent. Thus the landward boundary of the outer continental
shelf is a legal construct rather than a physical construct, modified only at
intervals by appropriate processes of law. For legislation concerning the OCS,
the United States Senate Committee on Commerce, Science & Transportation has
jurisdiction within the United States Senate. In the House of Representatives,
the Committee on Natural Resources Subcommittee on Energy and Mineral Resources
has jursidiction over administration and legislation amending the OSCLA. Within
the United States government, the Bureau of Ocean Energy Management, Regulation
and Enforcement (BOEMRE), also known as the Bureau of Ocean Energy (BOE), and
formerly known as the Minerals Management Service (MMS), is the agency charged
to provide regulatory oversight of deepwater oil drilling and offshore wind
energy sources in U.S. Federal waters that extend beyond State jurisdiction.
