Pacifism Pacifism is opposition to war and violence, even to the point of
allowing self-harm rather than a resort to violent resistance. The term
"pacifism" was coined by the French peace campaigner Émile Arnaud
(1864–1921) and adopted by other peace activists at the tenth Universal Peace
Congress in Glasgow in 1901. The concept is an ancient one that goes back to
the teachings of Siddhartha Gautama (Buddha), and Jesus. In modern times, it
was refined by Mohandas Gandhi (1869-1948) into the practice of steadfast
nonviolent opposition which he called "satyagraha". Its effectiveness served as
inspiration to Martin Luther King Jr. among many others. An iconic image of
pacifism came out of the Tiananmen Square Protests of 1989 with the "Tank Man",
where one protester stood in nonviolent opposition to a column of tanks.
Historians have identified that event as being a key motivation that led to the
fall of the Berlin Wall which ultimately precipitated the nonviolent fall of
Communism. Definition. Pacifism covers a spectrum of views, including the
belief that international disputes can and should be peacefully resolved, calls
for the abolition of the institutions of the military and war, opposition to
any organization of society through governmental force (anarchist or
libertarian pacifism), rejection of the use of physical violence to obtain
political, economic or social goals, the obliteration of force except in cases
where it is absolutely necessary to advance the cause of peace, and opposition
to violence under any circumstance, even defense of self and others. Historians
of pacifism Peter Brock and Thomas Paul Socknat define pacifism "in the sense
generally accepted in English-speaking areas" as "an unconditional rejection of
all forms of warfare". Philosopher Jenny Teichman defines the main form of
pacifism as "anti-warism", the rejection of all forms of warfare. Teichman's
beliefs have been summarized by Brian Orend as "...A pacifist rejects war and
believes there are no moral grounds which can justify resorting to war. War,
for the pacifist, is always wrong." The whole theory is based on the idea that
the end does NOT justify the means. Moral considerations. Pacifism may be based
on moral principles (a deontological view) or pragmatism (a consequentialist
view). Principled pacifism holds that at some point along the spectrum from war
to interpersonal physical violence, such violence becomes morally wrong.
Pragmatic pacifism holds that the costs of war and interpersonal violence are
so substantial that better ways of resolving disputes must be found. Pacifists
in general usually reject theories of Just War. Some, however, believe that if
the foe is willing to hurt others, then it is justified to respond with force,
even to the extent of the atomic bomb. Such people can be called semi-
pacifists. A counterargument to this is the belief that even if one side's
resort to force can provide more peace in the long run, people on both sides
will think they are on that side due to the worse side's propaganda, so it
would be safer for both sides to oppose war despite both believing they are on
that side which should resort to force. Nonviolence. Some pacifists follow
principles of nonviolence, believing that nonviolent action is morally superior
and/or pragmatically most effective. Some pacifists, however, support physical
violence for emergency defense of self or others. Others support destruction of
property in such emergencies or for conducting symbolic acts of resistance like
pouring red paint to represent blood on the outside of military recruiting
offices or entering air force bases and hammering on military aircraft. By no
means is all nonviolent resistance (sometimes also called civil resistance)
based on a fundamental rejection of all violence in all circumstances. Many
leaders and participants in such movements, while recognizing the importance of
using non-violent methods in particular circumstances, have not been absolute
pacifists. Sometimes, as with the US civil rights movement's march from Selma
to Montgomery in 1965, they have called for armed protection. The
interconnections between civil resistance and factors of force are numerous and
complex. Non-aggression. In contrast to the nonviolence principle stands the
non-aggression principle which rejects the initiation of violence, but permits
the use of violence for self-defense or delegated defense. People supporting
the non-aggression principle claim that the moral prohibition of the use of
violence follows from argumentation ethics, which applies only when people are
using argumentation to solve disputes. So it does not apply when someone is
subject to initiated violence, and hence self-defense is not morally rejected.
Another possible approach is a semantic one: the claim that defense and
aggression are fundamentally different, a point that is obscured when using
terms like "defensive violence" and "initiated violence"; that there is no
moral prohibition on defense and no need to justify it or make an exception for
it. Dove. "Dove" or "dovish" are informal terms used, especially in politics,
for people who prefer to avoid war or prefer war as a last resort. The terms
refer to the story of Noah's Ark in which the dove came to symbolize the hope
of salvation and peace. Similarly, in common parlance, the opposite of a dove
is a hawk or war hawk. Early history. Advocacy of pacifism can be found far
back in history and literature. India. Compassion for all life, human and
nonhuman, is central to Buddhism, which was founded by Siddhattha Gotama; and
also Jainism, which was founded by Mahavira 599–527 BC. Both the Buddha and
Mahavira were by birth kshatriya, the varna (social order) of soldiers and
officials. An unusual example is that of Emperor Ashoka who became a pacifist
after the bloody Kalinga war. Greece. In Ancient Greece, however, pacifism
seems not to have existed except as a broad moral guideline against violence
between individuals. No philosophical program of rejecting violence between
states, or rejecting all forms of violence, seems to have existed.
Aristophanes, in his play Lysistrata, creates the scenario of an Athenian
woman's anti-war sex strike during the Peloponnesian War of 431–404 BC, and
the play has gained an international reputation for its anti-war message.
Nevertheless, it is both fictional and comical, and though it offers a
pragmatic opposition to the destructiveness of war, its message seems to stem
from frustration with the existing conflict (then in its twentieth year) rather
than from a philosophical position against violence or war. Equally fictional
is the nonviolent protest of Hegetorides of Thasos. Euripides also expressed
strong anti-war ideas in his work, especially "The Trojan Women". China. During
the Warring States Period, the pacifist Mohist School opposed aggressive war
between the feudal states. They took this belief into action by using their
famed defensive strategies to defend smaller states from invasion from larger
states, hoping to dissuade feudal lords from costly warfare. The Taoist
scripture ""Classic of Great Peace" ("Taiping jing")" foretells "the coming Age
of Great Peace ("taiping")." The "Taiping Jing" advocates "a world full of
peace". Africa. The Lemba religion of southern French Congo, along with its
symbolic herb, is named for pacifism : " ""lemba, lemba"" (peace, peace),
describes the action of the plant "lemba-lemba" ("Brillantaisia patula T.
Anders")". Likewise in Cabinda, ""Lemba" is the spirit of peace, as its name
indicates." Chatham Islands. The Moriori, of the Chatham Islands, practiced
pacifism by order of their ancestor Nunuku-whenua. This enabled the Moriori to
preserve what limited resources they had in their harsh climate, avoiding waste
through warfare. In turn, this led to their almost complete annihilation in
1835 by invading Ngāti Mutunga and Ngāti Tama Māori from the Taranaki region
of the North Island of New Zealand. The invading Māori killed, enslaved and
cannibalised the Moriori. New Zealand. Among the Māori, the major god "Rongo"
is the "god of peace". The minor god Kahungunu is "a pacifist in spirit".
Hawaii. In Hawaii at the time of Captain Cook's visit (1779 Chr.E.), Lono was
worshipped as "god of peace". North America. The Whilkut of northern California
have a bird-god of peace-making, "Merk" ('Egret'). The Hopi people, whose name
means 'Peaceful' ("Hopi" is a contraction of /hopitu/ 'peaceful'), have
followed religious doctrine that is generally "anti-war". Among the Aztecs,
Quetzalcoatl was "god of Peace ..., who required his people to live in peace".
Judea under Roman control. Throughout history, many have understood Jesus of
Nazareth to have been a pacifist, drawing on his Sermon on the Mount (see
Christian pacifism). In the sermon Jesus stated that one should "not resist an
evildoer" and promoted his turn the other cheek philosophy. "If anyone strikes
you on the right cheek, turn the other also; and if anyone wants to sue you and
take your coat, give your cloak as well... Love your enemies, do good to those
who hate you, bless those who curse you, pray for those who abuse you." The New
Testament story is of Jesus, besides preaching these words, surrendering
himself freely to an enemy intent on having him killed and proscribing his
followers from defending him. There are those, however, who deny that Jesus was
a pacifist and state that Jesus never said that not to fight, citing examples
from the New Testament. One such instance portrays an angry Jesus driving
dishonest market traders from the temple. A frequently quoted passage is Luke
22:36: "He said to them, 'But now, the one who has a purse must take it, and
likewise a bag. And the one who has no sword must sell his cloak and buy one.'"
Others have interpreted the non-pacifist statements in the New Testament to be
related to self-defense or to be metaphorical and state that on no occasion did
Jesus shed blood or urge others to shed blood. Roman Empire. Panda was a god of
peace (according to a gloss by Philoxenos). Several Roman writers rejected the
militarism of Roman society and gave voice to anti-war sentiments, including
Propertius, Tibullus and Ovid. The Stoic Seneca the Younger criticised warfare
in his book "Naturales quaestiones" (circa 65 AD). Maximilian of Tebessa was a
conscientious objector. He was killed for refusing to be conscripted. Cathars.
Known in the Balkans as Bogomils and in northern Italy and southern France as
Cathars, they were pacifists totally dedicated to nonviolence. The Cathars were
actually branded heretics, persecuted, and eventually annihilated by the
Catholic Church through the Albigensian Crusade and the Inquisition that
followed. "These heretics are worse than the saracens" exclaimed Pope Innocent
III, and on March 10, 1208, after the murder of the papal legate Pierre de
Castelnau, probably by Raymond VI, Count of Toulouse, the pope took full
advantage of it and proclaimed a crusade against a sect in southern France.
Modern history. Beginning in the 16th century, the Protestant Reformation gave
rise to a variety of new Christian sects, including the historic peace
churches. Foremost among them were the Religious Society of Friends (Quakers),
Amish, Mennonites and Church of the Brethren. After its founding by Quaker
pacifist William Penn, Quaker-controlled colonial Pennsylvania employed an
anti-militarist public policy. Unlike residents of many of the colonies,
Quakers chose to trade peacefully with the Indians, including for land. The
colonial province was, for the 75 years from 1681 to 1756, essentially unarmed
and experienced little or no warfare in that period. The humanist writer
Desiderius Erasmus was one of the most outspoken pacifists of the Renaissance,
arguing strongly against warfare in his essays "The Praise of Folly" (1509) and
"The Complaint of Peace" (1517). From the 16th to the 18th centuries, a number
of thinkers devised plans for an international organisation that would promote
peace, and reduce or even eliminate the occurrence of war. These included the
French politician Duc de Sully, the philosophers Émeric Crucé and the Abbe de
Saint-Pierre, and the Quakers William Penn and John Bellers. These
internationalist ideas influenced both Jean-Jacques Rousseau, who promoted
Saint-Pierre's plan, (while criticising many aspects of it), in "Extrait du
Projet de Paix Perpetuelle de Monsieur l'Abbe Saint-Pierre" (1756), and
Immanuel Kant, in his "Thoughts on Perpetual Peace". Bohemian Bernard Bolzano
(1781–1848) taught about the social waste of militarism and the needlessness
of war. He urged a total reform of the educational, social, and economic
systems that would direct the nation's interests toward peace rather than
toward armed conflict between nations. Nineteenth century. In the aftermath of
the Napoleonic Wars, a number of peace societies were set up to prevent future
conflicts. The first such movements were the New York Peace Society, founded in
1815 by the theologian David Low Dodge, and the Massachusetts Peace Society.
These groups merged with other US peace groups in 1828 to form the American
Peace Society. The London Peace Society (also known as the Society for the
Promotion of Permanent and Universal Peace) was formed in 1816 with similar
aims, and in the 1840s, British women formed "Olive Leaf Circles", groups of
around 15 to 20 women, who discussed and promoted pacifist ideas. Russian
writer Leo Tolstoy was a fervent advocate of pacifism. In one of his latter
works, "The Kingdom of God is Within You", Tolstoy provides a detailed history,
account and defense of pacifism. Tolstoy's work inspired a movement named after
him advocating pacifism to arise in Russia and elsewhere. The book was a major
early influence on Mohandas K. Gandhi (1869–1948), and the two engaged in
regular correspondence while Gandhi was active in South Africa. Bertha von
Suttner, the first woman to be a Nobel Peace Prize laureate, became a leading
figure in the peace movement with the publication of her novel, "Die Waffen
nieder!" ("Lay Down Your Arms!") in 1889 and founded an Austrian pacifist
organization in 1891. Resistance to colonialism. In New Zealand, during the
latter half of the 19th century British colonists used many tactics to
confiscate land from the indigenous Māori, including warfare. In the 1870s and
1880s, Parihaka, then reputed to be the largest Māori village in New Zealand,
became the centre of a major campaign of non-violent resistance to European
occupation of confiscated land in the area. One Māori leader, Te Whiti-o-
Rongomai, inspired warriors to stand up for their rights without using weapons,
which had led to defeat in the past. In 1881 he convinced 2000 Maori to welcome
battle-hardened British soldiers into their village and even offered food and
drink. He allowed himself and his people to be arrested without resistance for
opposing land confiscation. He is remembered as a great leader because the
"passive resistance" he practiced prevented British massacres and even
protected far more land than violent resistance. Mohandas K. Gandhi was a major
political and spiritual leader of India, instrumental in the Indian
independence movement. The Nobel prize winning great poet Rabindranath Tagore,
who was also an Indian, gave him the honorific "Mahatma", usually translated
"Great Soul." He was the pioneer of a brand of nonviolence (or "ahimsa") which
he called "satyagraha" --translated literally as "truth force". This was the
resistance of tyranny through civil disobedience that was not only nonviolent
but also sought to change the heart of the opponent. He contrasted this with
"duragraha", "resistant force," which sought only to change behaviour with
stubborn protest. During his 30 years of work (1917–1947) for the
independence of his country from the British Raj, Gandhi led dozens of
nonviolent campaigns, spent over seven years in prison, and fasted nearly to
the death on several occasions to obtain British compliance with a demand or to
stop inter-communal violence. His efforts helped lead India to independence in
1947, and inspired movements for civil rights and freedom worldwide. World War
I. There was strong antiwar sentiment in Western Europe during the 19th century
and leading up to World War I. In Britain prominent peace activist Stephen
Henry Hobhouse went to prison for refusing military service, citing his
convictions as an "International Socialist and a Christian" Many socialist
groups and movements were antimilitarist, arguing that war by its nature was a
type of governmental coercion of the working class for the benefit of
capitalist elites. The French socialist pacifist leader Jean Jaurès was
assassinated by a nationalist fanatic on July 31, 1914. The national parties in
the Second International increasingly supported their respective nations in war
and the International was dissolved in 1916. Nevertheless many groups protested
against the war, including the traditional peace churches, the Woman's Peace
Party (which was organized in 1915 and led by noted reformer Jane Addams) and
the International Committee of Women for Permanent Peace (ICWPP) (also
organized in 1915). Other groups included the American Union Against
Militarism, the Fellowship of Reconciliation, and the American Friends Service
Committee. Jeanette Rankin, the first woman elected to Congress, was another
fierce advocate of pacifism, the only person to vote no to America's entrance
into both World Wars. Between the two World Wars. In the aftermath of World War
I, there was a great revulsion against war, leading to the formation of War
Resisters' International and the Women's International League for Peace and
Freedom, and in Britain the No More War Movement and the Peace Pledge Union
(PPU). The League of Nations convened several disarmament conferences in the
inter-war period. The British Labour Party had a strong pacifist wing in the
early 1930s and between 1931 and 1935 was led by George Lansbury, a Christian
pacifist who later chaired the No More War Movement and was president of the
PPU. The 1933 annual conference resolved unanimously to "pledge itself to take
no part in war". "Labour's official position, however, although based on the
aspiration towards a world socialist commonwealth and the outlawing of war, did
not imply a renunciation of force under all circumstances, but rather support
for the ill-defined concept of 'collective security' under the League of
Nations. At the same time, on the party's left, Stafford Cripps's small but
vocal Socialist League opposed the official policy, on the non-pacifist ground
that the League of Nations was 'nothing but the tool of the satiated
imperialist powers'." Lansbury was eventually persuaded to resign as Labour
leader by the non-pacifist wing of the party and was replaced by Clement
Attlee. As the threat from Nazi Germany increased in the 1930s, the Labour
Party abandoned its pacifist position and supported re-armament, largely due to
the efforts of Ernest Bevin and Hugh Dalton who by 1937 had also persuaded the
party to oppose Neville Chamberlain's policy of appeasement. In the Soviet
Union, pacifism was initially tolerated. However with the advent of Joseph
Stalin's rule, while a pro-Soviet "peace movement" was allowed to operate
abroad, "home-grown pacifism was ruthlessly suppressed"; all Soviet pacifist
organisations were closed down by 1929. Stalin's regime also removed the law
permitting conscientious objectors to serve in noncombatant roles in the Red
Army. A number of Tolstoyan pacifists were known to be among prisoners in the
gulags in the 1940s and 1950s. A noted Canadian pacifist was the politician J.
S. Woodsworth, who called for the strengthening of the League of Nations to
ensure world peace. Woodsworth also called for the use of economic sanctions
against states that committed aggression, such as Italy when it invaded
Abyssinia. Agnes Macphail, another noted Canadian pacifist, was the first woman
to be elected to the Canadian House of Commons. Macphail objected to the Royal
Military College of Canada in 1931 on pacific grounds. Macphail was also the
first Canadian woman delegate to the League of Nations, where she worked with
the World Disarmament Committee. Although a pacifist, she voted for Canada to
enter World War II. The Spanish Civil War proved a major test for international
pacifism, and the work of pacifist organisations (such as War Resisters'
International and the Fellowship of Reconciliation) and individuals (such as
José Brocca and Amparo Poch) in that arena has until recently been ignored or
forgotten by historians, overshadowed by the memory of the International
Brigades and other militaristic interventions. Shortly after the war ended,
Simone Weil, despite having volunteered for service on the republican side,
went on to publish "The Iliad or the Poem of Force", a work that has been
described as a pacifist manifesto. In response to the threat of fascism, some
pacifist thinkers, such as Richard B. Gregg, devised plans for a campaign of
nonviolent resistance in the event of a fascist invasion or takeover. World War
II. With the start of World War II, pacifist and anti-war sentiment declined in
nations affected by war. Even the communist-controlled American Peace
Mobilization reversed its anti-war activism once Germany invaded the Soviet
Union in 1941. After the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor, mainstream
isolationist groups like the America First Committee, declined, but many
smaller religious and socialist groups continued their opposition to war.
Bertrand Russell argued that the necessity of defeating Adolf Hitler and the
Nazis was a unique circumstance where war was not the worst of the possible
evils; he called his position "relative pacifism". H. G. Wells, who had joked
after the armistice ending World War I that the British had suffered more from
the war than they would have from submission to Germany, urged in 1941 a large-
scale British offensive on the continent of Europe to combat Hitler and Nazism.
Similarly Albert Einstein wrote: "I loathe all armies and any kind of violence;
yet I'm firmly convinced that at present these hateful weapons offer the only
effective protection." Pacifists in the Third Reich were dealt with harshly;
German pacifist Carl von Ossietzky, and Olaf Kullmann, a Norwegian pacifist
active during the Nazi occupation, were both imprisoned in concentration camps
and died as a result of their mistreatment there. Austrian farmer Franz
Jägerstätter was executed in 1943 for refusing to serve in the Wehrmacht.
There were conscientious objectors and war tax resisters in both World War I
and World War II. The United States government allowed sincere objectors to
serve in noncombatant military roles. However, those draft resisters who
refused any cooperation with the war effort often spent much of each war in
federal prisons. During World War II, pacifist leaders like Dorothy Day and
Ammon Hennacy of the Catholic Worker Movement urged young Americans not to
enlist in military service. Later twentieth century. Martin Luther King, Jr
(1929–1968), a Baptist minister, led the American civil rights movement which
successfully used Gandhian nonviolent resistance to repeal laws enforcing
racial segregation and work for integration of schools, businesses and
government. In 1957, his wife Coretta Scott King, Albert Schweitzer, Benjamin
Spock, and others formed the Committee for a Sane Nuclear Policy (now Peace
Action) to resist the nuclear arms race. In 1958 British activists formed the
Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament with Bertrand Russell as its president. In
1960, Thich Nhat Hanh came to the US to study comparative religion at Princeton
University and subsequently was appointed lecturer in Buddhism at Columbia
University. Thich Nhat Hanh had written a letter to Martin Luther King in 1965
entitled "Searching for the Enemy of Man" and during his 1966 stay in the US
met with King and urged him to publicly denounce the Vietnam War. King gave his
famous speech at the Riverside Church in New York City in 1967, his first to
publicly question the U.S. involvement in Vietnam. Other examples from this
period include the 1986 People Power Revolution in the Philippines led by Cory
Aquino, and the 1989 Tiananmen Square Protests which included the broadly
publicized "Tank Man" incident. Costa Rica. On December 1, 1948, President
José Figueres Ferrer of Costa Rica abolished the Costa Rica’s military. In
1949, the abolition of the military was introduced in Article 12 of the Costa
Rican Constitution. Unlike its neighbors, Costa Rica has not endured a civil
war since 1948. Figueres later remarked with justifiable pride that such
reforms gave Costa Rica a deeper and more human revolution than that of Cuba.
The budget previously dedicated to the military now is dedicated to providing
health care services and education. Religion. Ahmadiyya. According to the
Ahmadiyya understanding of Islam, pacifism is a strong current, and jihad is
one's personal inner struggle and should not be used violently for political
motives. Violence is the last option only to be used to protect religion and
one's own life in extreme situations of persecution. Mirza Ghulam Ahmad, the
founder of the Ahmadiyya Muslim Community, said that in contrary to the current
views, Islam "does not allow the use of sword in religion, except in the case
of defensive wars, wars waged to punish a tyrant, or those meant to uphold
freedom". Ahmadiyya claims its objective to be the peaceful propagation of
Islam with special emphasis on spreading the true message of Islam by the pen.
Ahmadis point out that as per prophecy, who they believe was the promised
messiah, Mirza Ghulam Ahmad, rendered the concept of violent jihad unnecessary
in modern times. They believe that the answer of hate should be given by love.
Bahá'í Faith. Bahá'u'lláh, the founder of the Bahá'í Faith abolished holy
war and emphasized its abolition as a central teaching of his faith. However,
the Bahá'í Faith does not have an absolute pacifistic position. For example
Bahá'ís are advised to do social service instead of active army service, but
when this is not possible because of obligations in certain countries, the
Bahá'í law of "loyalty to one's government" is preferred and the individual
should perform the army service. Shoghi Effendi, the Guardian of the Bahá'í
Faith, noted that in the Bahá'í view, absolute pacifists are anti-social and
exalt the individual over society which could lead to anarchy; instead he noted
that the Bahá'í conception of social life follows a moderate view where the
individual is not suppressed or exalted. On the level of society, Bahá'u'lláh
promotes the principle of collective security, which does not abolish the use
of force, but prescribes "a system in which Force is made the servant of
Justice." The idea of collective security from the Bahá'í teachings states
that if a government violates a fundamental norm of international law or
provision of a future world constitution which Bahá'ís believe will be
established by all nations, then the other governments should step in.
Buddhism. Buddhist Aung San Suu Kyi is a nonviolent pro-democracy activist and
leader of the National League for Democracy in Myanmar (Burma). A devout
Buddhist, Suu Kyi won the Rafto Prize and the Sakharov Prize for Freedom of
Thought in 1990 and in 1991 was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize for her peaceful
and non-violent struggle under a repressive military dictatorship. One of her
best known speeches is the "Freedom From Fear" speech, which begins, "It is not
power that corrupts but fear. Fear of losing power corrupts those who wield it
and fear of the scourge of power corrupts those who are subject to it."
Christianity. Peace churches. Peace churches are Christian denominations
explicitly advocating pacifism. The term "historic peace churches" refers
specifically to three church traditions: the Church of the Brethren, the
Mennonites (and some other Anabaptists, such as Amish and Hutterites), and the
Quakers (Religious Society of Friends). The historic peace churches have, from
their origins as far back as the 16th century, always taken the position that
Jesus was himself a pacifist who explicitly taught and practiced pacifism, and
that his followers must do likewise. Pacifist churches vary on whether physical
force can ever be justified in self-defense or protecting others, as many
adhere strictly to nonresistance when confronted by violence. But all agree
that violence on behalf of a country or a government is prohibited for
Christians. Pentecostal churches. Jay Beaman's thesis states that 13 of 21, or
62% of American Pentecostal groups formed by 1917 show evidence of being
pacifist sometime in their history. Furthermore Jay Beaman has shown in his
thesis that there has been a shift away from pacifism in the American
Pentecostal churches to more a style of military chaplaincy and support of war.
The major organisation for Pentecostal Christians who believe in pacifism is
the PCPF, the Pentecostal Charismatic Peace Fellowship. The United Pentecostal
Church, an Apostolic/Oneness denomination, is the largest Pentecostal
organization that takes an official stand of pacifism: its Articles of Faith
read, "We are constrained to declare against participating in combatant service
in war, armed insurrection... aiding or abetting in or the actual destruction
of human life." Other Christian denominations. The Peace Pledge Union was a
pacifist organisation from which the Anglican Pacifist Fellowship (APF) later
emerged within the Anglican Church. The APF succeeded in gaining ratification
of the pacifist position at two successive Lambeth Conferences, but many
Anglicans would not regard themselves as pacifists. South African Bishop
Desmond Tutu is the most prominent Anglican pacifist. Rowan Williams led an
almost united Anglican Church in Britain in opposition to the 2003 Iraq War. In
Australia Peter Carnley similarly led a front of bishops opposed to the
Government of Australia's involvement in the invasion of Iraq. The Catholic
Worker Movement is concerned with both social justice and pacifist issues, and
voiced consistent opposition to the Spanish Civil War and World War II. Many of
its early members were imprisoned for their opposition to conscription. Within
the Roman Catholic Church, the Pax Christi organisation is the premiere
pacifist lobby group. It holds positions similar to APF, and the two
organisations are known to work together on ecumenical projects. Within Roman
Catholicism there has been a discernible move towards a more pacifist position
through the twentieth and early twenty-first centuries. Popes Benedict XV, John
XXIII and John Paul II were all vocal in their opposition to specific wars. By
taking the name Benedict XVI, some suspect that Joseph Ratzinger will continue
the strong emphasis upon nonviolent conflict resolution of his predecessor.
However, the Roman Catholic Church officially maintains the legitimacy of Just
War, which is rejected by some pacifists. In the twentieth century there was a
notable trend among prominent Roman Catholics towards pacifism. Individuals
such as Dorothy Day and Henri Nouwen stand out among them. The monk and mystic
Thomas Merton was noted for his commitment to pacifism during the Vietnam War
era. Murdered Salvadoran Bishop Oscar Romero was notable for using non-violent
resistance tactics and wrote meditative sermons focusing on the power of prayer
and peace. School of the Americas Watch was founded by Maryknoll Fr. Roy
Bourgeois in 1990 and uses strictly pacifist principles to protest the training
of Latin American military officers by United States Army officers at the
School of the Americas in the state of Georgia. The Greek Orthodox Church also
tends towards pacifism, though it has accepted defensive warfare through most
of its history. However, more recently it took a strong stance towards the war
in Lebanon and its large community there refused to take up arms during its
civil wars. It also supports dialogue with Islam. In 1998 the Third Pre-
conciliar Pan-Orthodox Conference drew up a text on "the contribution of the
Orthodox Church to the achievement of peace" emphasizing respect for the human
person and the inseparability of peace from justice. The text states in part:
"Orthodoxy condemns war in general, for she regards it as a consequence of the
evil and sin in the world." The Southern Baptist Convention has stated in the
Baptist Faith and Message, "It is the duty of Christians to seek peace with all
men on principles of righteousness. In accordance with the spirit and teachings
of Christ they should do all in their power to put an end to war." The United
Methodist Church explicitly supports conscientious objection by its members "as
an ethically valid position" while simultaneously allowing for differences of
opinion and belief for those who do not object to military service. Jainism.
Compassion for all life, human and non-human, is central to Jainism. Human life
is valued as a unique, rare opportunity to reach enlightenment; to kill any
person, no matter what crime he may have committed, is considered unimaginably
abhorrent. It is a religion that requires monks and laity, from all its sects
and traditions, to be vegetarian. Some Indian regions, such as Gujarat, have
been strongly influenced by Jains and often the majority of the local Hindus of
every denomination have also become vegetarian. Judaism. Some pre-Holocaust
Hasidic groups were pacifist. The Jewish Peace Fellowship is a New-York based
nonprofit, nondenominational organization set up to provide a Jewish voice in
the peace movement. The organization was founded in 1941 in order to support
Jewish conscientious objectors who sought exemption from combatant military
service. It is affiliated to the International Fellowship of Reconciliation.
The small Neturei Karta group of anti-Zionist, ultra-orthodox Jews, supposedly
take a pacifist line, saying that "Jews are not allowed to dominate, kill, harm
or demean another people and are not allowed to have anything to do with the
Zionist enterprise, their political meddling and their wars.". However, the
Neturei Karta group do support violent, antisemitic terrorist groups such as
Hezbollah and Hamas. Most religious Jews in Europe and North America agree with
war when reasoning with the enemy does not work. Torah is full of examples when
Jews were told to go and war against enemy lands. November 11 is a day a
remembrance for many Jews as they honour those who fought to end the Hitler
government which starved and burnt over six million Jews to death. Raelism.
Non-violence is an important doctrine within Raelism. The founder of this
religion Rael has said ""The one holding the weapon is as responsible as the
one giving the orders"". Other Rael statements include ""even if the Elohim
asked them to kill someone they should refuse"". Government and political
movements. While many governments have tolerated pacifist views and even
accommodated pacifists' refusal to fight in wars, others at times have outlawed
pacifist and anti-war activity. In 1918, The United States Congress passed the
Sedition Act of 1918. During the periods between World Wars I and World War II,
pacifist literature and public advocacy was banned in Italy under Benito
Mussolini, Germany after the rise of Adolf Hitler, Spain under Francisco
Franco, and the Soviet Union under Joseph Stalin. In these nations, pacifism
was denounced as cowardice; indeed, Mussolini referred to pacifist writings as
the "propaganda of cowardice". Today, the United States requires that all young
men register for selective service but does not allow them to be classified as
conscientious objectors unless they are drafted in some future reinstatement of
the draft. does permits enlisted personnel to become conscientious objectors,
allowing them to be discharged or transferred to noncombatant status. Some
European governments like Switzerland, Greece, Norway and Germany offer
civilian service. However, even during periods of peace, many pacifists still
refuse to register for or report for military duty, risking criminal charges.
Anti-war and "pacifist" political parties seeking to win elections may moderate
their demands, calling for de-escalation or major arms reduction rather than
the outright disarmament which is advocated by many pacifists. Green parties
list "non-violence" and "decentralization" towards anarchist co-operatives or
minimalist village government as two of their ten key values. However, in
power, Greens often compromise. The German Greens in the cabinet of Social
Democrat Gerhard Schröder supported an intervention by German troops in
Afghanistan in 2001 if that they hosted the peace conference in Berlin.
However, during the 2002 election Greens forced Schröder to swear that no
German troops would invade Iraq. The controversial democratic peace theory
holds that liberal democracies have never (or rarely) made war on one another
and that lesser conflicts and internal violence are rare between and within
democracies. It also argues that the growth in the number of democratic states
will, in the not so distant future, end warfare. Some pacifists and
multilateralists are in favor of international criminal law as means to prevent
and control international aggression. The International Criminal Court has
jurisdiction over war crimes, but the crime of aggression has yet to be clearly
defined in international law. The Italian Constitution enforces a mild pacifist
character on the Italian Republic, as Article 11 states that "Italy repudiates
war as an instrument offending the liberty of the peoples and as a means for
settling international disputes..." Similarly, Articles 24, 25 and 26 of the
German Constitution (1949), Alinea 15 of the French Constitution (1946),
Article 20 of the Danish Constitution (1953), Article 9 of the Japanese
Constitution (1947) and several other mostly European constitutions correspond
to the United Nations Charter by rejecting the institution of war in favour of
collective security and peaceful cooperation. Pacifism and abstention from
political activity. However, some pacifists, such as the Christian anarchist
Leo Tolstoy and autarchist Robert LeFevre, consider the state a form of
warfare. In addition, for doctrinal reason that a manmade government is
inferior to divine governance and law, many pacifist-identified religious sects
also refrain from political activity altogether, including the Anabaptists,
Jehovah's Witnesses and Mandaeans. This means that such groups refuse to
participate in government office or serve under an oath to a government.
Anarcho-pacifism. Anarcho-pacifism (also pacifist anarchism or anarchist
pacifism) is a form of anarchism which completely rejects the use of violence
in any form for any purpose. The main precedent was Henry David Thoreau who
through his work Civil Disobedience influenced the advocacy of both Leo Tolstoy
and Mohandas Gandhi for nonviolent resistance. As a global movement, Anarchist
pacifism emerged shortly before World War II in the Netherlands, Great Britain
and the United States and was a strong presence in the subsequent campaigns for
nuclear disarmament. Violence has always been controversial in anarchism. While
many anarchists during the 19th century embraced propaganda of the deed, Leo
Tolstoy and other anarcho-pacifists directly opposed violence as a means for
change. He argued that anarchism must by nature be nonviolent since it is, by
definition, opposition to coercion and force and since the state is inherently
violent, meaningful pacifism must likewise be anarchistic. His philosophy was
cited as a major inspiration by Mohandas Gandhi, an Indian independence leader
and pacifist who self-identified as an anarchist. Ferdinand Domela Nieuwenhuis
was also instrumental in establishing the pacifist trend within the anarchist
movement. In France anti-militarism appeared strongly in individualist
anarchist circles as Émile Armand founded "Ligue Antimilitariste" in 1902 with
Albert Libertad and George Mathias Paraf-Javal. Opposition to military
taxation. Many pacifists who would be conscientious objectors to military
service are also opposed to paying taxes to fund the military. In the United
States, The National Campaign for a Peace Tax Fund works to pass a national law
to allow conscientious objectors to redirect their tax money to be used only
for non-military purposes. Criticism. One common argument against pacifism is
the possibility of using violence to prevent further acts of violence (and
reduce the "net-sum" of violence). This argument hinges on consequentialism: an
otherwise morally objectionable action can be justified if it results in a
positive outcome. For example, either violent rebellion, or foreign nations
sending in troops to end a dictator's violent oppression "may" save millions of
lives, even if many thousands died in the war. Those pacifists who base their
beliefs on deontological grounds would oppose such violent action, arguing that
nonviolent resistance should be just as effective and with a much lesser loss
of life. Others would oppose organized military responses but support
individual and small group self-defense against specific attacks if initiated
by the dictator's forces. Pacifists may argue that military action could be
justified should it subsequently advance the general cause of peace. Still more
pacifists would argue that a nonviolent reaction may not save lives immediately
but would in the long run. The acceptance of violence for any reason makes it
easier to use in other situations. Learning and committing to pacifism helps to
send a message that violence is, in fact, not the most effective way. It can
also help people to think more creatively and find more effective ways to stop
violence without more violence. In light of the common criticism of pacifism as
not offering a clear alternative policy, one approach to finding "more
effective ways" has been the attempt to develop the idea of "defence by civil
resistance", also called "social defence". This idea, which is not necessarily
dependent on acceptance of pacifist beliefs, is based on relying on nonviolent
resistance against possible threats, whether external (such as invasion) or
internal (such as coup d'état). There have been some works on this topic,
including by Adam Roberts and Gene Sharp. However, no country has adopted this
approach as the sole basis of its defence. (For further information and sources
see social defence.) Japanese, Italian and Nazi aggression that precipitated
World War II often is cited as an argument against pacifism. If these forces
had not been challenged and defeated militarily, the argument goes, many more
people would have died under their oppressive rule. Adolf Hitler told the
British Foreign Secretary Lord Halifax in 1937 that the British should "shoot
Gandhi, and if this doesn't suffice to reduce them to submission, shoot a dozen
leading members of the Congress, and if that doesn't suffice shoot 200, and so
on, as you make it clear that you mean business." Hermann Göring described,
during an interview at the Nuremberg Trials, how denouncing and outlawing
pacifism was an important part of the Nazis' seizure of power: "The people can
always be brought to the bidding of the leaders. That is easy. All you have to
do is tell them they are being attacked and denounce the pacifists for lack of
patriotism and exposing the country to danger. It works the same way in any
country." Some commentators on the most nonviolent forms of pacifism, including
Jan Narveson, argue that such pacifism is a self-contradictory doctrine.
Narveson claims that everyone has rights and corresponding responsibilities not
to violate others' rights. Since pacifists give up their ability to protect
themselves from violation of their right not to be harmed, then other people
thus have no corresponding responsibility, thus creating a paradox of rights.
Narveson said that "the prevention of infractions of that right is precisely
what one has a right to when one has a right at all". Narveson then discusses
how rational persuasion is a good but often inadequate method of discouraging
an aggressor. He considers that everyone has the right to use any means
necessary to prevent deprivation of their civil liberties and force could be
necessary. Many pacifists would argue that not only are there other ways to
protect oneself but that some of those ways are far more effective than
violence, and that physical harm is not the only variety that can be done.
Often pacifists would much rather take the physical harm inflicted by another
rather than cause themselves emotional or psychological harm, not to mention
harming the other. The ideology and political practice of pacifism also have
been criticized by the radical American activist Ward Churchill, in his essay,
"". Churchill argues that the social and political advancements pacifists claim
resulted from non-violent action always have been made possible by concurrent
violent struggles. In the late 1990s, Churchill's work convinced many anarchist
and left-wing activists to adopt what they called "diversity of tactics" using
"black bloc" formations that engage in property destruction and scuffles with
police at larger mainstream protests. One powerful pacifist reply to Churchill
was from American activist George Lakey, a founder of Movement for a New
Society, in a detailed response to "Pacifism as Pathology". Lakey quotes Martin
Luther King in entitling his 2001 article "Nonviolent Action as the Sword that
Heals". However, he takes on Churchill's assumptions and reading of history
from a pragmatic viewpoint, arguing the superiority of nonviolent action by
describing "some movements that learned, from their own pragmatic experience,
that they could wage struggle more successfully through nonviolent direct
action than through violence." In his book "The End of Faith", Sam Harris
argues that pacifism is a fallacy, combining hesitance with cowardice, in that
the social context in which a pacifist can protest was created by the actions
of direct activists. In the same philosophical chapter, he goes on to compare
the collateral damage that could result from practicing torture with that
resulting from errant bombing. He posits that if one is willing to accept the
collateral damage that results from the incidental bombing of civilians on the
one hand, one cannot denounce the collateral damage resulting from the
accidental torture of the innocent on the other. He notes that the only
difference between the two is that the revulsion one experiences when directly
causing the suffering of another human being is more potent when done in person
than when done from the safety of an aircraft or a command center. He brings to
light these similarities not to so much to argue for the potential use of
torture in combat but to demonstrate the hideousness of both. Ultimately, his
book suggests just and humane action must be taken in order to reduce the total
suffering of sentient beings. Further reading. Shalom: The Jewish Peace Letter.
An online zine published by the Jewish Peace Fellowship.org/Shalom
