Pacman conjecture The Pacman Conjecture holds that durable goods monopolists
have complete market power and so can exercise perfect price discrimination
thus extracting the total surplus. This is in contrast to the Coase Conjecture
which holds that a durable goods monopolist has no market power and so price is
equal to the competitive market price. Durable Goods Monopolists and the Coase
Conjecture. A durable goods monopolist sells goods which are in finite supply
and which last forever, (not depreciating over time). According to the Coase
Conjecture, such a monopolist has no market power as it is in competition with
itself; the more of the good it sells in period one the less it will be able to
sell in future periods. Assuming marginal costs are zero. In the first period
the monopolist will produce quantity (Q1) where marginal cost = marginal
revenue and so extract the monopoly surplus. However, in the second period the
monopolist will face a new residual demand curve (Q - Q1) and so will produce
quantity where the new marginal revenue is equal to the marginal cost, which is
at the competitive market price. There is then an incentive for consumers to
delay purchase of the good as they realize that its price will decrease over
time. If buyers are patient enough they will not buy until the price falls and
so durable goods monopolists face a horizontal demand curve at the equilibrium
price and so will have no market power. Durable Goods Monopolists and the
Pacman Conjecture. The Pacman Conjecture on the other hand holds that consumers
realize the price of the good will only fall when they purchase the good,
therefore, a patient monopolist with zero fixed costs can exercise full market
power and perfectly price discriminate. The monopolist sets the price of the
durable good at time t equal to the highest consumer reservation price who
hasn't purchased prior to that point t. The consumer then buys the good as soon
as it is equal to their reservation price as they realize price will not fall
further unless they purchase it. The Pacman Conjecture requires that buyers
have distinct reservation prices and that there are a finite number of buyers.
Otherwise perfect price discrimination would not be possible.
