Paleolibertarianism Paleolibertarianism is a school of thought within American
libertarianism associated with the late economist Murray Rothbard, and the
Ludwig von Mises Institute. It is based on an libertarian opposition to "all
forms of government intervention – economic, cultural, social, international"
combined with cultural conservatism in social thought and behavior. It opposes
a licentious libertarianism which advocates "freedom from bourgeois morality,
and social authority." Austrian economics, anti-federalism, opposition to war,
Misesian libertarianism, and anarcho-capitalism heavily influenced the
movement's attitudes toward ideas on trade, commerce, immigration and the
state. Principles. In January 1990 Llewellyn H. Rockwell, Jr. published "The
Case for Paleo-libertarianism" in "Liberty" magazine. Citing drug use by
libertarians and the nomination of a prostitute as the California Libertarian
Party candidate for lieutenant governor, Rockwell asserted that "the only way
to sever libertarianism's link with libertinism is with a cleansing debate."
Assailing alleged "hatred of western culture," he asserted that "pornographic
photography, 'free'-thinking, chaotic painting, atonal music, deconstructionist
literature, Bauhaus architecture, and modernist films have nothing in common
with the libertarian political agenda - no matter how much individual
libertarians may revel in them" and stated "we obey, and we ought to obey,
traditions of manners and taste." After explaining why cultural conservatives
could make a better argument for liberty to the middle classes, Rockwell
predicted "in the new movement, libertarians who personify the present
corruption will sink to their natural level, as will the Libertarian Party,
which has been their diabolic pulpit." Lew Rockwell as quoted by Karen De
Coster. Also see Blog entry Do You Consider Yourself a Libertarian?, Kenny
Johnsson interviews Lew Rockwell for The Liberal Post, as posted on
LewRockwell.Com, May 25, 2007. Paleolibertarianism is commonly distinguished by
appreciation for American limited government constitutionalism and even anti-
federalism, sometimes criticizing Abraham Lincoln for leading America toward a
centralized, managerial state. Paleolibertarians agree with Hans-Hermann Hoppe
who writes that in a world where all property was private, immigration policy
would be decided by individual property owners and not the state. Justin
Raimondo's 1993 book "Reclaiming the American Right" links paleolibertarianism
with the American Old Right. In "" by Hans-Hermann Hoppe, Hoppe writes that
"conservatives today must be antistatist libertarians and, equally important,
libertarians must be conservatives". In 1996 during Ron Paul's run for United
States congress, the issue of bigoted language in Ron Paul newsletters circa
1989-1994 arose. Paul had long been a close associate of Rothbard and Rockwell.
In 2008, the libertarian publication "Reason" asserted that "a half-dozen
longtime libertarian activists—including some still close to Paul" had
identified Lew Rockwell as the "chief ghostwriter" of the newsletters.
According to "Reason," Rockwell has denied responsibility for the disputed
material and has called the accusations "hysterical smears aimed at political
enemies." The connection of these writings to "paleolibertarianism" continues
to be made. Divergence from paleoconservatism. Murray Rothbard declared in 1992
that "with Pat Buchanan as our leader, we shall break the clock of social
democracy." Three years later, he said Buchanan developed too much faith in
economic planning and centralized state power. Lew Rockwell, [http://
www.lewrockwell.com/rockwell/paleo1.html The Paleo Question, 2000.
