Paleoconservatism Paleoconservatism (sometimes shortened to paleocon) is a term
for a conservative political philosophy found primarily in the United States
stressing tradition, limited government, civil society, anti-colonialism, anti-
corporatism and anti-federalism, along with religious, regional, national and
Western identity. Chilton Williamson, Jr. describes paleoconservatism as "the
expression of rootedness: a sense of place and of history, a sense of self
derived from forebears, kin, and culture—an identity that is both collective
and personal". Paleoconservatism is not expressed as an ideology and its
adherents do not necessarily subscribe to any one party line.
Paleoconservatives in the 21st century often highlight their points of
disagreement with neoconservatives, especially regarding issues such as
military interventionism, illegal immigration and large amounts of legal
immigration, affirmative action, and foreign aid, to which they are opposed.
They also criticize social welfare and social democracy, which some refer to as
the "therapeutic managerial state", the "welfare-warfare state" or "polite
totalitarianism". They see themselves as the legitimate heirs to the American
conservative tradition. Paul Gottfried is credited with coining the term in the
1980s. He says the term originally referred to various Americans, such as
conservative and traditionalist Catholics and agrarian Southerners, who turned
to anticommunism during the Cold War. Paleoconservatism is closely linked with
distributism. Paleoconservative thought has developed within the pages of the
Rockford Institute's "Chronicles: A Magazine of American Culture." Pat Buchanan
was heavily influenced by its articles and helped create another paleocon
publication, "The American Conservative". Its concerns overlap those of the Old
Right that opposed the New Deal in the 1930s and 1940s, as well as American
social conservatism of the late 20th century expressed, for example, in the
book "Single Issues" by Joseph Sobran. Core beliefs. Name. The prefix "paleo"
derives from the Greek root "" meaning "ancient" or "old". It is somewhat
tongue-in-cheek, and refers to the paleocons' claim to represent a more
historic, authentic conservative tradition than that found in neoconservatism.
Adherents of paleoconservatism often describe themselves simply as "paleo-."
Rich Lowry of "National Review" claims the prefix "is designed to obscure the
fact that it is a recent ideological creation of post-Cold War politics." The
paleoconservatives use the suffix conservative somewhat differently from some
US opponents of leftism. Paleocons may reject attempts by Rush Limbaugh and
others to graft short-term policy goals—such as school choice, enterprise
zones, and faith-based initiatives—into the core of conservatism. This is
mainly due to the paleoconservative's desire to see these incorporated as long-
term institutional goals, rather than short-term victories for the movement
itself. In this way, paleocons are generally regarded as taking the "long view"
toward US conservatism, willing to suffer temporary setbacks while never taking
their aim off the goal of establishing the primacy of conservative thought into
US politics. http://www.chroniclesmagazine.org/Chronicles/March2004/
0304Principalities.html The earliest mention of the word "paleoconservative"
listed in Nexis is an article by J. Patrick Lewis in the October 20, 1984,
issue of "The Nation", referring to academic economists who allegedly work to
redefine poverty. The American Heritage Dictionary (fourth edition) lists a
generic, informal use of the term, meaning "extremely or stubbornly
conservative in political matters." Outside of the United States, the word is
sometimes spelled "palaeoconservative". Conservative heritage. Many
paleoconservatives identify themselves as "classical conservatives" and trace
their philosophy to the Old Right Republicans of the interwar period which
influenced the U.S. not to join the League of Nations, reduce immigration with
the passage of the Immigration Act of 1924, and oppose Franklin Roosevelt. They
often look back even further, to Edmund Burke, as well as the anti-federalist
movement that stretched from the days of Thomas Jefferson to John C. Calhoun.
Francis, Samuel, "Statement of Principles", Feb. 24, 2004 (republished at
various journals) They are also strongly critical of neoconservatives and their
sympathizers in print media, talk radio and cable TV news.  By contrast,
paleocons see neoconservatives as empire-builders and themselves as defenders
of the republic, pointing to Rome as an example of how an ongoing campaign of
military expansionism can destroy a republic. On some issues, many paleocons
are hard to distinguish from others on the conservative spectrum. For example,
they tend to oppose abortion on demand and gay marriage, while supporting
capital punishment, handgun ownership and an original intent reading of the
U.S. Constitution. On the other hand, paleocons are often more sympathetic to
environmental protection, animal welfare, and anti-consumerism than others on
the US Right. Human nature, tradition and reason. Paleoconservatives argue that
since human nature is limited and finite, any attempt to create a man-made
utopia is headed for disaster and potential carnage. Instead, they lean toward
tradition, family, customs, religious institutions and classical learning to
provide wisdom and guidance.  [http://www.umsystem.edu/upress/spring2004/
mcdonald.htm russell kirk and the age of ideology by w. wesley mcdonald
Certain paleoconservatives say that tradition is a better guide than reason.
For example, Mel Bradford wrote that certain questions are settled before any
serious deliberation concerning a preferred course of conduct may begin. This
ethic is based in a "culture of families, linked by friendship, common enemies,
and common projects." So a good conservative keeps "a clear sense of what
Southern grandmothers have always meant in admonishing children, we don't do
that." There is no question of "resisting change." The only question is what
can and should be salvaged from "devouring time." Conservation is a labor, not
indolence, and it takes discrimination to identify and save a few strands of
tradition in the incessant flow of mutability. In fact conservation is so hard
that it could never be achieved by sheer conscious effort. Most of it has to be
done by habit, as when we speak in such a way as to make ourselves understood
by others without their having to consult a dictionary, and thereby give a
little permanence to the kind of tradition that is a language.  Concrete roots.
Many paleocons also say that Westerners have lost touch with their classical
and European heritage, to the point that they are in danger of losing their
civilization. Robert S. Griffin notes that paleocons fear the United States
becoming a "secularized, homogenized, de-Europeanized, pacified, deluded,
manipulated, lowest-common-denominator-leveled, popular-culture-dopified
country" http://www.chroniclesmagazine.org/cgi-bin/hardright.cgi/
Da_Vinci_Code_Prote.writeback  Some paleocons also profess a conservative
value-centered historicism, which Gottfried defines as "the belief that
historical circumstances set values." This is distinguished from nihilism,
postmodernism and moral relativism. Samuel Francis argued that this position is
a "Burkean appeal to tradition." For example, Edmund Burke wrote in his
"Reflections on the Revolution in France."   Anti-Federalism. Anti-Federalism
is another key aspect of paleoconservatism, which adherents see as an antitype
to the managerial state. The paleocon flavor urges honoring the principle of
subsidiarity, that is, decentralized government, local rule, private property
and minimal bureaucracy. In an international context, this view would be known
as federalism and paleocons often look to John C. Calhoun for inspiration.
http://www.chroniclesmagazine.org/cgi-bin/hardright.cgi/Anarcho-
Tyranny_Roc.writeback Russell Kirk, for example, argued that most government
tasks should be performed at the local or state level. This is intended to ward
off centralization and protect community sentiment by putting the decision-
making power closer to the populace. He rooted this in the Christian notion of
original sin; since humanity is flawed, society should not put too much power
in a few hands. Gerald J. Russello concluded that this involved "a different
way of thinking about government, one based on an understanding of political
society as beginning in place and sentiment, which in turn supports written
laws." This anti-federalism extends to culture too. In general, this means that
different regional groups should be able to maintain their own distinct
identity. For example, Thomas Fleming and Michael Hill argue that the American
South and every other region have the right to "preserve their authentic
cultural traditions and demand the same respect from others." In their Southern
context they call on citizens to "take control of their own governments, their
own institutions, their own culture, their own communities and their own lives"
and "wean themselves from dependence on federal largesse." http://
www.leagueofthesouth.net/static/homepage/intro_articles/newdixiemanifesto.html
In a similar fashion, Pat Buchanan argued during the 1996 campaign that the
social welfare should be left to the control of individual states. He also
called for abolishing the U.S. Department of Education and handing decision-
making over to parents, teachers and districts. Controversies such as
evolution, busing and curriculum standards would be settled on a local basis.
In addition, he opposed a 1998 Puerto Rican statehood plan on the grounds that
the island would be ripped from its cultural and linguistic roots: "Let Puerto
Rico remain Puerto Rico, and let the United States remain the United States and
not try to absorb, assimilate and Americanize a people whose hearts will
forever belong to that island." Family. Paleocons often argue that modern
managerial society is a threat to stable families. Allan C. Carlson, former
president of the Rockford Institute, argues that  He calls this a universal
rule of human nature, true for Westerners and non-Westerners alike. He also
argues that happiness "comes through natural family bonds" and that "the future
of any nation shall be by way of the family." He defines family as "a man and a
woman living in a socially sanctioned bond called marriage for the purposes of
propagating and rearing children, sharing intimacy and resources, and
conserving lineage, property, and tradition." To be human is to be familial.
Any significant departure from the family rooted in stable marriage, the
welcoming of children, and respect for ancestors and posterity—any deviation
from this social structure makes us in a way less "human": that is, I think it
fair to say, the true message of modern science. [http://www.sobran.com/
columns/2003/030805.shtml Sobran Column - Is the Pope Square?  Post-family
order. Allan C. Carlson says that we live in a "post-family order", in which
elites no longer accept the centrality of family life. In response, he calls
for a pro-active social conservatism that seeks "real alternatives to the
centralized ‘corporate state’ that are compatible with liberty and family
life." He argues that there is a permanent tension between the family and
"individualist, industrialized society." He says the modern "abstract state"
too often sees the family as "its principal rival" and tries to suppress it. It
can also hurt family living by the unintended consequences of public policy
with good intentions. He also chides U.S. Republicans "for consistently
favoring Wall Street over Main Street." As an alternative to the "abstract
state", Carlson argues the state must recognize that men and women "are
different in reproductive, economic, and social functions", even though they
share political and property rights. He says that churches and other religious
bodies must step in and help rebuild "family-centered communities." As for
common people, he says, Men and women are both called home to rebuild families
with an inner sanctity, to relearn the authentic meanings of the ancient words
husbandry and housewifery, and to exercise the natural family functions of
education, the care of the weak, charity, and a common economic life. Carlson
argues that the family's greatest challenge in the early 21st century comes
from what he calls "soft totalitarianisms", which are "packaged around a
militant secular individualism, but still seeking to build a marriage-free,
post-family order." This includes same-sex marriage, the Left's association of
family values with abortion, and "equity feminism". Samuel T. Francis uses
similar ideas to argue that society should regulate sexual behavior,
specifically laws against sodomy and gays in the military. Polemics. Other
contemporary luminaries include Donald Livingston, a Professor of Philosophy at
Emory and corresponding editor for "Chronicles"; Paul Craig Roberts, an
attorney and former Reagan administration Treasury official; commentator Joseph
Sobran (died 2010), a columnist and contributing editor for "Chronicles";
novelist and essayist Chilton Williamson, senior editor for books at
"Chronicles"; classicist Thomas Fleming, editor of "Chronicles"; and historian
Clyde N. Wilson, long-time contributing editor for "Chronicles". Another
prominent paleoconservative, Theodore Pappas, is the current executive editor
of "Encyclopædia Britannica". The movement combines disparate people and ideas
that might seem incompatible in another context. Such diversity of thought
echoes the paleo opposition to ideology and political rationalism, reflecting
the influence of thinkers like Russell Kirk and Michael Oakeshott. Pat Buchanan
argues that a good politician must "defend the moral order rooted in the Old
and New Testament and Natural Law"—and that "the deepest problems in our
society are not economic or political, but moral." On the other hand, Samuel
Francis complained that the "Religious Right" focuses on certain social issues
and neglects other civilizational crises. Kirkian legacy. Russell Kirk
(1914–94) is a key figure in paleoconservatism, in that several of his books
present an outline of a pervasive Anglo-American conservative tradition that
exists despite many other distinctions. His own career stretched long enough to
for him to defend Robert Taft in the 1950s, write for "National Review" during
the Cold War, criticize neoconservatism in the 1980s, and give speeches
supporting Buchanan in 1992. One neoconservative writer, Dan Himmelfarb, even
refers to Kirk's "The Conservative Mind" as "the seminal work of
paleoconservatism", even though it was first published in 1953. In addition,
Kirk said Christianity and Western Civilization are "unimaginable apart from
one another." Kirk called libertarians "chirping sectaries", quoting T. S.
Eliot, and said that they and conservatives have nothing in common. He called
the movement "an ideological clique forever splitting into sects still smaller
and odder, but rarely conjugating." He said a line of division exists between
believers in "some sort of transcendent moral order" and "utilitarians
admitting no transcendent sanctions for conduct." He put libertarians in the
latter category. Kirk also popularized the Anglo-Irish statesman Edmund Burke
as the prototypical conservative—and many paleocons consider him a hallowed
ancestor. For them, he represents a vital link between the American right and
the greater tradition of British customs and common law. As such, his ideas are
a touchstone for a conservatism that respects tradition, while rejecting
authoritarianism. Precursors. In the United States, the Southern Agrarians,
John T. Flynn, Albert Jay Nock, Garet Garrett, Robert R. McCormick, Felix
Morley, and Richard M. Weaver among others, articulated positions that have
proved influential among contemporary paleoconservatives. Some paleocons
enthusiastically embrace the decentralizing tenets of the Anti-Federalists,
such as John Dickinson and George Mason. Neoconservative critic David Brooks
lists William Jennings Bryan, T. S. Eliot, Allen Tate, John Crowe Ransom,
Cleanth Brooks, and Walker Percy as major paleo influences. The German-born
Johannes Althusius and his tract "Politica", with its core emphasis on the
principle of subsidiarity, has proven influential as well.  Some non-Catholic
paleocons, such as Sam Francis, complained that this tradition is
overrepresented among conservative intellectuals, thus putting the movement out
of step with Middle America. He reluctantly acknowledged the Southern
Presbyterian influence upon his own thinking. In addition, precursors of a
Protestant paleoconservatism can be seen in 19th century figures such as Robert
Lewis Dabney, Charles Hodge, Friedrich Julius Stahl, Abraham Kuyper and
Guillaume Groen van Prinsterer. Many paleocons also look to more modernist or
historicist sources, such as Machiavelli, Hobbes and even Gramsci for
intellectual ammunition. Contrarian Leftists such as Eugene Genovese,
Christopher Lasch and Paul Piccone also influenced the movement. Samuel Francis
even explored the nihilistic fiction of H. P. Lovecraft. To them, such thinkers
help explain modernity, power relationships, and show how managerial society
subverted Western traditions. Some modern European continental conservatives,
such as Frenchmen Jacques Barzun, Alain de Benoist, and René Girard, have a
mode of thought and cultural criticism esteemed by many paleoconservatives.
Southern tradition.  In the 1995 "New Dixie Manifesto", Fleming and Michael
Hill argued that Southerners are pelted with ethnic slurs, denied self-
government and stripped of their symbols, including the Confederate flag. Like
any other people, they have the right to their history and cultural identity.
"After so many decades of strife", they wrote, "black and white Southerners of
good will should be left alone to work out their destinies, avoiding, before it
is too late, the urban hell that has been created by the lawyers, social
engineers and imperial bureaucrats who have grown rich on programs that have
done nothing to help anyone but themselves."  chroniclesmagazine.org Francis,
while endorsing "authentic federalism," stopped short at supporting a
contemporary return to Southern secessionism, saying it is impractical and that
the main political line of division in the United States is not between the
regions of North and South (insofar as such regions can still be said to exist)
but between elite and nonelite. He said that Middle Americans in both regions
face the same threats. They do not shy away from expressing their true beliefs,
and if they supported slavery they would probably say so. They merely believe
in the social hierarchies. In those southern communities, they say, social
roles were crucial to happiness and ordered sociability. "Aristotle recognized
that a well-ordered society protected an ascending order of good through the
institutionalization of rank", Fleming and co-author Paul Gottfried wrote in
their book "The Conservative Movement". They are talking about the social
pecking order in old-time towns—the folks who live on the hill, the merchants
on Main Street, the village idiot on the green. On a larger scale, the
paleocons contrast the virtues of the republic with the corruptions of empire.
The empire throws its weight around in the world; the republic minds its own
business. Fusionism. William F. Buckley, Jr. was an unwitting influence on
paleoconservatism. During the Cold War, his "National Review" magazine vowed to
stand "athwart history, yelling Stop." It promoted both Burke and Kirk, along
with Frank Meyer's theory of fusionism; it suggested that conservatives and
libertarians reduce arguments with one another and present a united front
against Communism. Many first-generation paleocons were "National Review"
supporters, but slowly grew weary as the journal reflected more and more
neoconservative influence, starting in the 1970s. "Chronicles" founder Leopold
Tyrmand complained that the movement gave political solutions to cultural
problems. Open hostility broke out in the mid-1980s and was never resolved.
Some paleocons argued that fusionism failed and suggested a new alliance on the
right to stand outside the neoconservative consensus. Pat Buchanan's statement
that "We are old church and old right, anti-imperialist and anti-
interventionist, disbelievers in "Pax Americana"" reflects this new coalition.
William Rusher, former publisher of Buckley's magazine, claims that paleocons
are not "representative" conservatives. "The break between the National Review
and the paleoconservatives is no tempest in a teapot", he says. "It may well
determine the direction of American foreign policy for decades to come." One
problem, according to Paul Gottfried and Samuel Francis, was that this was an
"archaic conservatism." This means it saw too much continuity between ancient
traditions and the contemporary West, which was in "mortal combat" with
Communists and other enemies. Gottfried says the problem with this mindset,
which he finds even in Russell Kirk, is that it missed that "the U.S. was then
clearly on its way to becoming a self-identified multicultural society overseen
by a post-Christian managerial elite." So these conservatives became too
optimistic about modern-day civic virtue. Looking back, Thomas Fleming remarked
that One notable group, the Intercollegiate Studies Institute (ISI), still
follows the old fusionism. It showcases both neoconservative and Old Right
ideas, such as anti-interventionism, limited government and cultural
regionalism, in its publications and conferences. While they favor free-market
solutions they tend to recognize the limitations of the market, or as economist
Wilhelm Roepke says, "the market is not everything." ISI scholarship includes
analysis of agrarian and distributist works, along with the idea of an "humane
economy." Burnham revolution. If we could somehow take out the ideology, change
the minds of those who control the state, and convert them into paleo-
conservatives, the state apparatus itself would be neutral. What really
animates its drive toward a totalitarian conquest and reconfiguration of
society and the human mind itself comes from the ideology that the masters of
the managerial state have adopted, a force that is entirely extraneous and
largely accidental to the structure by which they exercise power. International
parallels. As paleoconservatism germinated as a reaction to neoconservatism,
most of its development as a distinct political tendency under that name has
been in the United States, although there are parallels in the traditional Old
Right of other Western nations. French conservatives such as Jean Raspail, and
British conservatives such as Enoch Powell, Peter Hitchens, Antony Flew (whom
the Rockford Institute awarded the Ingersoll Prize), John Betjeman, and Roger
Scruton as well as Scruton's "Salisbury Review" and Derek Turner's "Quarterly
Review", emphasize skepticism, stability, and the Burkean inheritance, and may
be considered broadly sympathetic to paleo values. For example, Hitchens wrote,
in opposition to the Iraq War, From , mirrored on LewRockwell.com Note the One
Nation movement in 1990s Australia, Germany's Junge Freiheit, and Italy's Lega
Nord. And compare the Russian dissidents Andrei Navrozov and Aleksandr
Solzhenitsyn. Heredity and human nature. Biology, genes and behavior. While in
the past, many paleocons have criticized Darwinism, as such theories become
widely accepted in society, many paleoconservative intellectuals have become
interested in the findings of anthropology, genetics, and sociobiology for
insight into human behavior. Murphy says that Thomas Fleming was influenced by
the works of writers like E. Evans-Pritchard and Edward O. Wilson. While
criticizing evolutionary biologists like Stephen Jay Gould they see evidence
for traditional values in these fields. The Rockford Institute even awarded
sociobiologist Edward O. Wilson a 1989 Ingersoll Prize. For Fleming, human
nature is rooted in the biological family; consequently, the extension of state
power he sees as thoroughly deleterious. Family adhesion is the glue of our
biologically determined natural social environment. From John Locke and Jean-
Jacques Rousseau to existentialism (and by implication, nihilism) and social
fragmentation, the way is shorter than we think. The principle that society
consists of a social bond created contractually between each member and every
other, is in accordance with the existentialist belief that existence precedes
essence. For the existentialist, man creates his nature and his history by
existing and the actions which constitute that existence and not by virtue of a
biological inheritance or the unfolding of an inherent "human nature". If there
is no God which precedes Man, there is no essence to which his reactions refer.
This implies a rejection of essential or immutable human nature. In this way,
Fleming sees both the sexual revolution and abortion as "a revolution against
human nature and against the most basic elements of human society."
chroniclesmagazine.org Sailer, Steve, [http://www.vdare.com/sailer/nepotism.htm
"Where Dawkins Fears To Tread: Ethnic Nepotism And The Reality Of Race", VDare,
Oct. 3, 2004. Sailer, Steve, [http://www.isteve.com/makingsense.htm "Making
Sense of the Concept of Race: A Race Is An Extremely Extended Family" ISteve,
September 2008. Neoconservatism. "Why I Too Am Not a Neoconservative" by
Stephen Tonsor
