Carpetbagger In United States history, carpetbagger was a pejorative term
Southerners gave to Northerners (also referred to as Yankees) who moved to the
South during the Reconstruction era, between 1865 and 1877. The term referred
to the observation that these newcomers tended to carry "carpet bags," a common
form of luggage at the time (sturdy and made from used carpet). It was used as
a derogatory term, suggesting opportunism and exploitation by the outsiders.
Together with Republicans they are said to have politically manipulated and
controlled former Confederate states for varying periods for their own
financial and power gains. In sum, carpetbaggers were seen as insidious
Northern outsiders with questionable objectives meddling in local politics,
buying up plantations at fire-sale prices and taking advantage of Southerners.
The term "carpetbaggers" was also used to describe the Republican political
appointees who came South, arriving with their travel carpet bags. Southerners
considered them ready to loot and plunder the defeated South. In modern usage
in the U.S., the term is sometimes used derisively to refer to a politician who
runs for public office in an area of the south where he or she does not have
deep community ties, or has lived only for a short time. In the United Kingdom,
the term was adopted to refer informally to those who join a mutual
organization, such as a building society, in order to force it to demutualize,
that is, to convert into a joint stock company, solely for personal financial
gain. Background information. Reforming impulse. Beginning in 1862 Northern
abolitionists moved to areas in the South that had fallen under Union control.
Schoolteachers and religious missionaries arrived in the South, some sponsored
by northern churches. Some were abolitionists who sought to continue the
struggle for racial equality; they often became agents of the federal
Freedmen's Bureau, which started operations in 1865 to assist the vast numbers
of recently emancipated slaves. The bureau established schools in rural areas
of the South for the purpose of educating the mostly illiterate black
population. Other Northerners who moved to the South participated in rebuilding
railroads that had been previously destroyed during the war. During the time
African-Americans were enslaved, they were prohibited from education and
attaining literacy. Southern states had no public school systems, and white
southerners sent their children to private schools or else employed private
tutors. After the war, hundreds of northern white women moved South; many to
teach newly freed African-American children. While some northerners went south
with reformist impulses, many others went South merely to exploit the chaotic
situation for personal gain. Economic motives. Many carpetbaggers were
businessmen who purchased or leased plantations and became wealthy landowners,
hiring freedmen to do the labor. Most were former Union soldiers eager to
invest their savings in this promising new frontier, and civilians lured south
by press reports of "the fabulous sums of money to be made in the South in
raising cotton." Foner notes that "joined with the quest for profit, however,
was a reforming spirit, a vision of themselves as agents of sectional
reconciliation and the South's "economic regeneration." Accustomed to viewing
Southerners—black and white—as devoid of economic initiative and self-
discipline, they believed that only "Northern capital and energy" could bring
"the blessings of a free labor system to the region." Carpetbaggers tended to
be well educated and middle class in origin. Some had been lawyers,
businessmen, newspaper editors, Union Army members and other pillars of
Northern communities. The majority (including 52 of the 60 who served in
Congress during Reconstruction) were veterans of the Union Army. Leading "black
carpetbaggers" believed the interests of capital and labor identical, and the
freedmen entitled to little more than an "honest chance in the race of life."
Many Northern and Southern Republicans shared a modernizing vision of upgrading
the Southern economy and society, one that would replace the inefficient
Southern plantation regime with railroads, factories and more efficient
farming. They actively promoted public schooling and created numerous colleges
and universities. The Northerners were especially successful in taking control
of Southern railroads, aided by state legislatures. In 1870 Northerners
controlled 21% of the South's railroads (by mileage); 19% of the directors were
from the North. By 1890 they controlled 88% of the mileage; 47% of the
directors were from the North. Examples of prominent carpetbaggers in state
politics. Mississippi. Union General Adelbert Ames, a native of Massachusetts,
was appointed military governor and later was elected as Republican governor of
Mississippi during the Reconstruction era. Ames tried unsuccessfully to ensure
equal rights for black Mississippians. His political battles with the
Southerners and African Americans ripped apart his party. The "Black and Tan"
(biracial) constitutional convention in Mississippi in 1868 included 29 white
Southerners, 17 Southern freedmen and 24 nonsoutherners, nearly all of whom
were veterans of the Union Army. They included four men who had lived in the
South before the war, two of whom had served in the Confederate States Army.
Among the more prominent were Gen. Beroth B. Eggleston, a native of New York;
Col. A. T. Morgan, of the Second Wisconsin Volunteers; Gen. W. S. Barry, former
commander of a Colored regiment raised in Kentucky; an Illinois general and
lawyer who graduated from Knox College; Maj. W. H. Gibbs, of the Fifteenth
Illinois infantry; Judge W. B. Cunningham, of Pennsylvania; and Cap. E. J.
Castello, of the Seventh Missouri infantry. They were among the founders of the
Republican party in Mississippi. They were prominent in the politics of the
state until 1875, but nearly all left Mississippi in 1875 to 1876 under
pressure from the Red Shirts and White Liners. These white paramilitary
organizations, described as "the military arm of the Democratic Party", worked
openly to violently overthrow Republican rule, using intimidation and
assassination to turn Republicans out of office and suppress freedmen's voting.
Albert T. Morgan, the Republican sheriff of Yazoo, Mississippi, received a
brief flurry of national attention when insurgent white Democrats took over the
county government and forced him to flee. He later wrote "Yazoo; Or, on the
Picket Line of Freedom in the South" (1884). Elza Jeffords, a lawyer from
Portsmouth, Ohio, who fought with the Army of the Tennessee, remained in
Mississippi after the conclusion of the Civil War. He was the last Republican
to represent that state in the U.S. House of Representatives, having served
from 1883 to 1885. He died in Vicksburg sixteen days after he left Congress.
The next Republican congressman from the state came eighty years later,
Prentiss Walker of Mize in Smith County, who served a single term from 1965 to
1967. North Carolina. Corruption was a charge made by Democrats in North
Carolina against the Republicans, notes the historian Paul Escott, "because its
truth was apparent." The historians Eric Foner and W. E. B. Du Bois have noted
that Democrats as well as Republicans received bribes and participated in
decisions about the railroad. Gen. Milton S. Littlefield, was dubbed the
"Prince of Carpetbaggers," and bought votes in the legislature "to support
grandiose and fraudulent railroad schemes." Escott concludes that some
Democrats were involved, but Republicans "bore the main responsibility for the
issue of $28 million in state bonds for railroads and the accompanying
corruption. This sum, enormous for the time, aroused great concern." Foner says
Littlefield disbursed $200,000 (bribes) to win support in the legislature for
state money for his railroads, and Democrats as well as Republicans were guilty
of taking the bribes and making the decisions on the railroad. North Carolina
Democrats condemned the legislature's "depraved villains, who take bribes every
day;" one local Republican officeholder complained, "I deeply regret the course
of some of our friends in the Legislature as well as out of it in regard to
financial matters, it is very embarrassing indeed." Extravagance and corruption
increased taxes and the costs of government in a state that had always favored
low expenditure, Escott pointed out. The context was that a planter elite kept
taxes low because it benefited them. They used their money toward private ends
rather than public investment. None of the states had established public school
systems before the Reconstruction state legislatures created them, and they had
systematically underinvested in infrastructure such as roads and railroads.
Planters whose properties occupied prime riverfront locations relied on river
transportation, but smaller farmers in the backcountry suffered. Escott
claimed, "Some money went to very worthy causes— the 1869 legislature, for
example, passed a school law that began the rebuilding and expansion of the
state's public schools. But far too much was wrongly or unwisely spent" to aid
the Republican Party leadership. A Republican county commissioner in Alamance
eloquently denounced the situation: "Men are placed in power who instead of
carrying out their duties . . . form a kind of school for to graduate Rascals.
Yes if you will give them a few Dollars they will liern you for an accomplished
Rascal. This is in reference to the taxes that are rung from the labouring
class of people. Without a speedy reformation I will have to resign my post."
Albion W. Tourgée, formerly of Ohio and a friend of President James A.
Garfield, moved to North Carolina, where he practiced as a lawyer and was
appointed a judge. He once opined that "Jesus Christ was a carpetbagger."
Tourgée later wrote "A Fool's Errand", a largely autobiographical novel about
an idealistic carpetbagger persecuted by the Ku Klux Klan in North Carolina.
South Carolina. A politician in South Carolina who was called a carpetbagger
was Daniel Henry Chamberlain, a New Englander who had served as an officer of a
predominantly black regiment of the United States Colored Troops. He was
appointed South Carolina's attorney general from 1868 to 1872 and was elected
Republican governor from 1874 to 1877. As a result of the national Compromise
of 1877, Chamberlain lost his office. He was narrowly re-elected in a campaign
marked by egregious voter fraud and violence against freedmen by Democratic Red
Shirts, who succeeded in suppressing the black vote in some majority-black
counties. While serving in South Carolina, Chamberlain was a strong supporter
of Negro rights. Some historians of the early 1930s, who belonged to the
Dunning School that believed that the Reconstruction era was fatally flawed
claimed that Chamberlain was later influenced by Social Darwinism to become a
white supremacist. They also wrote that he supported states' rights and
laissez-faire in the economy. They portrayed "liberty" in 1896 as the right to
rise above the rising tide of equality. Chamberlain was said to justify white
supremacy by arguing that, in evolutionary terms, the Negro obviously belonged
to an inferior social order. Charles Stearns, also from Massachusetts, wrote an
account of his experience in South Carolina: "The Black Man of the South, and
the Rebels: Or, the Characteristics of the Former and the Recent Outrages of
the Latter" (1873). Francis Lewis Cardozo, a black minister from New Haven,
Connecticut, served as a delegate to South Carolina's Constitutional Convention
(1868). He made eloquent speeches advocating that the plantations be broken up
and distributed among the freedmen. They wanted their own land to farm and
believed they had already paid for land by their years of uncompensated labor
and the trials of slavery. Louisiana. Henry C. Warmoth was the Republican
governor of Louisiana from 1868 to 1874. As governor, Warmoth was plagued by
accusations of corruption, which continued to be a matter of controversy long
after his death. He was accused of using his position as governor to trade in
state bonds for his personal benefit. In addition, the newspaper company which
he owned received a contract from the state government. Warmoth supported the
franchise for freedmen. He struggled to lead the state during the years when
the White League, a white Democratic paramilitary organization, conducted an
open campaign of violence and intimidation against Republicans, including
freedmen, with the goals of regaining Democratic power and white supremacy.
They ran Republicans out of office, were responsible for the Coushatta
Massacre, disrupted Republican organizing, and preceded elections with such
intimidation and violence that black voting was sharply reduced. Warmoth stayed
in Louisiana after Reconstruction and following the white Democrats' regaining
political power in the state. He died in 1931 at age 89. Algernon Sidney
Badger, a Boston, Massachusetts native, held various appointed federal
positions in New Orleans only under Republican national administrations during
and after Reconstruction. He first came to New Orleans with the Union Army in
1863 and never left the area. He is interred at Metairie Cemetery there.
Alabama. George E. Spencer was a prominent Republican U.S. Senator. His 1872
reelection campaign in Alabama opened him to allegations of "political betrayal
of colleagues; manipulation of Federal patronage; embezzlement of public funds;
purchase of votes; and intimidation of voters by the presence of Federal
troops." He was a major speculator in a distressed financial paper. Georgia.
Tunis Campbell, a black New York businessman, was hired in 1863 by Secretary of
War Edwin M. Stanton to help former slaves in Port Royal, South Carolina. When
the Civil War ended, Campbell was assigned to the Sea Islands of Georgia, where
he engaged in an apparently successful land reform program for the benefit of
the freedmen. He eventually became vice-chair of the Georgia Republican Party,
a state senator and the head of an African-American militia which he hoped to
use against the Ku Klux Klan. Arkansas. William Hines Furbush, born a slave in
Kentucky in 1839, received an education in Ohio, and migrated to Helena,
Arkansas in 1862. Back in Ohio in February 1865, he joined the Forty-second
Colored Infantry at Columbus. After the war Furbush migrated to Liberia through
the American Colonization Society. He returned to Ohio after 18 months and
moved back to Arkansas by 1870.2004 Furbush was elected to two terms in the
Arkansas House of Representatives, 1873–74 (Phillips County) and 1879–80
(Lee County). In 1873 the state passed a civil rights law. Furbush and three
other black leaders, including the bill's primary sponsor state Sen. Richard A.
Dawson, sued a Little Rock barkeeper for refusing to serve the group service.
The suit resulted in the only successful Reconstruction prosecution under the
state's civil rights law. In the legislature Furbush worked to create a new
county, Lee, from portions of Phillips, Crittenden, Monroe and St. Francis
counties. Following the end of his 1873 legislative term, Furbush was appointed
sheriff by Republican Governor Elisha Baxter. Furbush won reelection as sheriff
twice and served from 1873 to 1878. During his term, he adopted a policy of
"fusion," a post-Reconstruction power-sharing compromise between Democrats and
Republicans. Furbush was originally elected as a Republican, but he switched to
the Democratic Party at the end of his time as sheriff. In 1878, Furbush was
again elected to the Arkansas House. His election is noteworthy because he was
elected as a black Democrat in an election season notorious for white
intimidation of black and Republican voters in black-majority eastern Arkansas.
Furbush is the first known black Democrat elected to the Arkansas General
Assembly. In March 1879 Furbush left Arkansas for Colorado, where he worked as
an assayer and barber. In Bonanza, Colorado he avoided a lynch mob after
shooting and killing a town constable. At the trial he was acquitted of murder.
He returned to Little Rock, Arkansas, by 1888, following another stay in Ohio.
In 1889, he and E. A. Fulton, a fellow black Democrat, announced plans for the
"National Democrat", a party weekly intended to attract black voters to the
Democratic Party. After failing to attract black voters and following white
Democrats' passage of the Arkansas 1891 Election Law that disfranchised most
black voters, Furbush left the state. He traveled to South Carolina and
Georgia, but they soon disfranchised black voters, too. The last stop of
Furbush was in October 1901 at Marion, Indiana's National Home for Disabled
Veterans. He died there on September 3, 1902. He was interred at the Marion
National Cemetery. Texas. Carpetbaggers were least visible in Texas.
Republicans were in power from 1867 to January 1874. Only one state official
and one justice of the state supreme court were Northerners. About 13% to 21%
of district court judges were Northerners, along with about 10% of the
delegates who wrote the Reconstruction constitution of 1869. Of the 142 men who
served in the 12th Legislature, only 12 to 29 were Northerners. At the county
level, they included about 10% of the commissioners, county judges and
sheriffs. New Yorker George T. Ruby was sent as an agent by the Freedmen's
Bureau to Galveston, Texas, where he settled. Later elected a Texas state
senator, Ruby was instrumental in various economic development schemes and in
efforts to organize African-American dockworkers into the Labor Union of
Colored Men. When Reconstruction ended Ruby became a leader of the Exoduster
movement, which encouraged Southern blacks to homestead in Kansas to escape
white supremacist violence and the oppression of segregation. Historiography.
The Dunning school of American historians (1900–1950) viewed carpetbaggers
unfavorably, arguing that they degraded the political and business culture. The
revisionist school in the 1930s called them stooges of Northern business
interests. After 1960 the neoabolitionist school emphasized their moral
courage. Modern use. United Kingdom. "Carpetbagging" was used as a term in
Great Britain in the late 1990s during the wave of demutualizations of building
societies. It indicated members of the public who joined mutual societies with
the hope of making a quick profit from the conversion. Contemporarily speaking,
the term carpetbagger refers to roving financial opportunists, often of modest
means, who spot investment opportunities and aim to benefit from a set of
circumstances to which they are not ordinarily entitled. In recent years the
best opportunities for carpetbaggers have come from opening membership accounts
at building societies for as little as £1, to qualify for windfalls running
into thousands of pounds from the process of conversion and takeover. The
influx of such transitory ‘token’ members as carpetbaggers, took advantage
of these nugatory deposit criteria, often to instigate or accelerate the trend
towards wholesale demutualisation. Investors in these mutuals would receive
shares in the new public companies, usually distributed at a flat rate, thus
equally benefiting small and large investors, and providing a broad incentive
for members to vote for conversion-advocating leadership candidates. The word
was first used in this context in early 1997 by the chief executive of the
Woolwich Building Society, who announced the society's conversion with rules
removing the most recent new savers' entitlement to potential windfalls and
stated in a media interview, "I have no qualms about disenfranchising
carpetbaggers." Between 1997 and 2002, a group of pro-demutualization
supporters “Members for Conversion” operated a website, carpetbagger.com,
which highlighted the best ways of opening share accounts with UK building
societies, and organized demutualization resolutions. This led many building
societies to implement "anti-carpetbagging" policies, such as not accepting new
deposits from customers who lived outside the normal operating area of the
society. World War II. During World War II, the U.S. Office of Strategic
Services surreptitiously supplied necessary tools and material to anti-Nazi
resistance groups in Europe. The OSS called this effort Operation Carpetbagger,
and the modified B-24 aircraft used for the night-time missions were referred
to as "carpetbaggers." (Among other special features, they were painted a
glossy black to make them less visible to searchlights.) Between January and
September 1944, Operation Carpetbagger ran 1,860 sorties between RAF
Harrington, England, and various points in occupied Europe. Australia. In
Australia, the term "carpetbagger" refers to unscrupulous dealers and business
managers in Indigenous Australian art. The term "carpetbagger" was also used by
John Fahey, a former Premier of New South Wales and federal Liberal finance
minister, in the context of shoddy "tradespeople" who travelled to Queensland
to take advantage of victims following the 2010–2011 Queensland floods. The
United States. The awards season blog of The New York Times is entitled "The
Carpetbagger." The blog covers the Golden Globes, the Oscars, and other red-
carpet awards events. Cuisine. A carpetbag steak or carpetbagger steak refers
to an end cut of steak that is pocketed and stuffed with, but not limited to,
oysters, mushrooms, bacon, blue cheese and/or garlic. The steak is then sutured
with toothpicks or thread. Although its origin is unclear, it may indicate a
connection with carpetbaggers or to gluttony.
