Paradox of voting The paradox of voting, also called Downs paradox, is that for
a rational, self-interested voter, the costs of voting will normally exceed the
expected benefits. Because the chance of exercising the pivotal vote (i.e., in
an otherwise tied election) is minuscule compared to any realistic estimate of
the private individual benefits of the different possible outcomes, the
expected benefits of voting are less than the costs. The fact that people do
vote is a problem for public choice theory, first observed by Anthony Downs.
Responses. Alternative responses modify the postulate of egoistic rationality
in various ways. For example, Brennan and Lomasky suggest that voters derive
'expressive' benefits from supporting particular candidates. However, this
implies that voting choices are unlikely to reflect the self-interest of
voters, as is normally assumed in public choice theory; that is, rational
behavior is restricted to the instrumental as opposed to the intrinsic value of
actions. Some have hypothesized that voting is linked genetically with evolved
behaviors such as cooperation. One study of identical and fraternal twins'
voting patterns concluded that 60% of differences in turnout among twins can be
accounted for by genetics, but another interpretation of this study put the
figure at 40%. Another suggestion is that voters are rational but not fully
egoistic. In this view voters have some altruism, and perceive a benefit if
others (or perhaps only others like them) are benefited. They care about
others, even if they care about themselves more. Since an election affects many
others, it could still be rational to cast a vote with only a small chance of
affecting the outcome. This view makes testable predictions: that close
elections will see higher turnout, and that a candidate who made a secret
promise to pay a given voter if they win would sway that voter's vote less in
large and/or important elections than in small and/or unimportant ones. The
paradox appears to ignore the collateral benefits associated with voting,
besides affecting the outcome of the vote. A voter may feel pride in having
voted, especially for the first time. Researching who or what to vote for may
increase the voter's political knowledge and community awareness, both of which
may contribute to a general sense of civic duty. Even the exercise of walking
to the polling station, if the voter chose to, would be beneficial.
