Parent-Teacher Association A parent-teacher association (PTA) or Parent-
Teacher-Student Association (PTSA) is a formal organization composed of
parents, teachers and staff that is intended to facilitate parental
participation in a school. They occur in the United States, the United Kingdom,
and Japan and may occur in other countries. PTAs in the United States. In the
U.S., most public and private K-8 schools have a PTA, a Parent Teacher
Organization or an equivalent local organization. These organizations also
occur (though less frequently) at high schools and preschools. Groups going by
the PTA acronym are part of the National Parent Teacher Association (National
PTA), a non-profit formerly based in Chicago (now in Alexandria, Virginia) that
was founded on February 17, 1897, with membership open to anyone who believes
in its mission and purposes. The first meeting was held in Marietta, Georgia by
Alice McLellen Birney at Marietta High School. Every person who joins a local
PTA automatically becomes a member of both the state and National PTAs. PTA
membership — including the number of affiliated units and of individual
members — has been declining for several decades. The group boasted more than
12 million members in the late 1960s; today membership is down below 5.2
million. On June 28, 2009, Chuck Saylors became the 113 year old group's first
male president. According to Saylors, only about 10% of the formerly all-female
group's members are men. Local groups doing similar work but that are
unassociated with the state and national structure of the National PTA are
often known as Parent Teacher Organizations (PTOs). A number of other acronyms
are used as well. In the United States, roughly 25% of parent groups are PTAs,
while the remainder are independent. There are 23,000 local organizations
recognized by the National PTA in the United States. PTAs in the United
Kingdom. In the United Kingdom Parent Teacher Associations are common, being
present in the majority of schools (sometimes called Home School Associations).
An NFER study "How are schools involving parents in school life? Annual survey
of trends in education 2007" found that 83 per cent of primary schools, and 60
per cent of secondary schools had a "PTA or equivalent". In England, Wales and
Northern Ireland PTAs may choose to join PTA-UK which describes itself as "The
national charity representing over 13,750 PTAs across England, Wales and
Northern Ireland" which seeks "To advance education by encouraging the fullest
co-operation between home and school, education authorities, central government
and all other interested parties and bodies." Unlike the USA the fact that a
body is called a PTA does not, in itself, imply membership of any national
organisation. There is a separate, similar body for Scotland. "The Scottish
Parent Teacher Council" PTAs are, in general not involved in the Governance of
Schools, that is a matter for the school governing bodies, but in practice
parents who are active in the PTA will tend to engage in the elections of
parent representatives (Parent Governors).
