Pareto efficiency __FORCETOC__ Pareto efficiency, or Pareto optimality, is a
concept in economics with applications in engineering. The term is named after
Vilfredo Pareto (1848–1923), an Italian economist who used the concept in his
studies of economic efficiency and income distribution. In a Pareto efficient
economic allocation, no one can be made better off without making at least one
individual worse off. Given an initial allocation of goods among a set of
individuals, a change to a different allocation that makes at least one
individual better off without making any other individual worse off is called a
Pareto improvement. An allocation is defined as "Pareto efficient" or "Pareto
optimal" when no further Pareto improvements can be made. Pareto efficiency is
a minimal notion of efficiency and does not necessarily result in a socially
desirable distribution of resources: it makes no statement about equality, or
the overall well-being of a society. The notion of Pareto efficiency can also
be applied to the selection of alternatives in engineering and similar fields.
Each option is first assessed under multiple criteria and then a subset of
options is identified with the property that no other option can categorically
outperform any of its members. Pareto efficiency in short. It is commonly
accepted that outcomes that are "not" Pareto efficient are to be avoided, and
therefore Pareto efficiency is an important criterion for evaluating economic
systems and public policies. If economic allocation in any system is not Pareto
efficient, there is potential for a Pareto improvement—an increase in Pareto
efficiency: through reallocation, improvements can be made to at least one
participant's well-being without reducing any other participant's well-being.
It is important to note, however, that a change from an inefficient allocation
to an efficient one is not necessarily a Pareto improvement. Thus, in practice,
ensuring that nobody is disadvantaged by a change aimed at achieving Pareto
efficiency may require compensation of one or more parties. For instance, if a
change in economic policy eliminates a monopoly and that market subsequently
becomes competitive and more efficient, the monopolist will be made worse off.
However, the loss to the monopolist will be more than offset by the gain in
efficiency. This means the monopolist can be compensated for its loss while
still leaving a net gain for others in the economy, a Pareto improvement. In
real-world practice, such compensations have unintended consequences. They can
lead to incentive distortions over time as agents anticipate such compensations
and change their actions accordingly. Under certain idealized conditions, it
can be shown that a system of free markets will lead to a Pareto efficient
outcome. This is called the first welfare theorem. It was first demonstrated
mathematically by economists Kenneth Arrow and Gérard Debreu. However, the
result only holds under the restrictive assumptions necessary for the proof
(markets exist for all possible goods so there are no externalities, all
markets are in full equilibrium, markets are perfectly competitive, transaction
costs are negligible, and market participants have perfect information). In the
absence of perfect information or complete markets, outcomes will generically
be Pareto inefficient, per the Greenwald–Stiglitz theorem. Weak Pareto
efficiency. A "weak Pareto optimum" (WPO) is an allocation for which there are
no possible alternative allocations whose realization would cause every
individual to gain. Thus an alternative allocation is considered to be a Pareto
improvement "only if" the alternative allocation is strictly preferred by "all"
individuals. When contrasted with weak Pareto efficiency, a standard Pareto
optimum as described above may be referred to as a "strong Pareto optimum"
(SPO). Weak Pareto-optimality is "weaker" than strong Pareto-optimality in the
sense that the conditions for WPO status are "weaker" than those for SPO
status: any SPO also qualifies as a WPO, but a WPO allocation is not
necessarily an SPO.
