Parity of esteem "Parity of esteem" is a phrase used in political philosophy to
explain a theory to overcome inter-communal conflict. Promoters of the theory
argue that ""parity of esteem"" "offers a language for negotiation of a post-
conflict equilibrium." This negotiation begins with the communities recognising
the stalemate of their position. Rather than continue trying to out-do each
other, the communities should attempt to negotiate a peaceful coexistence in a
shared physical space despite their cultural differences. ""Parity of esteem""
can be described as a post-Enlightenment theory as it differs drastically from
classical liberal or Marxist rationalism and is contrary to 20th century ideas
of "self-determination" or the 19th century idea of the nation-state. Many of
these anticipated a "withering away of nationalism" once minorities were
brought within the nation-state. These concepts are today the most dominant
within contemporary political theory. As Ernest Gellner writes, "the idea that
political boundaries must be congruent with ethnic ones, that rulers must not
be ethnically distinguishable from the ruled now has a salience and authority
which it has never possessed in the previous history of mankind." Where
Enlightenment theories addressed issues of inter-communinal conflict, it did so
either by promoting "non-sectarianism" against "tribalism" (liberalism) or
emphasising "class politics" against "bourgeois nationalism" (Marxism). Neither
of these approaches recognised the traditions of belligerents in inter-communal
conflicts. ""Parity of esteem"" on the other hand can accepts various
nationalist traditions within one state. Interest in ""parity of esteem""
approaches emerged during the mid-1980s and accelerated following the fall of
the Berlin Wall and the Yugoslav wars of the early-90s. It was recognised that
while there were 184 independent states, there were more than 600 living
language groups and more than 5,000 ethnic groups. Simply put, without enough
geo-political space, slogans such as the Serb nationalist claim for "All Serbs
in One State" were simply unworkable. Since the end of the 1990s, ""Parity of
esteem"" is a core concept to the Northern Ireland peace process. References.
Tom Hennessey and Robin Wilson, 1997, "With All Due Respect: Pluralism and
Parity of Esteem", Democratic Dialogue, ISBN 1-900281-06-6 Northern Ireland
peace process
