Parliamentary informatics Parliamentary informatics is carried on both by
officials of legislatures and by private for-profit and non-profit actors, with
motivations ranging from the administration of parliaments to lobbying and
facilitating democratic discourse. The division of activities between official
and unofficial activity differs widely between polities, even within a single
country. There exists substantial overlap with disciplines such as psephology
and, as far as the text of successfully enacted legislation is concerned, legal
informatics in general. The use of parliamentary informatics is also a rapidly
growing trend in parliamentary monitoring. In a September 2011 joint report
from the National Democratic Institute and World Bank Institute, a survey of
parliamentary monitoring organizations (PMOs) found that parliamentary
informatics are used by approximately 40 percent of PMOs worldwide. The report
states, "These tools can automatically aggregate and organize information from
parliamentary websites and other information sources, generate visualizations
(such as political finance maps), and create new platforms for citizens to
interact with MPs or participate in parliamentary monitoring and policy
analysis." Issues. Access to parliamentary information is the most significant
issue in parliamentary informatics; access may be inhibited technologically
through the provision of parliamentary information in a form not amenable to
processing by machines, or legally, by copyright or other protection of the
parliamentary record. Ultimately, it may be possible to provide citizens with a
comprehensive overview of all the legislation going through parliaments
everywhere in the world, which would allow the tracking of the implementation
of international treaties and of general legislative trends. In a September
2011 report from the National Democratic Institute and World Bank Institute on
parliamentary monitoring organizations, open data is cited as a fundamental
issue for further development. The report explains, "While they have proven
effective in many instances, the most useful informatics tools require the
availability of parliamentary data in machine-readable or “open data”
formats, which remains a challenge in many contexts." Around the world.
Albania. Une Votoj (in English, "I vote") is a website that provides
information about the Parliament of Albania. The site structures Parliamentary
plenary and committee sessions and agendas, and summaries of the proceedings.
It also provides biographical notes about elected members, attendance and
voting records. It was established in 2005, and is presently run by Mjaft!, an
Albanian non-governmental civil society movement. Australia. OpenAustralia.org
is a community-funded site which was launched in June 2008 and automatically
collects and publishes in an easy-to-read format the transcripts of all
Australian Government House of Representatives and Senate debates, questions,
discussions and notices. OpenAustralia.org also made available the Register of
Senators' and Members' Interests online for the first time ever in Australia.
The site was developed in Australia with the assistance of the UK-based
mySociety group who also built TheyWorkForYou from which OpenAustralia has been
adapted. The site allows comment and discussion against debates and allows
users to track the level of participation of Member of the House in debates,
including statistics on their appearances in the House — so citizens can keep
track of their representatives and be fully informed and involved with their
Member's performance in the House. Within weeks of being launched OpenAustralia
attracted a lot of attention and positive feedback from both the public and
government and is set to pave the way for closer working relationships between
government and citizens. Austria. The National Council of Austria is covered by
meinparlament.at. The website was modeled after a German partner website.
Africa. "Africa i-Parliaments" is the portal of the regional initiatives of the
United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs (UN/DESA) aimed at
strengthening the role of African Parliaments in fostering democracy and good
governance by developing common information services and tools, and building
information management capabilities with the objective of making Parliaments i-
nterconnected, i-nformed i-ndependent, or in short, i-Parliaments. AKOMA NTOSO
(Architecture for Knowledge-Oriented Management of African Normative Texts
using Open Standards and Ontologies) proposes an XML document schema providing
sophisticated description possibilities for several Parliamentary document
types (including bills, acts and parliamentary records, etc.). It aims to
standardize simple, technology-neutral representations of Parliamentary
Documents in order to improve inter-Parliamentary cooperation and reduce the
costs of Parliamentary IT support systems. AKOMA NTOSO defines a set of
recommendations and guidelines for e-Parliament services in a Pan-African
context and provides an enabling framework for the effective exchange of
machine readable Parliamentary Documents such as legislation, debate record,
minutes, etc. Bungeni – Parliamentary Information System is an end-to-end
suite of applications that provides a world-leading solution for drafting,
managing, consolidating and publishing legislative and other parliamentary
documents. Bungeni aims to increase the efficiency of parliamentary activities
and make Parliaments more open and accessible to citizens—virtually allowing
them “inside the Parliament” or Bungeni, the Kiswahili word for “inside
the Parliament”. Brazil. Vota Na Web - Votes on the web. Congresso Aberto -
Open Congress. Canada. How'd They Vote? is a volunteer-run website providing
information about the voting record and speeches of MPs, as is
OpenParliament.ca. Chile. Vota Inteligente Vote in an intelligent way.
Colombia. Congreso Visible Czech Republic. KohoVolit.eu is a volunteer-run
website providing a sample of votings both in the Lower and Upper Chamber of
the Czech Parliament allowing the user to test her or his own preferences
against the MPs. Denmark. The Parliament website (Folketinget) has records of
votes, speeches, laws and written questions in plain form. Hvem Stemmer Hvad
has elaborate parliament voting statistics and tracks parliamentary questions
and media mentions of politicians. The site offers access to its data through
an API. The name translates to "Who Votes What". Folkevalg lets users debate
and vote on concrete parliamentary issues. The site is financially supported by
the EU. Folkets Ting is a volunteer-run website with the same data that also
offers rss feeds and lets users comment on content. "Folkets Ting" means
"Peoples Parliament" and is a pun on "Folketinget". European Parliament.
www.votewatch.eu has collected and displays full records of the activities of
the Members of the European Parliament starting with 2004. VoteWatch.eu is
based on the expertize of academics from London School of Economics and
Universite Libre de Bruxelles. The website displays full records of voting,
attendance and other activities (parliamentary questions, speeches, reports
etc.) of MEPs from all 27 member states. Furthermore, it shows a set of
statistics that provide detailed information on how the coalitions are forming
between the various European Political Groups. VoteWatch.eu has been updated
for the 2009-2014 parliamentary term and in early 2010 has also released a
report on the voting behavior in the newly-elected Parliament. The site "It's
Your Parliament" contains voting records of the Members of the European
Parliament (MEPs) and makes it easy to compare voting records of individual
MEPs and political groups. Users can comment on legislation, MEPs and cast
their own votes. In March 2010 "It's Your Parliament" opened an API. ParlTrack
is closely monitoring the legislative process within the European Parliament.
Among other things it covers committee agendas, votes and tracking of dossiers
via email and RSS. Parltrack is available as free software. "Testbeeld Europa"
shows how the Dutch Members of the European Parliament voted. Made by the
nonpartisan, non-profit "Instituut voor Publiek en Politiek" (IPP). IPP in
Romania ran a full site monitoring MEPs. Czech-Slovak KohoVolit.eu (in English,
too) prepares calculators on match between user and political groups and
parties in EP, and individual MEPs. It is available for the 2009- term. "Follow
the Money" which aims to monitor the EU budget and runs the twin sites
"FarmSubsidy" and FishSubsidy. Finland. Kansan Muisti ("the memory of the
people"), follows the Finish Parliament and investigates whether the MPs votes
in accordance with the promises made in voter advice applications before the
elections. Parliament voting data is available as a RESTful API. Germany. The
German federal parliament Deutscher Bundestag and eight state parliaments
(Landtag) (last update: January 2012) are covered by "abgeordnetenwatch.de".
The website supports the transparency of MP's voting behavior and MP's
supplementary income. However, the main focus is on public Q&A. Citizens can
ask questions, which can be answered by members of parliament. Projects like
"Deutschland API", "Bundestagger", "Offenes Köln" and "Wahlversprechen.info"
are associated with the Open Data Network, a non-profit organisation of
software developers and political activists to promote open access, open data,
open government, transparency and participation in Germany. "Offenes Parlament"
is a newer effort by the German chapter of the Open Knowledge Foundation, which
allows citizens to search and subscribe to parliamentary documents and plenary
transcripts. The organization is also operating "Frankfurt gestalten", a local
portal for the inhabitants of Frankfurt am Main. Georgia. Georgian Parliament
has information on MPs, and their voting records. Civilin has information about
legislation. My Parliament aggregates it all together. Ireland.
KildareStreet.com (named for Kildare Street, where the Irish Parliament is
located) is a volunteer-made site launched in April 2009 which collects and
republishes the transcripts of debates in Dáil Éireann and Seanad Éireann,
and parliamentary questions. It, like the Australian project OpenAustralia is
partly derived from the code base of TheyWorkForYou in the UK. It intends to
expand to cover members' expenses and register of interests in the future.
[http://handelaar.org/blog/2009/04/a-substantial-announcement] Israel. Open
Knesset is an open-source, volunteer-run website tracking legislative
processes, voting records and trends of the Israeli parliament (Knesset).
Italy. openparlamento allows to track legislative progress, votes and
Parliament members using official data from italian Parliament. The platform
lets users comment, vote and emend on every parliament act, supplies official
legislative text and rss feeds. openparlamento is a non partisan project
realised by openpolis. The source code is available on a Subversion repository
at http://svn.openpolis.it/repos/openparlamento. Jordan. The Jordanian
Parliament Monitor is a website that provides information about the Parliament
of Jordan. The site presents profiles of all members of Parliament, information
about the MP's deeds and stances on public policy issues, bills and law
proposals, questions to the Cabinet, interventions during plenary and committee
sessions. The website also includes news about the various parties and blocs
represented in Parliament, statistics about the Parliament and about MP's
performance as well as the studies and reports published by the Monitor. It was
established in 2009, and is run by Al-Quds Center for Political Studies, a
Jordanian think-tank based in Amman. Kenya. mzalendo: Eye On Kenyan Parliament
provides electronic information about the Kenyan parliament, which is otherwise
only available offline. Kosovo. KDI Kosovo provides electronic reports and
voting records from Kosovo's parliament. Latvia. GudrasGalvas.lv is a social
networking website between the citizens and their elected parliamentary
representatives and ministers. Every visitor of the site (without registration)
is free to view the profiles of MPs and ministers, read their pre-election
promises, blogs, overview of their on-line and media "footprint", which is
updated automatically. MPs and ministers can also add their blogs, start
discussions as well as post other information at their will and convenience.
Having logged in, the visitors of the site (using their Twitter, Facebook etc.
accounts) can ask questions, post their comments or replies, participate in
discussions and use other interactive features of GudrasGalvas.lv[*] [*] Gudras
galvas - "smart heads", words often used in Latvia when referring to the
Parliament as an institution or its individual members. Lebanon. [http://
www.lpmonitor.org] (the Lebanese Parliamentary Monitor) is a website that
provides information about the Parliament of Lebanon. The site presents
profiles of all 128 Lebanese members of Parliament, information about the MP's
deeds and stances on 50 public policy issues, bills and law proposals,
questions to the Cabinet, interventions during plenary and committee sessions
and law challenges submitted to the Lebanese Constitutional Council. The
website also includes statistics about the Parliament and about MP's
performance as well as the monthly newsletters of the Monitor, summarizing the
parliamentary activities. The Monitor organizes regular public hearings
gathering citizens and one or two MPs from a certain district, to debate the
MPs' commitment to voicing the concerns of aspirations of their constituents.
It was established in 2006, and is run by Nahwa al-Muwatiniya(Towards
Citizenship), a Beirut-based non-governmental civil society organization.
Lithuania. Atviras Seimas (Open Parliament) provides statistics for MP
attendance, votes, speeches, rebellions, travel maps, popularity ratings based
on internet search result counts. It is a volunteer-run website. Mano Seimas
(My Parliament) publishes voting records for interesting or controversial
bills, provides MP's biography and allows to ask questions and receive answers
from MPs. Part of the published data is fetched through API provided by Atviras
Seimas. Mano Seimas is a part of e-democracy project run by Institute of
International Relations and Political Science, Vilnius University.
Manobalsas.lt (myvote) is a smart voting tool allowing users to take a test and
find out which political party and candidate best matches their opinion. The
site launched in 2008 before National parliament elections. More than 300
candidates registered on the site. Malaysia. Citizen Think Tank This domain
expired 24 May 2012 -- no useful information. New Zealand. TheyWorkForYou.co.nz
hosts a user friendly version of the NZ Parliament debate transcripts, and
summarizies activity by bill, by ministerial portfolio and by organisations
making submissions to the Parliament. It also provides lists of how parties
voted on bills in Parliament. It is a volunteer-run project. CommoNZ provides
lists of how MPs votes on non-party votes in Parliament (in New Zealand, many
votes are formally conducted by the parties rather than the individuals, even
in respect of MPs with constituencies). Netherlands. wiekiesjij.nl helps you
find the politician of your choice based on expertise, professional background,
age, religious affiliation, and political experience. More than 90% of Dutch
candidates for national parliament filled-in an online questionnaire on which
the system was based. It was made by the foundation "The New Way of Voting"
(See: Het Nieuwe Stemmen or its international forum: Forum POLITIX.nl tracks
voting behaviour of Dutch political parties. Stemmentracker was launched in the
national elections in November 2006. For crucial votes the site provides an
introduction to the vote and shows how parties voted. A voter can also vote, so
the systems shows the parties that voted most like the user. Made by the
nonpartisan, non-profit Instituut voor Publiek en Politiek (IPP). IPP looking
for possibilities for keeping it up to date in the future. Poland. Sejmometr
monitors the Polish parliament. Mam Prawo Wiedzieć collects and presents
information about Members of Polish Parliament (and Polish Members of the
European Parliament). Portugal. Demo.cratica by Manufactura Independente
Russia. In Russia, projects in the sphere of Government 2.0 are actively
developing. Government Web catalog of all government bodies and official
websites created by any government structure. It includes ratings of websites
quality, special lists of government websites that violates Russian laws and so
on. Government People automatic aggregator of all Russian officials blogs. It
includes ratings of persons, monitors activity by region and person competences
and provides public API for reuse. Project Duma 2.0 is a social initiative
aimed to improve the laws and to find in Internet effective ways of solving
problems. The aim of the project is not simply to inform officials about the
citizens' decisions and initiatives, but lobbying of these ideas at the
legislative level with the maximum of their application. Duma 2.0 - the first
project in Russia, which was created in the global world trend called Citizen
2.0. OpenGovData.ru – a non-profit project dedicated to the availability of
information disclosed by the state for its citizens. Romania. The Institutul
pentru Politici Publice has created a web site with lots of structured data
about the Romanian Parliament. Adrian Moraru, deputy director with IPP said in
an interview with mySociety explains how they have had to obtain much of their
Parliamentary data by court action. The site was first lunched in 2006 and
redesigned in 2010. Slovakia. KohoVolit.eu is a volunteer-run website providing
a sample of votings of the Slovak Parliament allowing the user to test her or
his own preferences against the MPs. United Kingdom. The situation in the
United Kingdom is very active, with several of the major volunteer projects run
by mySociety. The official UK Parliament website provides transcripts of the
Parliamentary debates and votes in plain text form, and these are parsed by a
project known as parlparse into a timeline of publicly available structured XML
files. These files provide the data for TheyWorkForYou, which hosts the
speeches in a user friendly form and creates email alerts and rss feeds, and
Public Whip, which keeps track of the votes and allows for an expression of
their meanings in plain English. Independently of this, the academic Philip
Cowley at Nottingham University researches specifically into how MPs vote
through his Revolts website and publications. Commercial companies Dods,
DeHavilland, SW1A.net,Randall's and many traditional public affairs
consultancies offer paid for parliamentary monitoring and wider research and
intelligence services. United Nations. The website Undemocracy gives
hyperlinked access to transcripts of the General Assembly and Security Council
of the United Nations, with parsed voting records.
