Legislative session A legislative session is the period of time in which a
legislature, in both parliamentary and presidential systems, is convened for
purpose of lawmaking, usually being one of two or more smaller divisions of the
entire time between two elections. In each country the procedures for opening,
ending, and in between sessions differs slightly. Common procedure.
Historically, each session of a parliament would last less than one year,
ceasing with a prorogation during which legislators could return to their
constituencies. In more recent times, development in transportation technology
has permitted these individuals to journey with greater ease and frequency from
the legislative capital to their respective electoral districts (sometimes
called "ridings") for short periods, meaning that parliamentary sessions
typically last for more than one year, though the length of sessions varies.
Legislatures plan their business within a legislative calendar, which lays out
how Bills will proceed before a session ceases, though related, but unofficial,
affairs may be conducted by legislators outside a session or during a session
on days in which parliament is not meeting. While a parliament is prorogued,
between two legislative sessions, the legislature is still constitutedi.e. no
general election takes place and all Members of Parliament thus retain their
seats. In many legislatures, prorogation causes all orders of the bodybills,
motions, etc.to be expunged. Prorogations should thus not be confused with
recesses, adjournments, or holiday breaks from legislation, after which bills
can resume exactly where they left off. In the United Kingdom, however, the
practice of terminating all bills upon prorogation has slightly altered; Public
Bills may be carried over from one legislative session to the next. This break
takes place so as to prevent the upper house from sitting during an election
campaign and to purge all upper chamber business before the start of the next
legislative session. It is not uncommon for a session of parliament to be put
into recess during holidays and then resumed a few weeks later exactly where it
left off. Governments today end sessions whenever it is most convenient, and
often, a new session will begin on the same day that the previous session
ended. In most cases, when parliament reconvenes for a new legislative session,
the head of state, or a representative thereof, will address the legislature in
an opening ceremony. In both parliamentary and presidential systems, sessions
are referred to by the name of the body and an ordinal numberfor example, the
"2nd Session of the 39th Canadian Parliament" or the "1st Session of the 109th
United States Congress". Procedure in Commonwealth realms. In Commonwealth
realms, legislative sessions can last from a few weeks to over a year; between
general elections, there are usually anywhere from one to six sessions of
parliament before a dissolution by either the Crown-in-Council or the expiry of
a legally mandated term limit. Each session begins with a speech from the
throne, read to the members of both legislative chambers either by the reigning
sovereign or a viceroy or other representative. Houses of parliament in some
realms will, following this address, introduce a "pro forma" bill as a symbol
of the right of parliament to give priority to matters other than the monarch
and his or her words (always written by the cabinet of the day). Bills are
numbered within each session; in Canada, for example, each period's government
House Bills are numbered from C-2 to C-200 (for the House of Commons) and S-
2 to S-200 (for the Senate), returning again to C-2 and S-2 following a
prorogation (C-1 and S-1 always being the aforementioned "pro-forma" bill). In
the parliament of the United Kingdom, is immediately preceded by a speech to
both legislative chambers, with procedures similar to the Throne Speech. The
monarch usually approves the oration which recalls the prior legislative
session, noting major bills passed and other functions of the government but
rarely delivers it in person, Queen Victoria being the last to do so. Instead,
the speech is presented by the Lords Commissioners and read by the Leader of
the House of Lords. When King Charles I dissolved the Parliament of England in
1628, after the Petition of Right, he gave a prorogation speech that
effectively cancelled all future meetings of the legislature, at least until he
again required finances. In the British and Canadian parliamentary systems, the
legislature is typically prorogued upon the completion of the agenda set forth
in the Speech from the Throne, called in the UK the "legislative programme",
and remain in recess until the monarch, governor-general, lieutenant governor,
or governor summons parliamentarians again. In Canada, however, prorogations
have triggered speculation that they were advised by the sitting prime minister
for political purposes: for example, in the 40th Parliament, the first
prorogation occurred in the midst of a parliamentary dispute, in which the
opposition parties expressed intent to defeat the minority government, and the
second was suspected by opposition Members of Parliament to be a way to avoid
investigations into the Afghan detainees affair and triggered citizen protests.
Probably the most prominent case of alleged abuse of prorogation in recent
United Kingdom history was the short session of Parliament convened in
September and October 1948, which included a King's Speech on 14 September 1948
and prorogation on 25 October. The Labour government of Clement Attlee used
this tactic to ensure a more rapid enactment of the Parliament Act 1949 which
reduced the powers of the House of Lords. Procedure in the United States. In
the United States, some state legislatures meet only part of the year. If
business arises that must be addressed before the next regular session, the
chief executive (like the governor) may call a special session.
