Participatory economics Participatory economics, often abbreviated parecon, is
an economic system proposed by the 1990s primarily by activist and political
theorist Michael Albert and radical economist Robin Hahnel, among others. It
uses participatory decision making as an economic mechanism to guide the
production, consumption and allocation of resources in a given society.
Proposed as an alternative to contemporary capitalist market economies and also
an alternative to centrally planned socialism, it is described as "an
anarchistic economic vision", and is a form of socialism, since in a parecon
the means of production are owned in common. Albert and Hahnel stress that
parecon is only meant to address an alternative economic theory and must be
accompanied by equally important alternative visions in the fields of politics,
culture and kinship. The authors have also discussed elements of anarchism in
the field of politics, polyculturalism in the field of culture, and feminism in
the field of family and gender relations as being possible foundations for
future alternative visions in these other spheres of society. Stephen R. Shalom
has begun work on a participatory political vision he calls "par polity". Both
systems together make up the political philosophy of Participism, which has
significantly informed the interim International Organization for a
Participatory Society. Participatory Economics has also significantly shaped
the interim International Organization for a Participatory Society. Decision-
making principle. One of the primary propositions of parecon is that all
persons should have a say in decisions proportionate to the degree to which
they are affected by them. This decision-making principle is often referred to
as "self-management". In parecon, it constitutes a replacement for the
mainstream economic conception of economic freedom, which Albert and Hahnel
argue that by its very vagueness has allowed it to be abused by capitalist
ideologues. Work in a participatory economy. Democratic Work Life. Workers in a
Participatory Economy would make decisions about what to do in the workplace
according to the above decision making principle, where workers have say in
proportion to how much they are affected by a decision. Workplace decisions
might be through majority vote, requiring 50% majority. Sometimes a higher
percentage, such as a 2/3 majority, or 80%, or even consensus might be needed.
For instance, upgrades to a plant that would require a great deal of time and
effort for all workers might need greater than 50% vote, as workers would be
affected adversely by the decision. Another example is when a decision might
have advantages but involves some risk, such as raising a heavy beam while
building a bridge that might endanger some workers, but will make the bridge be
built faster. Such a decision would seem to require consensus among the
affected workers, giving any one worker veto power due to the danger. Personal
decisions of any one worker, such as where to place pictures on their desk, do
not require a vote at all, as they affect only one individual. Balanced job
complexes. Some tasks and jobs are more desirable than others, and some tasks
and jobs are more menial than others. So, to achieve an equitable division of
labour, it is proposed that each individual do different tasks, which, taken
together, bring an average desirability and an average level of empowerment.
The main goals are to dissolve economic hierarchy and achieve one class of
workers, and to empower all to make contributions to the workplace. Hahnel and
Albert argue that without balanced job complexes, those with empowering jobs,
such as accounting or management, would be able to formulate plans and ideas,
while others, such as janitors, would not develop the capacity to do so,
neither would they have the training. Without balanced job complexes, most
workers would most likely end up merely ratifying the proposals of empowered
workers, and would have little reason to attend meetings. Compensation for
effort and sacrifice. Albert and Hahnel argue that it is inequitable and
ineffective to compensate people on the basis of their birth or heredity.
Therefore, the primary principle of participatory economics is to reward for
effort and sacrifice. For example, mining work — which is dangerous and
uncomfortable — would be more highly paid than office work for the same
amount of time, thus allowing the miner to work fewer hours for the same pay,
and the burden of highly dangerous and strenuous jobs to be shared among the
populace. Additionally, participatory economics would provide exemptions from
the compensation for effort principle. People with disabilities who are unable
to work, children, the elderly, the infirm and workers who are legitimately in
transitional circumstances, can be remunerated according to need. However,
every "able" adult has the obligation to perform some socially useful work as a
requirement for receiving reward, albeit in the context of a society providing
free health care, education, skills training, and the freedom to choose between
various democratically structured workplaces with jobs balanced for
desirability and empowerment. The starting point for the income of all workers
in participatory economics is an equal share of the social product. From this
point, incomes for personal expenditures and consumption rights for public
goods can be expected to diverge by small degrees reflecting the choices that
individual workers make in striking a balance between work and leisure time,
and reflecting the level of danger and strenuousness of a job as assigned by
their immediate peers. Allocation in a participatory economy. Consumers' and
producers' councils. Albert and Hahnel proposed the creation and organization
of consumers' and producers' councils to implement the decision making
principle. These would be similar to workers' councils, and many individuals
would be eligible for participation on both sides of the principle. Consumers'
councils would act as decision-making bodies for consumption planning, and
producers' councils - which are agglomerations of several workers' councils -
act as decision-making bodies for production planning. Geographically,
consumers' councils could be nested within the same neighborhood councils, ward
councils, city or regional councils and a country council used for political
decision-making through parpolity - parecon's political counterpart. Decisions
would be achieved either through consensus decision-making, majority votes or
through other means compatible with the principle. The most appropriate method
would be decided on by each council. The producers' councils would probably
correspond to workplace councils in each workplace and similar workplaces would
group into nested councils on successively larger geographical scales.
Facilitation Boards. In a proposed Participatory Economy, key information
relevant to converging on an economic plan would be made available by Iteration
Facilitation Boards (IFBs), which, based on proposals from worker/consumer
councils and economic data, present indicative prices and economic projections
at each round of the planning process. The IFB has no decision-making
authority. In theory, the IFB's activity can consist mainly of computers
performing the (agreed upon) algorithms for adjusting prices and forecasts,
with little human involvement. At later stages of the planning process, the
IFBs could present a number of annual plans consistent with the participatory
planning results, to be chosen by a popular vote. The facilitation boards
should function according to a maximum level of radical transparency and only
have very limited powers of mediation, subject to the discretion of the
participating councils. The real decisions regarding the formulation and
implementation of the plan are to be made in the consumers' and producers'
councils. Participatory Planning. The proposed participatory planning procedure
would be a periodic (probably either annual, bi-annual or quarterly) event
where citizens participate to determine which and how many goods to produce.
This would result in new base prices, which could be adjusted between planning
events by Facilitation Boards according to established guidelines to account
for unforeseen circumstances. The process would begin with Facilitation Boards
first announcing a set of indicative prices which workers and consumers would
use, individually and through their councils at each level, to decide on their
production and consumption proposals. Proposals could be made either
collectively through a local consumer council, or individually on a computer;
or any combination of the two. Personal consumption proposals would be a
prediction by each citizen of what goods and services they plan to consume the
next year. Collective consumption proposals would be created by citizens making
proposals for a wider geographical area (e.g. a new recreation center at the
community level or a new power plant at the provincial level) and interested
parties would be able to vote on collective consumption proposals affecting
their region. Workers' councils and producers councils would respond with
production proposals outlining the outputs they propose to produce and the
inputs they believe are required to produce them. Individual workers would
indicate their proposed hours of work, and workers will be able to propose
upgrades and innovations for their workplace. When the proposals are all in,
the IFBs aggregate all the production and consumption proposals for the
different categories of goods and services – inputs into all the production
processes as well as consumer goods – to see if proposed supply and demand
are equal. If they are not equal for every good and service the IFB revises the
set of indicative prices and the process is repeated through successive rounds
until a consistent set of production and consumption proposals is arrived at.
The facilitation boards then implement these final proposals by setting new
prices and organizing production plans. Pareconomists believe it would be
possible for planning iterations to converge on a feasible plan within an
acceptable time delay, and claim this method would lead to prices representing
the estimated marginal social opportunity cost for all goods and services.
Money in a participatory economy. Pareconomists propose replacing conventional
money with a personal voucher system which would be non-transferable between
consumers, and would be only usable at a store to purchase goods. The proposed
electronic "credits" awarded to workers based on their perceived level of
effort and sacrifice would simply be deducted from the workers account when
used to make a purchase, disappearing rather than transferring the credit to
the vendor. People would be able to borrow credits if approved by an
appropriate board, but no interest would be charged. Albert and Hahnel claim
the non-transferability of parecon credits would make it impossible to bribe or
even beg for money. and monetary theft would be impossible. People would still
be free to barter their individual goods with each other, e.g. exchange a couch
for a stereo, but any attempt to create an exchangeable currency would likely
be discouraged, as this might lead to attempts to reinstate money and
capitalism. Credits might be shareable amongst family members, depending on how
the parecon is set up. Albert and Hahnel did not clarify how a currency of this
form would be used in international trading with non-parecon countries. If a
capitalist country refuses to be paid for their bought goods in this way, it is
likely that a parecon nation would use money for international trading, but
keep its unique credit currency for internal purposes. Albert-Hahnel Class
Theory. When analyzing the subject of class and how individuals stratified into
them interact with each other, Albert and Hahnel came to the conclusion that
Marxian class theory and views of class among capitalist economists were
inadequate to assess how economies of all kinds are divided along class lines.
While both agree with many leftist theories of class that view wage-labor as
resulting from the inequality of bargaining power between those who own the
means of production in the economy (owner class) and those who operate them and
produce wealth (working/producer class), they criticize theories which they
claim fail to acknowledge a third class in-between labor and capital; the
professional-managerial class or "Coordinator class". The coordinator class,
they claim, are neither owners of the means of production nor producers of
wealth but rather "monopolizers of empowering work" who's main function is to
act as middle-men between ownership and production. The interests of the
coordinator class are seen as distinct from both workers and owners; this
class's ideal is neither pure capitalism or worker self-management but a
managerial state. Similar to the New Class theory, it is this class Albert and
Hahnel claim which usurped power in former Communist states rather than the
working class and rearranged economic power-structures in their favor.
Opposition to central planning and capitalism. "Economic Justice and Democracy:
From Competition to Cooperation" p. 81, Hahnel, Routledge, 2005. Albert and
Hahnel have voiced detailed critiques of centrally-planned economies in theory
and practice, but are also highly-critical of capitalism. Hahnel claims "the
truth is capitalism aggravates prejudice, is the most inequitable economy ever
devised, is grossly inefficient — even if highly energetic — and is
incompatible with both economic and political democracy. In the present era of
free-market triumphalism it is useful to organize a sober evaluation of
capitalism responding to Friedman's claims one by one." Critique of markets. A
primary reason why advocates of participatory economics perceive markets to be
unjust and inefficient is that only the interests of buyer and seller are
considered in a typical market transaction, while others who are affected by
the transaction have no voice in it. For example when vehicles using fossil
fuels are manufactured, distributed and sold, others outside the transaction
end up bearing costs in the form of pollution and resource depletion. The
market price of vehicles and fuel does not include these additional costs,
which are referred to as "externalities", resulting in prices which will not
accurately reflect aggregate opportunity costs. Mainstream economists largely
acknowledge the problem of externalities but believe they can be addressed
either through Coasian bargaining or the use of Pigovian taxes - extra taxes on
goods that have externalities. According to economic theory, if Pigovian taxes
are set so that the after-tax cost of the good is equal to the social cost of
the good, the direct cost of production plus cost of externalities, then
quantities produced will tend toward a socially optimal level. Hahnel observes,
"more and more economists outside the mainstream are challenging this
assumption, and a growing number of skeptics now dare to suggest that
externalities are prevalent, and often substantial". Or, as E.K. Hunt put it
externalities are the rule rather than the exception, and therefore markets
often work as if they were guided by a "malevolent invisible foot" that keeps
kicking us to produce more of some things, and less of others than is socially
efficient." As long as a market economy is in place, Albert and Hahnel favour
Pigovian taxes over other solutions to environmental problems such as command
and control, or the issuance of marketable permits. However, Hahnel, who
teaches ecological economics at American University, argues that in a market
economy businesses try to avoid the "polluter pays principle" by shifting the
burden of the costs for their polluting activities to consumers. In terms of
incentives he argues this might be considered a positive development because it
would penalize consumers for "dirty" consumption. However it also has
regressive implications since tax incidence studies show that ultimately it
would be poor people who would bear a great deal of the burden of many
pollution taxes. "In other words, many pollution taxes would be highly
regressive and therefore aggravate economic injustice.". He therefore
recommends that pollution taxes be linked to cuts in regressive taxes such as
social security taxes. Robin Hahnel, (2004). "Protecting the Environment in a
Participatory Economy". Retrieved February 13, 2006. Critique of private
ownership and corporations. Advocates of parecon say the basis of capitalism is
the concept of "private" ownership of resources and corporate entities, which
confers upon every owner the right to do with their property as they please,
even though decisions relating to some property may have unwanted effects on
other people. They believe in a capitalist system people outside a corporation
have limited ability to interfere with owners' activities while they abide by
the law. Whilst consumers can influence corporations through their own market
interactions, or through buying and selling of their goods, services, or even
shares, advocates of parecon are unsatisfied with this limited influence,
especially as organization of collective consumer action is difficult in a
market economy. Promoters of parecon hold that corporate lobbying, bribery, and
propaganda campaigns enable pursuit of private profit and power and are not in
the interest of the majority of citizens. Critique of tendency towards
efficiency. Hahnel has also written a detailed discussion of parecon's
desirability compared to capitalism with respect to incentives to innovate. In
capitalism, patent laws, intellectual property rights, industry structures, and
barriers to market entry are institutional features that reward individual
innovators while limiting the use of new technologies. Hahnel notes that, in
contrast, "in a participatory economy all innovations will immediately be made
available to all enterprises, so there will never be any loss of static
efficiency.". Innovation is sometimes the outcome of cumulative creativity,
which pareconomists believe may not be legitimately attributed to individuals.
Participatory economics and socialism. Although participatory economics is not
in itself intended to provide a general political system, clearly its practical
implementation would depend on an accompanying political system. Advocates of
parecon say the intention is that the four main ingredients of parecon be
implemented with a minimum of hierarchy and a maximum of transparency in all
discussions and decision making. This model is designed to eliminate secrecy in
economic decision making, and instead encourage friendly cooperation and mutual
support. This avoidance of power hierarchies puts parecon in the anarchist
political tradition. Stephen Shalom has produced a political system meant to
complement parecon, called Parpolity Although parecon falls under left-wing
political tradition, it is designed to avoid the creation of powerful
intellectual elites or the rule of a bureaucracy, which is perceived as the
major problem of the economies of the communist states of the 20th century.
Parecon advocates recognize that monopolization of empowering labor, in
addition to private ownership, can be a source of class division. Thus, a
three-class view of the economy (capitalists, coordinators, and workers) is
stressed, in contrast to the traditional two-class view of Marxism. The
coordinator class, emphasized in Parecon, refers to those who have a monopoly
on empowering skills and knowledge, and corresponds to the doctors, lawyers,
managers, engineers, and other professionals in present economies. Parecon
advocates argue that, historically, Marxism ignored the ability of coordinators
to become a new ruling class in a post-capitalist society. The archetypal
workplace democracy model, the Wobbly Shop was pioneered by the Industrial
Workers of the World, in which the self-managing norms of grassroots democracy
were applied. While many types of production and consumption may become more
localised under participatory economics, the model does not exclude economies
of scale. Criticisms. David Schweickart suggests Participatory Economics would
be undesirable even if it was possible, accusing it of being: Planning.
Participatory Economics would create a large amount of administrative work for
individual workers, who would have to plan their consumption in advance, and a
new bureaucratic class. Proponents of parecon argue that capitalist economies
are hardly bureaucracy or meeting free, and a parecon would eliminate banks,
advertising, stock market, tax returns and long-term financial planning. Albert
and Hahnel claim that is probable that a similar number of workers will be
involved in a parecon bureaucracy as in a capitalist bureaucracy, with much of
the voting achieved by computer rather than meeting, and those who are not
interested in the collective consumption proposals not required to attend.
Critics suggest that proposals require consideration of an unfeasibly large set
of policy choices, and that lessons from planned societies show that peoples'
daily needs cannot be established well in advance simply by asking people what
they want. Albert and Hahnel note that markets themselves hardly adjust prices
instantaneously, and suggest that in a Participatory Economy Facilitation
boards could modify prices on a regular basis. According to Hahnel these act
according to democratically decided guidelines, can be composed of members from
other regions and are impossible to bribe due to parecon's non-transferable
currency. However, Takis Fotopoulos argues that "no kind of economic
organisation based on planning alone, however democratic and decentralised it
is, can secure real self-management and freedom of choice." Loss of efficiency.
Parecon might reduce efficiency in the workplace. For one, expert and
exceptional workers (e.g. exceptional surgeons and scientists) would not be
performing their tasks full-time. Participatory economics would expect them to
share in "disempowering work" and would not offer opportunities to seek
additional compensation for their high ability or finding solutions to
problems. Theodore Burczak argues that it is impossible for workers to give the
unbiased assessments of the "largely unobservable" characteristics of effort
proposed as the basis for salary levels, and the absence of market "exchange"
mechanisms likewise makes calculating social costs of production and
consumption impossible.
