Party system A party system is a concept in comparative political science
concerning the system of government by political parties in a democratic
country. The idea is that political parties have basic similarities: they
control the government, have a stable base of mass popular support, and create
internal mechanisms for controlling funding, information and nominations. The
concept was originated by European scholars studying the United States,
especially James Bryce and Moisey Ostrogorsky, and has been expanded to cover
other democracies. Giovanni Sartori devised the most widely used classification
method for party systems. He suggested that party systems should be classified
by the number of relevant parties and the degree of fragmentation. Party
systems can be distinguished by the effective number of parties. Party systems
per country. Europe. Italy. Italian party systems are usually considered only
since the foundation of the Italian Republic (1946) as pre-fascist parties
lacked a wide popular base. The party system of the so-called "First Republic"
(1946–1994), though based on a proportional electoral law, saw the dominance
of the Christian Democracy (DC) and the "conventio ad excludendum" against the
Italian Communist Party (PCI). DC and PCI together gathered around 85% of the
votes in average. The system was thus a blocked bipolar system; governments
were very short (in average lasting less than one year) and post-electoral, but
the supporting parties and personnel could not change. With time, some parties
(especially the Italian Socialist Party, PSI) gained momentum, till reaching
the role of government-making in the 1980s. The system was completely destroyed
by the bribery scandals of Tangentopoli, which shattered DC and PSI. According
to Sartori, the two possible degenerations of proportionalism (fragmentation
and lack of party discipline) were reduced by two factors: the stron role of
parties (""partitocrazia"") and the polarization between Christian-democrats
and communists. Therefore, the "first republic" saw a maximum level of 5
effective parties, with only one dominant party. Though more fragmented in the
number of parties, the system was bipolar in its functioning. With time, both
sides saw a strengthening of coalitions (even if with ups and downs) and the
birth of unified parties (the Ulivo federation and then the Democratic Party on
the left, and the People of Freedom party on the right side). The change in the
electoral law in 2005 and the return to proportionality (although with a
majority premium able to transform, in the lower chamber, the plurality in a
55% majority) didn't bring about a return to collusion, while still leaving
such prospect open for the future. Germany. The 2009 Bundestag election in
Germany was characterized by widespread public apathy and record low voter
turnout. Weldon and Nüsser (2010) argue that it solidified a new stable, but
fluid five-party system that they see as a defining feature of the emerging
German political system. The three minor parties each achieved historical bests
at the polls with steep losses for the two traditional Volksparteien. They
report that the increased volatility and fluidity of the party system is
structured along the left-right ideological spectrum with the parties divided
into two major camps and vote-switching much more likely within the respective
camps rather than between them. The 2009 election also marked a devastating
defeat for the SPD, leading some commentators to speculate about the end of the
Social Democratic Party of Germany (SPD) as a "catch-all party" and, against
the backdrop of recent poor performance of center-left parties all across
Europe—perhaps even "the end of social democracy." Finland. Finland was a
Grand Duchy controlled by Russia until 1918. Nationalistic demands from the
peasants and workers for greater use of the Finnish language led to the first
political party: the Finnish Party in 1860. In response, the Swedish-speaking
aristocracy, landowners and businessmen formed their own political party. Thus
emerged the first party system. Canada. According to recent scholarship there
have been four party systems in Canada at the federal level since
Confederation, each with its own distinctive pattern of social support,
patronage relationships, leadership styles, and electoral strategies. Political
scientists disagree on the names and precise boundaries of the eras, however.
Steve Patten identifies four party systems in Canada's political history
Clarkson (2005) shows how the Liberal Party has dominated all the party
systems, using different approaches. It began with a "clientelistic approach"
under Laurier, which evolved into a "brokerage" system of the 1920s, 1930s and
1940s under Mackenzie King. The 1950s saw the emergence of a "pan-Canadian
system", which lasted until the 1990s. The 1993 election — categorized by
Clarkson as an electoral "earthquake" which "fragmented" the party system, saw
the emergence of regional politics within a four party-system, whereby various
groups championed regional issues and concerns. Clarkson concludes that the
inherent bias built into the first-past-the-post system, has chiefly benefited
the Liberals. United States. The concept of party system was introduced by
English scholar James Bryce in "American Commonwealth" (1885). "American Party
Systems" was a major textbook by Charles Merriam in 1920s. In 1967 the most
important single breakthrough appeared, "The American Party Systems. Stages of
Political Development", edited by William Nisbet Chambers and Walter Dean
Burnham. It brought together historians and political scientists who agreed on
a common framework and numbering system. Thus Chambers published "The First
Party System" in 1972. Burnham published numerous articles and books. Closely
related is the concept of "critical elections" (introduced by V. O. Key in
1955), and "realignments." First Party System: This system can be considered to
have developed as a result of the factions in the George Washington
administration. The two factions were Alexander Hamilton and the Federalists
and Thomas Jefferson and the Democratic-Republican Party. The Federalists
argued for a strong national government with a national bank and a strong
economic and industry system. The Democratic-Republicans argued for a limited
government, with a more emphasis on farmers and states' rights. After the 1800
Presidential election, the Democratic-Republicans gained major dominance for
the next twenty years, and the Federalists slowly died off. Second Party
System: This system developed as a result of the one party rule of the
Democratic-Republicans not being able to contain some of the most pressing
issues of the time, namely slavery. Out of this system came the Whig Party and
Henry Clay's American System. Wealthier people tended to support the Whigs, and
the poorer tended to support the Democrats. During the Jacksonian era, his
Democrat Party evolved from Democratic-Republicans. The Whig party began to
break apart into factions, mainly over the issue of slavery. This period lasted
until 1860. Third Party System: Beginning around the time of the start of the
Civil War, this system was defined by bitter conflict and striking party
differences and coalitions. These coalitions were most evidently defined by
geography. The South was dominated by the Democrats who opposed the ending of
slavery, and the North, with the exception of some major political machines,
was dominated by the Republicans, who supported ending slavery. This era was a
time of extreme industrial and economic expansion. The Third Party System
lasted until 1896. Fourth Party System: This era was defined by Progressivism
and immigration, as well as the political aftermath of the American Civil War.
Northeastern business supported the Republicans while the South and West
supported the Democrats. Immigrant groups were courted by both parties. The
Fourth Party System came to an end around 1932. Fifth Party System: This system
was defined by the creation of the New Deal Coalition by President Franklin D.
Roosevelt in response to the Great Depression. This coalition supporting new
social welfare programs brought together many under-privileged, working class,
and minority groups including unions, Catholics, and Jews. It also attracted
African-Americans, who had previously largely supported the Republican Party
due to Lincoln's freeing of the slaves. This era lasted approximately until
1968. Sixth Party System: This system is currently developing. It appears to
have begun with the Civil Rights Act of 1964 the Democrat's subsequently losing
their long dominance of the South in the late 1960s, leading to a Republican
dominance as evidenced by election results. Argentina. Scholars of Argentina
identify two distinct party systems, one in place between 1912 and 1940, the
other emerging after 1946. The first party system was not consistently class
based, but the second was, with the Radical Party representing the middle
classes and the Peronists, workers and the poor.
