Partnership at Drugfree.org The Partnership at Drugfree.org, formerly known as
the Partnership for a Drug-Free America (PDFA) is a New York City-based non-
profit organization which runs campaigns against teenage drug abuse in the
United States. It is notable for mobilizing volunteer talent "against a single
social problem". It focused efforts to "unsell" illegal drugs such as cocaine,
heroin, prescription drugs, marijuana, Ecstasy, and others, as well as
discouraged abuse of alcohol and nitrous oxide by breaking away from a standard
public service approach and doing a coordinated media campaign. While the
agency has focused anti-drug advertising on broadcast media such as television,
there are signs in recent years that it is shifting media dollars to emerging
channels such as video-on-demand, digital technology and particularly the
Internet. The agency's marketing experience was written up as a 58-page
marketing "case study" for study by students at the Harvard Business School.
The agency is perhaps best known for its iconic TV ad "This is your brain on
drugs", but it has made over 3,000 ads by 2011 while pursuing a flexible
strategy. According to its website, its current purpose is to act as a resource
to help parents cope with drug abuse and alcohol abuse by their teenaged
children. History. A departure from standard PSA advertising. The 1960s and
1970s had been turbulent years marked by wider acceptance of drugs than from
previous decades as well as a consumer culture encouraged by advertising in
mass media. There had been sporadic efforts by anti-smoking groups to
discourage cigarette smoking, and tobacco company executives learned that sales
would decline overall if pro-smoking ads were shown in the same proportions as
anti-smoking ads. In the 1980s, the nation faced a serious problem with drug
abuse. At the time the Partnership was created, the nation was in the throes of
the crack cocaine epidemic. Strategic vision. The agency found itself able to
solicit help from many sources, for free. Copywriters often competed for
assignments on a pro bono basis. The agency finagled free media exposure from
print media and broadcast networks including spots during prime time. Later,
when advertising was directed at inner-city youth, media was selected to target
37 large cities. The firm has turned to media planning and placement experts
who work, as well, on a pro bono basis. One report suggested that there was a
wealth of creative talent vying for a chance for assignments. The group was
prepared to feature rather risque push–the–envelope ads; for example, one
advertisement showed a girl with the "barrel of a revolver pushed up one
nostril and a father singing a lullaby to his little daughter from his coffin."
Doria Steedman described the ads as neither pretty nor polite nor nice but
designed deliberately to "disturb and upset." A bandwagon effect happened soon
thereafter: big advertising agencies including Saatchi & Saatchi, J. Walter
Thompson, BBDO Worldwide joined the consortium. Key executives from The New
York Times Company, Procter & Gamble, USA Network and others such as Daniel
Burke of Capital Cities sat on the Partnership's board of directors. Funding.
The Partnership found office space on the 16th floor of the Chrysler Building
in New York City. By 1993, it had 30 employees, according to one estimate. An
early grant of $300,000 from the American Association of Advertising Agencies
helped considerably to pay for rent, salaries, and other expenses, and
subsequent funds were provided by generous grants from the Robert Wood Johnson
Foundation which is a Princeton-based philanthropic organization focusing
exclusively on health care and particularly substance abuse. The foundation's
founder, Robert Wood Johnson II, had built the family firm of Johnson & Johnson
into an international health products maker, and he left the foundation a
generous bequest of stock upon his death in 1968. In addition to these revenue
sources, the organization also holds fundraisers, including an annual awards
dinner; in 2007, one awards dinner at the Waldorf-Astoria Hotel raised $2.2
million. "This is your brain on drugs". Analysis of research suggested that
consumers decided about possibly doing drugs based on two basic considerations:
the risk involved, and the perception of social disapproval. And campaigns were
targeted towards both mindsets: that using drugs "was" risky and that it was
"uncool" among peer groups. The organization first entered the wider public
consciousness in 1987, with its "This is Your Brain on Drugs" broadcast and
print public service advertisements (PSAs). The advertisement used the analogy
that if a person's brain is an egg, then using illegal drugs would be like
frying it. This advertisement was shown repeatedly on broadcast media to the
extent that it became a hallmark for the organization. "Time Magazine"
described the advertisement as "iconic". It has been recognized by marketing
professionals as "one of the most influential" ad campaigns in the history of
marketing, according to numerous sources, and has been applauded as one of the
"most unforgettable images in modern American advertising." "TV Guide" named it
as one of the "top 100 ads of all time". The ad became the organization's
"calling card", according to one account. The agency was able to solicit
generous donations of free media time with an estimated worth of "$1 million
worth of advertising every day" for more than a decade, totalling more than $2
billion in free space and time, according to one estimate. Copywriters from big
city agencies in Los Angeles, Chicago, New York and elsewhere from "250 big-
name ad agencies" contributed their creative expertise. There were other
commercials with a bite, too. For example, in one commercial an angry father
"grills his son about where he learned to smoke pot", and his teenager retorts
ironically: "I learned from you, Dad! I learned it by watching you!"
Coordination with federal anti-drug efforts. The Partnership holds a special
position under law within the National Youth Anti-Drug Media Campaign of the
Office of National Drug Control Policy. It cooperates with government agencies
in many initiatives to try to help reduce drug abuse. In 2010, it worked with
the Drug Enforcement Administration in 2010 in a public relations event
entitled "National Prescription Drug Take-Back Day." The event involved 4,000
so-called "drop spots" for people to discard extra prescription drugs as a way
to lessen the temptation for their abuse. The 1990s. In 1989, Johnson & Johnson
chief executive James E. Burke took over leadership of the organization. He had
been instrumental in growing the large pharmaceutial firm as well as adeptly
handling a difficult crisis "in a forthright way" with "decisive leadership"
when a terrorist had poisoned bottles of one of the company's products and
caused several deaths. Burke brought new contacts and savvy to the operation
and a reputation for the highest ethical standards. The agency picked up real-
life horror stories about the effect of drug abuse, and used these stories at
times in its commercials. For example, a 28-year old former drug user met for
lunch with the Partnership's Doria Steedman, and at one point "pulled out her
teeth" to show the ravages of the drug use, and this idea was used in a
subsequent commercial. At the same time, different drugs were coming in and out
of vogue, sometimes introduced by films such as "Trainspotting". Research
efforts suggested that a key metric for the agency was getting preteens and
teenagers to wait longer and longer before having their "first taste of drugs",
since the longer wait period meant that it became less and less likely that a
child would become a regular drug user. In 1996, Partnership director Ginna
Marston noticed, after examining survey data, disturbing trends indicating that
not just teenagers, but preteens were showing greater smoking of marijuana and
that the problem could no longer be viewed as a "teenage problem only." At a
press conference, Marston told reporters of a new media blitz aimed at "getting
parents involved in the war against drugs. Survey data showed marijuana use had
gone from 230,000 children in 1995 to 460,000 children in 1996, according to
the report. In addition, there continued to be high-profile deaths of
celebrities who had overdosed, such as Jonathan Melvoin of the group The
Smashing Pumpkins, which put pressure on the music industry to take a serious
look at drug influence in pop music. While Rock 'n' roll music has been
described as "steeped in rebellion," there is a long list of musicians who have
abused heroin which includes John Lennon, Keith Richards, Jim Morrison, Jerry
Garcia, Jimi Hendrix, Janis Joplin and Eric Clapton, Kurt Cobain, Shannon Hoon,
Courtney Love, Scott Weiland, Anthony Kiedis, Layne Staley, David Gahan and
others. While heroin can give a "relaxing, euphoric high" lasting for six
hours, the body grows increasingly tolerant and more is needed until addicts
must keep using the drug to stave off withdrawal. Since the agency had been
tracking usage and attitudes, it had the flexibility to adapt to changing
circumstances. Marston and other executives adjusted their media strategy
accordingly as fast-moving trends made one drug "hot" while others fell out of
favor. The campaign was primarily oriented towards television and print media.
An analysis of the Partnership's efforts by "Forbes Magazine" around this time
suggested that it had earned "a single-brand advertising clout" comparable to
McDonald's, while noting that the fast food franchiser outspent the Partnership
by a ratio of "2 to 1." The Partnership coordinated efforts with "Drug Czar"
Barry McCaffrey, a retired general who was the director of the Office of
National Drug Control Policy, in targeting efforts against heroin. McCaffrey
endorsed the Partnership's campaigns and spoke at their news conferences.
Later, it worked with state alliance programs. During these years, it was a
continuing effort to persuade media sources to provide the best spots and
airtime. Newspapers such as the "New York Times" and "Washington Post" had
generously given prime full-page spots for their ads, but "few other papers
have been so generous", according to one account. The 2000s. The firm continued
its efforts to make drug use look uncool, in part by getting celebrities to
help them break the "age-old stereotype of sex, drugs, rock-'n'- roll going
together with everything cool", according to Marston commenting on "CNN".
Celebrities such as Lauryn Hill and the Dixie Chicks came forward to say
they're "drug free". In 2002, Burke retired as chairman, and was replaced by
Roy J. Bostock. In the mid 2000s, the Partnership gradually shifted away from
de-emphasizing the perils of marijuana and focused more on targets such as
prescription drugs, possibly responding to a shift of emphasis by the U.S.
government as well as possible indications of declining marijuana usage by
teens. Reporter Elizabeth Sprague of "CBS News" noticed that the Partnership
had not produced a single anti-marijuana PSA since 2005. In a conflicting
report in 2011, a study suggested that there were "sharp increases in the use
of marijuana" as well as Ecstasy after "years of declining use." The "frying
pan" ad was described as a "relic" in one report, although "New York Sun"
reporter Amanda Gordon noted that the agency gives gold-plated frying pan
awards (mounted under glass) at fundraisers. By 2007, the agency had produced
over 3,000 spots from 1985 to 2007. In 2010, the organization changed its name
from "Partnership for a Drug-Free America" to "Partnership at Drugfree.org,"
possibly as a result of increased emphasis on websites and Internet appeals.
Current Approaches. In 2011, a study found that marijuana use was increasing,
as well as the use of a drug called Ecstasy and found that 45% of teenagers did
not think drinking alcohol was "a big deal." The Partnership was focusing more
on teenagers abuse of prescription drugs; one study they did suggested that on
any given day, 2,500 American teens get high for the first time by using
prescription medication. The group was part of a campaign known as "National
Prescription Drug Take Back Day" which encouraged residents to dispose of their
old prescription drugs to nearby city halls or police departments. Partnership
executive Sean Clarkin suggests that parents sit down with their teens and ask
"what's going on" as a possible beginning of a conversation. There was one
report that the Partnership will be reducing its commitment to broadcast media
in favor of an approach of reaching out to parents, particularly via the
Internet, which increased from 10% of its budget to 31% for 2010. It has
focused on web efforts such as the site "Time to Talk" (timetotalk.org), and is
exploring the possibility of advertising on cell phones and possibly in
videogames. The drugfree.org website, according to one source, attracts a
million visitors each month. The agency is making a $55 million three-year
commitment with cable operator Comcast including its "Time to Talk" campaign.
There was a report that it will sponsor a toll-free hotline. Research findings
and tracking. The Partnership has consistently done a tracking study as part of
an ongoing longitudinal study to assess attitudes towards drugs and alcohol.
The survey research helped it keep on top of trends, although since in many
cases research organizations were providing studies without cost, the
Partnership had less ability to impose a strict study design on some of the
efforts. As a result, some surveys, using different questions and designs,
conflicted with other survey data, although on key tracking measures, the
Partnership was able to follow shifts in teenaged awareness and attitudes
towards drugs. Awards. The Partnership has won numerous advertising and
efficacy awards for its PSA campaigns. Over the past two decades, the public
service advertisements have grown to target more illegal drugs like heroin,
methamphetamine, ecstasy, and others. Criticism and controversy. PDFA was the
subject of criticism when it was revealed by Cynthia Cotts of the Village Voice
that their federal tax returns showed that they had received several million
dollars worth of funding from major pharmaceutical, tobacco and alcohol
corporations including American Brands (Jim Beam whiskey), Philip Morris
(Marlboro and Virginia Slims cigarettes, Miller beer), Anheuser Busch
(Budweiser, Michelob, Busch beer), R.J. Reynolds (Camel, Salem, Winston
cigarettes), as well as pharmaceutical firms Bristol Meyers-Squibb, Merck &
Company and Procter & Gamble. From 1997 it has discontinued any direct fiscal
association with tobacco and alcohol suppliers, although it still receives
donations from pharmaceutical companies. There has been criticism that some of
its PSAs have had "little proven effect on drug use." Satire. Some of the
campaigns run by the PDFA have been either satirized or referred to in popular
media. In the comedy film "Harold & Kumar Go to White Castle" (2004), John Cho
and Kal Penn's characters are watching the "Harmless" PSA while intoxicated
from marijuana. The advertisement in question features two teen boys smoking
marijuana; one of them handles a gun and then fatally shoots himself, saying,
"I'm so high, nothing can hurt me!". On a segment of The Daily Show, Ed Helms
showed a PDFA advertisement in which a stoned teenager takes out a gun and, not
realizing that it is loaded, shoots his friend. At the end of the PSA Helms
says, "Obviously this is a very effective commercial... for "gun control". Come
on parents, what were you thinking, leaving a loaded gun around teenagers? Are
you high or something?" The "South Park" episode "My Future Self 'n' Me"
reflects on some campaigns run by the PDFA. The "Family Guy" episode "Boys Do
Cry" featured the character Meg lying on the couch deflated in reference to a
PDFA commercial.
