Patriarchy Patriarchy is a social system in which the male is the primary
authority figure central to social organization, and where fathers hold
authority over women, children, and property. It implies the institutions of
male rule and privilege, and entails female subordination. Many patriarchal
societies are also patrilineal, meaning that property and title are inherited
by the male lineage. The female equivalent is matriarchy. Historically,
patriarchy has manifested itself in the social, legal, political, and economic
organization of a range of different cultures. Patriarchy also has a strong
influence on modern civilization, although many cultures have moved towards a
more egalitarian social system over the past century. Definition and usage.
Patriarchy literally means "rule of fathers", from the Greek
πατριάρχης ("patriarkhēs"), "father" or "chief of a race,
patriarch". Historically, the term patriarchy was used to refer to autocratic
rule by the male head of a family. However, in modern times, it more generally
refers to social systems in which power is primarily held by adult men.
History. Anthropological evidence suggests that most prehistoric hunter-
gatherer societies were relatively egalitarian, and that patriarchal social
structures did not develop until many years after the end of the Pleistocene
era, following social and technological innovations such as agriculture and
domestication. However, according to Robert M. Strozier, historical research
has not yet found a specific "initiating event". Some scholars point to about
six thousand years ago (4000 BCE), when the concept of fatherhood took root, as
the beginning of the spread of patriarchy. Domination by men of women is found
in the Ancient Near East as far back as 3100 BCE, as are restrictions on a
woman's reproductive capacity and exclusion from "the process of representing
or the construction of history". With the appearance of the Hebrews, there is
also "the exclusion of woman from the God-humanity covenant". A prominent Greek
general Meno, in the Platonic dialogue of the same name, sums up the prevailing
Greek sentiment about the respective virtues of men and women. He says: The
works of Aristotle portrayed women as morally, intellectually, and physically
inferior to men; saw women as the property of men; claimed that women's role in
society was to reproduce and serve men in the household; and saw male
domination of women as natural and virtuous. Ancient China was patriarchal,
women being expected to be submissive to men in the family and society. Egypt
left no philosophical record, but Herodotus left a record of his shock at the
contrast between the roles of Egyptian women and the women of Athens. He
observed that Egyptian women attended market and were employed in trade. In
ancient Egypt a middle-class woman might sit on a local tribunal, engage in
real estate transactions, and inherit or bequeath property. Women also secured
loans, and witnessed legal documents. Greek influence spread, however, with the
conquests of Alexander the Great, who was educated by Aristotle. In medieval
Europe, female Empresses (such as Theodora) and Matriarchs (such as Helena, the
mother of Constantine) enjoyed privilege, political rule, and societal honor.
From the time of Martin Luther, Protestantism regularly used the commandment in
Exodus 20:12 to justify the duties owed to all superiors. ‘Honor thy
father,’ was taken to apply not only to fathers, but elders, and the king.
Although many 16th and 17th Century theorists agreed with Aristotle’s views
concerning the place of women in society, none of them tried to prove political
obligation on the basis of the patriarchal family until sometime after 1680.
The patriarchal political theory is closely associated with Sir Robert Filmer.
Sometime before 1653, Filmer completed a work entitled "Patriarcha". However,
it was not published until after his death. In it, he defended the divine right
of kings as having title inherited from Adam, the first man of the human race,
according to Judeo-Christian tradition. In the 19th Century, various women
began to question the commonly accepted patriarchal interpretation of Christian
scripture. One of the foremost of these was Sarah Grimké, who voiced
skepticism about the ability of men to translate and interpret passages
relating to the roles of the sexes without bias. She proposed alternative
translations and interpretations of passages relating to women, and she applied
historical and cultural criticism to a number of verses, arguing that their
admonitions applied to specific historical situations, and were not to be
viewed as universal commands. Elizabeth Cady Stanton used Grimké’s criticism
of biblical sources to establish a basis for feminist thought. She published
"The Woman's Bible", which proposed a feminist reading of the Old and New
Testament. This tendency was enlarged by feminist theory, which denounced the
patriarchal Judeo-Christian tradition. Feminist theory. Most forms of feminism
characterize patriarchy as an unjust social system that is oppressive to women.
As feminist and political theorist Carole Pateman writes, "The patriarchal
construction of the difference between masculinity and femininity is the
political difference between freedom and subjection." In feminist theory the
concept of patriarchy often includes all the social mechanisms that reproduce
and exert male dominance over women. Feminist theory typically characterizes
patriarchy as a social construction, which can be overcome by revealing and
critically analyzing its manifestations. Biological vs. social theories. Most
sociologists reject predominantly biological explanations of patriarchy and
contend that social and cultural conditioning is primarily responsible for
establishing male and female gender roles. According to standard sociological
theory, patriarchy is the result of sociological constructions that are passed
down from generation to generation. These constructions are most pronounced in
societies with traditional cultures and less economic development. Even in
modern developed societies, however, gender messages conveyed by family, mass
media, and other institutions largely favor males having a dominant status.
Some sociobiologists, such as Steven Goldberg, argue that social behavior is
primarily determined by genetics, and thus that patriarchy arises more as a
result of inherent biology than social conditioning. Goldberg also contends
that patriarchy is a universal feature of human culture. In 1973, Goldberg
wrote, "The ethnographic studies of every society that has ever been observed
explicitly state that these feelings were present, there is literally no
variation at all." Goldberg has critics among anthropologists. Concerning
Goldberg's claims about the "feelings of both men and women" Eleanor Leacock
countered in 1974 that the data on women's attitudes are "sparse and
contradictory", and that the data on male attitudes about male-female relations
are "ambiguous". Also, the effects of colonialism on the cultures represented
in the studies were not considered. There is considerable variation in the role
that gender plays in human societies. Although there are no known human
examples of strictly matriarchal cultures, there are a number of societies that
have been shown to be matrilinear or matrilocal and gynocentric, especially
among indigenous tribal groups. Some hunter-gatherer groups have been
characterized as largely egalitarian. One evolutionary psychology explanation
for the origin of patriarchy starts with the view that females almost always
invest more energy into producing offspring than males, and therefore in most
species females are a limiting resource over which males will compete. This is
sometimes referred to as Bateman's principle. One important female preference
will be for males who control more resources which can help her and her
children. This in turn has caused a selection pressure on men to be competitive
and succeed in gaining resources and power in competition with other men. There
has not been a similarly strong selection pressure on females. Psychoanalytic
theories. Although the term "patriarchy" is loosely used to stand for 'male
domination', as has been pointed out above, it more crucially means - as others
have stated here: "The rule of The Father". So patriarchy does not refer to a
simple binary pattern of male power over women, but power exerted more
complexly by age as well as gender, and by older men over women, children, and
younger men. Some of these younger men may inherit and therefore have a stake
in patriarchy's continuing conventions. Others may rebel. This psychoanalytic
model is based upon revisions of Freud's description of the normally neurotic
family using the analogy of the story of Oedipus. Those who fall outside the
Oedipal triad of mother/father/child are less subject to patriarchal authority.
This has been taken as a position of symbolic power for queer identities. The
operations of power in patriarchy are usually enacted unconsciously. All are
subject, even fathers are bound by its strictures. It is represented in
unspoken traditions and conventions performed in everyday behaviors, customs
and habits. The patriarchal triangular relationship of a father, a mother and
an inheriting eldest son frequently form the dynamic and emotional narratives
of popular culture and are enacted performatively in rituals of courtship and
marriage. They provide conceptual models for organising power relations in
spheres that have nothing to do with the family, for example, politics and
business.
