Peacefire Peacefire is a U.S.-based website, with a registered address in
Bellevue, Washington, dedicated to "preserving First Amendment rights for
Internet users, particularly those younger than 18". It was founded in August
1996 by Bennett Haselton, who still runs it. The site's motto is, "You'll
understand when you're younger." Ideology. Peacefire is primarily concerned
with free speech rights. The authors on the site have been opponents of web
content filtering and content-control software, which they refer to as
censorware or "blocking software". They have offered numerous methods for
defeating common web filters, and this has drawn some interest from the
Internet community. The site has conducted long battles against the most
commonly used filter programs, including, most famously, SurfWatch, Net Nanny,
CyberPatrol, and Bess. In particular, Peacefire has demonstrated that the
filter programs suppress political speech and filter preferentially for
corporate and conservative causes. In other cases, Peacefire has presented
evidence that several filtering programs block some websites without having a
human being review those sites first, despite the filtering companies' claims
to the contrary. However, Peacefire is not usually active against filters that
act in a more neutral way. Peacefire criticised SurfWatch for indiscriminately
blocking gay and lesbian web sites. Further information. One common test that
Peacefire runs is to create web pages filled with content clipped from news
items. In particular, they will take quotes from conservative politicians that
seem politically sensitive. They will then submit the site to a filter and see
if it gets blocked. They will then point out that the content deemed
"inappropriate" on their pages was, in fact, "appropriate" when coming from a
corporate (or conservative blog) site. They also routinely search out sites of
liberal and progressive content to see if they are blocked. They then compile a
report to point out how the said software is discriminatory and restrictive of
free speech/free access in what it censors. They offer these reports to the
software makers and later follow up to see if any corrective measures have been
taken. The site is also involved in alerting the online community of efforts to
pass laws restricting content to websites. Peacefire's own website is often
blocked, either in part or whole, by filtering software, and the organization
has both sued and been threatened with lawsuits in civil court in the United
States. Peacefire claims to have about twelve staffers and about 7,000 members.
Anyone of any age can become a member by signing up for the site's low-volume,
announcement-only electronic mailing list. Court cases. In March 2002,
Peacefire won a $1000 award at King County District Court in Bellevue,
Washington in each of three cases against Red Moss Media, Paulann Allison, and
Richard Schueler (for sending misleading, unsolicited, commercial emails to its
webmaster bearing deceptive information such as a forged return e-mail address
or a misleading subject line), in a test of Washington's tough anti-spamming
laws.
