Peace walk A peace walk or peace march, sometimes referred to as a peace
pilgrimage, is a form of nonviolent action where a person or groups of people
march a set distance to raise awareness of particular issues important to the
walkers. Europe. Europe is launching its first permanent Peace Walk Route, that
will run along the former division between East and West Europe and end in
Trieste, N-E Italy. A pan European network is currently working on its Design,
and it is set to open in 2014, to mark the 100th anniversary of WWI. India. One
famous example was that of Vinoba Bhave, who undertook a peace walk with many
of his followers throughout India for land reform. A recent peace walk campaign
named "Freedom Walk" was organized by the Free Software Community in Kerala in
2008. 4 volunteers walked 750 miles from one end of the state to the other to
promote Free Software. A peace walk was undertaken in 1962 by Satish Kumar and
his companion who walked without money from India via the Soviet Union, France
and the UK to the USA (using ships to cross the channel and Atlantic). Vinoba
gave 2 gifts to Satish and his companion: pennilessness, i.e. voluntary
poverty, and vegetarianism. UK. Early in 1984, peace campers walked 26 miles
from Daws hill to Naphill through country roads and countryside to raise money
for "The Angry Pacifist" magazine. US. "King-Carter Freedom Peace Walk" is a
1.5-mile walkway in Atlanta, Georgia's (USA) Freedom Park. It commemorates the
only two Georgia winners of the Nobel Prize for Peace: Martin Luther King Jr.
and Jimmy Carter. Various peace organizations throughout the United States have
organized marches and vigils to protest the Iraq War, since before the war
started in 2003, and then annually ever since. Sometimes these marches are
coordinated to take place on the same day across the nation. In San Diego, the
greatest number of anti-war protesters, an estimated 7,000, turned out for a
demonstration on March 15, just five days before the beginning of the Iraq War.
International. The Interfaith Pilgrimage for Peace and Life. "The Interfaith
Pilgrimage for Peace and Life" started in Auschwitz, Poland on December 8,
1994, and ended in Nagasaki on the fiftieth anniversary of the Nagasaki
bombing, 9 August 1995. It was led by Nipponzan-Myōhōji Japanese Buddhist
monks. The monks, however, were dwarfed in number by American, European, South
American and Japanese lay people. The trip was organized to both commemorate
the 50th anniversary of the end of World War II as well as to be witness to the
suffering in contemporary war zones. The group walked from Auschwitz to Vienna,
then travelled through Croatia, Bosnia and Serbia. They crossed the front lines
of the Bosnian war in Mostar and held a day of vigil, fasting and prayer there.
The next leg took them through Israel, the Gaza Strip, the West Bank, Jordan
and Iraq. The group travelled across the front lines in Cambodia, where they
joined the Dhammayietra, an annual Cambodian peace walk led by "the Gandhi of
Cambodia" Maha Ghosananda. They then visited war sites in Vietnam and the
Philippines before going to Hiroshima and Nagasaki. This walk was one of many
peace pilgrimages organized by the Nipponzan Myōhōji monks, but it was the
largest in scale, number of participants, time, and distance travelled. Over
1000 people participated in at least part of the pilgrimage, including
Buddhists, Quakers, Catholics, Muslims and Jews. The pilgrimage received media
attention and books were written about it. A Walk to Moscow. "A Walk to Moscow"
was a peace walk, one of many walks for peace in the 20th century. These were
specially organized by groups of pacifists who wanted to make some protest
against the politics of war and the use of chemical, biological and nuclear
weapons. In the early 1960s, there was a walk across the United States, Europe
and the USSR (its history is told in a book "You Come with Naked Hands" by
Bradford Lyttle. In the 1980s, a group organized to walk across America and
through Europe to Moscow to show solidarity with all people and to demonstrate
in a grass roots way that all people are linked by their right to live on the
earth in peace and safety. This walk was conceived by organizers while on
another peace walk "A Walk for Survival" (from Santa Cruz, California to
Washington State) in 1980. While at a requested meeting with the Russian
Consulate in San Francisco an organizer asked if we continued our walk across
America, and Europe would we be allowed to walk to Moscow? The Consulate
answered "of course". "A Walk for Survival" ended at Bangor, Washington State
at the site of a Trident nuclear submarine base, and the organizers immediately
started planning "A Walk to Moscow". The walk started in Bangor on March 1,
1981 and reached the East Coast in time to winter it out in Boston, before
flying to Europe in March 1982. The summer of 1982 was spent walking across the
UK (with a side-tip to Ireland), France, Belgium, and Federal Republic of
Germany (with a trip to West Berlin by bus which returned to its starting point
in order for the walking route to continue uninterrupted.) The Walk operated by
sending advance teams a few weeks ahead to cities and towns along a prospective
path to set up press, speaking engagements and accommodations for the group.
Decisions were made only by complete consensus, which often led to long and
stormy meetings. The German Democratic Republic had refused entry to the group,
so they walked south to Bavaria and stayed there for the winter, while
negotiating visas for Czechoslovakia, Poland and the USSR. A Walk to Moscow
(the indefinite article rather than the definite "The Walk" was important to
many of the original walkers, as it implied that it was only one initiative,
and others would hopefully follow. The distinction was, however, lost on people
in the Eastern countries of the route,as Slavonic languages do not have words
for either a or the!) spent nearly a year in Europe working from an Old Mill in
Regnitlosau in Bavaria, Germany. It was difficult to get the governments then
in the Communist Bloc to allow the group to walk through their territory. While
the group negotiated with the government of Czechoslovakia, Poland and Russia
the walkers visited many places on foot in Germany and gave talks to local
Peace groups. Some members of the group got involved in passive resistance
chaining themselves to railings over conscription in Germany or others fasted
for peace in the world. Members went to Denmark to join in with peace groups
and talk about the walk. In 1983 visas were obtained for Czechoslovakia and
Poland, and a continuous walking route was planned and successfully carried out
as far as the border between Poland and the USSR. Relations with official
"peace" groups in those countries were tricky, and the Czech government tried
to incorporate the initiative into their showpiece pro-Warsaw Pact 1983
conference in Prague - however the group did not partake, although a few
members lobbied delegates outside, and were invited in for one discussion).
Walking across the USSR was not permitted however. The group entered and
transited to Minsk, then Smolensk, hoping for some compromise in negotiations,
but this did not happen. At this point many of the members chose to return, and
not go to Moscow; the others tried to walk to Moscow anyway, but were
immediately apprehended and sent to rejoin the others in Minsk. Some members
went to Denmark to join in with peace groups and talk about the walk. When the
walk finished some people from the group talked at a CND rally about their work
and the passive resistance movement. The group membership was international,
people came from all over the world to join in and make a difference. Some Walk
to Moscow participants later met with other walks that crossed the U.S. and
Europe, including Walk of the People - A Pilgrimage for Life, which occurred
from 1984 to 1985. References. Int'l Peace Walks
