Peace and conflict studies Peace and conflict studies is a social science field
that identifies and analyses violent and nonviolent behaviours as well as the
structural mechanisms attending conflicts (including social conflicts) with a
view towards understanding those processes which lead to a more desirable human
condition. A variation on this, peace studies (irenology), is an
interdisciplinary effort aiming at the prevention, de-escalation, and solution
of conflicts by peaceful means, thereby seeking 'victory' for all parties
involved in the conflict. This is in contrast to war studies (polemology) which
has as its aim on the efficient attainment of victory in conflicts, big and
large by violent means and to the satisfaction of one or more, but not all,
parties involved. Disciplines involved may include political science,
geography, economics, psychology, sociology, international relations, history,
anthropology, religious studies, and gender studies, as well as a variety of
others. Johan Galtung is widely considered "the principal founder of the
discipline of peace studies". Historical background. Peace and conflict studies
is both a pedagogical activity, in which teachers transmit knowledge to
students; and a research activity, in which researchers create new knowledge
about the sources of conflict. Peace and conflict studies entails understanding
the concept of peace which is defined as political condition that ensures
justice and social stability through formal and informal institutions,
practices, and norms As pedagogical activity. Academics and students in the
world's oldest universities have long been motivated by an interest in peace.
American student interest in what we today think of as peace studies first
appeared in the form of campus clubs at U.S. colleges in the years immediately
following the American Civil War. Similar movements appeared in Sweden in the
last years of the 19th century, as elsewhere soon after. These were student-
originated discussion groups, not formal courses included in college curricula.
The First World War was a turning point in Western attitudes to war. At the
1919 Peace of Paris where the leaders of France, Britain and the USA (led by
Georges Clemenceau, David Lloyd George and Woodrow Wilson) met to decide the
future of Europe, Wilson proposed his famous Fourteen Points for peacemaking.
These included breaking up European empires into nation states and the
establishment of the League of Nations. These moves, intended to ensure a
peaceful future, were the background to a number of developments in the
emergence of Peace and Conflict Studies as an academic discipline (but they
also, as Keynes presciently pointed out, laid the seeds for future conflict).
The founding of the first chair in International Relations (at Aberystwyth
University, Wales), whose remit was partly to further the cause of peace,
occurred in 1919. After World War II, the founding of the UN system provided a
further stimulus for more rigorous approaches to peace and conflict studies to
emerge. Many university courses in schools of higher learning around the world
began to develop which touched upon questions of peace (often in relation to
war) during this period. The first undergraduate academic program in peace
studies in the United States was not to develop until 1948, and then only at
Manchester College in Indiana, a small liberal arts college. It was not until
the late 1960s in the US that student concerns about the Vietnam War forced
ever more universities to offer courses about peace, whether in a designated
peace studies course or as a course within a traditional major. Work by
academics such as Johan Galtung and John Burton, and debates in fora such as
the Journal of Peace Research in the 1960s reflected the growing interest and
academic stature of the field. Growth in the number of peace studies programmes
around the world was to accelerate during the 1980s, as students became more
concerned about the prospects of nuclear war. As the Cold War ended, peace and
conflict studies courses shifted their focus from international conflict and
towards complex issues related to political violence, human security,
democratisation, human rights, social justice, welfare, development, and
producing sustainable forms of peace. A proliferation of international
organisations, agencies and international NGOs, from the UN, Organization for
Security and Co-operation in Europe, European Union, and World Bank to
International Crisis Group, International Alert, and others, began to draw on
such research. Agendas relating to positive peace in European academic contexts
were already widely debated in the 1960s. By the mid-1990s peace studies
curricula in the US had shifted "...from research and teaching about negative
peace, the cessation of violence, to positive peace, the conditions that
eliminate the causes of violence." As a result the topics had broadened
enormously. By 1994, a review of course offerings in peace studies included
topics such as: "north-south relations"; "development, debt, and global
poverty"; "the environment, population growth, and resource scarcity"; and
"feminist perspectives on peace, militarism, and political violence." There is
now a general consensus on the importance of peace and conflict studies amongst
scholars from a range of disciplines in and around the social sciences, as well
as from many influential policymakers around the world. Peace and conflict
studies today is widely researched and taught in a large and growing number of
institutions and locations. The number of universities offering peace and
conflict studies courses is hard to estimate, mostly because courses may be
taught out of different departments and have very different names. The
International Peace Research Association website gives one of the most
authoritative listings available. A 2008 report in the "International Herald
Tribune" mentions over 400 programmes of teaching and research in peace and
conflict studies, noting in particular those at the United World Colleges,
Peace Research Institute(Oslo), the American University, University of
Bradford, the UN mandated Peace University]] UPEACE in Ciudad Colón/Costa
Rica, George Mason, Lund, Michigan, Notre Dame, Queensland, Uppsala, Innsbruck/
Austria, Universitat Jaume I in Castellón de la Plana (Spain), Virginia, and
Wisconsin. The Rotary Foundation and the UN University (Tokyo) supports several
international academic teaching and research programmes. A 1995 survey found
136 U.S. colleges with peace studies programs: "Forty-six percent of these are
in church related schools, another 32% are in large public universities, 21%
are in non-church related private colleges, and 1% are in community colleges.
Fifty-five percent of the church related schools that have peace studies
programs are Roman Catholic. Other denominations with more than one college or
university with a peace studies program are the Quakers, Mennonites, Church of
the Brethren, and United Church of Christ. One hundred fifteen of these
programs are at the undergraduate level and 21 at the graduate level. Fifteen
of these colleges and universities had both undergraduate and graduate
programs." Other notable programmes can be found at the University of Manitoba
(Canada),University of Hiroshima (Japan), University of Innsbruck (Austria),
Universitat Jaume I in Castellón de la Plana (Spain), University of Sydney,
University of Queensland (Brisbane), King's College (London), Sault College
(Sault Ste. Marie), London Metropolitan, Sabanci (Istanbul), Marburg (Germany),
Sciences Po (Paris), University of Amsterdam (The Netherlands), Otago (New
Zealand), St Andrews, and York (UK). Perhaps most importantly, such programmes
and research agendas have now become common in institutions located in
conflict, post-conflict, and developing countries and regions (e.g., National
Peace Council (Sri Lanka), Centre for Human Rights, University of Sarajevo,
Bosnia), Chulalongkorn University (Thailand), National University of Timor
(Timor-Leste), University of Kabul (Afghanistan), Makerere University, Mbarara
University (Uganda), Tel Aviv University (Israel), etc. As research activity.
Although individual thinkers such as Immanuel Kant had long recognised the
centrality of peace (see Perpetual Peace), it was not until the 1950s and 1960s
that peace studies began to emerge as an academic discipline with its own
research tools, a specialized set of concepts, and forums for discussion such
as journals and conferences. Beginning in 1959, with the founding of the Peace
Research Institute Oslo- PRIO - (associated with Johan Galtung), a number of
research institutes began to appear. In 1963, Walter Isard, the principal
founder of Regional science assembled a group of scholars in Malmö, Sweden,
for the purpose of establishing the Peace Research Society. The group of
initial members included Kenneth Boulding and Anatol Rapoport. In 1973, this
group became the Peace Science Society. Peace science was viewed as an
interdisciplinary and international effort to develop a special set of
concepts, techniques and data to better understand and mitigate conflict. Peace
science attempts to use the quantitative techniques developed in economics and
political science, especially game theory and econometrics, techniques
otherwise seldom used by researchers in peace studies. The Peace Science
Society website hosts the second edition of the Correlates of War, one of the
most well known collections of data on international conflict. The society
holds an annual conference, attended by scholars from throughout the world, and
publishes two scholarly journals: Journal of Conflict Resolution and Conflict
Management and Peace Science. In 1964, the International Peace Research
Association was formed at a conference organized by Quakers in Clarens,
Switzerland. Among the original executive committee was Johan Galtung. The IPRA
holds a biennial conference. Research presented at its conferences and in its
publications typically focuses on institutional and historical approaches,
seldom employing quantitative techniques. In 2001, the Peace and Justice
Studies Association (PJSA) was formed as a result of a merger of two precursor
organizations. The PJSA is the North American affiliate of IPRA, and includes
members from around the world with a predominance from the United States and
Canada. The PJSA publishes a regular newsletter ("The Peace Chronicle"), and
holds annual conferences on themes related to the organization's mission "to
create a just and peaceful world" through research, scholarship, pedagogy, and
activism. Description. Peace Studies can be classified as: There has been a
long standing and vibrant debate on disarmament issues, as well as attempts to
investigate, catalogue, and analyses issues relating to arms production, trade,
and their political impacts. There have also been attempts to map the economic
costs of war, or of relapses into violence, as opposed to those of peace. Peace
and conflict studies is now well established within the social sciences: it
comprises many scholarly journals, college and university departments, peace
research institutes, conferences, as well as outside recognition of the utility
of peace and conflict studies as a method. Peace Studies allows one to examine
the causes and prevention of war, as well as the nature of violence, including
social oppression, discrimination and marginalization. Through peace studies
one can also learn peace-making strategies to oversome persecution and
transform society to attain a more just and equitable international community.
Ideas. Conceptions of peace. Galtung's negative and positive peace framework is
the most widely used today. Negative peace refers to the absence of direct
violence. Positive peace refers to the absence of indirect and structural
violence, and is the concept that most peace and conflict researchers adopt.
Several conceptions, models, or modes of peace have been suggested in which
peace research might prosper. There have been many offerings on these various
forms of peace. These range from the well known works of Kant, Locke, Rousseau,
Paine, on various liberal international and constitutional and plans for peace.
Variations and additions have been developed more recently by scholars such as
Raymond Aron, Edward Azar, John Burton, Martin Ceadal, Wolfgang Dietrich, Kevin
Dooley, Johan Galtung, Michael Howard, Vivienne Jabri, Jean-Paul Lederach,
Roger Mac Ginty, Hugh Miall, David Mitrany, Oliver Ramsbotham, Anatol Rapoport,
Mikkel Vedby Rasmussen, Oliver Richmond, S.P. Udayakumar, Tom Woodhouse, others
mentioned above and many more. Democratic peace, liberal peace, sustainable
peace, civil peace, trans-rational peace(s)and other concepts are regularly
used in such work. Conflict triangle. Johan Galtung's conflict triangle works
on the assumption that the best way to define peace is to define violence, its
antithesis. It reflects the normative aim of preventing, managing, limiting and
overcoming violence. Each corner of Galtung's triangle can relate to the other
two. Ethnic cleansing can be an example of all three. Cost of conflict. Cost of
conflict is a tool which attempts to calculate the price of conflict to the
human race. The idea is to examine this cost, not only in terms of the deaths
and casualties and the economic costs borne by the people involved, but also
the social, developmental, environmental and strategic costs of conflict. The
approach considers direct costs of conflict, for instance human deaths,
expenditure, destruction of land and physical infrastructure; as well as
indirect costs that impact a society, for instance migration, humiliation,
growth of extremism and lack of civil society. Strategic Foresight Group, a
think tank in India, has developed a Cost of Conflict Series for countries and
regions involved in protracted conflicts. This tool is aimed at assessing past,
present and future costs looking at a wide range of parameters. Normative aims.
The normative aims of Peace Studies are conflict transformation and conflict
resolution through mechanisms such as peacekeeping, peacebuilding (e.g.,
tackling disparities in rights, institutions and the distribution of world
wealth) and peacemaking (e.g., mediation and conflict resolution). Peacekeeping
falls under the aegis of negative peace, whereas efforts toward positive peace
involve elements of peace building and peacemaking. Teaching peace and conflict
studies to the military. One of the interesting developments within peace and
conflict studies is the number of military personnel undertaking such studies.
This poses some challenges, as the military is an institution overtly committed
to combat. In the article "Teaching Peace to the Military", published in the
journal Peace Review, James Page argues for five principles that ought to
undergird this undertaking, namely, respect but do not privilege military
experience, teach the just war theory, encourage students to be aware of the
tradition and techniques of nonviolence, encourage students to deconstruct and
demythologize, and recognize the importance of military virtue. From conflict
resolution via liberal peace- and statebuilding to trans-rational peace and
elicitive conflict transformation. Scholars working in the areas of peace and
conflict studies have made significant contributions to the policies used by
non-governmental organisations, development agencies, International Financial
Institutions, and the UN system, in the specific areas of conflict resolution
and citizen diplomacy, development, political, social, and economic reform,
peacekeeping, mediation, early warning, prevention, peacebuilding, and
statebuilding. This represented a shift in interest from conflict management
approaches oriented towards a ‘negative peace’ to conflict resolution and
peacebuilding approaches aimed at a 'positive peace'. This emerged rapidly at
the end of the Cold War, and was encapsulated in the report of then-UN
Secretary-General Boutros Boutros-Ghali, "An Agenda for Peace". Indeed, it
might be said that much of the machinery of what has been called ‘liberal
peacebuilding’ by a number of scholars rests, or ‘statebuilding’ by
another groups of scholars is based largely on the work that has been carried
out in this area. Many scholars in the area have advocated a more
‘emancipatory’ form of peacebuilding, however, based upon a
‘Responsibility to Protect’ (R2P), human security, local ownership and
participation in such processes, especially after the limited success of
liberal peacebuilding/ statebuilding in places as diverse as Cambodia, the
Balkans, Timor Leste, Sierra Leone, Liberia, Nepal, Afghanistan and Iraq. This
research agenda is in the process of establishing a more nuanced agenda for
peacebuilding which also connects with the original, qualitatively and
normatively oriented work that emerged in the peace studies and conflict
research schools of the 1960s (e.g. see the Oslo Peace Research Institute
research project on "Liberal Peace and the Ethics of Peacebuilding" and the
"Liberal Peace Transitions" project at the University of St Andrews and more
critical ideas about peacebuilding that have recently developed in many
European and non-western academic and policy circles. The UNESCO Chair for
Peace Studies at the University of Innsbruck/Austria proposed in 2008 a
culture-based classification of peace interpretations: energetic, moral,
modern, post-modern and trans-rational approaches. The trans-rational approach
unites existing spiritual interpretations of society and relation with the
mechanistic methods of modern peace. Hence this school prefers the strictly
relational and systemic method of elicitive conflict transformation (Lederach)
to the prescriptive approaches of modern conflict resolution. Criticism and
controversy. A number of criticisms have been aimed at peace and conflict
studies, often but not necessarily from outside the realms of university
system, including: Barbara Kay, a columnist for the National Post, specifically
criticized the views of Norwegian professor Johan Galtung, who is considered to
be a leader in modern peace research. Kay wrote that Galtung has written on the
"structural fascism" of "rich, Western, Christian" democracies, admires Fidel
Castro, opposed resistance to the Soviet Invasion of Hungary in 1956, and has
described Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn and Andrei Sakharov as "persecuted elite
personages." Galtung has also praised Mao Zedong for "endlessly liberating"
China. Galtung has also stated that the United States is a “killer country”
that is guilty of “neo-fascist state terrorism” and has reportedly stated
that the destruction of Washington, D. C. could be justified by America's
foreign policy. He has also compared the U.S. to Nazi Germany for bombing
Kosovo during the 1999 NATO bombing of Yugoslavia. In the Summer 2007 edition
of City Journal, Bruce Bawer sharply criticized Peace Studies. He noted that
many Peace Studies programs in American Universities are run by Marxist or far-
left Professors. More broadly, he argued that Peace Studies are dominated by
the belief that "America that is the wellspring of the world’s problems" and
that while Professors of Peace Studies argue "that terrorist positions deserve
respect at the negotiating table," they "seldom tolerate(s) alternative views"
and that "Peace studies, as a rule, rejects questioning of its own guiding
ideology." Regarding his claim that Peace Studies supports violence in the
pursuit of leftist ideology, Bawer cited a quote from "Peace and Conflict
Studies", a widely used 2002 textbook written by Charles P. Webel and David P.
Barash which praised Vladimir Lenin because he “maintained that only
revolution—not reform—could undo capitalism’s tendency toward imperialism
and thence to war." David Horowitz has argued that Webel and Barash's book
implicitly supports violence for socialist causes, noting that the book states
"the case of Cuba indicates that violent revolutions can sometimes result in
generally improved living conditions for many people." Horowitz also argued
that the book "treats the Soviet Union as a sponsor of peace movements, and the
United States as the militaristic, imperialist power that peace movements try
to keep in check" and that "the authors justify Communist policies and actions
while casting those of America and Western democracies in a negative light."
Horowitz also claimed that the authors discuss the Cuban Missile Crisis without
mentioning its cause (i.e. the placement of the Soviet missiles in Cuba) and
blame John F. Kennedy while praising Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev for
"bewilling to back down." Finally, Horowitz criticised the author's use of
Marxist writers, such as Andre Gunder Frank and Frances Moore Lappe, as the
sole basis on which to study "poverty and hunger as causes of human conflict".
Kay and Bawer also specifically criticized Professor Gordon Fellman, the
Chairman of Brandeis University's Peace, Conflict, and Coexistence Studies
Program, whom they claimed has justified Palestinian suicide-bombings against
Israelis as “ways of inflicting revenge on an enemy that seems unable or
unwilling to respond to rational pleas for discussion and justice.” Katherine
Kersten, who is a senior fellow at the Minneapolis-based conservative think
tank Center of the American Experiment, believes that Peace Studies programs
are "dominated by people of a certain ideological bent, and thus hard to take
seriously." [http://www.stthomas.edu/cathstudies/faculty/kennedy.htm Robert
Kennedy, a professor of Catholic studies and management at the University of
St. Thomas, criticized his university's Peace Studies Program in an interview
with Minneapolis Star Tribune in 2002, stating that the program employs several
adjunct professors "whose academic qualifications are not as strong as we would
ordinarily look for" and that "The combination of the ideological bite and the
maybe less-than-full academic credentials of the faculty would probably raise
some questions about how scholarly the program is." Responses. Such views have
been strongly opposed by scholars who claim that these criticisms underestimate
the development of detailed interdisciplinary, theoretical, methodological, and
empirical research into the causes of violence and dynamics of peace that has
occurred via academic and policy networks around the world. In reply to Barbara
Kay's article, a group of Peace Studies experts in Canada responded that
"Kay's...argument that the field of peace studies endorses terrorism is
nonsense" and that "Dedicated peace theorists and researchers are distinguished
by their commitment to reduce the use of violence whether committed by enemy
nations, friendly governments or warlords of any stripe." They also argued
that: In defence of peace studies by Catherine Morris, director, Peacemakers
Trust, Victoria; Ben Hoffman, president and CEO, Canadian International
Institute of Applied Negotiation, Ottawa; Dean E. Peachey, visiting professor
in transitional justice, Global College, University of Winnipeg, National Post,
February 25, 2009. (Full letter is available here) Most academics in the area
argue that the accusations that peace studies approaches are not objective, and
derived from mainly leftist or inexpert sources, are not practical, support
violence rather than reject it, or have not led to policy developments, are
clearly incorrect. They note that the development of UN and major donor
policies (including the EU, US, and UK, as well as many others including those
of Japan, Canada, Norway, etc.) towards and in conflict and post-conflict
countries have been heavily influenced by such debates. A range of key policy
documents and responses have been developed by these governments in the last
decade and more, and in UN (or related) documentation such as 'Agenda for
Peace', 'Agenda for Development', 'Agenda for Democratization', the Millennium
Development Goals, Responsibility to Protect, and the 'High Level Panel
Report'. They have also been significant for the work of the World Bank,
International Development Agencies, and a wide range of Non Governmental
Organisations. It has been influential in the work of, among others, the UN,
UNDP, UN Peacebuilding Commission, UNHCR, World Bank, EU, Organization for
Security and Co-operation in Europe, for national donors uncluding USAID, DFID,
SIDA, NORAD, DANIDA, Japan Aid, GTZ, and international NGOs such as
International Alert or International Crisis Group, as well as many local NGOs.
Major databases have been generated by the work of scholars in these areas.
Finally, peace and conflict studies debates have generally confirmed, not
undermined, a broad consensus (western and beyond) on the importance of human
security, human rights, development, democracy, and a rule of law (though there
is a vibrant debate ongoing about the contextual variations and applications of
these frameworks). Sources. Routledge Contemporary Security Studies series:
‘Women, Peace and Security: Translating Policy into Practice’ First
published 2010. Introduction by ‘Funmi Olonisakin, Director of Conflict,
Security & Development Group, King’s College London, and Karen Barnes.
Chapter by Lesley Abdela ‘Nepal and the implementation of UNSCR1325’. ISBN
978-0-415-58797-6 (hbk)
