People's Justice Party (UK) The People's Justice Party (PJP) was a minor
political party in the United Kingdom from 1998 to 2006. It was formed in 1998
and grew out of "Justice for Kashmir", which changed its name to the "Justice
Party" before settling on its final name. It operated mainly in the Birmingham
area, where it won a few council seats from the Labour Party, drawing its
support mainly from the sizable Kashmiri population in the city (there are some
90,000 residents of Kashmiri descent in Birmingham). The party platform was
based on an appeal for votes on two fronts: local and international. It
promised single-sex schools for girls, changes to housing grants, and improved
street lighting beside commitments to campaign for self-determination for
Kashmir, the formation of a Palestinian state and the release of two Kashmiris
(Mohammed Riaz and Quayyam Raja) imprisoned in 1984 for their role in the
killing of an Indian diplomat. Indeed, it was that very issue that prompted
their formation—before being named "Justice for Kashmir", the group was
entitled, the "Free Riaz and Quayyam Campaign". The PJP was also active in the
anti-war activity at the time of the American led campaign against the Taliban
regime in Afghanistan. The PJP was led on Birmingham City Council by Shaukat
Ali Khan. Ali Khan was formerly a member of the Labour Party, as were many
other PJP members. Those ex-Labour members of the PJP decided to form a new
party in response to what they felt was a failure by the Labour government in
the UK to deal adequately with the ongoing Indian and Pakistani tensions around
Kashmir, and what they perceive as a failure to improve the lives of the
Kashmiri population in Birmingham. Some people criticised it for being focussed
on only one ethnic group to the exclusion of others, although the PJP itself
admitted that at least half their votes come from the Birmingham Kashmiri
population. It claimed to be a secular organisation. The PJP lost all of its
seats in the 2004 Birmingham City Council election, but following the finding
of postal vote fraud in Aston and Bordesley Green, by-elections were held in
both wards in July 2005 with the PJP seeing two of its three
candidates—Shaukat Ali Khan and Mohammed Saeed—elected in Bordesley Green.
The party was dissolved in March 2006, with many of its members, including both
councillors, joining the Liberal Democrats. PJP group leader Shaukat Ali Khan
said talks about disbanding the party began when members worked closely with
the Liberal Democrats to expose New Labour's postal vote fraud in Aston and
Bordesley Green. The founder member was Mr Allah Dita Khan and Mr Skintaj and
Mr Rajasab Ali of Azad Kashmir in Pakistan.
