People & Planet People & Planet is a network of student campaign groups in the
UK. It is "the largest student campaigning organization in the country
campaigning to alleviate world poverty, defend human rights and protect the
environment." Organization. People & Planet is Britain's largest student
network campaigning on global poverty, human rights, and the environment. The
network has over 2,000 active members at 50 universities and 79 schools and
colleges across the UK. People & Planet groups are completely autonomous and
there is no formal membership system. The organisation is overseen by a
Management Committee, the majority of whom are student members elected by the
network. The support office, based in Oxford, provides training, outreach and
resources to support groups and campaigns. People & Planet is funded primarily
from governmental grants, trusts and foundations, and an increasingly
successful social enterprise training FE and school students. People & Planet
has a Fundraising and Activist Network called the FAN Club, allowing members to
make regular monthly donations that provide invaluable unrestricted income to
support the organization's work. History. The organization was founded in 1969
as Third World First by a group of students at Oxford University, supported by
NGOs including Oxfam. In 1997, the network voted to change the name to People &
Planet. Third World First was instrumental in setting up the magazine, "The
Internationalist" which was later reincarnated as the now popular activist-
magazine, The New Internationalist. Campaigns. People & Planet's current
campaign areas are Climate Change and Corporate Power. Corporate Power. People
& Planet are currently running the "Buy Right" campaign, focusing on defending
human rights within university supply chains. Universities are being encouraged
to sign up to the Worker Rights Consortium, an independent monitoring
organisation that supports workers in the garment industry in defending their
workplace rights. Climate Change. People & Planet's current climate change
campaign, Going Greener focuses on a 'transition universities' movement. Its
aim is to move towards a low-carbon, resilient and community-led education
sector that achieves carbon emissions reductions of at least 50% by 2020. In
2012, members of the network voted for a new climate change campaign, focusing
on Unconventional Fossil Fuels. Past Successes and Campaigns. People & Planet
activists have played a key role in action for social and environmental justice
across a variety of campaigns. The People & Planet Green League. People &
Planet's Green League is the only comprehensive and independent ranking of UK
universities by environmental and ethical performance. In 2012, the People &
Planet Green League was published in "The Guardian". The People & Planet Green
League was first published in 2007, as a way of driving forward environmental
performance within the university sector. The People & Planet Green League
publically benchmarks the sector's green credentials by combining universities'
estates performance data with information about their environmental policies
and management practices. Since the first Green League in 2007, People & Planet
has widened the criteria to assess both policy and performance of higher
education institutions. The Green League is widely credited with shifting the
UK's Higher Education sector towards improved environmental management and
performance. In 2012, People & Planet awarded 46 First Class awards in the
Green League, compared to just 15 in 2007. Notable improvements have been
measured in areas such as the proportion of renewable electricity used by
universities (72%, up from 12% in 2007) and in the number of Fairtrade
Universities (112, up from 41 in 2007). In 2012, People & Planet held its first
ever Green League Graduation Ceremony in Westminster, celebrating the
achievements of its top-ranking universities. Awards and Praise. The Green
League won "Best Campaign" at the 2007 British Environment and Media Awards.
The People & Planet Green League has been shortlisted for the Green Gown award,
administered by the Environmental Association for Universities and Colleges
(EAUC). Events. People & Planet runs several events each year across its
network. Shared Planet is the largest student campaigning conference in the UK.
Previous speakers have included Shiv Malik, Peter Tatchell and Caroline Lucas.
In 2012, Shared Planet will be held at Sheffield Hallam University. Summer
Gathering is a yearly camp which prepares student activists for the year ahead
with training, workshops, bonfires and a ceilidh. Each spring, a series of
regional Student Activism Weekends are held across the network, to bring
together members to participate in People & Planet's democratic process. These
events include the election of student members to the Management Committee and
deciding which new campaigns the network will focus on. The Student Activism
Weekends replaced the annual decision making conference, The Forum. Quotes.
Lord Joel Joffe, CBE, Chair of Oxfam, 1999. George Monbiot, Guardian columnist,
writer and environmentalist, 2007.
