Peronism Peronism (), or Justicialism ("Justicialismo"), is an Argentine
political movement based on the thought of former President Juan Domingo Perón
and his second wife, Eva Perón. Perón's party, the "Partido Justicialista",
derived its name from the Spanish words for "Social Justice" ("Justicia
Social"). The pillars of the Peronist ideal, known as the "three flags", are
social justice, economic independence, and political sovereignty. Peronism can
be described as a third position ideology, as it rejects the extremes of
Capitalism and Communism. Peronism espouses Corporatism and thus aims to
mediate tensions between the classes of society, with the state responsible for
negotiating compromise in conflicts between managers and workers. It is,
however, a generally ill-defined ideology; different, and sometimes
contradictory sentiments are expressed in the name of Peronism. Today, the
legacy and thought of Perón have transcended the confines of any single
political party and bled into the broader political landscape of Argentina,
therefore Peronists are usually described as a 'movement'. Traditionally the
Peronist movement has drawn its strongest support from the working class and
sympathetic unions, and has been characterized as proletarian in nature. From
the perspective of opponents, Peronism is an authoritarian ideology. Perón was
often compared to fascist dictators, accused of demagoguery, and his policies
derided as populist. Proclaiming himself the embodiment of nationality,
Perón's regime often silenced dissent by accusing opponents of being
unpatriotic. The corporatist character of Peronism drew attacks from Socialists
who accused his administration of preserving capitalist exploitation and class
division. Conservatives rejected its modernist ideology and felt their status
threatened by the ascent of the Peronist apparat. Liberals condemned the Perón
regime's arbitrariness and dictatorial tendencies. Defenders of Peronism also
describe the doctrine as populist, albeit in the sense that they believe it
embodies the interests of the masses, and in particular the most vulnerable
social strata. Admirers hold Perón in esteem for his administration's anti-
imperialism, and non-alignment, as well as its socially progressive
initiatives. Since its inception in 1946, Peronist candidates have won 8 of the
10 presidential elections that they have not been banned from participating in.
Perón himself remains the only Argentine to have been elected President three
times. Perón's policies. Perón's ideas were initially widely embraced by a
variety of different groups in Argentina across the political spectrum.
Perón's personal views would later become a burden on the ideology; for
example, his anti-clericalism did not strike a sympathetic chord with upper-
class Argentinians. Peronism is widely regarded as a form of corporate
socialism, or "right-wing socialism". Perón's public speeches were
consistently nationalist and populist. It would be difficult to separate
Peronism from corporate nationalism, for Perón nationalized Argentina's large
corporations, blurring distinctions between corporations and government. At the
same time, the labor unions became corporate, ceding the right to strike in
agreements with Perón as Secretary of Welfare in the military government from
1943-45. In exchange, the state was to assume the role of negotiator between
conflicting interests. A military and civilian coup, the "Revolución
Libertadora", led by General Aramburu, overthrew the Perón regime in 1955.
Perón spent 18 years in exile, mostly in Francisco Franco's Spain. Though his
feelings for Franco were mixed, Perón never disguised his admiration for
Benito Mussolini's fascist domestic policies. Perón and his administration
resorted to organized violence and dictatorial rule. Perón showed contempt for
any opponents, and regularly characterized them as traitors and agents of
foreign powers. Perón maintained the institutions of democratic rule, but
subverted freedoms through such actions as nationalizing the broadcasting
system, centralizing the unions under his control, and monopolizing the supply
of newspaper print. At times, Perón also resorted to tactics such as illegally
imprisoning opposition politicians and journalists, including UCR leader
Ricardo Balbin, and shutting down opposition papers, such as "La Prensa".
Peronism also lacked a strong interest in matters of foreign policy other than
the belief that the political and economic influences of other nations should
be kept out of Argentina; he was somewhat isolationist. Early in his
presidency, Perón envisioned Argentina's role as a model for other countries
in Latin America and beyond. Such ideas were ultimately abandoned. Despite his
oppositional rhetoric, Perón frequently sought cooperation with the U.S.
government on various issues. Perón's ideology was economic and political in
character and did not have the racism of Nazi Germany, though he was
sympathetic to the Nazi government. He made arrangements for many Nazi war
criminals and collaborators to reach Argentina under false passports after the
Second World War. Among them were Joseph Mengele, Adolf Eichmann, and Erich
Priebke. Before Perón came to power in Argentina, Argentina had the largest
Jewish population in Latin America. After becoming president, he invited
members of the Jewish community to participate in his government. One of his
advisors was José Ber Gelbard, a Jewish man from Poland. Peronism did not have
anti-Semitic or other racial bias. The Jewish Virtual Library writes that while
Juan Perón had sympathized with the Axis powers, "Perón also expressed
sympathy for Jewish rights and established diplomatic relations with Israel in
1949. Since then, more than 45,000 Jews have immigrated to Israel from
Argentina." In the book "Inside Argentina from Perón to Menem" author Laurence
Levine, former president of the US-Argentine Chamber of Commerce, writes:
"although anti-Semitism existed in Argentina, Perón's own views and his
political associations were not anti-Semitic... While Perón allowed many Nazi
criminals to take refuge in Argentina, he also attracted many Jewish
immigrants. Argentina has a Jewish population of over 200,000 citizens, the
largest in Latin America and one of the largest in the world. Perón's
admiration for Mussolini is well documented. Many scholars categorize Peronism
as a fascist ideology. Carlos Fayt believes that Peronism was just "an
Argentine implementation of Italian fascism". Hayes reaches the conclusion that
"the Peronist movement produced a form of fascism that was distinctively Latin
American". One of the most vocal critics of Peronism was the Argentine writer
Jorge Luis Borges. After Perón ascended to the presidency in 1946, Borges
spoke before the Argentine Society of Writers (SADE), saying "Borges: A Life",
page 295. From the 1960s to modern day. The absence of Perón, who lived for 20
years in exile in Francoist Spain, is an important key to understanding
Peronism. After he went into exile, he could be invoked by a variety of
Argentine sectors opposed to the current state of affairs. The personality cult
of Eva Perón, in particular, was conserved by supporters, while despised by
the "national bourgeoisie". In the 1960s, John William Cooke's writings became
an important source of left-wing revolutionary Peronism. Left-wing Peronism was
represented by many organizations, from the Montoneros and the "Fuerzas Armadas
Peronistas" to the Peronist Youth, the "Frente Revolucionario Peronista" and
the Revolutionary Peronist Youth, passing by "Peronismo en Lucha" or "Peronismo
de Base", which supported a Marxist viewpoint. On the other hand, older
Peronists formed the base of the orthodox bureaucracy, represented by the
"Unión Obrera Metalúrgica" (Augusto Vandor, famous for his 1965 slogan "For a
Peronism without Perón," and declaring as well: "to save Perón, one has to be
against Perón", or José Ignacio Rucci). Another current was formed by the "62
Organizaciones "De pie junto a Perón"", led by José Alonso and opposed to the
right-wing Peronist unionist movement. In the early 1970s, left-wing Peronism
rejected liberal democracy and political pluralism as the mask of bourgeois
domination. The anti-communist right-wing Peronism also rejected it, in the
name of corporatism, claiming to return to a "Christian and humanist, popular,
national socialism". By 1970, many groups from opposite sides of the political
spectrum had come to support Perón, from the left-wing and Catholic Montoneros
to the fascist-leaning and strongly anti-Semitic "Movimiento Nacionalista
Tacuara", one of Argentina's first guerrilla movements. In March 1973, Héctor
José Cámpora, who had been named as Perón's personal delegate, was elected
President of Argentina. A few months after Perón's return and the subsequent
Ezeiza massacre, during which the Peronist Left and Right violently clashed,
new elections were held in September. José Cámpora, a left-wing Peronist, was
replaced by interim President Raúl Alberto Lastiri, while Perón chose to
openly support the Peronist right. On October 1, 1973, senator Humberto
Martiarena, who was the national secretary of the Superior Council of the
National Justicialist Movement, publicized a document giving directives to
confront "subversives, terrorist and Marxist groups" which had allegedly
initiated a "war" inside the Peronist organizations. From then on, the Superior
Council took a firm grip on the Peronist organizations to expel the Left from
it. On that same day, a meeting took place among President Raúl Lastiri,
Interior Minister Benito Llambí, Social Welfare Minister José López Rega,
general secretary of the Presidency José Humberto Martiarena and various
provincial governors, which has been alleged to have been the foundational act
of the "Alianza Anticomunista Argentina" death-squad. Legacy. The official
Peronist party is the Justicialist Party (PJ), which was the only Peronist
party for a long time. During the government of Carlos Menem a group of
legislators led by Carlos Álvarez, known as the "Group of 8", left the party,
claiming that the government was not following Peronist doctrines. They created
a new party, the "Frente Grande" (Broad Front). A short time later, José
Octavio Bordón left the PJ as well, fearing that he might lose a primary
election against Menem, so he created his own party to take part in the 1995
elections, and allied with Álvarez' Broad Front in the Frepaso coalition.
Similar breakaway movements followed frequently after that, creating many small
parties which were led by single politicians claiming to be the authentic
inheritors of Peronism. Kirchnerism. The PJ did not participate as such during
the 2003 elections. The party allowed all three precandidates to run for the
general elections, using small parties created for that purpose. Néstor
Kirchner won the elections running on a Front for Victory ticket. As he did not
disband his party after the election, Kirchnerism relies on both the PJ and the
Front for Victory.
