Perspectives on capitalism Throughout modern history, a variety of influential
perspectives on capitalism have shaped modern economic thought. Overview. Adam
Smith was one of the first influential writers on the topic, with his book "The
Wealth of Nations", which is generally considered to be the start of classical
economics which emerged in the 18th century. To the contrary, Karl Marx
considered capitalism to be a historically specific mode of production and
considered capitalism a phase of economic development that would pass and be
replaced by pure communism. In conjunction with his criticism of capitalism was
Marx's belief that exploited labor would be the driving force behind a
revolution to a socialist-style economy. For Marx, this cycle of the extraction
of the surplus value by the owners of capital or the bourgeoisie becomes the
basis of class struggle. This argument is intertwined with Marx's version of
the labor theory of value asserting that labor is the source of all value, and
thus of profit. Max Weber considered market exchange, rather than production,
as the defining feature of capitalism; capitalist enterprises, in contrast to
their counterparts in prior modes of economic activity, was their
rationalization of production, directed toward maximizing efficiency and
productivity; a tendency leading to a sociological process of enveloping
'rationalization'. According to Weber, workers in pre-capitalist economic
institutions understood work in terms of a personal relationship between master
and journeyman in a guild, or between lord and peasant in a manor. Meanwhile
Institutional economics, once the main school of economic thought in the United
States, holds that capitalism cannot be separated from the political and social
system within which it is embedded. In the late 19th century, the German
Historical School of economics diverged, with the emerging Austrian School of
economics, led at the time by Carl Menger. Later generations of followers of
the Austrian School continued to be influential in Western economic thought
through much of the 20th century. The Austrian economist Joseph Schumpeter, a
forerunner of the Austrian School of economics, emphasized the "creative
destruction" of capitalism‚Äîthe fact that market economies undergo constant
change. The Austrian economists Ludwig von Mises and Friedrich Hayek were among
the leading defenders of market economy against 20th century proponents of
socialist planned economies. Among Mises's arguments were the economic
calculation problem. It was first proposed by Ludwig von Mises in 1920 and
later expounded by Friedrich Hayek. The problem referred to is that of how to
distribute resources rationally in an economy. The free market solution is the
price mechanism, wherein people individually have the ability to decide how a
good or service should be distributed based on their willingness to give money
for it. Mises and Hayek argued that only market capitalism could manage a
complex, modern economy. Partially opposed to that view the British economist
John Maynard Keynes argued in his 1937 "The General Theory of Employment,
Interest, and Money" that capitalism suffered a basic problem in its ability to
recover from periods of slowdowns in investment. Keynes argued that a
capitalist economy could remain in an indefinite equilibrium despite high
unemployment. John Maynard Keynes tried to provide solutions to many of
Marx‚Äôs problems without completely abandoning the classical understanding of
capitalism. His work attempted to show that regulation can be effective, and
that economic stabilizers can rein in the aggressive expansions and recessions
that Marx disliked. These changes sought to create more stability in the
business cycle, and reduce the abuses of laborers. Keynesian economists argue
that Keynesian policies were one of the primary reasons capitalism was able to
recover following the Great Depression. Supply-side economics developed during
the 1970s in response to Keynesian economic policy, and in particular the
failure of demand management to stabilize Western economies during the
stagflation of the 1970s, in the wake of the oil crisis in 1973. It drew on a
range of non-Keynesian economic thought, particularly Austrian school thinking
on entrepreneurship and new classical macroeconomics. The intellectual roots of
supply-side economics have also been traced back to various early economic
thinkers such as Ibn Khaldun, Jonathan Swift, David Hume, Adam Smith and
Alexander Hamilton. Typical policy recommendations of supply-side economics are
lower marginal tax rates and less regulation. Maximum benefits from taxation
policy are achieved by optimizing the marginal tax rates to spur growth,
although it is a common misunderstanding that supply side economics is
concerned only with taxation policy when it is about removing barriers to
production more generally. Today, the majority academic research on capitalism
in the English-speaking world draws on neoclassical economic thought. It favors
extensive market coordination and relatively neutral patterns of governmental
market regulation aimed at maintaining property rights; deregulated labor
markets; corporate governance dominated by financial owners of firms; and
financial systems depending chiefly on capital market-based financing rather
than state financing. Milton Friedman took many of the basic principles set
forth by Adam Smith and the classical economists and gave them a new twist. One
example of this is his article in the September 1970 issue of "The New York
Times" Magazine, where he claims that the social responsibility of business is
‚Äúto use its resources and engage in activities designed to increase its
profits‚Ä¶(through) open and free competition without deception or fraud.‚Äù
This is similar to Smith‚Äôs argument that self-interest in turn benefits the
whole of society. Work like this helped lay the foundations for the coming
marketization (or privatization) of state enterprises and the supply-side
economics of Ronald Reagan and Margaret Thatcher. The Chicago School of
economics is best known for its free market advocacy and monetarist ideas.
According to Friedman and other monetarists, market economies are inherently
stable if left to themselves and depressions result only from government
intervention. Classical political economy. The classical school of economic
thought emerged in Britain in the late 18th century. The classical political
economists Adam Smith, David Ricardo, Jean-Baptiste Say, and John Stuart Mill
published analyses of the production, distribution and exchange of goods in a
market that have since formed the basis of study for most contemporary
economists. In France, 'Physiocrats' like Fran√ßois Quesnay promoted free trade
based on a conception that wealth originated from land. Quesnay's "Tableau
√âconomique" (1759), described the economy analytically and laid the foundation
of the Physiocrats' economic theory, followed by Anne Robert Jacques Turgot who
opposed tariffs and customs duties and advocated free trade. Richard Cantillon
defined long-run equilibrium as the balance of flows of income, and argued that
the supply and demand mechanism around land influenced short-term prices.
Smith's attack on mercantilism and his reasoning for "the system of natural
liberty" in "The Wealth of Nations" (1776) are usually taken as the beginning
of classical political economy. Smith devised a set of concepts that remain
strongly associated with capitalism today, particularly his theory of the
"invisible hand" of the market, through which the pursuit of individual self-
interest unintentionally produces a collective good for society. It was
necessary for Smith to be so forceful in his argument in favor of free markets
because he had to overcome the popular mercantilist sentiment of the time
period. He criticized monopolies, tariffs, duties, and other state enforced
restrictions of his time and believed that the market is the most fair and
efficient arbitrator of resources. This view was shared by David Ricardo,
second most important of the classical political economists and one of the most
influential economists of modern times. In "The Principles of Political Economy
and Taxation" (1817), he developed the law of comparative advantage, which
explains why it is profitable for two parties to trade, even if one of the
trading partners is more efficient in every type of economic production. This
principle supports the economic case for free trade. Ricardo was a supporter of
Say's Law and held the view that full employment is the normal equilibrium for
a competitive economy. He also argued that inflation is closely related to
changes in quantity of money and credit and was a proponent of the law of
diminishing returns, which states that each additional unit of input yields
less and less additional output. The values of classical political economy are
strongly associated with the classical liberal doctrine of minimal government
intervention in the economy, though it does not necessarily oppose the state's
provision of a few basic public goods. Classical liberal thought has generally
assumed a clear division between the economy and other realms of social
activity, such as the state. While economic liberalism favors markets
unfettered by the government, it maintains that the state has a legitimate role
in providing public goods. For instance, Adam Smith argued that the state has a
role in providing roads, canals, schools and bridges that cannot be efficiently
implemented by private entities. However, he preferred that these goods should
be paid proportionally to their consumption (e.g. putting a toll). In addition,
he advocated retaliatory tariffs to bring about free trade, and copyrights and
patents to encourage innovation. Marxist political economy. Karl Marx
considered capitalism to be a historically specific mode of production (the way
in which the productive property is owned and controlled, combined with the
corresponding social relations between individuals based on their connection
with the process of production) in which capitalism has become the dominant
mode of production. The capitalist stage of development or "bourgeois society,"
for Marx, represented the most advanced form of social organization to date,
but he also thought that the working classes would come to power in a worldwide
socialist or communist transformation of human society as the end of the series
of first aristocratic, then capitalist, and finally working class rule was
reached. Following Adam Smith, Marx distinguished the use value of commodities
from their exchange value in the market. Capital, according to Marx, is created
with the purchase of commodities for the purpose of creating new commodities
with an exchange value higher than the sum of the original purchases. For Marx,
the use of labor power had itself become a commodity under capitalism; the
exchange value of labor power, as reflected in the wage, is less than the value
it produces for the capitalist. This difference in values, he argues,
constitutes surplus value, which the capitalists extract and accumulate. In his
book "Capital", Marx argues that the capitalist mode of production is
distinguished by how the owners of capital extract this surplus from
workers‚Äîall prior class societies had extracted surplus labor, but capitalism
was new in doing so via the sale-value of produced commodities. He argues that
a core requirement of a capitalist society is that a large portion of the
population must not possess sources of self-sustenance that would allow them to
be independent, and must instead be compelled, to survive, to sell their labor
for a living wage. In conjunction with his criticism of capitalism was Marx's
belief that exploited labor would be the driving force behind a revolution to a
socialist-style economy. For Marx, this cycle of the extraction of the surplus
value by the owners of capital or the bourgeoisie becomes the basis of class
struggle. This argument is intertwined with Marx's version of the labor theory
of value asserting that labor is the source of all value, and thus of profit.
Vladimir Lenin, in "Imperialism, the Highest Stage of Capitalism" (1916),
modified classic Marxist theory and argued that capitalism necessarily induced
monopoly capitalism‚Äîwhich he also called "imperialism"‚Äîto find new markets
and resources, representing the last and highest stage of capitalism. Some
20th-century Marxian economists consider capitalism to be a social formation
where capitalist class processes dominate, but are not exclusive. Capitalist
class processes, to these thinkers, are simply those in which surplus labor
takes the form of surplus value, usable as capital; other tendencies for
utilization of labor nonetheless exist simultaneously in existing societies
where capitalist processes are predominant. However, other late Marxian
thinkers argue that a social formation as a whole may be classed as capitalist
if capitalism is the mode by which a surplus is "extracted", even if this
surplus is not "produced" by capitalist activity, as when an absolute majority
of the population is engaged in non-capitalist economic activity. David Harvey
extends Marxian thinking through which he theorizes the differential production
of place, space and political activism under capitalism. He uses Marx‚Äôs
theory of crisis to aid his argument that capitalism must have its ‚Äúfixes‚Äù
but that we cannot predetermine what fixes will be implemented, nor in what
form they will be. This idea of fix is suggestive and could mean fix as in
stabilize, heal or solve, or as in a junky needing a fix ‚Äì the idea of
preventing feeling worse in order to feel better. In "Limits to Capital"
(1982), Harvey outlines an overdetermined, spatially restless capitalism
coupled with the spatiality of crisis formation and its resolution.
Furthermore, his work has been central for understanding the contractions of
capital accumulation and international movements of capitalist modes of
production and money flows. In his essay, "Notes towards a theory of uneven
geographical development", Harvey examines the causes of the extreme volatility
in contemporary political economic fortunes across and between spaces of the
world economy. He bases this uneven development on four conditionalities,
being: The material embedding of capital accumulation processes in the web of
socio-ecological life; accumulation by dispossession; the law-like character of
capital accumulation in space and time; and, political, social and ‚Äúclass‚Äù
struggles at a variety of geographical scales. Weberian political sociology. In
some social sciences, the understanding of the defining characteristics of
capitalism has been strongly influenced by 19th century German social theorist
Max Weber. Weber considered market exchange, rather than production, as the
defining feature of capitalism; capitalist enterprises, in contrast to their
counterparts in prior modes of economic activity, was their rationalization of
production, directed toward maximizing efficiency and productivity; a tendency
leading to a sociological process of enveloping 'rationalization'. According to
Weber, workers in pre-capitalist economic institutions understood work in terms
of a personal relationship between master and journeyman in a guild, or between
lord and peasant in a manor. In his book "The Protestant Ethic and the Spirit
of Capitalism" (1904‚Äì1905), Weber sought to trace how a particular form of
religious spirit, infused into traditional modes of economic activity, was a
condition of possibility of modern western capitalism. For Weber, the 'spirit
of capitalism' was, in general, that of ascetic Protestantism; this ideology
was able to motivate extreme rationalization of daily life, a propensity to
accumulate capital by a religious ethic to advance economically, and thus also
the propensity to reinvest capital: this was sufficient, then, to create "self-
mediating capital" as conceived by Marx. This is pictured in Proverbs 22:29,
‚ÄúSeest thou a man diligent in his calling? He shall stand before kings‚Äù and
in Colossians 3:23, "Whatever you do, do your work heartily, as for the Lord
rather than for men." In the "Protestant Ethic", Weber further stated that
‚Äúmoneymaking ‚Äì provided it is done legally ‚Äì is, within the modern
economic order, the result and the expression of diligence in one‚Äôs
calling‚Ä¶‚Äù And, "If God show you a way in which you may lawfully get more
than in another way (without wrong to your soul or to any other), if you refuse
this, and choose the less gainful way, you cross one of the ends of your
calling, and you refuse to be God's steward, and to accept His gifts and use
them for him when He requierth it: you may labour to be rich for God, though
not for the flesh and sin" (p.¬ 108). Western Capitalism, was, most generally
for Weber, the "rational organization of formally free labor." The idea of the
"formally free" laborer, meant, in the double sense of Marx, that the laborer
was both free to own property, and free of the ability to reproduce his labor
power, i.e., was the victim of expropriation of his means of production. It is
only on these conditions, still abundantly obvious in the modern world of
Weber, that western capitalism is able to exist. For Weber, modern western
capitalism represented the order "now bound to the technical and economic
conditions of machine production which to-day determine the lives of all the
individuals who are born into this mechanism, not only those directly concerned
with economic acquisition, with irresistible force. Perhaps it will so
determine them until the last ton of fossilized coal is burnt" (p.¬ 123). This
is further seen in his criticism of "specialists without spirit, hedonists
without a heart" that were developing, in his opinion, with the fading of the
original Puritan "spirit" associated with capitalism. Institutional economics.
Institutional economics, once the main school of economic thought in the United
States, holds that capitalism cannot be separated from the political and social
system within which it is embedded. It emphasizes the legal foundations of
capitalism (see John R. Commons) and the evolutionary, habituated, and
volitional processes by which institutions are erected and then changed (see
John Dewey, Thorstein Veblen, and Daniel Bromley.) One key figure in
institutional economics was Thorstein Veblen who in his book The Theory of the
Leisure Class (1899) analyzed the motivations of wealthy people in capitalism
who conspicuously consumed their riches as a way of demonstrating success. The
concept of conspicuous consumption was in direct contradiction to the
neoclassical view that capitalism was efficient. In The Theory of Business
Enterprise (1904) Veblen distinguished the motivations of industrial production
for people to use things from business motivations that used, or misused,
industrial infrastructure for profit, arguing that the former is often hindered
because businesses pursue the latter. Output and technological advance are
restricted by business practices and the creation of monopolies. Businesses
protect their existing capital investments and employ excessive credit, leading
to depressions and increasing military expenditure and war through business
control of political power. German Historical School and Austrian School. From
the perspective of the German Historical School, capitalism is primarily
identified in terms of the organization of production for markets. Although
this perspective shares similar theoretical roots with that of Weber, its
emphasis on markets and money lends it different focus. For followers of the
German Historical School, the key shift from traditional modes of economic
activity to capitalism involved the shift from medieval restrictions on credit
and money to the modern monetary economy combined with an emphasis on the
profit motive. In the late 19th century, the German Historical School of
economics diverged, with the emerging Austrian School of economics, led at the
time by Carl Menger. Later generations of followers of the Austrian School
continued to be influential in Western economic thought through much of the
20th century. The Austrian economist Joseph Schumpeter, a forerunner of the
Austrian School of economics, emphasized the "creative destruction" of
capitalism‚Äîthe fact that market economies undergo constant change. At any
moment of time, posits Schumpeter, there are rising industries and declining
industries. Schumpeter, and many contemporary economists influenced by his
work, argue that resources should flow from the declining to the expanding
industries for an economy to grow, but they recognized that sometimes resources
are slow to withdraw from the declining industries because of various forms of
institutional resistance to change. The Austrian economists Ludwig von Mises
and Friedrich Hayek were among the leading defenders of market economy against
20th century proponents of socialist planned economies. Mises and Hayek argued
that only market capitalism could manage a complex, modern economy. Among their
arguments were the economic calculation problem. It was first proposed by
Ludwig von Mises in 1920 and later expounded by Friedrich Hayek. The problem
referred to is that of how to distribute resources rationally in an economy.
The free market solution is the price mechanism, wherein people individually
have the ability to decide how a good or service should be distributed based on
their willingness to give money for it. The price conveys embedded information
about the abundance of resources as well as their desirability which in turn
allows, on the basis of individual consensual decisions, corrections that
prevent shortages and surpluses; Mises and Hayek argued that this is the only
possible solution, and without the information provided by market prices
socialism lacks a method to rationally allocate resources. Ludwig von Mises
argued in a famous 1920 article "Economic Calculation in the Socialist
Commonwealth" that the pricing systems in socialist economies were necessarily
deficient because if government owned or controlled the means of production,
then no rational prices could be obtained for capital goods as they were merely
internal transfers of goods in a socialist system and not "objects of
exchange," unlike final goods. Therefore, they were unpriced and hence the
system would be necessarily inefficient since the central planners would not
know how to allocate the available resources efficiently. This led him to
declare "...that rational economic activity is impossible in a socialist
commonwealth." Mises developed his critique of socialism more completely in his
1922 book "Socialism, an Economic and Sociological Analysis". Since a modern
economy produces such a large array of distinct goods and services, and
consists of such a large array of consumers and enterprises, asserted Mises and
Hayek, the information problems facing any other form of economic organization
other than market capitalism would exceed its capacity to handle information.
Thinkers within Supply-side economics built on the work of the Austrian School,
and particularly emphasize Say's Law: "supply creates its own demand."
Capitalism, to this school, is defined by lack of state restraint on the
decisions of producers. Austrian economists claim that Marx failed to make the
distinction between "capitalism" and "mercantilism". They argue that Marx
conflated the imperialistic, colonialistic, protectionist and interventionist
doctrines of mercantilism with capitalism. Austrian economics has been a major
influence on some forms of libertarianism, in which laissez-faire capitalism is
considered to be the ideal economic system. It influenced economists and
political philosophers and theorists including Henry Hazlitt, Hans-Hermann
Hoppe, Israel Kirzner, Murray Rothbard, Walter Block and Richard M. Ebeling.
Keynesian economics. In his 1937 "The General Theory of Employment, Interest,
and Money", the British economist John Maynard Keynes argued that capitalism
suffered a basic problem in its ability to recover from periods of slowdowns in
investment. Keynes argued that a capitalist economy could remain in an
indefinite equilibrium despite high unemployment. Essentially rejecting Say's
law, he argued that some people may have a liquidity preference that would see
them rather hold money than buy new goods or services, which therefore raised
the prospect that the Great Depression would not end without what he termed in
the "General Theory" "a somewhat comprehensive socialization of investment."
Keynesian economics challenged the notion that laissez-faire capitalist
economics could operate well on their own, without state intervention used to
promote aggregate demand, fighting high unemployment and deflation of the sort
seen during the 1930s. He and his followers recommended "pump-priming" the
economy to avoid recession: cutting taxes, increasing government borrowing, and
spending during an economic down-turn. This was to be accompanied by trying to
control wages nationally partly through the use of inflation to cut real wages
and to deter people from holding money. John Maynard Keynes tried to provide
solutions to many of Marx‚Äôs problems without completely abandoning the
classical understanding of capitalism. His work attempted to show that
regulation can be effective, and that economic stabilizers can rein in the
aggressive expansions and recessions that Marx disliked. These changes sought
to create more stability in the business cycle, and reduce the abuses of
laborers. Keynesian economists argue that Keynesian policies were one of the
primary reasons capitalism was able to recover following the Great Depression.
The premises of Keynes‚Äôs work have, however, since been challenged by
neoclassical and supply-side economics and the Austrian School. Another
challenge to Keynesian thinking came from his colleague Piero Sraffa, and
subsequently from the Neo-Ricardian school that followed Sraffa. In Sraffa's
highly technical analysis, capitalism is defined by an entire system of social
relations among both producers and consumers, but with a primary emphasis on
the demands of production. According to Sraffa, the tendency of capital to seek
its highest rate of profit causes a dynamic instability in social and economic
relations. Supply Side Economics. "Supply-side economics" is a school of
macroeconomic thought that argues that economic growth can be most effectively
created by lowering barriers for people to produce (supply) goods and services,
such as adjusting income tax and capital gains tax rates, and by allowing
greater flexibility by reducing regulation. Consumers will then benefit from a
greater supply of goods and services at lower prices. The term "supply-side
economics" was thought, for some time, to have been coined by journalist Jude
Wanniski in 1975, but according to Robert D. Atkinson's "Supply-Side Follies"
[p.¬ 50], the term "supply side" ("supply-side fiscalists") was first used by
Herbert Stein, a former economic adviser to President Nixon, in 1976, and only
later that year was this term repeated by Jude Wanniski. Its use connotes the
ideas of economists Robert Mundell and Arthur Laffer. Today, supply-side
economics is often conflated with the politically rhetorical term "trickle-down
economics", but as Jude Wanniski points out in his book "The Way The World
Works", trickle-down economics is conservative Keynesianism associated with the
Republican Party. Typical policy recommendations of supply-side economics are
lower marginal tax rates and less regulation. Maximum benefits from taxation
policy are achieved by optimizing the marginal tax rates to spur growth,
although it is a common misunderstanding that supply side economics is
concerned only with taxation policy when it is about removing barriers to
production more generally. Many early proponents argued that the size of the
economic growth would be significant enough that the increased government
revenue from a faster growing economy would be sufficient to compensate
completely for the short-term costs of a tax cut, and that tax cuts could, in
fact, cause overall revenue to increase. Neoclassical economics and the Chicago
School. Today, the majority academic research on capitalism in the English-
speaking world draws on neoclassical economic thought. It favors extensive
market coordination and relatively neutral patterns of governmental market
regulation aimed at maintaining property rights; deregulated labor markets;
corporate governance dominated by financial owners of firms; and financial
systems depending chiefly on capital market-based financing rather than state
financing. Milton Friedman took many of the basic principles set forth by Adam
Smith and the classical economists and gave them a new twist. One example of
this is his article in the September 1970 issue of "The New York Times"
Magazine, where he claims that the social responsibility of business is ‚Äúto
use its resources and engage in activities designed to increase its profits‚Ä¶
(through) open and free competition without deception or fraud.‚Äù This is
similar to Smith‚Äôs argument that self-interest in turn benefits the whole of
society. Work like this helped lay the foundations for the coming marketization
(or privatization) of state enterprises and the supply-side economics of Ronald
Reagan and Margaret Thatcher. The Chicago School of economics is best known for
its free market advocacy and monetarist ideas. According to Friedman and other
monetarists, market economies are inherently stable if left to themselves and
depressions result only from government intervention. Friedman, for example,
argued that the Great Depression was result of a contraction of the money
supply, controlled by the Federal Reserve, and not by the lack of investment as
John Maynard Keynes had argued. Ben Bernanke, current Chairman of the Federal
Reserve, is among the economists today generally accepting Friedman's analysis
of the causes of the Great Depression. Neoclassical economists, today the
majority of economists, consider value to be subjective, varying from person to
person and for the same person at different times, and thus reject the labor
theory of value. Marginalism is the theory that economic value results from
marginal utility and marginal cost (the marginal concepts). These economists
see capitalists as earning profits by forgoing current consumption, by taking
risks, and by organizing production. Mainstream Economics. Mainstream economics
is a loose term used to refer to the non-heterodox economics taught in
prominent universities. It is most closely associated with neoclassical
economics, or more precisely by the neoclassical synthesis, which combines
neoclassical approach to microeconomics with Keynesian approach to
macroeconomics. Mainstream economists are not generally separated into schools,
but two major contemporary orthodox economic schools of thought are the
"saltwater and freshwater schools." The saltwater schools consist of the
universities and other institutions located near the east and west coast of the
United States, such as Berkeley, Harvard, MIT, University of Pennsylvania,
Princeton, Columbia, Duke, Stanford, and Yale. Freshwater schools include the
University of Chicago, Carnegie Mellon University, the University of Rochester
and the University of Minnesota. They were referred to as the 'freshwater
school' since Pittsburgh, Chicago, Rochester, and Minneapolis are located
nearer to the Great Lakes. The Saltwater school is associated with Keynesian
ideas of government intervention into the free market, while the Freshwater
schools are skeptical of the benefits of the government. Mainstream economists
do not, in general, identify themselves as members of a particular school; they
may, however, be associated with approaches within a field such as the
rational-expectations approach to macroeconomics.
