Pete Stark Fortney Hillman "Pete" Stark, Jr. (born November 11, 1931) is the
outgoing U.S. Representative for , serving since 1973. He is a member of the
Democratic Party. He is the 5th most senior Representative, as well as 6th most
senior member of Congress overall. He is also the dean of California's 55-
member Congressional delegation. His district lies in southwestern Alameda
County and includes Alameda, Union City, Hayward, Newark, San Leandro, San
Lorenzo, and Fremont, as well as parts of Oakland and Pleasanton. Prior to his
service to the 13th district, Stark had also represented the 8th and 9th
congressional districts in California. After 2010 redistricting, Stark
campaigned for the 15th district seat in 2012, and lost to fellow Democrat Eric
Swalwell. Early life, education, and banking career. Stark was born in
Milwaukee, Wisconsin. He received a Bachelor of Science degree in general
engineering at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology in 1953. He served in
the United States Air Force from 1955 to 1957. After leaving the Air Force,
Stark attended the Haas School of Business at the University of California,
Berkeley, and received his MBA in 1960. Stark originally lived in the Bay Area,
but ultimately relocated to Maryland. He primarily resides in his Maryland home
with his family but still maintains a residence in the California district he
represents, although he only visits his constituents twice per month. In 1963,
Stark founded Security National Bank, a small bank in Walnut Creek. Within 10
years it grew to a $100 million company with branches across the East Bay. U.S.
House of Representatives. Elections. In 1972, Stark moved to Oakland to run in
the Democratic primary against 14-term incumbent U.S. Representative George
Paul Miller in what was then the 8th district. Stark then 41, a sharp critic of
the octogenarian, Miller. He stated, "Miller entered the House in 1945...28
years ago." He won the Democratic primary with 56% of the vote, a 34-point
margin. In the 1972 general election, he defeated Republican Lew Warden with
53% of the vote, the lowest winning percentage of his career. He has since been
re-elected 18 times, and has only dropped below 60 percent of the vote twice
(1980 and 1990). In 1980, he won with just 54%, and in 1990 he won with 58% of
the vote. Due to redistricting, his district has changed numbers twice, from
the 8th (1973–75) to the 9th (1975–93) to the 13th (since 1993). He was
unopposed for the Democratic nomination in the 2008 election and was re-elected
in the general election with 76.3% of the vote. In the 2012 elections, due to
California's nonpartisan blanket primary, his opponent in the general election
was a fellow Democrat, Eric Swalwell. Swalwell defeated Stark in the race to
represent California's 15th congressional district, to which Stark was
redistricted from the 13th district. Tenure. At 39 years, Stark was the
longest-serving member of Congress from California. Stark voted against the
bipartisan May 2008 farm subsidy bill, which was supported by most House
Democrats and over half of House Republicans, in part because of its cost. He
also voted against both readings of the Emergency Economic Stabilization Act of
2008, which gave $700 billion dollars to troubled investment banks. Stark
argued that "the proposed bailout will only help reckless speculators who have
been caught on the wrong side of the come line." Criticizing the bill as
corporate welfare, he said "The bill before us today is basically the same
three-page Wall Street give-away first put forth by President Bush" before the
vote on the first bailout. On September 25, 2008, Stark and Peter DeFazio
signed a letter to House Speaker Nancy Pelosi proposing a one quarter of one
percent “transaction tax” on all trades in financial instruments including
stocks, options, and futures. On September 29, 2008, Stark voted against HR
3997, the bailout bill backed by President Bush, House Speaker Pelosi and
presidential candidates Barack Obama and John McCain, and the bill subsequently
failed to pass. Explaining his vote, Stark stated, "President Bush tells us
that we face unparalleled financial doom if this $700 billion bailout is not
approved today. He and his Treasury Secretary—a former Wall Street fat
cat—tell us that we have reached the point of 'crisis.' That is a familiar
line from this President. It sounds like the disastrous rush to war in Iraq and
the subsequent stampede to enact the Patriot Act. As I opposed the Iraq War and
the Patriot Act, I stand in opposition to his latest rush to judgment." On
October 3, 2008, Stark voted against HR 1424, the Emergency Economic
Stabilization Act of 2008. With this vote, Stark became the sole member of the
House of Representatives from the San Francisco Bay Area to oppose the bill.
Explaining his vote, Stark stated, "You're getting the same kind of
misinformation now, the same kind of rush to judgment to tell you that a crisis
will occur. It won't. Vote 'no.' Come back and help work on a bill that will
help all Americans." Stark is known to have a longstanding interest in health
care issues and was critical of the fate of the uninsured under the George W.
Bush administration. With John Conyers, in April 2006, Stark brought an action
against President Bush and others alleging violations of the Constitution in
the passing of the Deficit Reduction Act of 2005, which cut Medicaid payments.
The case, "Conyers v. Bush", was ultimately dismissed for lack of standing in
November of the same year. Stark was an early opponent of the Iraq War, against
the resolution authorizing military force against Iraq, on October 10, 2002. In
part he said, "Well then, who will pay? School kids will pay. There'll be no
money to keep them from being left behind—way behind. Seniors will pay.
They'll pay big time as the Republicans privatize Social Security and rob the
Trust Fund to pay for the capricious war. Medicare will be curtailed and drugs
will be more unaffordable. And there won't be any money for a drug benefit
because Bush will spend it all on the war. Working folks will pay through loss
of job security and bargaining rights. Our grandchildren will pay through the
degradation of our air and water quality. And the entire nation will pay as
Bush continues to destroy civil rights, women's rights and religious freedom in
a rush to phony patriotism and to courting the messianic Pharisees of the
religious right." In January 2003 Stark supported a reinstatement of the draft,
partly in protest against the call to war but also saying, "If we're going to
have these escapades, we should not do it on the backs of poor people and
minorities."In October 2004, he was one of only two members of Congress to vote
in favor of the Universal National Service Act of 2003 (HR 163), a bill
proposing resumption of the military draft. He has not voted for any bills to
continue funding the Iraq war, but has voted 'present' for some. In a statement
posted on his website he explained, "Despite my utmost respect for my
colleagues who crafted this bill, I can't in good conscience vote to continue
this war. Nor, however, can I vote 'No' and join those who think today's
legislation goes too far toward withdrawal. That's why I'm making the difficult
decision to vote 'present'."Stark was the only member of Congress to take this
position. Stark is the first openly atheist member of Congress, as announced by
the Secular Coalition for America. Stark acknowledged that he is an atheist in
response to an SCA questionnaire sent to public officials in January 2007. On
September 20, 2007, Stark reaffirmed that he is an atheist by making a public
announcement in front of the Humanist Chaplaincy at Harvard, the Harvard Law
School Heathen Society, and various other atheist, agnostic, secular, humanist,
and nonreligious groups. The American Humanist Association named him their 2008
Humanist of the Year, and serves on the AHA Advisory Board. On February 9,
2011, Stark introduced a bill to Congress designating February 12, 2011 as
Darwin Day as a culmination of collaboration between Rep. Stark and the
American Humanist Association. The resolution states, “Charles Darwin is a
worthy symbol of scientific advancement… and around which to build a global
celebration of science and humanity.” Controversies. Controversial
statements. In August 1990, Stark drew controversy for calling Health and Human
Services Secretary Louis Wade Sullivan, an African American, "a disgrace to his
race" for supporting Bush Administration policies that Stark called "bankrupt
and damaging to minority members." Stark was criticizing Sullivan's opposition
to proposals for federally sponsored national health insurance when Stark had
introduced legislation for national health insurance at the time, and said that
Sullivan had been influenced by George H. W. Bush administration officials such
as Office of Management and Budget Director Richard Darman and White House
Chief of Staff John H. Sununu to change his positions on both abortion and
health care. Sullivan angrily retorted, "I don't live on Pete Stark's
plantation", and replied in a statement, saying in part, "I guess I should feel
ashamed because Congressman Stark thinks I am not a 'good Negro.' As a Cabinet
member who has spent almost four decades of my life dedicated to healing...am
unable to express my own views without being subject to race-based criticism by
those who are not ready to accept independent thinking by a black man." Stark
later apologized for the controversy. On October 18, 2007, Stark made the
following comments on the House floor during a debate with Congressman Joe
Barton of Texas: "Republicans sure don't care about finding $200 billion to
fight the illegal war in Iraq. Where are you going to get that money? Are you
going to tell us lies like you're telling us today? Is that how you're going to
fund the war? You don't have money to fund the war or children. But you're
going to spend it to blow up innocent people if we can get enough kids to grow
old enough for you to send to Iraq to get their heads blown off for the
President's amusement." Following the initial criticism to his statements, when
asked by a radio station if he would take back any of his statements, Stark
responded "Absolutely not. I may have dishonored the Commander-in-Chief, but I
think he’s done pretty well to dishonor himself without any help from me."
The same day, his office also issued a press release, saying in part, "I have
nothing but respect for our brave men and women in uniform and wish them the
very best. But I respect neither the Commander-in-Chief who keeps them in harms
way nor the chickenhawks in Congress who vote to deny children health care."
Five days later on October 23, after the House voted down a censure resolution
against Stark sponsored by Minority Leader John Boehner, he said, "I apologize
for this reason: I think we have serious issues before us, the issue of
providing medical care to children, the issue about what we’re going to do
about a war that we’re divided about how to end." Other controversies include
singling out "Jewish colleagues" for blame for the Persian Gulf War and
referring to Congressman Stephen Solarz of New York (who co-sponsored the Gulf
War Authorization Act) as "Field Marshal Solarz in the pro-Israel forces." in
1991. In 1995, during a private meeting with Congresswoman Nancy Johnson of
Connecticut, he called Johnson a "whore for the insurance industry" and
suggested that her knowledge of health care came solely from "pillow talk" with
her husband, a physician. His press secretary, Caleb Marshall, defended him in
saying, "He didn't call her a 'whore,' he called her a 'whore of the insurance
industry.'" In a 2001 Ways and Means Subcommittee on Health hearing on
abstinence promotion, he referred to Congressman J. C. Watts of Oklahoma as
"the current Republican Conference Chairman, whose children were all born out
of wedlock." In 2003, when Stark was told to "shut up" by Congressman Scott
McInnis of Colorado during a Ways and Means Committee meeting due to Stark's
belittling of the chairman, Bill Thomas of California, he replied, "You think
you are big enough to make me, you little wimp? Come on. Come over here and
make me, I dare you. You little fruitcake." In an older video taped interview
with Jan Helfeld concerning the size of the national debt, Stark stated that
the size of the national debt is a reflection of the nation's wealth. When
pressed if the nation should take on more debt in order to have more wealth,
Stark threatened Helfeld and said, “You get the fuck out of here or I’ll
throw you out the window.” On August 27, 2009, Stark suggested that his
moderate Democratic colleagues were "brain dead" for proposing changes to the
health care reform bill being considered by Congress. Saying that they "just
want to cause trouble," Stark claimed, "they're for the most part, I hate to
say, brain dead, but they're just looking to raise money from insurance
companies and promote a right-wing agenda that is not really very useful in
this whole process" during a conference call. The "San Francisco Chronicle"
editorialized on Stark, "Only a politician who assumes he has a job for life
could behave so badly on a semi-regular basis by spewing personalized invective
that might get him punched in certain East Bay taverns. Would-be challengers
sometimes sense a whiff of opportunity, but the reality of taking on a 16-term
Democrat in solidly liberal terrain is nothing short of daunting. Surely there
must be someone along the shoreline between Alameda and Fremont who could
represent the good citizens of the district with class and dignity. It's not
the case now." During a town hall meeting in 2009, a constituent who opposed
President Barack Obama's health care plan told Stark, "Mr. Congressman, don't
pee on my leg and tell me it's raining." Stark responded with, "I wouldn't
dignify you by peeing on your leg. It wouldn't be worth wasting the urine."
Real estate taxes. For two years, Stark was allegedly claiming his waterfront
Maryland home as his primary residence in order to claim a homestead exemption
to reduce his local real estate taxes. Under Maryland law, in order to qualify,
the owner must register to vote and drive in Maryland—Stark uses a California
address for those purposes. On December 24, 2008, the House Ethics Committee
began an investigation in regard to Stark using his Maryland residence as his
primary residence while claiming to live in San Lorenzo. The home Stark claims
as his residence and where he is registered to vote is owned and occupied by
his in-laws. In January 2010, the House Ethics Committee voted unanimously that
the allegations that Stark took a tax break on a property he owns in Maryland
were unfounded. Electoral history. !Year !Winning candidate !Party !Pct
!Opponent !Party !Pct !Year !Winning candidate !Party !Pct !Opponent !Party
!Pct !Opponent !Party !Pct !Year !Winning candidate !Party !Pct !Opponent
!Party !Pct !Opponent !Party !Pct !Opponent !Party !Pct !Opponent !Party !Pct
!Year !Winning candidate !Party !Pct !Opponent !Party !Pct
