Petrocurrency Oil producers' trading surpluses. With the large rise in oil
prices in the 1970s, there was concern that the world economy might contract if
the oil producers extracted money and failed to recycle it back to oil
consumers. With a similar rise in prices at the start of the 21st century, more
of these oil surpluses have been reinvested through sovereign wealth funds. Two
early examples were the Kuwait Investment Authority and the Petroleum Fund of
Norway. Currencies correlated with oil prices. The pound sterling has sometimes
been regarded as a petrocurrency as a result of North Sea oil exports. The
Dutch guilder was regarded as a petrocurrency due to its large quantities of
natural gas and North Sea oil exports. This caused the Dutch Guilder to
strengthen severely in the 1970s when the OPEC started their price hikes. As a
result of this strengthening industrial manufacturing and services were crowded
out and became non-competitive on world markets, a phenomenon that is often
referred to in economics literature as Dutch disease. The Canadian dollar is
increasingly viewed as a petrocurrency. As the price of oil rises, oil-related
export revenues rise, and thus constitute a larger component of Canadian
exports. Thus, the movements of the Canadian dollar have become increasingly
correlated with the price of oil. For example, the exchange rate of Canadian
dollars for Japanese yen (99% of Japan's oil is imported) is 85% correlated
with crude prices. Currencies used to trade oil. Since the agreements of 1971
and 1973, OPEC oil is exclusively quoted in US dollars. This created a
permanent demand for dollars on the international exchange markets. As of 2005,
OPEC continues to trade in US Dollars, but some OPEC members (such as Iran and
Venezuela) have been pushing for a switch to the euro. Since the beginning of
2003, Iran has required euro in payment of exports toward Asia and Europe. The
government opened an Iranian Oil Bourse on the free trade zone on the island of
Kish, for the express purpose of trading oil priced in other currencies,
including euros.
