Pharaonism Pharaonism is an ideology that rose to prominence in Egypt in the
1920s and 1930s. It looked to Egypt's pre-Islamic past and argued that Egypt
was part of a larger Mediterranean civilization. This ideology stressed the
role of the Nile River and the Mediterranean Sea. Pharaonism's most notable
advocate was Taha Hussein. Egyptian identity. Egyptian identity since the Iron
Age Egyptian Empire evolved for the longest period under the influence of
native Egyptian culture, religion and identity (see Ancient Egypt). The
Egyptians came subsequently under the influence of brief successions of foreign
rulers including Berbers, Nubians, Persians, Greeks, Romans, Arabs, Turks,
French and British. Under these foreign rulers, the Egyptians accommodated two
new religions, Christianity and Islam, and a new language, Egyptian Arabic.
Nationalism. It has been argued that until the 1940s, Egypt was more in favor
of territorial, Egyptian nationalism and distant from the pan-Arab ideology.
Egyptians generally did not identify themselves as Arabs, and it is revealing
that when the Egyptian nationalist leader Saad Zaghlul met the Arab delegates
at Versailles in 1918, he insisted that their struggles for statehood were not
connected, claiming that the problem of Egypt was an Egyptian problem and not
an Arab one. Arab identity. However, Egypt under King Farouk was a founding
member of the Arab League in 1945, and the first Arab state to declare war in
support of the Palestinians in the Palestine War of 1948. This Arab nationalist
sentiment increased exponentially after the Egyptian Revolution of 1952. The
primary leaders of the Revolution, Muhammad Naguib, and Gamal Abdel Nasser,
were staunch Arab nationalists who stressed that pride in Egypt's individual
indigenous identity was entirely consistent with pride in an overarching Arab
cultural identity. It was during Naguib's tenure as leader that Egypt adopted
the Arab Liberation Flag to symbolise the country's links to the rest of the
Arab World. For a while Egypt and Syria formed the United Arab Republic. When
the union was dissolved, Egypt continued to be known as the UAR until 1971,
when Egypt adopted the current official name, the Arab Republic of Egypt. The
Egyptians' attachment to Arabism, however, was particularly questioned after
the 1967 Six-Day War. Thousands of Egyptians had lost their lives and the
country became disillusioned with Pan-Arab politics. Nasser's successor Anwar
Al Sadat, both through public policy and his peace initiative with Israel,
revived an uncontested Egyptian orientation, unequivocally asserting that only
Egypt and Egyptians were his responsibility. The terms "Arab," "Arabism," and
"Arab unity," save for the new official name, became conspicuously absent. (See
also Liberal age and Republic sections.) Although the overwhelming majority of
Egyptians today continue to self-identify as Arabs in a cultural sense, a
minority reject this, pointing to the failures of Arab and pan-Arab nationalist
policies, and even publicly voicing objection to the present official name of
the country. In late 2007, "el-Masri el-Yom" daily newspaper conducted an
interview at a bus stop in the working-class district of Imbaba to ask citizens
what Arab nationalism ("el-qawmeyya el-'arabeyya") represented for them. One
Egyptian Muslim youth responded, "Arab nationalism means that the Egyptian
Foreign Minister in Jerusalem gets humiliated by the Palestinians, that Arab
leaders dance upon hearing of Sadat's death, that Egyptians get humiliated in
the Arab states of the Persian Gulf, and of course that Arab countries get to
fight Israel until the last Egyptian soldier." Another felt that,"Arab
countries hate Egyptians", and that unity with Israel may even be more of a
possibility than Arab nationalism, because he believes that Israelis would at
least respect Egyptians. Some contemporary prominent Egyptians who oppose Arab
nationalism or the idea that Egyptians are Arabs include Secretary General of
the Supreme Council of Antiquities Zahi Hawass, popular writer Osama Anwar
Okasha, Egyptian-born Harvard University Professor Leila Ahmed, Member of
Parliament Suzie Greiss, in addition to different local groups and
intellectuals. This understanding is also expressed in other contexts, such as
Neil DeRosa's novel "Joseph's Seed" in his depiction of an Egyptian character
"who declares that Egyptians are not Arabs and never will be." Copts. Many
Coptic intellectuals hold to a version of Pharaonism which states that Coptic
culture is largely derived from pre-Christian, Pharaonic culture, and is not
indebted to Greece. It gives the Copts a claim to a deep heritage in Egyptian
history and culture. Pharaonism was widely held by Coptic and Muslim scholars
in the early 20th century, and it helped bridge the divide between those
groups. Most scholars today see Pharaonism as a late development shaped
primarily by western Orientalism, and they doubt its validity.
