Philosophy, Politics and Economics Philosophy, Politics and Economics (PPE) is
a popular interdisciplinary undergraduate/graduate degree which combines study
from the three disciplines. The first institution to offer degrees in PPE was
the University of Oxford and this particular course has produced a significant
number of notable graduates such as David Cameron, the current Prime Minister
of the United Kingdom, and Ed Miliband, the current Leader of the Opposition.
In the 1980s, the University of York, the University of Warwick and University
of Manchester went on to establish their own widely respected PPE degrees based
upon the Oxford model. According to the BBC, it "dominate public life" (in the
UK). It is now offered at several other leading colleges and universities
around the world. History. PPE was established at Balliol College, Oxford in
the 1920s, as a modern alternative to Classics (known as Greats) because it was
thought that a course in Philosophy and Ancient History was no longer relevant
for those entering the civil service. It was thus initially known as Modern
Greats. Christopher Stray has pointed to the course as one reason for the
gradual decline of the study of classics, as classicists in political life
began to be edged out by those who had studied the Modern Greats. Dario
Castiglione and Iain Hampsher-Monk have described the course as being
fundamental to the development of political thought in the UK, since it
established a connection between politics and philosophy. Previously at Oxford,
and for some time subsequently at Cambridge, politics had been taught only as a
branch of modern history. Course material. The programme is rooted in the view
that to understand social phenomena one must approach them from several
complementary disciplinary directions and analytical frameworks. In this
regard, the study of philosophy is considered important because it both equips
students with meta-tools such as the ability to reason rigorously and
logically, and facilitates ethical reflection. The study of politics is
considered necessary because it acquaints students with the institutions that
govern society and help solve collective action problems. Finally, studying
economics is seen as vital in the modern world because political decisions
often concern economic matters, and government decisions are often influenced
by economic events. It is common for students at Oxford to drop one of the
three subjects for the second and third year of their course. Oxford now has
more than 600 undergraduates studying the subject, taking in a cohort of just
over 200 each year. Oxford PPE graduate Nick Cohen and former tutor Iain McLean
consider the course's breadth important to its appeal, especially because
British society values generalists over specialists. However, Geoffrey Evans
has argued that the Oxford course's success is a self-perpetuating feature of
the class system.
