Philosophical anarchism Philosophical anarchism is an anarchist school of
thought which contends that the state lacks moral legitimacy while not
supporting violence to eliminate it. Though philosophical anarchism does not
necessarily imply any action or desire for the elimination of the State,
philosophical anarchists do not believe that they have an obligation or duty to
obey the State, or conversely, that the State has a right to command.
Philosophical anarchism is a component especially of individualist anarchism.
Philosophical anarchists of historical note include Mohandas Gandhi, William
Godwin, J.R.R. Tolkien, Pierre-Joseph Proudhon, Herbert Spencer, Max Stirner
and Henry David Thoreau. Michael Freeden identifies four broad types of
individualist anarchism. He says the first is the type associated with William
Godwin that advocates self-government with a "progressive rationalism that
included benevolence to others." The second type is Egoism, most associated
with Stirner. The third type is "found in Herbert Spencer's early predictions,
and in that of some of his disciples such as Donisthorpe, foreseeing the
redundancy of the state in the source of social evolution." The fourth type
retains a moderated form of egoism and accounts for social cooperation through
the advocacy of the market, having such followers as Benjamin Tucker and
Thoreau. Contemporary philosophical anarchists include A. John Simmons and
Robert Paul Wolff. Variations. Philosophical anarchists may accept the
existence of a minimal state as an unfortunate, and usually temporary,
"necessary evil" but argue that citizens do not have a moral obligation to obey
the state when its laws conflict with individual autonomy. As conceived by
William Godwin, it requires individuals to act in accordance with their own
judgments and to allow every other individual the same liberty; conceived
egoistically as by Max Stirner, it implies that 'the unique one' who truly
'owns himself' recognizes no duties to others; within the limit of his might,
he does what is right for him. Rather than taking up arms to bring down the
state, philosophical anarchists "have worked for a gradual change to free the
individual from what they thought were the oppressive laws and social
constraints of the modern state and allow all individuals to become self-
determining and value-creating." They may oppose the immediate elimination of
the state by violent means out of concern that what remained might be
vulnerable to the establishment of a yet more harmful and oppressive state.
This is especially true among those anarchists who consider violence and the
state as synonymous, or who consider it counterproductive where public reaction
to violence results in increased "law enforcement" efforts. Notable
philosophical anarchists. William Godwin, the founder of philosophical
anarchism, believed that government was a "necessary evil" but that it will
become increasingly unnecessary and powerless by the gradual spread of
knowledge. Godwin warned individuals against the possible evils of government
and to be vigilant against what he considered "an usurpation upon the private
judgment and individual conscience of mankind." Godwin believed that the
government should be tolerated "as little of it as possible, and carefully ...
observed" as people evolved in terms of intellectual and social abilities to
interact with each other. The nineteen century individualist anarchist Victor
Yarros also stated a typical philosophical anarchist position when he said,
Similarly, philosophical anarchist Henry David Thoreau asserted Thomas
Jefferson is also sometimes seen as a philosophical anarchist, who cautioned
that "law is often but the tyrant's will," and that people needed to be
vigilant against any laws that "violates the rights of the individual." For
Jefferson, one's liberty was limited by the presence of other individuals
within a society and that people could only have "unobstructed action ...within
limits drawn around us by the equal rights of others." Philosophical anarchists
may not wish to disrupt a particular state, but they do not necessarily think
anyone has an obligation to obey the state. According to philosophical
anarchist Robert Paul Wolff, there can be no such thing as a government which
"has a right to command and whose subjects have a binding obligation to obey."
Mohandas Gandhi also identified himself as a philosophical anarchist.
