Pi Sigma Alpha Pi Sigma Alpha (Î Î£Î‘ or PSA), the National Political Science
Honor Society, is the only honor society for college and university students of
political science in the United States. Its purpose is to recognize and promote
high academic achievement in the field of political science. It is a member of
the Association of College Honor Societies (ACHS) and adheres to all the
standards set by ACHS for an upper-division, specialized honor society. Pi
Sigma Alpha is not a social fraternity or club. Chapters. The first chapter of
Pi Sigma Alpha was founded in 1920 at the University of Texas at Austin, and
the society has grown over the years to over 700 chapters (as of 2012). A local
chapter may be established at any college or university granting the
baccalaureate or higher degrees, which is accredited by a regional or national
accrediting association, and which offers a major sequence of courses in
political science through an appropriate administrative department, school, or
division of the institution, and which conforms to other requirements
established by the Executive Council of the society. Chapters are guided by
faculty advisors and by student officers. Membership. Faculty in political
science departments where chapters are located are automatically eligible for
membership in the honor society. Honorary membership is intended for persons of
recognized ability and achievement in the field of political science. No more
than two such honorary members may be elected by a local chapter in any one
year. Election to membership may be based solely on stated criteria and is
irrespective of membership in an affiliation with any other organization or
group. Chapters may not discriminate on any basis prohibited by law.
Membership, once conferred, is for life. The lifetime national membership fee
is $35.00. Individual chapters often collect additional money from each
initiate to use for their own chapter programs. The initiation fee is the only
payment members ever make to the national office of the honor society. There
are no annual dues. Governance. Pi Sigma Alpha is governed by an elected
Executive Council, which acts as its board of directors. The Council includes
the President, the President-elect, the three most recent past presidents, the
Executive Director, the Newsletter Editor, the General Counsel, and twelve
other members at large. Six of these are elected every two years to serve four-
year terms. Members of the Council are almost always faculty of recognized
distinction in the field of political science, or of proven leadership to the
honor society. Elections take place in even numbered years at the Biennial
Business Meeting of the honor society. The daily business of Pi Sigma Alpha is
conducted by the National Office staff. Programs. Pi Sigma Alpha has programs
to benefit its student members and their chapters, and the profession of
political science. Programs for chapters and members include an annual Chapter
Activity Grants competition, Best Undergraduate Student Paper and Best
Undergraduate Honors Thesis awards, Scholarships for Graduate Study in
Political Science, Scholarship for Washington Internships, Best Chapter awards,
and Chapter Advisor Recognition awards. For the profession of political
science, Pi Sigma Alpha sponsors major speakers at the annual meetings of the
American Political Science Association (APSA) and the several regional and
state political science associations, and provides Best Paper awards for the
APSA Annual Meeting and the regional political science association annual
meetings. It also co-sponsors APSA's annual awards for teachers of political
science in higher education. Publications. Pi Sigma Alpha publishes "Pi Sigma
Alpha Newsletter" and "Pi Sigma Alpha Undergraduate Journal of Politics", both
twice per year. Headquarters. Pi Sigma Alpha National Office Washington, DC
20036
