Play2upnow.com.au "play2upnow.com.au" is an Australian activist campaign
seeking to address Australia's population ageing by encouraging people to have
more children. The campaign takes its name from the Australian practice of
playing 2-Up on ANZAC Day. The campaign's bylines are In the Spirit of ANZAC
and Doing Something about Australia's Ageing Population. The campaign. The
"play2upnow.com.au" campaign is concerned with Australia's ageing population.
Australia's fertility rate is below the replacement fertility rate. The
campaign encourages Australian families to "play 2-Up, legally every day of the
year" by having at least two children. The "play2upnow.com.au" campaign reached
public attention on ANZAC Day, 25 April 2006, with a large advertisement
appearing in the daily newspapers of most Australian capital cities. This was
followed by a second advertisement the following Saturday, 29 April 2006. The
campaign also maintains a website containing more detailed information. The
ANZAC theme. The "play2upnow.com.au" campaign makes a point of borrowing
heavily from the imagery and patriotism of ANZAC day. Its website and both
advertisements feature a well-known Australian enlistment poster from World War
I. The campaign equates the sacrifice of Australian soldiers killed at
Gallipoli with the sacrifice of Australian families having another child. The
campaign also suggests that Australians have a patriotic duty to make up for
the 102,000 Australians killed in overseas wars throughout Australian history.
(8,709 Australians died at Gallipoli.) "play2upnow.com.au" chose the ANZAC
theme because it contrasts the ANZAC spirit of sacrifice against present-day
materialism. It asserts that the main cause of Australia's declining birth rate
is its preoccupation with material possessions. This is portrayed as different
from the outlook of Australians who fought and died in World War I. The
founder. "play2upnow.com.au" was founded by Gary Johnston of Silverwater, New
South Wales. Gary Johnston is better known as the Managing Director of Jaycar,
an Australian electronics retailer founded in Silverwater in 1985. The website
is sponsored by Jaycar, and gives special thanks to Jaycar workers. Although
Gary Johnston is the founder and main contributor to the "play2upnow.com.au"
campaign, he has not made himself into a spokesman. His name is only mentioned
four times: twice on the website and once in each of the two advertisement.
Gary Johnston describes himself as "a proud Australian" who is "not a member of
any political party, religious group or other special interest group". He
asserts that he is "not a member of any political party, religious group or
other special interest group". His credentials on population issues have not
been established. Australia's population. The "play2upnow.com.au" web site
refers to the Australian Bureau of Statistics (ABS) publication Yearbook of
Australia, 2005. According to this source, Australia's fertility rate in 2002
was 1.76 babies per woman. Australia's fertility rate has been falling since
1961, and fell below the replacement level of 2.1 babies per woman in 1976.
Since 1998, the fertility rate has been fairly stable between, varying between
1.73 and 1.76 babies per woman. "play2upnow.com.au" is not particularly
rigorous in its use of ABS statistics. On its main page it refers to the 2005
Yearbook, in spite of the fact that the Yearbook of Australia, 2006 is
available. This publication contains more recent data that tells much the same
story. Further, the 2005 Yearbook reveals the fertility rate of 2002, which
"play2upnow.com.au" inaccurately refers to as fertility rate "at present".
Australia's present fertility rate is not known. A page added to the web site
later contains a more rigorous statistical analysis of Australia's fertility
rate. This page correctly notes that the most recent fertility statistics are
from 2004, and that Australia's fertility rate has risen slightly since 2003.
It observes that Australia's fertility rate is stable and well below
replacement rate. The page also makes a brief analysis of Australia's fertility
rate by age group and by State/Territory. The information on this page was
provided by Professor John S. Croucher of Macquarie University. Attitude to
immigration. Immigration is sometimes suggested as a solution to Australia's
aging population. "play2upnow.com.au" does not support this solution out of
concern of the effect of immigration on Australia's national character,
stating: "If immigration dominated over domestic population growth in 50 years
– living memory – the national character of the country would change in
ways we just cannot imagine." It feels that "immigration should augment our
population, not dominate it". Nearly half of Australia's population growth
comes from immigration, so it could be argued that immigration comes close to
dominating Australia's population growth. The ABS Yearbook of Australia, 2006
reveals that traditionally, most of Australia's population growth has come from
natural increase. However, since 1998-1999 overseas migration has comprised
almost half of Australia's population growth. In 2003-2004, Australia's net
overseas migration was 117,600 persons, representing 49% of Australia's
population growth for the year. While it could be said that immigration comes
close to dominating Australia's population "growth", it in no way dominates
Australia's "population". In June 2004, Australia's population was just over
20.1 million, which means that in that year, immigration contributed 0.6% to
Australia's population. The concerns of "play2upnow" for Australia's national
character are shared by some Australians, but it is difficult to determine
whether these concerns are reasonable. In 2006, Federal Treasurer Peter
Costello warned Australians to increase their birth rate to replacement levels
or run the risk of Australia's population composition being fundamentally
transformed by immigration. He stated: "Increasing immigration to cover natural
population decline will change the composition of our population and raise
concerns about social dislocation." It is worth noting that the two biggest
contributors to Australia's overseas migration are the United Kingdom and New
Zealand; two other Anglospheric countries that presumably share much of
Australia's national character. These two countries have been in Australia's
top four source countries for over 20 years, and in 2003-04 contributed over
29% of Australia's immigrants. This means that immigration from other countries
contributed only 35% of Australia's population growth and 0.4% of Australia's
population. Attitude to abortion. Population ageing is sometimes used as an
argument against abortion. "play2upnow" strongly disagrees with this position,
and distance themselves from it. The web site states that both "play2upnow" and
Gary Johnston are "not... associated with any movement... which proposes that
unwanted pregnancies be encouraged to come to term for reasons that are not
necessarily in the best long term interests of the mother." It further states
that they "do not want an unloved baby to come into this world for any
sentimental reasons that may be erroneously attributed to what we hope to
achieve."
