Plumi Plumi is a free software video sharing content management system based on
Plone and primarily developed by the Asia-Pacific based EngageMedia, the Greece
based Unweb.me consultancy, Infinite Recursion, and others. Plumi allows users
to create a video sharing site by adding it to an existing Plone instance. The
software includes a wide array of functionality to facilitate video
distribution and community creation. Plumi is one project that aims to help
establish "community controlled, noncommercial, free and open source
alternatives" to commercial video sites such as YouTube. It is designed to
allow communities and "citizen publishers create their own video-sharing
communities out of the box" It is also designed to be more accessible to non-
profit groups and independent journalists, given it is available as free-
software without cost. History. Plumi for Plone 2. Plumi was first developed
for Plone 2 by EngageMedia, with the first stable version released in September
2007. The second major release occurred on February 8, 2008. By this time
several organisations and projects had installed Plumi to create their own
video-sharing websites, including the World Social Forum TV, Bonn University
Africa on TV and CabTube. Plumi for Plone 3. Version 3.0 of Plumi is based on
Plone 3 and was deployed on May 19, 2010. The latest production version is
3.1.2 that was released at the end of November, 2010. Plumi for Plone 4.
Development on migration to Plone 4 began in October 2010, with a 4.0b1 beta
released in late November and a release candidate for 4.0 released in early
December. A final stable release of Plumi 4.0 for Plone 4.0 was released on
January 17, 2011. This version includes bug fixes and improvements to ensure a
stable release primarily focused on rebasing Plumi on Plone 4, in addition to
other improvements and re-factoring of Plumi including new production and
development buildouts located inside the plumi.app egg, updating the caching
system, cleanup of installation code and moving parts to GenericSetup,
replacing older products with newer and better maintained products or removing
dependencies and other improvements. FFmpeg and codecs required by the
transcoding framework are also now included in the buildout which means a
simpler installation process. A beta of Plumi 4.3 was released on December 4,
2011. The beta includes updating to Plone 4.1.2, support for 16:9 video
transcoding, webm transcoding, replacement of Flowplayer with mediaelement.js
HTML5 player, video language added to metadata and support for the Universal
Subtitles platform. A final version of 4.3 was released in January 2012. Plumi
4.3.1 Final was released in April 2012. This includes minor improvements to the
backend and user interface. Features. The latest version of Plumi is packaged
with Plone 4.x. Developers have the option to run a buildout to create either a
development or production environment using Plumi.
