Plutarch Plutarch (; Greek: , "Plo√∫tarkhos", ) then named, on his becoming a
Roman citizen, Lucius Mestrius Plutarchus (), "c." 46 ‚Äì 120 AD, was a Greek
historian, biographer, and essayist, known primarily for his "Parallel Lives"
and "Moralia". He is considered today to be a Middle Platonist. He was born to
a prominent family in Chaeronea, Boeotia, a town about twenty miles east of
Delphi. Early life. Plutarch was born in 46 AD in the small town of Chaeronea,
in the Greek region known as Boeotia. His family was wealthy. The name of
Plutarch's father has not been preserved, but it was probably Nikarchus (),
from the common habit of Greek families to repeat a name in alternate
generations. The name of Plutarch's grandfather was Lamprias, as he attested in
"Moralia" and in his "Life of Antony". His brothers, Timon and Lamprias, are
frequently mentioned in his essays and dialogues, where Timon is spoken of in
the most affectionate terms. Rualdus, in his 1624 work "Life of Plutarchus",
recovered the name of Plutarch's wife, Timoxena, from internal evidence
afforded by his writings. A letter is still extant, addressed by Plutarch to
his wife, bidding her not give way to excessive grief at the death of their two
year old daughter, who was named Timoxena after her mother. Interestingly, he
hinted at a belief in reincarnation in that letter of consolation. The exact
number of his sons is not certain, although two of them, Autobulus and second
Plutarch, are often mentioned. Plutarch's treatise "De animae procreatione in
Timaeo" is dedicated to them, and the marriage of his son Autobulus is the
occasion of one of the dinner-parties recorded in the 'Table Talk.' Another
person, Soklarus, is spoken of in terms which seem to imply that he was
Plutarch's son, but this is nowhere definitely stated. His treatise on marriage
questions, addressed to Eurydice and Pollianus, seems to speak of her as having
been recently an inmate of his house, but without enabling us to form an
opinion whether she was his daughter or not. Plutarch studied mathematics and
philosophy at the Academy of Athens under Ammonius from 66 to 67. He had a
number of influential friends, including Quintus Sosius Senecio and Fundanus,
both important senators, to whom some of his later writings were dedicated.
Plutarch travelled widely in the Mediterranean world, including central Greece,
Sparta, Corinth, Patrae (Patras), Sardes, Alexandria, and two trips to Rome. At
some point, Plutarch took up Roman citizenship. As evidenced by his new name,
Lucius Mestrius Plutarchus, his sponsor for citizenship was Lucius Mestrius
Florus, a Roman of consular status whom Plutarch also used as an historical
source for his "Life of Otho". He lived most of his life at Chaeronea, and was
initiated into the mysteries of the Greek god Apollo. However, his duties as
the senior of the two priests of Apollo at the Oracle of Delphi (where he was
responsible for interpreting the auguries of the Pythia) apparently occupied
little of his time. He led an active social and civic life while producing an
extensive body of writing, much of which is still extant. For many years
Plutarch served as one of the two priests at the temple of Apollo at Delphi,
the site of the famous Delphic Oracle, twenty miles from his home. By his
writings and lectures Plutarch became a celebrity in the Roman empire, yet he
continued to reside where he was born, and actively participated in local
affairs, even serving as mayor. At his country estate, guests from all over the
empire congregated for serious conversation, presided over by Plutarch in his
marble chair. Many of these dialogues were recorded and published, and the 78
essays and other works which have survived are now known collectively as the
"Moralia". Work as magistrate and ambassador. In addition to his duties as a
priest of the Delphic temple, Plutarch was also a magistrate in Chaeronea and
he represented his home on various missions to foreign countries during his
early adult years. Plutarch held the office of archon in his native
municipality, probably only an annual one which he likely served more than
once. He busied himself with all the little matters of the town and undertook
the humblest of duties. The Suda, a medieval Greek encyclopedia, states that
emperor Trajan made Plutarch procurator of Illyria. However, most historians
consider this unlikely, since Illyria was not a procuratorial province, and
Plutarch probably did not speak Illyrian. According to the 10th century
historian George Syncellus, late in Plutarch's life, emperor Hadrian appointed
him nominal procurator of Achaea ‚Äì a position that entitled him to wear the
vestments and ornaments of a consul himself. Plutarch died between the years AD
119 and 127. "Lives of the Roman emperors". The first biographical works to be
written by Plutarch were the Lives of the Roman Emperors from Augustus to
Vitellius. Of these, only the Lives of Galba and Otho survive. The Lives of
Tiberius and Nero are extant only as fragments, provided by Dasmascius (Life of
Tiberius, cf. his Life of Isidore) and Plutarch himself (Life of Nero, cf.
Galba 2.1), respectively. These early emperors‚Äô biographies were probably
published under the Flavian dynasty or during the reign of Nerva (CE 96‚Äì98).
There is reason to believe that the two Lives still extant, those of Galba and
Otho, ‚Äúought to be considered as a single work.‚Äù Therefore they do not form
a part of the Plutarchian canon of single biographies ‚Äì as represented by the
Life of Aratus of Sicyon and the Life of Artaxerxes (the biographies of Hesiod,
Pindar, Crates and Daiphantus were lost). Unlike in these biographies, in
Galba-Otho the individual characters of the persons portrayed are not depicted
for their own sake but instead serve as an illustration of an abstract
principle; namely the adherence or non-adherence to Plutarch‚Äôs morally
founded ideal of governing as a Princeps (cf. Galba 1.3; Moralia 328D-E).
Arguing from the perspective of Platonian political philosophy (cf. Republic
375E, 410D-E, 411E-412A, 442B-C), in Galba-Otho Plutarch reveals the
constitutional principles of the Principate in the time of the civil war after
Nero‚Äôs death. While morally questioning the behavior of the autocrats, he
also gives an impression of their tragic destinies, ruthlessly competing for
the throne and finally destroying each other. ‚ÄúThe Caesars‚Äô house in Rome,
the Palatium, received in a shorter space of time no less than four
Emperors,‚Äù Plutarch writes, ‚Äúpassing, as it were, across the stage, and one
making room for another to enter‚Äù (Galba 1). Galba-Otho was handed down
through different channels. It can be found in the appendix to Plutarch‚Äôs
Parallel Lives as well as in various Moralia manuscripts, most prominently in
Maximus Planudes‚Äôs edition where Galba and Otho appear as ‚ÄúOpera‚Äù XXV and
XXVI. Thus it seems reasonable to maintain that Galba-Otho was from early on
considered as an illustration of a moral-ethical approach, possibly even by
Plutarch himself. "Parallel Lives". Plutarch's best-known work is the "Parallel
Lives", a series of biographies of famous Greeks and Romans, arranged in pairs
to illuminate their common moral virtues and vices. The surviving "Lives"
contain 23 pairs, each with one Greek "Life" and one Roman "Life", as well as
four unpaired single "Lives". As is explained in the opening paragraph of his
"Life of Alexander", Plutarch was not concerned with history so much as the
influence of character, good or bad, on the lives and destinies of men. Whereas
sometimes he barely touched on epoch-making events, he devoted much space to
charming anecdote and incidental triviality, reasoning that this often said far
more for his subjects than even their most famous accomplishments. He sought to
provide rounded portraits, likening his craft to that of a painter; indeed, he
went to tremendous lengths (often leading to tenuous comparisons) to draw
parallels between physical appearance and moral character. In many ways, he
must be counted amongst the earliest moral philosophers. Some of the "Lives",
such as those of Heracles, Philip II of Macedon and Scipio Africanus, no longer
exist; many of the remaining "Lives" are truncated, contain obvious lacunae or
have been tampered with by later writers. Extant "Lives" include those on
Solon, Themistocles, Aristides, Pericles, Alcibiades, Nicias, Demosthenes,
Pelopidas, Philopoemen, Timoleon, Dion of Syracuse, Alexander the Great,
Pyrrhus of Epirus, Romulus, Numa Pompilius, Coriolanus, Theseus, Aemilius
Paullus, Tiberius Gracchus, Gaius Gracchus, Gaius Marius, Sulla, Sertorius,
Lucullus, Pompey, Julius Caesar, Cicero, Cato the Younger, Mark Antony, and
Marcus Junius Brutus. "Life of Alexander". Plutarch's "Life of Alexander",
written as a parallel to that of Julius Caesar, is one of only five extant
tertiary sources on the Macedonian conqueror Alexander the Great. It includes
anecdotes and descriptions of events that appear in no other source, just as
Plutarch's portrait of Numa Pompilius, the putative second king of Rome, holds
much that is unique on the early Roman calendar. Plutarch devotes a great deal
of space to Alexander's drive and desire, and strives to determine how much of
it was presaged in his youth. He also draws extensively on the work of
Lysippus, Alexander's favourite sculptor, to provide what is probably the
fullest and most accurate description of the conqueror's physical appearance.
When it comes to his character, however, Plutarch is often rather less
accurate, ascribing inordinate amounts of self-control to a man who very often
lost it. It is significant, though, that the subject incurs less admiration
from his biographer as the narrative progresses and the deeds that it recounts
become less savoury. Much, too, is made of Alexander's scorn for luxury: "He
desired not pleasure or wealth, but only excellence and glory." This is most
true, for Alexander's tastes grew more extravagant as he grew older only in the
last year of his life and only as a means of approaching the image of a ruler
his Persian subjects were better accustomed to - thus making it easier for him
to succeed in uniting the Greek and Persian worlds together, according to the
plan he had announced in his famous Speech given in Opis in 324 BC. "Life of
Caesar". Together with Suetonius's "The Twelve Caesars" this "Life" is the main
account of Julius Caesar's feats by ancient historians. Plutarch starts by
telling us the audacity of Caesar and his refusal of dismissing Cinna's
daughter, Cornelia. Other important parts are these containing his military
deeds, accounts of battles and Caesar's capacity of inspiring the soldiers.
However, this "Life" shows few differences between Suetonius' work and Caesar's
own works (see "De Bello Gallico" and "De Bello Civili"). Sometimes, Plutarch
quotes directly from the "De Bello Gallico" and even tell us of the moments
when Caesar was dictating his works. In the final part of this "Life", Plutarch
counts Caesar's assassination, and several details. The book ends on telling
the destiny of his murderers, and says that Caesar's "great guardian-genius"
avenged him after life. "Life of Pyrrhus". Plutarch's "Life of Pyrrhus" is a
key text because it is the main historical account on Roman history for the
period from 293 to 264 BC, for which neither Dionysius nor Livy have surviving
texts. Criticism of "Parallel Lives". Plutarch stretches and occasionally
fabricates the similarities between famous Greeks and Romans in order to be
able to write their biographies as parallel. The lives of Nicias and Crassus,
for example, have nothing in common except that both were rich and both
suffered great military defeats at the ends of their lives. In his "Life of
Pompey", Plutarch praises Pompey's trustworthy character and tactful behaviour
in order to conjure a moral judgement that opposes most historical accounts.
Plutarch delivers anecdotes with moral points, rather than in-depth comparative
analyses of the causes of the fall of the Achaemenid Empire and the Roman
Republic, and tends on occasion to fit facts to hypotheses rather than the
other, more scholastically acceptable way round. On the other hand, he
generally sets out his moral anecdotes in chronological order (unlike, say, his
Roman contemporary Suetonius) and is rarely narrow-minded and unrealistic,
almost always prepared to acknowledge the complexity of the human condition
where moralising cannot explain it. "Moralia". The remainder of Plutarch's
surviving work is collected under the title of the "Moralia" (loosely
translated as "Customs and Mores"). It is an eclectic collection of seventy-
eight essays and transcribed speeches, which includes "On Fraternal
Affection"‚Äîa discourse on honour and affection of siblings toward each other,
"On the Fortune or the Virtue of Alexander the Great"‚Äîan important adjunct to
his Life of the great king, "On the Worship of Isis and Osiris" (a crucial
source of information on Egyptian religious rites), along with more
philosophical treatises, such as "On the Decline of the Oracles", "On the
Delays of the Divine Vengeance", "On Peace of Mind" and lighter fare, such as
"Odysseus and Gryllus", a humorous dialogue between Homer's Odysseus and one of
Circe's enchanted pigs. The "Moralia" was composed first, while writing the
Lives occupied much of the last two decades of Plutarch's own life. "On the
Malice of Herodotus". In "On the Malice of Herodotus" Plutarch criticizes the
historian Herodotus for all manner of prejudice and misrepresentation. It has
been called the ‚Äúfirst instance in literature of the slashing review.‚Äù The
19th century English historian George Grote considered this essay a serious
attack upon the works of Herodotus, and speaks of the "honourable frankness
which Plutarch calls his malignity." Plutarch makes some palpable hits,
catching Herodotus out in various errors, but it is also probable that it was
merely a rhetorical exercise, in which Plutarch plays devil's advocate to see
what could be said against so favourite and well-known a writer. According to
Plutarch scholar R. H. Barrow, Herodotus‚Äô real failing in Plutarch‚Äôs eyes
was to advance any criticism at all of those states that saved Greece from
Persia. ‚ÄúPlutarch,‚Äù he concluded, ‚Äúis fanatically biased in favor of the
Greek cities; they can do no wrong.‚Äù Questions. Book IV of the "Moralia"
contains the "Roman and Greek Questions". The customs of Romans and Greeks are
illuminated in little essays that pose questions such as 'Why were patricians
not permitted to live on the Capitoline?' (no. 91) and then suggests answers to
them, often several mutually exclusive. Pseudo-Plutarch. Pseudo-Plutarch is the
conventional name given to the unknown authors of a number of pseudepigrapha
attributed to Plutarch. Some editions of the "Moralia" include several works
now known to be pseudepigrapha: among these are the "Lives of the Ten Orators"
(biographies of the Ten Orators of ancient Athens, based on Caecilius of
Calacte), "The Doctrines of the Philosophers", and "On Music". One "pseudo-
Plutarch" is held responsible for all of these works, though their authorship
is of course unknown. The thoughts and opinions recorded are not Plutarch's and
come from a slightly later era, though they are all classical in origin. Lost
works. The Romans loved the "Lives", and enough copies were written out over
the centuries so that a copy of most of the lives managed to survive to the
present day. Some scholars, however, believe that only a third to one-half of
Plutarch‚Äôs corpus is extant. The lost works of Plutarch are determined by
references in his own texts to them and from other authors' references over
time. There are traces of twelve more Lives that are now lost. Plutarch's
general procedure for the "Lives" was to write the life of a prominent Greek,
then cast about for a suitable Roman parallel, and end with a brief comparison
of the Greek and Roman lives. Currently, only nineteen of the parallel lives
end with a comparison while possibly they all did at one time. Also missing are
many of his "Lives" which appear in a list of his writings, those of Hercules,
the first pair of "Parallel Lives", Scipio Africanus and Epaminondas, and the
companions to the four solo biographies. Even the lives of such important
figures as Augustus, Claudius and Nero have not been found and may be lost
forever. Philosophy. Plutarch was a Platonist, but was open to the influence of
the Peripatetics, and in some details even to Stoicism despite his polemics
against their principles. He rejected absolutely only Epicureanism. He attached
little importance to theoretical questions and doubted the possibility of ever
solving them. He was more interested in moral and religious questions. In
opposition to Stoic materialism and Epicurean "atheism" he cherished a pure
idea of God that was more in accordance with Plato. He adopted a second
principle ("Dyad") in order to explain the phenomenal world. This principle he
sought, however, not in any indeterminate matter but in the evil world-soul
which has from the beginning been bound up with matter, but in the creation was
filled with reason and arranged by it. Thus it was transformed into the divine
soul of the world, but continued to operate as the source of all evil. He
elevated God above the finite world, and thus daemons became for him agents of
God's influence on the world. He strongly defends freedom of the will, and the
immortality of the soul. Platonic-Peripatetic ethics were upheld by Plutarch
against the opposing theories of the Stoics and Epicureans. The most
characteristic feature of Plutarch's ethics is, however, its close connection
with religion. However pure Plutarch's idea of God is, and however vivid his
description of the vice and corruption which superstition causes, his warm
religious feelings and his distrust of human powers of knowledge led him to
believe that God comes to our aid by direct revelations, which we perceive the
more clearly the more completely that we refrain in "enthusiasm" from all
action; this made it possible for him to justify popular belief in divination
in the way which had long been usual among the Stoics. His attitude to popular
religion was similar. The gods of different peoples are merely different names
for one and the same divine Being and the powers that serve it. The myths
contain philosophical truths which can be interpreted allegorically. Thus
Plutarch sought to combine the philosophical and religious conception of things
and to remain as close as possible to tradition. Influence. Plutarch's writings
had an enormous influence on English and French literature. Shakespeare in his
plays paraphrased parts of Thomas North's translation of selected "Lives", and
occasionally quoted from them in verbatim. Ralph Waldo Emerson and the
Transcendentalists were greatly influenced by the "Moralia" ‚Äî so much so, in
fact, that Emerson called the Lives "a bible for heroes" in his glowing
introduction to the five-volume 19th-century edition. He also opined that it
was impossible to "read Plutarch without a tingling of the blood; and I accept
the saying of the Chinese Mencius: 'A sage is the instructor of a hundred ages.
When the manners of Loo are heard of, the stupid become intelligent, and the
wavering, determined.'" Montaigne's own "Essays" draw extensively on Plutarch's
"Moralia" and are consciously modelled on the Greek's easygoing and discursive
inquiries into science, manners, customs and beliefs. "Essays" contains more
than 400 references to Plutarch and his works. James Boswell quoted Plutarch on
writing lives, rather than biographies, in the introduction to his own "Life of
Samuel Johnson". Other admirers included Ben Jonson, John Dryden, Alexander
Hamilton, John Milton, Louis L'amour, and Francis Bacon, as well as such
disparate figures as Cotton Mather and Robert Browning. Plutarch's influence
declined in the 19th and 20th centuries, but it remains embedded in the popular
ideas of Greek and Roman history. One of his most famous quotes was one that he
included in one of his earliest works. "The world of man is best captured
through the lives of the men who created history." Translations of "Lives" and
"Moralia". There are translations in Latin, English, French, German, Italian,
Polish and Hebrew. Italian translations. Giuliano Pisani, "Moralia I - ¬´La
serenit√  interiore¬ª e altri testi sulla terapia dell'anima", with Greek text,
Italian translation, introduction and notes, La Biblioteca dell'Immagine,
Pordenone 1989, pp.¬ LIX-508 ("De tranquillitate animi; De virtute et vitio; De
virtute morali; An virtus doceri possit; Quomodo quis suos in virtute sentiat
profectus; Animine an corporis affectiones sint peiores; De vitioso pudore; De
cohibenda ira; De garrulitate; De curiositate ; De invidia et odio ; De
cupiditate divitiarum") Giuliano Pisani, "Moralia II - L'educazione dei
ragazzi", with Greek text, Italian translation, introduction and notes, La
Biblioteca dell'Immagine, Pordenone, 1990, pp.¬ XXXVIII-451 ("De liberis
educandis; Quomodo adolescens poetas audire debeat ; De recta ratione audiendi
; De musica", in collaboration with Leo Citelli) Giuliano Pisani, "Moralia III
- Etica e politica", with Greek text, Italian translation, introduction and
notes, La Biblioteca dell'Immagine, Pordenone, 1992, pp.¬ XLIII-490 ("Praecepta
gerendae rei publicae; An seni sit gerenda res publica; De capienda ex inimicis
utilitate; De se ipsum citra invidiam laudando; Maxime cum principibus
philosopho esse disserendum; Ad principem ineruditum; De unius in republica
dominatione, populari statu et paucorum imperio; De exilio") Giuliano Pisani,
Plutarco, "Vite di Lisandro e Silla", Fondazione Lorenzo Valla, 1997 (in
collaboration with Maria Gabriella Angeli Bertinelli, Mario Manfredini, Luigi
Piccirilli). French translations. Jacques Amyot's translations brought
Plutarch's works to Western Europe. He went to Italy and studied the Vatican
text of Plutarch, from which he published a French translation of the "Lives"
in 1559 and "Moralia" in 1572, which were widely read by educated Europe.
Amyot's translations had as deep an impression in England as France, because
Thomas North later published his English translation of the "Lives" in 1579
based on Amyot‚Äôs French translation instead of the original Greek. English
translations. Plutarch's "Lives" were translated into English, from Amyot's
version, by Sir Thomas North in 1579. The complete "Moralia" was first
translated into English from the original Greek by Philemon Holland in 1603. In
1683, John Dryden began a life of Plutarch and oversaw a translation of the
"Lives" by several hands and based on the original Greek. This translation has
been reworked and revised several times, most recently in the 19th century by
the English poet and classicist Arthur Hugh Clough which can be found in The
Modern Library Random House, Inc. translation. In 1770 the English brother John
and his brother William Langhorne published "Plutarch's Lives from the original
Greek, with notes critical and historical, and a new life of Plutarch" in 6
volumes and dedicated to Lord Folkestone. Their translation was re-edited by
Archdeacon Wrangham in the year 1819. From 1901‚Äì1912, American classicist
Bernadotte Perrin produced a new translation of the "Lives" for the Loeb
Classical Library series. The "Moralia" are also included in the Loeb series,
though are translated by various authors. Latin translations. There are
multiple translations of Parallel Lives into Latin, most notably the one titled
"Pour le Dauphin" (French for "for the Prince") written by a scribe in the
court of Louis XV of France and a 1470 Ulrich Han translation. German
translations. Hieronymus Emser. In 1519, Hieronymus Emser translated "De
capienda ex inimicis utilitate" (wie ym eyner seinen veyndt nutz machen kan,
Leipzig). Gottlob Benedict von Schirach. The biographies were translated by
Gottlob Benedict von Schirach (1743‚Äì1804) and printed in Vienna by Franz
Haas, 1776‚Äì80. Hebrew translations. Following some Hebrew translations of
selections from Plutarch's "Parallel Lives" published in the 1920s and the
1940s, a complete translation was published in three volumes by the Bialik
Institution in 1954, 1971 and 1973. The first volume, "Roman Lives", first
published in 1954, presents the translations of Joseph G. Liebes to the
biographies of Coriolanus, Fabius Maximus, Tiberius Gracchus and Gaius
Gracchus, Cato the Elder and Cato the Younger, Gaius Marius, Sulla, Sertorius,
Lucullus, Pompey, Crassus, Cicero, Julius Caesar, Brutus and Mark Anthony. The
second volume, "Greek Lives", first published in 1971 presents A. A. Halevy's
translations of the biographies of Lycurgus, Aristides, Cimon, Pericles,
Nicias, Lysander, Agesilaus, Pelopidas, Dion, Timoleon, Demosthenes, Alexander
the Great, Eumenes and Phocion. Three more biographies presented in this
volume, those of Solon, Themistocles and Alcibiades were translated by M. H.
Ben-Shamai. The third volume, "Greek and Roman Lives", published in 1973,
presented the remaining biographies and parallels as translated by Halevy.
Included are the biographies of Demetrius, Pyrrhus, Agis and Cleomenes, Aratus
and Artaxerxes, Philopoemen, Camillus, Marcellus, Flamininus, Aemilius Paulus,
Galba and Otho, Theseus, Romulus, Numa Pompilius and Poplicola. It completes
the translation of the known remaining biographies. In the introduction to the
third volume Halevy explains that originally the Bilaik Institution intended to
publish only a selection of biographies, leaving out mythological figures and
biographies that had no parallels. Thus, to match the first volume in scope the
second volume followed the same path and the third volume was required. Notes.
a. Plutarch was probably born during the reign of the Roman Emperor Claudius
and between 45 AD and 50 AD. The exact date is debated. b. Plutarch was once
believed to have spent 40 years in Rome, but it is currently thought that he
traveled to Rome once or twice for a short period. c. Plutarch died between the
years 119 AD and 127 AD.
