Political movement A political movement is a social movement in the area of
politics. A political movement may be organized around a single issue or set of
issues, or around a set of shared concerns of a social group. In contrast with
a political party, a political movement is not organized to elect members of
the movement to government office; instead, a political movement aims to
convince citizens and/or government officers to take action on the issues and
concerns which are the focus of the movement. Political movements are an
expression of the struggle of a social group for the political space and
benefits. The political movements are presented by non-state groups who are led
by their élite. In fact the process of the construction of identities and
reinforcing them is also a part of political movements. A political movement
may be local, regional, national, or international in scope. Some have aimed to
change government policy, such as the anti-war movement, the Ecology movement,
and the Anti-globalization movement. Many have aimed to establish or broaden
the rights of subordinate groups, such as abolitionism, the women's suffrage
movement, the Civil rights movement, feminism, men's rights movement, gay
rights movement, the Disability rights movement, or the inclusive human rights
movement. Some have represented class interests, such as the Labour movement,
Socialism, and Communism, others have expressed national aspirations, such as
anticolonialist movements, Ratana, Zionism, and Sinn Féin. Political movements
can also involve struggles to decentralize or centralize state control, as in
Anarchism, Fascism, and Nazism. Some activists and scholars claim that along
with globalization a new type of political movement emerges that is not merely
international or single-issue focused, but is characterized with global
approach. This has been termed a global citizens movement and debate continues
over whether it has manifested or is still a latent potential. Identification
of supporters. It is often outsiders rather than insiders that apply the
identifying labels for a movement, which the insiders then may or may not adopt
and use to self-identify. For example, the label for the levellers political
movement in 17th century England was applied to them by their antagonists, as a
term of disparagement. Yet admirers of the movement and its aims later came to
use the term, and it is the term by which they are known to history. Caution
must always be exercised in any discussion of amorphous phenomena such as
movements to distinguish between the views of insiders and outsiders,
supporters and antagonists, each of whom may have their own purposes and
agendas in characterization or mischaracterization of it.
