Sobriquet A sobriquet () is a nickname, sometimes assumed, but often given by
another. It is usually a familiar name, distinct from a pseudonym assumed as a
disguise, but a nickname which is familiar enough such that it can be used in
place of a real name without the need of explanation. This salient
characteristic is of sufficient familiarity that the sobriquet can become more
familiar than the original name. For example, Genghis Khan, who is rarely
recognized now by his original name, Temüjin; or Mohandas Gandhi who is better
known as Mahatma Gandhi. Well known places often have sobriquets, such as New
York City, often referred to as the Big Apple. The term can therefore apply to
the nickname for a specific person, group of people or even a place. Etymology.
Two early variants of the term are found, "sotbriquet" and "soubriquet"; the
latter form is still often used. The modern French spelling is "sobriquet". The
first form suggests derivation from "sot", foolish, and the second form,
"briquet", is a French adaptation of Italian "brichetto", diminutive of
"bricco", ass, knave, possibly connected with "briccone", rogue, which is
supposed to be a derivative of Ger. "brechen", to break; but Skeat considers
this spelling to be an example of false etymology. The real origin is to be
sought in the form "soubriquet". Littré gives an early fourteenth century
"soubsbriquet" as meaning a chuck under the chin, and this would be derived
from "soubs", mod. "sous" (Lat. "sub"), under, and "briquet" or "bruchel", the
brisket, or lower part of the throat. Use. Sobriquets are often found in music,
sports and politics. Candidates and political figures are often branded with
sobriquets, either while living or posthumously. For example, President of the
United States Abraham Lincoln came to be known as Honest Abe. Sobriquets are
not necessarily complimentary. A banking tycoon and politician from Knoxville,
Tennessee named Jake Butcher was known as "Jake the Snake" after being indicted
and subsequently convicted for bank fraud. "Fowler's Modern English Usage"
(1926) warned, "Now the sobriquet habit is not a thing to be acquired, but a
thing to be avoided; & the selection that follows is compiled for the purpose
not of assisting but of discouraging it." Fowler included the sobriquet among
what he termed the "battered ornaments" of the language, but opinion on their
use varies. Sobriquets remain a common feature of speech today.
