Political entrepreneur Politician as a political entrepreneur. In the field of
business, entrepreneurship involves people taking a risk in order to create new
business ventures, to gain advantage over a competitor, and to maximize
profits. Traditionally entrepreneurs have been associated with the world of
business, however the term is used in the political arena also. For example
Choi Taewook in 2004 wrote: "A political entrepreneur refers to a political
player who seeks to gain certain political and social benefits in return for
providing the common goods that can be shared by an unorganized general public.
These common goods that political entrepreneurs attempt to provide to the
populace generally include foreign- and domestic-related public policy, while
the benefits they hope to gain involve voter support, public recognition, and
personal popularity." History and cultural context. The political activism of
American business as a class has surged and ebbed at various historical
moments. Variations in both business and countervailing political mobilization
should be approached as problems of collective interpretation and action. To
explain the historical patterns of class-wide business activism, we need to
look at the dynamics of partisan regimes in American politics. Partisan
leaders, not businesses or other policy-seekers themselves, have the strongest
incentives to absorb the transaction costs associated with either broad-scale
business or countervailing collective action. When partisan entrepreneurs see
an opportunity to alter the distribution of power at the national level, they
engage in a discursive exercise to remold business or oppositional interests
and undertake the mobilization of these interests. An analytical framework for
dealing with political entrepreneurship and reform is proposed which is based
on some new combinations of Schumpeterian political economy, an extended
version of Tullock's model of democracy as franchise-bidding for natural
monopoly and some basic elements of New Institutional Economics. It is shown
that problems of insufficient award criteria and incomplete contracts which may
arise in economic bidding schemes, also - and even more so - characterise
political competition. At the same time, these conditions create leeway for
Schumpeterian political entrepreneurship. The same is true for various barriers
to entry in politics. These barriers affect a trade-off between political
stability and political contestability which will be discussed with special
emphasis on incentives and opportunities for political entrepreneurship in the
sense of risking long-term investments in basic political reforms.
Businessperson as a political entrepreneur. However the term is also used in a
very different way by those that wish to contrast what they see as a pure
"market entrepreneur" with someone that uses the political system to further a
commercial venture or their own career. On this definition a political
entrepreneur is a business entrepreneur who seeks to gain profit through
subsidies, protectionism, government contracts, or other such favorable
arrangements with government(s) through political influence (also known as
corporate welfare). Ed Younkins (in 2000) wrote: "Political entrepreneurs seek
and receive help from the state and, therefore, are not true entrepreneurs."
Similarly, Thomas DiLorenzo says, "a "political entrepreneur" succeeds
primarily by influencing government to subsidize his business or industry, or
to enact legislation or regulation that harms his competitors." He says, in
contrast, the ""market entrepreneur" succeeds financially by selling a newer,
better, or less expensive product on the free market without any government
subsidies, direct or indirect." He gives the example of a mousetrap
manufacturer who seeks to gain market share by making a better mousetrap as
being a market enterpreneur, and a manufacturer who lobbies Congress to ban the
importation of foreign-made mousetraps as a political entrepreneur. (DiLorenzo,
Thomas, Chapter 7 of "How Capitalism Saved America") [http://www.mises.org/
story/2317] In practice, the division between the market entrepreneur and the
political entrepreneur can be hazy. Many business entrepreneurs share both
characteristics in varying degrees. The term appears to have been coined by
Burton W. Folsom Jr. in his book, "The Myth of the Robber Barons".
