Political corruption Political corruption is the use of power by government
officials for illegitimate private gain. Misuse of government power for other
purposes, such as repression of political opponents and general police
brutality, is not considered political corruption. Neither are illegal acts by
private persons or corporations not directly involved with the government. An
illegal act by an officeholder constitutes political corruption only if the act
is directly related to their official duties, is done under color of law or
involves trading in influence. Forms of corruption vary, but include bribery,
extortion, cronyism, nepotism, patronage, graft, and embezzlement. Corruption
may facilitate criminal enterprise such as drug trafficking, money laundering,
and human trafficking, though is not restricted to these activities. The
activities that constitute illegal corruption differ depending on the country
or jurisdiction. For instance, some political funding practices that are legal
in one place may be illegal in another. In some cases, government officials
have broad or ill-defined powers, which make it difficult to distinguish
between legal and illegal actions. Worldwide, bribery alone is estimated to
involve over 1 trillion US dollars annually. A state of unrestrained political
corruption is known as a kleptocracy, literally meaning "rule by thieves". Some
forms of corruption—-now called “institutional corruption”—-are
distinguished from bribery and other kinds of obvious personal gain. Campaign
contributions are the prime example. Even when they are legal, and do not
constitute a quid pro quo, they have a tendency to bias the process in favor of
special interests, and undermine public confidence in the political
institution. They corrupt the institution without individual members being
corrupt themselves. A similar problem of corruption arises in any institution
that depends on financial support from people who have interests that may
conflict with the primary purpose of the institution. Effects. Effects on
politics, administration, and institutions. Corruption poses a serious
development challenge. In the political realm, it undermines democracy and good
governance by flouting or even subverting formal processes. Corruption in
elections and in legislative bodies reduces accountability and distorts
representation in policymaking; corruption in the judiciary compromises the
rule of law; and corruption in public administration results in the inefficient
provision of services. It violates a basic principle of republicanism regarding
the centrality of civic virtue. More generally, corruption erodes the
institutional capacity of government as procedures are disregarded, resources
are siphoned off, and public offices are bought and sold. At the same time,
corruption undermines the legitimacy of government and such democratic values
as trust and tolerance. Economic effects. In the private sector, corruption
increases the cost of business through the price of illicit payments
themselves, the management cost of negotiating with officials, and the risk of
breached agreements or detection. Although some claim corruption reduces costs
by cutting bureaucracy, the availability of bribes can also induce officials to
contrive new rules and delays. Openly removing costly and lengthy regulations
are better than covertly allowing them to be bypassed by using bribes. Where
corruption inflates the cost of business, it also distorts the playing field,
shielding firms with connections from competition and thereby sustaining
inefficient firms. Corruption also generates economic distortions in the public
sector by diverting public investment into capital projects where bribes and
kickbacks are more plentiful. Officials may increase the technical complexity
of public sector projects to conceal or pave the way for such dealings, thus
further distorting investment. Corruption also lowers compliance with
construction, environmental, or other regulations, reduces the quality of
government services and infrastructure, and increases budgetary pressures on
government. Economists argue that one of the factors behind the differing
economic development in Africa and Asia is that in Africa, corruption has
primarily taken the form of rent extraction with the resulting financial
capital moved overseas rather than invested at home (hence the stereotypical,
but often accurate, image of African dictators having Swiss bank accounts). In
Nigeria, for example, more than $400 billion was stolen from the treasury by
Nigeria's leaders between 1960 and 1999. University of Massachusetts Amherst
researchers estimated that from 1970 to 1996, capital flight from 30 sub-
Saharan countries totaled $187bn, exceeding those nations' external debts. (The
results, expressed in retarded or suppressed development, have been modeled in
theory by economist Mancur Olson.) In the case of Africa, one of the factors
for this behavior was political instability, and the fact that new governments
often confiscated previous government's corruptly-obtained assets. This
encouraged officials to stash their wealth abroad, out of reach of any future
expropriation. In contrast, Asian administrations such as Suharto's New Order
often took a cut on business transactions or provided conditions for
development, through infrastructure investment, law and order, etc.
Environmental and social effects. Corruption is often most evident in countries
with the smallest per capita incomes, relying on foreign aid for health
services. However, political exploitation of these funds have been noted to
occur in the past, especially in the sub-Saharan African nations, where it was
reported in the 2006 World Bank Report that about half of the funds that were
donated for health usages, were never invested into the health sectors or given
to those needing medical attention. Instead, they were expended through
“counterfeit drugs, siphoning off of drugs to the black market, and payments
to ghost employees”. Ultimately, there is a sufficient amount of money for
health in developing countries, but this cash is given to the wrong hands,
which leads to political and governmental corruption that takes away medical
attention necessary for the citizens of these regions, and rather, used for
personal gain. Corruption facilitates environmental destruction. Corrupt
countries may formally have legislation to protect the environment, it cannot
be enforced if officials can easily be bribed. The same applies to social
rights worker protection, unionization prevention, and child labor. Violation
of these laws rights enables corrupt countries to gain illegitimate economic
advantage in the international market. The Nobel Prize-winning economist
Amartya Sen has observed that "there is no such thing as an apolitical food
problem." While drought and other naturally occurring events may trigger famine
conditions, it is government action or inaction that determines its severity,
and often even whether or not a famine will occur. Governments with strong
tendencies towards kleptocracy can undermine food security even when harvests
are good. Officials often steal state property. In Bihar, India, more than 80%
of the subsidized food aid to poor is stolen by corrupt officials. Similarly,
food aid is often robbed at gunpoint by governments, criminals, and warlords
alike, and sold for a profit. The 20th century is full of many examples of
governments undermining the food security of their own nations – sometimes
intentionally. Effects on Humanitarian Aid. The scale of humanitarian aid to
the poor and unstable regions of the world grows, but it is highly vulnerable
to corruption, with food aid, construction and other highly valued assistance
as the most at risk. Food aid can be directly and physically diverted from its
intended destination, or indirectly through the manipulation of assessments,
targeting, registration and distributions to favour certain groups or
individuals. Elsewhere, in construction and shelter, there are numerous
opportunities for diversion and profit through substandard workmanship,
kickbacks for contracts and favouritism in the provision of valuable shelter
material. Thus while humanitarian aid agencies are usually most concerned about
aid being diverted by including too many, recipients themselves are most
concerned about exclusion. Access to aid may be limited to those with
connections, to those who pay bribes or are forced to give sexual favours.
Equally, those able to do so may manipulate statistics to inflate the number
beneficiaries and siphon off additional assistance. Other areas: health, public
safety, education, trade unions, etc.. Corruption is not specific to poor,
developing, or transition countries. In western countries, cases of bribery and
other forms of corruption in all possible fields exist: under-the-table
payments made to reputed surgeons by patients attempting to be on top of the
list of forthcoming surgeries, bribes paid by suppliers to the automotive
industry in order to sell low-quality connectors used for instance in safety
equipment such as airbags, bribes paid by suppliers to manufacturers of
defibrillators (to sell low-quality capacitors), contributions paid by wealthy
parents to the "social and culture fund" of a prestigious university in
exchange for it to accept their children, bribes paid to obtain diplomas,
financial and other advantages granted to unionists by members of the executive
board of a car manufacturer in exchange for employer-friendly positions and
votes, etc. Examples are endless. These various manifestations of corruption
can ultimately present a danger for the public health; they can discredit
specific, essential institutions or social relationships. Corruption can also
affect the various components of sports activities (referees, players, medical
and laboratory staff involved in anti-doping controls, members of national
sport federation and international committees deciding about the allocation of
contracts and competition places). Cases exist against (members of) various
types of non-profit and non-government organisations, as well as religious
organisations. Ultimately, the distinction between public and private sector
corruption sometimes appears rather artificial, and national anti-corruption
initiatives may need to avoid legal and other loopholes in the coverage of the
instruments. Types. Bribery. A bribe is a payment given personally to a
government official in exchange of his use of official powers. Bribery requires
two participants: one to give the bribe, and one to take it. Either may
initiate the corrupt offering; for example, a customs official may demand
bribes to let through allowed (or disallowed) goods, or a smuggler might offer
bribes to gain passage. In some countries the culture of corruption extends to
every aspect of public life, making it extremely difficult for individuals to
stay in business without resorting to bribes. Bribes may be demanded in order
for an official to do something he is already paid to do. They may also be
demanded in order to bypass laws and regulations. In addition to using bribery
for private financial gain, they are also used to intentionally and maliciously
cause harm to another (i.e. no financial incentive). In some developing
nations, up to half of the population has paid bribes during the past 12
months. In recent years, efforts have been made by the international community
to encourage countries to dissociate and incriminate as separate offences,
active and passive bribery. Active bribery can be defined for instance as "the
promising, offering or giving by any person, directly or indirectly, of any
undue advantage any public official, for himself or herself or for anyone else,
for him or her to act or refrain from acting in the exercise of his or her
functions." (article 2 of the Criminal Law Convention on Corruption (ETS 173)
of the Council of Europe). Passive bribery can be defined as "the request or
receipt any public official, directly or indirectly, of any undue advantage,
for himself or herself or for anyone else, or the acceptance of an offer or a
promise of such an advantage, to act or refrain from acting in the exercise of
his or her functions" (article 3 of the Criminal Law Convention on Corruption
(ETS 173)). The reason for this dissociation is to make the early steps
(offering, promising, requesting an advantage) of a corrupt deal already an
offence and, thus, to give a clear signal (from a criminal policy point of
view) that bribery is not acceptable. Furthermore, such a dissociation makes
the prosecution of bribery offences easier since it can be very difficult to
prove that two parties (the bribe-giver and the bribe-taker) have formally
agreed upon a corrupt deal. In addition, there is often no such formal deal but
only a mutual understanding, for instance when it is common knowledge in a
municipality that to obtain a building permit one has to pay a "fee" to the
decision maker to obtain a favourable decision. A working definition of
corruption is also provided as follows in article 3 of the Civil Law Convention
on Corruption (ETS 174): "For the purpose of this Convention, "corruption"
means requesting, offering, giving or accepting, directly or indirectly, a
bribe or any other undue advantage or prospect thereof, which distorts the
proper performance of any duty or behavior required of the recipient of the
bribe, the undue advantage or the prospect thereof. Trading in influence.
Trading in influence, or influence peddling in some countries, refers to the
situation where a person is selling his/her influence over the decision process
involving a third party (person or institution). The difference with bribery is
that this is a tri-lateral relation. From a legal point of view, the role of
the third party (who is the target of the influence) does not really matter
although he/she can be an accessory in some instances. It can be difficult to
make a distinction between this form of corruption and some forms of extreme
and loosely regulated lobbying where for instance law- or decision-makers can
freely "sell" their vote, decision power or influence to those lobbyists who
offer the highest compensation, including where for instance the latter act on
behalf of powerful clients such as industrial groups who want to avoid the
passing of specific environmental, social, or other regulations perceived as
too stringent, etc. Where lobbying is (sufficiently) regulated, it becomes
possible to provide for a distinctive criteria and to consider that trading in
influence involves the use of "improper influence", as in article 12 of the
Criminal Law Convention on Corruption (ETS 173) of the Council of Europe.
Patronage. Patronage refers to favoring supporters, for example with government
employment. This may be legitimate, as when a newly elected government changes
the top officials in the administration in order to effectively implement its
policy. It can be seen as corruption if this means that incompetent persons, as
a payment for supporting the regime, are selected before more able ones. In
nondemocracies many government officials are often selected for loyalty rather
than ability. They may be almost exclusively selected from a particular group
(for example, Sunni Arabs in Saddam Hussein's Iraq, the nomenklatura in the
Soviet Union, or the Junkers in Imperial Germany) that support the regime in
return for such favors. A similar problem can also be seen in Eastern Europe,
for example in Romania, where the government is often accused of patronage
(when a new government comes to power it rapidly changes most of the officials
in the public sector). Nepotism and cronyism. Favoring relatives (nepotism) or
personal friends (cronyism) of an official is a form of illegitimate private
gain. This may be combined with bribery, for example demanding that a business
should employ a relative of an official controlling regulations affecting the
business. The most extreme example is when the entire state is inherited, as in
North Korea or Syria. A lesser form might be in the Southern United States with
Good ol' boys, where women and minorities are excluded. A milder form of
cronyism is a "old boy network", in which appointees to official positions are
selected only from a closed and exclusive social network – such as the alumni
of particular universities – instead of appointing the most competent
candidate. Seeking to harm enemies becomes corruption when official powers are
illegitimately used as means to this end. For example, trumped-up charges are
often brought up against journalists or writers who bring up politically
sensitive issues, such as a politician's acceptance of bribes. Electoral fraud.
Electoral fraud is illegal interference with the process of an election. Acts
of fraud affect vote counts to bring about an election result, whether by
increasing the vote share of the favored candidate, depressing the vote share
of the rival candidates, or both. Also called voter fraud, the mechanisms
involved include illegal voter registration, intimidation at polls, and
improper vote counting. Embezzlement. Embezzlement is outright theft of
entrusted funds. It is political when it involves public money taken by a
responsible public official. A common type of embezzlement is that of personal
use of entrusted government resources; for example, when an official assigns
public employees to renovate his own house. Kickbacks. A kickback is an
official's share of misappropriated funds allocated from his or her
organization to an organization involved in corrupt bidding. For example,
suppose that a politician is in charge of choosing how to spend some public
funds. He can give a contract to a company that is not the best bidder, or
allocate more than they deserve. In this case, the company benefits, and in
exchange for betraying the public, the official receives a kickback payment,
which is a portion of the sum the company received. This sum itself may be all
or a portion of the difference between the actual (inflated) payment to the
company and the (lower) market-based price that would have been paid had the
bidding been competitive. Another example of a kickback would be if a judge
receives a portion of the profits that a business makes in exchange for his
judicial decisions. Kickbacks are not limited to government officials; any
situation in which people are entrusted to spend funds that do not belong to
them are susceptible to this kind of corruption. Involvement in organized
crime. An illustrative example of official involvement in organized crime can
be found from 1920s and 1930s Shanghai, where Huang Jinrong was a police chief
in the French concession, while simultaneously being a gang boss and co-
operating with Du Yuesheng, the local gang ringleader. The relationship kept
the flow of profits from the gang's gambling dens, prostitution, and protection
rackets undisturbed. The United States accused Manuel Noriega's government in
Panama of being a "narcokleptocracy", a corrupt government profiting on illegal
drug trade. Later the U.S. invaded Panama and captured Noriega. Conditions
favorable for corruption. In the Indian political system, for example, it has
become usual that the leadership of national and regional parties are passed
from generation to generation creating a system in which a family holds the
center of power. Some examples are most of the Dravidian parties of south India
and also the Congress party, which is one of the two major political parties in
India. Size of public sector. Extensive and diverse public spending is, in
itself, inherently at risk of cronyism, kickbacks, and embezzlement.
Complicated regulations and arbitrary, unsupervised official conduct exacerbate
the problem. This is one argument for privatization and deregulation. Opponents
of privatization see the argument as ideological. The argument that corruption
necessarily follows from the opportunity is weakened by the existence of
countries with low to non-existent corruption but large public sectors, like
the Nordic countries. However, these countries score high on the Ease of Doing
Business Index, due to good and often simple regulations, and have rule of law
firmly established. Therefore, due to their lack of corruption in the first
place, they can run large public sectors without inducing political corruption.
Like other governmental economic activities, also privatization, such as in the
sale of government-owned property, is particularly at the risk of cronyism.
Privatizations in Russia, Latin America, and East Germany were accompanied by
large scale corruption during the sale of the state owned companies. Those with
political connections unfairly gained large wealth, which has discredited
privatization in these regions. While media have reported widely the grand
corruption that accompanied the sales, studies have argued that in addition to
increased operating efficiency, daily petty corruption is, or would be, larger
without privatization, and that corruption is more prevalent in non-privatized
sectors. Furthermore, there is evidence to suggest that extralegal and
unofficial activities are more prevalent in countries that privatized less.
There is the counter point, however, that industries with an oligarchy of
companies can be quite corrupt, with collusive price-fixing, pressuring
dependent businesses, etc., and only by having a portion of the market owned by
someone "other than" that oligarchy, i.e. public sector, can keep them in line.
If the public sector company is making money and selling their product for half
of the price of the private sector companies, the private sector companies
won't be able to simultaneously gouge to that degree and keep their customers:
the competition keeps them in line. Private sector corruption can increase the
poverty and helplessness of the population, so it can affect government
corruption, in the long-term. In the European Union, the principle of
subsidiarity is applied: a government service should be provided by the lowest,
most local authority that can competently provide it. An effect is that
distribution of funds into multiple instances discourages embezzlement, because
even small sums missing will be noticed. In contrast, in a centralized
authority, even minute proportions of public funds can be large sums of money.
Governmental corruption. If the highest echelons of the governments also take
advantage from corruption or embezzlement from the state's treasury, it is
sometimes referred with the neologism "kleptocracy". Members of the government
can take advantage of the natural resources (e.g., diamonds and oil in a few
prominent cases) or state-owned productive industries. A number of corrupt
governments have enriched themselves via foreign aid, which is often spent on
showy buildings and armaments. A corrupt dictatorship typically results in many
years of general hardship and suffering for the vast majority of citizens as
civil society and the rule of law disintegrate. In addition, corrupt dictators
routinely ignore economic and social problems in their quest to amass ever more
wealth and power. The classic case of a corrupt, exploitive dictator often
given is the regime of Marshal Mobutu Sese Seko, who ruled the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (which he renamed Zaire) from 1965 to 1997. It is said
that usage of the term kleptocracy gained popularity largely in response to a
need to accurately describe Mobutu's regime. Another classic case is Nigeria,
especially under the rule of General Sani Abacha who was "de facto" president
of Nigeria from 1993 until his death in 1998. He is reputed to have stolen some
US$3–4 billion. He and his relatives are often mentioned in Nigerian 419
letter scams claiming to offer vast fortunes for "help" in laundering his
stolen "fortunes", which in reality turn out not to exist. More than $400
billion was stolen from the treasury by Nigeria's leaders between 1960 and
1999. More recently, articles in various financial periodicals, most notably
"Forbes" magazine, have pointed to Fidel Castro, General Secretary of the
Republic of Cuba since 1959, of likely being the beneficiary of up to $900
million, based on "his control" of state-owned companies. Opponents of his
regime claim that he has used money amassed through weapons sales, narcotics,
international loans, and confiscation of private property to enrich himself and
his political cronies who hold his dictatorship together, and that the $900
million published by Forbes is merely a portion of his assets, although that
needs to be proven. Judiciary corruption. There are two methods of corruption
of the judiciary: the state (through budget planning and various privileges),
and the private. Budget of the judiciary in many transitional and developing
countries is almost completely controlled by the executive. The latter
undermines the separation of powers, as it creates a critical financial
dependence of the judiciary. The proper national wealth distribution including
the government spending on the judiciary is subject of the constitutional
economics. Fighting corruption. Mobile telecommunications and radio
broadcasting help to fight corruption, especially in developing regions like
Africa, where other forms of communications are limited. In India, the anti-
corruption bureau fights against corruption, and a new ombudsman bill called
Jan Lokpal Bill is being prepared. The purpose of these instruments was to
address the various forms of corruption (involving the public sector, the
private sector, the financing of political activities, etc.) whether they had a
strictly domestic or also a transnational dimension. To monitor the
implementation at national level of the requirements and principles provided in
those texts, a monitoring mechanism – the Group of States Against Corruption
(also known as GRECO) (French: Groupe d'Etats contre la corruption) was
created. Further conventions were adopted at the regional level under the aegis
of the Organization of American States (OAS or OEA), the African Union, and in
2003, at the universal level under that of the United Nations Convention
against Corruption. Campaign contributions. In the political arena, corruption
is mainly proven by following the money trail. However, the connection between
the contribution and anything in return is difficult to prove. For this reason,
there are often unproven rumors, that are termed, smear campaign, about many
politicians. Politicians are placed in apparently compromising positions
because of their need to solicit financial contributions for their campaign
finance. If they then appear to be acting in the interests of those parties
that funded them, it could be considered corruption. Though donations may be
coincidental, the question asked is, why are they funding politicians at all,
if they get nothing for their money. In the United States, before the Citizens
United decision, the laws regulating campaign finance in the United States
required that all contributions, and their, use should be publicly disclosed.
However, some managed to evade disclosure till at after votes were made or
years later. Many companies, especially larger ones, funded, and continue to
fund, both the Democratic and Republican parties. Since the Citizens United
decision, the pattern of corporate funding has increased, as the disclosure
requirements have effectively been circumvented. Certain countries, such as
France, ban altogether the corporate funding of political parties. Because of
the possible circumvention of this ban with respect to the funding of political
campaigns, France also imposes maximum spending caps on campaigning; candidates
that have exceeded those limits, or that have handed in misleading accounting
reports, risk having their candidacy ruled invalid. They also may be prevented
from running in future elections. In addition, the government funds political
parties according to their successes in elections. In some countries, political
parties are run solely off subscriptions (membership fees). Even legal measures
such as these have been argued to be legalized corruption, in that they often
favor the political status quo. Minor parties and independents often argue that
efforts to rein in the influence of contributions do little more than protect
the major parties with guaranteed public funding while constraining the
possibility of private funding by outsiders. In these instances, officials are
legally taking money from the public coffers for their election campaigns to
guarantee that they will continue to hold their influential and often well-paid
positions. As indicated above, the Committee of Ministers of the Council of
Europe recognized in 1996 the importance of links between corruption and
political financing. It adopted in 1837 the Recommendation on Common Rules
against Corruption in the Funding of Political Parties and Electoral Campaigns
(Rec(2003)4). This text is quite unique at international levels as it aims i.a.
at increasing transparency in the funding of political parties and election
campaigns (these two areas are difficult to dissociate since parties are also
involved in campaigning and in many countries, parties do not have the monopoly
over the presentation of candidates for elections), ensuring a certain level of
control over the funding and spending connected with political activities, and
making sure infringements are subject to effective, proportionate, and
dissuasive sanctions. In the context of its monitoring activities, the Group of
States Against Corruption has identified a great variety of possible
improvements in those areas (see the country reports adopted under the Third
Evaluation Round). The legalization of enormous undisclosed campaign
contributions allows undisclosed donors of sufficient wealth to effectively
purchase election outcomes. Such donors are able to influence the politicians
dependent on their contributions to give them governmental largess such as
payments or tax reductions at the expense of other taxpayers, government-
created monopolies at the expense of competitors and consumers, and license to
adversely impact the well-being of common citizens by the release of unsafe
products or of industrial pollution. The ability to command such influence,
coupled with the granting of such favored treatment, gives rise to a perceived
risk to clean elections and honest governance. In response, a number of
potential legislative remedies have been proposed, among them the DISCLOSE Act.
Measuring corruption. Measuring corruption statistically is difficult if not
impossible due to the illicit nature of the transaction and imprecise
definitions of corruption. While "corruption" indices first appeared in 1995
with the Corruption Perceptions Index CPI, all of these metrics address
different proxies for corruption, such as public perceptions of the extent of
the problem. Transparency International, an anti-corruption NGO, pioneered this
field with the CPI, first released in 1995. This work is often credited with
breaking a taboo and forcing the issue of corruption into high level
development policy discourse. Transparency International currently publishes
three measures, updated annually: a CPI (based on aggregating third-party
polling of public perceptions of how corrupt different countries are); a Global
Corruption Barometer (based on a survey of general public attitudes toward and
experience of corruption); and a Bribe Payers Index, looking at the willingness
of foreign firms to pay bribes. The Corruption Perceptions Index is the best
known of these metrics, though it has drawn much criticism and may be declining
in influence. The World Bank collects a range of data on corruption, including
survey responses from over 100,000 firms worldwide and a set of indicators of
governance and institutional quality. Moreover, one of the six dimensions of
governance measured by the Worldwide Governance Indicators is Control of
Corruption, which is defined as "the extent to which power is exercised for
private gain, including both petty and grand forms of corruption, as well as
'capture' of the state by elites and private interests." While the definition
itself is fairly precise, the data aggregated into the Worldwide Governance
Indicators is based on any available polling: questions range from "is
corruption a serious problem?" to measures of public access to information, and
not consistent across countries. Despite these weaknesses, the global coverage
of these datasets has led to their widespread adoption, most notably by the
Millennium Challenge Corporation. In part in response to these criticisms, a
second wave of corruption metrics has been created by Global Integrity, the
International Budget Partnership, and many lesser known local groups, starting
with the Global Integrity Index, first published in 2004. These second wave
projects aim not to create awareness, but to create policy change via targeting
resources more effectively and creating checklists toward incremental reform.
Global Integrity and the International Budget Partnership each dispense with
public surveys and instead uses in-country experts to evaluate "the opposite of
corruption" – which Global Integrity defines as the public policies that
prevent, discourage, or expose corruption. These approaches compliment the
first wave, awareness-raising tools by giving governments facing public outcry
a checklist which measures concrete steps toward improved governance. Typical
second wave corruption metrics do not offer the worldwide coverage found in
first wave projects, and instead focus on localizing information gathered to
specific problems and creating deep, "unpackable" content that matches
quantitative and qualitative data. Meanwhile, alternative approaches such as
the British aid agency's Drivers of Change research skips numbers entirely and
favors understanding corruption via political economy analysis of who controls
power in a given society.
