Political spectrum A political spectrum is a way of modeling different
political positions by placing them upon one or more geometric axes symbolizing
independent political dimensions. Most long-standing spectra include a right
wing and left wing, which originally referred to seating arrangements in the
18th century French parliament. According to the simplest left-right axis,
communism and socialism are usually regarded internationally as being on the
left, opposite fascism and conservatism on the right. Liberalism can mean
different things in different contexts, sometimes on the left, sometimes on the
right. There is politics that rejects the conventional left-right spectrum,
this is known as syncretic politics. However, researchers have frequently noted
that a single left-right axis is insufficient in describing the existing
variation in political beliefs, and often include other axes. Though the
descriptive words at polar opposites may vary, often in popular biaxial spectra
the axes are split between cultural issues and economic issues, each scaling
from some form of individualism (or government for the freedom of the
individual) to some form of communitarianism (or government for the welfare of
the community). In this context, the contemporary American left is often
considered individualist (or libertarian) on social/cultural issues and
communitarian (or populist) on economic issues, while the contemporary American
right is often considered communitarian (or populist) on social/cultural issues
and individualist (or libertarian) on economic issues. Historical origin of the
terms.  Clickable. rect 236 0 531 82 Libertarianism rect 38 35 233 150
Anarchism rect 272 112 453 199 Social liberalism rect 456 143 637 232
Conservative liberalism rect 138 169 327 263 Social democracy rect 0 255 134
364 Left-wing politics rect 624 255 764 364 Right-wing politics rect 280 331
483 447 Christian democracy rect 487 376 650 476 Conservatism rect 543 526 696
617 Fascism rect 83 512 246 613 Communism rect 275 550 482 650 Authoritarianism
rect 280 266 482 328 Centrism  The terms "Right" and "Left" refer to political
affiliations which originated early in the French Revolutionary era of
1789–1796, and referred originally to the seating arrangements in the various
legislative bodies of France. The aristocracy sat on the right of the Speaker
(traditionally the seat of honor) and the commoners sat on the Left, hence the
terms Right-wing politics and Left-wing politics. Originally, the defining
point on the ideological spectrum was the "ancien régime" ("old order"). "The
Right" thus implied support for aristocratic or royal interests, and the
church, while "The Left" implied support for republicanism, secularism, and
civil liberties. Because the political franchise at the start of the revolution
was relatively narrow, the original "Left" represented mainly the interests of
the bourgeoisie, the rising capitalist class (with notable exceptions such as
the proto-communist Gracchus Babeuf). Support for laissez-faire capitalism and
Free markets were expressed by politicians sitting on the left, because these
represented policies favorable to capitalists rather than to the aristocracy;
but outside of parliamentary politics, these views are often characterized as
being on the Right. The reason for this apparent contradiction lies in the fact
that those 'to the left' of the parliamentary left, outside of official
parliamentary structures (such as the "sans-culottes" of the French
Revolution), typically represent much of the working class, poor peasantry, and
the unemployed. Their political interests in the French Revolution lay with
opposition to the aristocracy, and so they found themselves allied with the
early capitalists. However, this did not mean that their economic interests lay
with the 'laissez-faire' policies of those representing them politically. As
capitalist economies developed, the aristocracy became less relevant and were
mostly replaced by capitalist representatives. The size of the working class
increased as capitalism expanded, and began to find expression partly through
trade unionist, socialist, anarchist, and communist politics, rather than being
confined to the capitalist policies expressed by the original 'left'. This
evolution has often pulled parliamentary politicians away from laissez-faire
economic policies, although this has happened to different degrees in different
countries. Thus, the word 'left' in American political parlance may refer to
'liberalism' and be identified with the Democratic Party, whereas in a country
such as France these positions would be regarded as relatively more right-wing,
and 'left' is more likely to refer to 'socialist' positions rather than
'liberal' ones. Academic investigation. For almost a century, social scientists
have considered the problem of how best to describe political variation; a
sample of their results is given below. Early research. Submitting the results
to factor analysis, he was able to identify three factors, which he named
"Religionism", "Humanitarianism", and "Nationalism". Leonard Ferguson's
"Religionism" was defined by belief in God and negative attitudes toward
evolution and birth control; "Humanitarianism" was related to attitudes
opposing the harsh treatment of criminals, capital punishment, and war; and
"Nationalism" described variation in opinions on censorship, law, patriotism,
and communism. This system was derived empirically; rather than devising a
political model on purely theoretical grounds and testing it, Ferguson's
research was exploratory. As a result of this method, care must be taken in the
interpretation of Ferguson's three factors, as factor analysis will output an
abstract 'factor' whether an objectively real factor exists or not. Although
replication of the "Nationalism" factor was inconsistent, the finding of
"Religionism" and "Humanitarianism" had a number of replications by Ferguson
and others. Eysenck's research. Shortly afterward, Hans Eysenck began
researching political attitudes in Great Britain. He believed that there was
something existentially similar about the National Socialists or Nazis on the
one hand, and the Communists on the other, despite their opposite positions on
the left-right axis. As Hans Eysenck described in his 1956 book "Sense and
Nonsense in Psychology", Eysenck compiled a list of political statements found
in newspapers and political tracts and asked subjects to rate their agreement
or disagreement with each. Submitting this value questionnaire to the same
process of factor analysis used by Ferguson, Eysenck drew out two factors,
which he named "Radicalism" (R-factor) and "Tender-Mindedess" (T-factor). Such
analysis produces a factor whether or not it corresponds to a real-world
phenomenon, and so caution must be exercised in its interpretation. While
Eysenck's R-factor is easily identified as the classical "left-right"
dimension, the T-factor (representing a factor drawn at right angles to the R-
factor) is less intuitive; high-scorers favored pacifism, racial equality,
religious education, and restrictions on abortion, while low-scorers had
attitudes more friendly to militarism, harsh punishment, easier divorce laws,
and companionate marriage. Despite the difference in methodology, location, and
theory, the results attained by Eysenck and Ferguson matched; simply rotating
Eysenck's two factors 45 degrees renders the same factors of "Religionism" and
"Humanitarianism" identified by Ferguson in America. Eysenck's dimensions of R
and T were found by factor analyses of values in Germany and Sweden, France,
and Japan. One interesting result Eysenck noted in his 1956 work was that in
the United States and Great Britain, most of the political variance was
subsumed by the left/right axis, while in France, the T-axis was larger, and in
the Middle East, the only dimension to be found was the T-axis: "Among mid-
Eastern Arabs it has been found that while the tough-minded/tender-minded
dimension is still clearly expressed in the relationships observed between
different attitudes, there is nothing that corresponds to the radical-
conservative continuum." Relationship between Eysenck's political views and
political research. Eysenck's political views related to his research: Eysenck
was an outspoken opponent of what he perceived as the authoritarian abuses of
the left and right, and accordingly he believed that, with this T axis, he had
found the link between nazism and communism. According to Eysenck, members of
both ideologies were tough-minded. Central to Eysenck's thesis was the claim
that tender-minded ideologies were democratic and friendly to human freedoms,
while tough-minded ideologies were aggressive and authoritarian, a claim that
is open to political criticism. In this context, Eysenck carried out studies on
nazism and communist groups, claiming to find members of both groups to be more
"dominant" and more "aggressive" than control groups. Eysenck left Nazi Germany
to live in Britain, and was not shy in attacking Stalinist 'communism' (which
he regarded as representative of communist ideology), noting the anti-Semitic
prejudices of the Russian government, the luxurious lifestyles of the USSR's
leaders despite their talk about equality and the poverty of their people, and
the Orwellian "doublethink" of East Germany's naming itself the "German
Democratic Republic" despite being "one of the most undemocratic regimes in the
world today." While Eysenck was an opponent of Nazism, his relationship with
fascist organizations was more complex. Eysenck himself lent theoretical
support to the English National Party (which also opposed "Hitlerite" Nazism),
and was interviewed in the first issue of their journal "The Beacon" in
relation to his controversial views on relative intelligence between different
races. At one point during the interview, Eysenck was asked whether or not he
was of Jewish origin before the interviewer proceeded. His political
allegiances were called into question by other researchers, notably Steven
Rose, who alleged that his scientific research was used for political purposes.
Subsequent criticism of Eysenck's research. Eysenck's conception of 'tough-
mindedness' has been criticized for a number of reasons. Rokeach's research.
Dissatisfied with Hans J. Eysenck's work, Milton Rokeach developed his own two-
axis model of political values in 1973, basing this on the ideas of "freedom"
and "equality", which he described in his book, "The Nature of Human Values."
Milton Rokeach claimed that the defining difference between the left and right
was that the left stressed the importance of equality more than the right.
Despite his criticisms of Eysenck's tough-tender axis, Rokeach also postulated
a basic similarity between communism and nazism, claiming that these groups
would not value freedom as greatly as more conventional social democrats,
democratic socialists and capitalists would, and he wrote that "the two value
model presented here most resembles Eysenck's hypothesis." To test this model,
Milton Rokeach and his colleagues used content analysis on works exemplifying
nazism (written by Adolf Hitler), communism (written by V.I. Lenin), capitalism
(by Barry Goldwater) and socialism (written by various socialist authors). This
method has been criticized for its reliance on the experimenter's familiarity
with the content under analysis, and its dependence on the researcher's
particular political outlooks. "In excerpts from..." Later studies using
samples of American ideologues and American presidential inaugural addresses
attempted to apply this model. Later research. In further research, Hans J.
Eysenck refined his methodology to include more questions on economic issues.
Doing this, he revealed a split in the left–right axis between social policy
and economic policy, with a previously undiscovered dimension of "socialism-
capitalism" (S-factor). While factorially distinct from Eysenck's previous R
factor, the S-factor did positively correlate with the R-factor, indicating
that a basic left–right or right–left tendency underlies both social values
and economic values, although S tapped more into items discussing economic
inequality and big business, while R relates more to the treatment of
criminals, and to sexual issues and military issues. Most research and
political theory since this time has replicated the factors shown above, either
with two axes or three. A recent analysis of survey data using principal
component analysis was carried out in 2003 in the UK; the results of this study
yielded the same two dimensions as found by Eysenck's original research: the
familiar "left-right" R-dimension that mixes economic issues and social issues,
and a second T-dimension that is described as "pragmatism vs idealism." See for
more information. Another replication came from Ronald Inglehart's research
into national opinions based on the World Values Survey, although Inglehart's
research described the values of "countries" rather than individuals or groups
of individuals within nations. Inglehart's two-factor solution took the form of
Ferguson's original Religionism and Humanitarianism dimensions; Inglehart
labelled them "secularism–traditionalism", which covered issues of tradition
and religion, like patriotism, abortion, euthanasia and the importance of
obeying the law and authority figures, and "survivalism – self expression",
which measured issues like everyday conduct and dress, acceptance of diversity
(including foreigners) and innovation, and attitudes towards people with
specific controversial lifestyles such as homosexuality and vegetarianism, as
well as willingness to partake in political activism. See for Inglehart's
national chart. Other proposed dimensions. Numerous alternatives exist, usually
developed by those that feel their views are not fairly represented on the
traditional right-left spectrum. One alternative spectrum offered by the
conservative "American Federalist Journal" accounts for only the "Degree of
Government Control" without consideration for any other social or political
variable, and thus places "Fascism" (totalitarianism) at one extreme and
"Anarchy" (no government at all) at the other extreme. In 1998, political
author Virginia Postrel, in her book "The Future and Its Enemies", offered
another single-axis spectrum that measures views of the future, contrasting
"stasists", who allegedly fear the future and wish to control it, and
"dynamists", who want the future to unfold naturally and without attempts to
plan and control. The distinction corresponds to the utopian versus dystopian
spectrum used in some theoretical assessments of liberalism, and the book's
title is borrowed from the work of the anti-utopian classic-liberal theorist
Karl Popper. Other multi-axis models. Nolan: economic freedom, personal
freedom. The Nolan chart was created by libertarian David Nolan. This chart
shows what he considers as "economic freedom" (issues like taxation, free trade
and free enterprise) on the horizontal axis and what he considers as "personal
freedom" (issues like drug legalization, abortion and the draft) on the
vertical axis. This puts left-wingers in the left quadrant, libertarians in the
top, right-wingers in the right, and what Nolan originally named populists in
the bottom. It is possible to consider the Nolan chart to be an Eysenck model
that has been rotated 45 degrees. The popular "diamond" presentation of the
Nolan chart makes this particular comparison readily apparent. The traditional
left-right spectrum forms a diagonal across the Nolan chart, with communism and
fascism both in the ultra-populist corner, an assignment hotly disputed by more
liberal-minded communists who do not advocate state control over matters of
personal freedom. There are some discrepancies between various forms of the
model. In some, the bottom section is labeled with neutral, non-pejorative
terms (such as 'communitarian') whereas others use emotional, loaded terms such
as 'statist', 'authoritarian', or 'totalitarian'. The Nolan chart has been
reoriented and visually represented in many forms since David Nolan first
created it, and has been the inspiration for an endless array of political
self-quizzes, perhaps the most famous of these being the World's Smallest
Political Quiz, which places one on the Diamond Chart with "statist" at the
bottom. this quiz is being used in 420 schools. It can be found in at least a
dozen popular textbooks that feature the Quiz as part of their enhanced digital
content. In August 2000 Portrait of America did a telephone survey that was
done using the same questions and scale. More recently, The Institute for
Humane Studies has created Politopia, a similar quiz. Interestingly, the
Institute found that most applicants fell into the lower, populist section.
Three axis variants of Nolan Chart. There are two three-axis models based on
the Nolan Chart. The Friesian Institute has suggested a model that combines the
economic liberty and personal liberty axes with positive liberty, creating a
cube. The Vosem Chart (from Russian восемь "vosem" 'eight') splits the
economic axis of the Nolan chart into two axes, corporate economics (z-axis)
and individual economics (y-axis), which combine with the civil liberty axis
(x-axis) to form a cube. Political compass. The political compass has two axes.
One represents economic issues as right-vs-left. The other represents issues of
freedom, or social issues, as authoritarian-vs-liberal. One can determine their
position on the political compass through an online quiz by the same name. It
is essentially the same as the Eysenck model and Nolan chart, with slightly
different wording. Greenberg & Jonas: left-right, ideological rigidity. In a
2003 "Psychological Bulletin" paper, Jeff Greenberg and Eva Jonas posit a model
comprising the standard left-right axis and an axis representing ideological
rigidity. For Greenberg and Jonas, ideological rigidity has "much in common
with the related concepts of dogmatism and authoritarianism" and is
characterized by "believing in strong leaders and submission, preferring
one’s own in-group, ethnocentrism and nationalism, aggression against
dissidents, and control with the help of police and military." Greenberg and
Jonas posit that high ideological rigidity can be motivated by "particularly
strong needs to reduce fear and uncertainty" and is a primary shared
characteristic of "people who subscribe to any extreme government or ideology,
whether it is right-wing or left-wing." UK inferred model: left-right,
political pragmatism. While multiple axes on the political spectrum had been
postulated for a while, statistical analysis of survey data using principal
component analysis to verify the theory and establish their existence, number
and meaning was not done until recently. A 2003 study by Chris Lightfoot in the
UK consisted of a survey that yielded two significant eigenvectors (that is,
groups of questions that tend to be answered consistently), one less well-
constrained than the other. Upon examining the survey questions one could
assign a meaning to the axes: one is like the familiar "left-right" axis that
mixes economic and social issues, and the other indicates a degree of
"political pragmatism". The outcome of that study is that the UK political
spectrum is most sensibly described with two axes. Pournelle: liberty-control,
irrationalism-rationalism. This very distinct two-axis model was created by
Jerry Pournelle in 1963 for his doctoral dissertation in political science. The
Pournelle chart has liberty on one axis, with those on the left seeking freedom
from control or protections for social deviance and those on the right
emphasizing state authority or protections for norm enforcement (farthest right
being state worship, farthest left being the idea of a state as the "ultimate
evil"). The other axis is rationalism, defined here as the belief in planned
social progress, with those higher up believing that there are problems with
society that can be rationally solved, and those lower down skeptical of such
approaches. Inglehart: traditionalist–secular, and self expressionist –
survivalist. In its 4 January 2003 issue, "The Economist" discussed a chart,
proposed by Dr. Ronald Inglehart and supported by the World Values Survey
(associated with the University of Michigan), to plot cultural ideology onto
two dimensions. On the y-axis it covered issues of tradition and religion, like
patriotism, abortion, euthanasia and the importance of obeying the law and
authority figures. At the bottom of the chart is the "traditionalist" position
on issues like these (with loyalty to country and family and respect for life
considered important), while at the top is the "secular" position. The x-axis
deals with self-expression, issues like everyday conduct and dress, acceptance
of diversity (including foreigners) and innovation, and attitudes towards
people with specific controversial lifestyles such as vegetarianism, as well as
willingness to partake in political activism. At the right of the chart is the
open "self-expressionist" position, while at the left is its opposite position,
which Dr. Inglehart calls "survivalist". This chart not only has the power to
map the values of individuals, but also to compare the values of people in
different countries. Placed on this chart, EU countries in continental Europe
come out on the top right, Anglophone countries on the middle right, Latin
American countries on the bottom right, African, Middle Eastern and South Asian
countries on the bottom left, and ex-Communist countries on the top left.
Mitchell: Eight Ways to Run the Country. Mitchell charts these traditions
graphically using a vertical axis as a scale of kratos/akrateia and a
horizontal axis as a scale of archy/anarchy. He places democratic progressivism
in the lower left, plutocratic nationalism in the lower right, republican
constitutionalism in the upper right, and libertarian individualism in the
upper left. The political left is therefore distinguished by its rejection of
archy, while the political right is distinguished by its acceptance of archy.
For Mitchell, anarchy is not the absence of government but the rejection of
rank. Thus there can be both anti-government anarchists (Mitchell’s
"libertarian individualists") and pro-government anarchists (Mitchell's
"democratic progressives", who favor the use of government force against social
hierarchies such as patriarchy). Mitchell also distinguishes between left-wing
anarchists and right-wing anarchists, whom Mitchell renames "akratists" for
their opposition to the government’s use of force. A potential ninth
perspective, in the midst of the eight, is populism, which Mitchell says is
vaguely defined and situation-dependent, having no fixed character other than
opposition to the prevailing power. Political-spectrum-based forecasts. As
shown by Russian political scientist Stepan S. Sulakshin, political spectra can
be used as a forecasting tool. Sulakshin offered mathematical evidence that
stable development (positive dynamics of the vast number of statistic indices)
depends on the width of the political spectrum: if it is too narrow or too
wide, stagnation or political disasters will result. Sulakshin also showed
that, in the short run, the political spectrum determines the statistic indices
dynamic and not vice versa. Biological variables. A number of recent studies
have investigated the relationship between biology and political orientation
