Political management Political management is a broad and ever evolving field
encompassing a number of activities in professional politics. The field
includes campaign management and consulting, advertisement creation/purchasing,
grassroots politics, opposition research, issue advocacy, lobbying,
fundraising, and polling. Some consider political management to be an applied
form of political science. History. Political managers first emerged during the
early 20th century as American politics drifted away from party-centered
politics towards an atmosphere focusing more on the individual candidates.
Candidates began to hire their own staff to manage strategic decisions,
fundraise, and handle the day-to-day campaign activities. Initially corporate
public relations firms were hired to manage campaigns. However, eventually
public relations firms specializing in political campaigns began to surface
during the 1950s and 60s. One of the first professionals to be labeled a
“political consultant” was Joseph Napolitan who went on to found the
American Association for Political Consultants. Eventually consultants
specializing in specific aspects of the campaign began to grow in popularity,
like, Tony Schwartz, the creator of the now infamous “Daisy” ad, and one of
the first media consultants to specialize in political campaigns. After media,
polling was one of the first services sought out by campaign managers, followed
by direct mail. Today, political managers specialize in a wide range of
consulting areas including strategy, polling, direct mail, fundraising, web
design, lobbying, and get out the vote efforts. Educational opportunities.
Several universities offer graduate degrees in political management and applied
politics. Some well known degree programs include The Graduate School of
Political Management at The George Washington University, the Campaign
Management Institute at American University, the Bliss Institute of Applied
Politics at the University of Akron, and the Political Campaigning Program at
the University of Florida. A Canadian Masters of Political Management (MPM)
program was also recently started at Carleton University; as of July 2012, it
is the only degree of its type focusing on Canadian politics.
