Political culture Political culture is defined by the "International
Encyclopedia of the Social Sciences" as "the set of attitudes, beliefs and
sentiments which give order and meaning to a political process and which
provide the underlying assumptions and rules that govern behavior in the
political system. It encompasses both the political ideals and operating norms
of a polity. Political culture is thus the manifestation in aggregate form of
the psychological and subjective dimensions of politics. A political culture is
the product of both the collective history of a political system and the life
histories of the members of the system and thus it is rooted equally in public
events and private experience." Conceptions. In the early 1960s, two Americans,
Gabriel Almond and Sidney Verba, outlined three pure types of political culture
in Great Britain that can combine to create civic culture. These three key
features expressed by both men were composed to establish a link between the
public and the government. The first of these features is Deference, which
looks at the respect, acknowledgment or inferiority of authority and superiors
in society. The second key feature is Consensus, which represents the key link
between government and public agreement and appeasement. The appeasement may
not always be shared with the whole nation but as a whole people agree to
sustain it, meaning it is a common agreement. There are various Examples of
Consensus in British Political culture; how we are governed as a whole,
agreement on the welfare state, an agreement to whom the powers governed by
head of state go to. The third features of British Political Culture is
Homogeneity. Church attendance as a whole is decreasing. Nations within the
British Isles such as Scotland and Wales desire independence to become its own
state. Political philosophy. The term political culture was brought into
political science to promote the American political system. The concept was
used by Gabriel Almond in late 50s, and outlined in "The Civic Culture" (1963,
Almond & Verba), but was soon opposed by two European political scientists,
Gerhard Lehmbruch and Arend Lijphart. Lehmbruch analysed politics in
Switzerland and Austria and Lijphart analysed politics in Netherlands. Both
argued that there are political systems that are more stable than the one in
the USA. Categories. Different typologies of political culture have been
proposed. Political scientist William S. Stewart, all political behavior can be
explained as participating in one or more of eight political cultures:
anarchism, oligarchy, Tory corporatism, fascism, classical liberalism, radical
liberalism, democratic socialism, and Leninist socialism. Societies that
exemplify each of these cultures have existed historically. Almond and Verba
wrote that these types of political culture can combine to create the civic
culture, which mixes the best elements of each.
