Political sociology Contemporary political sociology involves, but is not
limited to, the study of the relations between state and society. Where a
typical research question in political sociology might have been: "Why do so
few American citizens choose to vote?" or even, "What difference does it make
if women get elected?" political sociologists also now ask: "How is the body a
site of power?", "How are emotions relevant to global poverty?" or "What
difference does knowledge make to democracy?" In other words, political
sociology was traditionally concerned with how social trends, dynamics, and
structures of domination affect formal political processes, as well as
exploring how various social forces work together to change political policies.
From this perspective we can identify three major theoretical frameworks:
pluralism, elite or managerial theory, and class analysis (which overlaps with
Marxist analysis). Pluralism sees politics primarily as a contest among
competing interest groups. Elite or managerial theory is sometimes called a
state-centered approach. It explains what the state does by looking at
constraints from organizational structure, semi-autonomous state managers, and
interests that arise from the state as a unique, power concentrating
organization. A leading representative is Theda Skocpol. Social class theory
analysis emphasizes the political power of capitalist elites. It can be split
into two parts. One is the 'power structure' or 'instrumentalist' approach,
another is the structuralist approach. The power structure approach focuses on
'Who Rules?' and its most well-known representative is G. William Domhoff. The
structuralist approach emphasizes on the way a capitalist economy operates;
only allowing and encouraging the state to do some things but not others (Nicos
Poulantzas, Bob Jessop). Contemporary political sociology takes these questions
seriously, but it is concerned with the play of power and politics across
societies, which includes, but is not restricted to, relations between the
state and society. In part, this is a product of the growing complexity of
social relations, the impact of social movement organising, and the relative
weakening of the state as a result of globalization. In large part, however, it
is due to the radical rethinking of social theory. This is as much focused now
on micro questions (such as the formation of identity through social
interaction, the politics of knowledge, and the effects of the contestation of
meaning on structures), as it is on macro questions (such as how to capture and
use state power). Chief influences here include cultural studies (Stuart Hall),
post-structuralism (Michel Foucault, Judith Butler), pragmatism (Luc
Boltanski), structuration theory (Anthony Giddens), and cultural sociology
(Jeffrey C. Alexander).
