Political philosophy Political philosophy is the study of such topics as
politics, liberty, justice, property, rights, law, and the enforcement of a
legal code by authority: what they are, why (or even if) they are needed, what,
if anything, makes a government legitimate, what rights and freedoms it should
protect and why, what form it should take and why, what the law is, and what
duties citizens owe to a legitimate government, if any, and when it may be
legitimately overthrown, if ever. In a vernacular sense, the term "political
philosophy" often refers to a general view, or specific ethic, political belief
or attitude, about politics that does not necessarily belong to the technical
discipline of philosophy. Political philosophy can also be understood by
analysing it through the perspectives of metaphysics, epistemology and
axiology. It provides insight into, among other things, the various aspects of
the origin of the state, its institutions and laws. History. Ancient. Ancient
China. Chinese political philosophy dates back to the Spring and Autumn Period,
specifically with Confucius in the 6th century BC. Chinese political philosophy
developed as a response to the social and political breakdown of the country
characteristic of the Spring and Autumn Period and the Warring States Period.
The major philosophies during the period, Confucianism, Legalism, Mohism,
Agrarianism and Taoism, each had a political aspect to their philosophical
schools. Philosophers such as Confucius, Mencius, and Mozi, focused on
political unity and political stability as the basis of their political
philosophies. Confucianism advocated a hierarchical, meritocratic government
based on empathy, loyalty, and interpersonal relationships. Legalism advocated
a highly authoritarian government based on draconian punishments and laws.
Mohism advocated a communal, decentralized government centered on frugality and
ascetism. The Agrarians advocated a peasant utopian communalism and
egalitarianism. Taoism advocated a proto-anarchism. Legalism was the dominant
political philosophy of the Qin Dynasty, but was replaced by Confucianism in
the Han Dynasty. Prior to China's adoption of communism, Confucianism remained
the dominant political philosophy of China up to the 20th century. Ancient
Greece. Western political philosophy originates in the philosophy of ancient
Greece, where political philosophy begins with Plato's "Republic" in the 4th
century BC. Ancient Greece was dominated by city-states, which experimented
with various forms of political organization, grouped by Plato into four
categories: timocracy, tyranny, democracy and oligarchy. One of the first,
extremely important classical works of political philosophy is Plato's
"Republic", which was followed by Aristotle's Nichomachean Ethics and Politics.
Roman political philosophy was influenced by the Stoics, including the Roman
statesman Cicero. Ancient Indian Subcontinent and Hindu Philosophy. Political
philosophy originates in Ancient India with the Hindu text "Manusmṛti", or
"Laws of Manu" and Chanakya's "Arthashastra". In "Arthashastra", Chanakya
developed a viewpoint which recalls both the Legalists and Niccolò
Machiavelli. Medieval Christianity. Saint Augustine The early Christian
philosophy of Augustine of Hippo was heavily influenced by Plato. The main
change that Christian thought brought was to moderate the Stoicism and theory
of justice of the Roman world, and emphasize the role of the state in applying
mercy as a moral example. Augustine also preached that one was not a member of
his or her city, but was either a citizen of the City of God (Civitas Dei) or
the City of Man (Civitas Terrena). Augustine's "City of God" is an influential
work of this period that refuted the thesis, after the First Sack of Rome, that
the Christian view could be realized on Earth at all - a view many Christian
Romans held. Saint Thomas Aquinas Medieval Islam. Mutazilite vs Asharite The
rise of Islam, based on both the Qur'an and the prophet Muhammad strongly
altered the power balances and perceptions of origin of power in the
Mediterranean region. Early Islamic philosophy emphasized an inexorable link
between science and religion, and the process of ijtihad to find truth - in
effect "all" philosophy was "political" as it had real implications for
governance. This view was challenged by the "rationalist" Mutazilite
philosophers, who held a more Hellenic view, reason above revelation, and as
such are known to modern scholars as the first speculative theologians of
Islam; they were supported by a secular aristocracy who sought freedom of
action independent of the Caliphate. By the late ancient period, however, the
"traditionalist" Asharite view of Islam had in general triumphed. According to
the Asharites, reason must be subordinate to the Quran and the Sunna. Islamic
political philosophy, was, indeed, rooted in the very sources of Islam, i.e.
the Qur'an and the Sunnah, the words and practices of Muhammad. However, in the
Western thought, it is generally supposed that it was a specific area peculiar
merely to the great philosophers of Islam: al-Kindi (Alkindus), al-Farabi
(Abunaser), İbn Sina (Avicenna), Ibn Bajjah (Avempace), Ibn Rushd (Averroes),
and Ibn Khaldun. The political conceptions of Islam such as kudrah (power),
sultan, ummah, cemaa (obligation)-and even the "core" terms of the Qur'an, i.e.
ibadah, din (religion), rab (master) and ilah- is taken as the basis of an
analysis. Hence, not only the ideas of the Muslim political philosophers but
also many other jurists and ulama posed political ideas and theories. For
example, the ideas of the Khawarij in the very early years of Islamic history
on Khilafa and Ummah, or that of Shia Islam on the concept of Imamah are
considered proofs of political thought. The clashes between the Ehl-i Sunna and
Shia in the 7th and 8th centuries had a genuine political character. Ibn
Khaldun The 14th century Arab scholar Ibn Khaldun is considered one of the
greatest political theorists. The British philosopher-anthropologist Ernest
Gellner considered Ibn Khaldun's definition of government, "an institution
which prevents injustice other than such as it commits itself", the best in the
history of political theory. For Ibn Khaldun, government should be restrained
to a minimum for as a necessary evil, it is the constraint of men by other men.
Medieval Europe. Medieval political philosophy in Europe was heavily influenced
by Christian thinking. It had much in common with the Mutazalite Islamic
thinking in that the Roman Catholics though subordinating philosophy to
theology did not subject reason to revelation but in the case of
contradictions, subordinated reason to faith as the Asharite of Islam. The
Scholastics by combining the philosophy of Aristotle with the Christianity of
St. Augustine emphasized the potential harmony inherent in reason and
revelation. Perhaps the most influential political philosopher of medieval
Europe was St. Thomas Aquinas who helped reintroduce Aristotle's works, which
had only been transmitted to Catholic Europe through Muslim Spain, along with
the commentaries of Averroes. Aquinas's use of them set the agenda, for
scholastic political philosophy dominated European thought for centuries even
unto the Renaissance. Medieval political philosophers, such as Aquinas in
"Summa Theologica", developed the idea that a king who is a tyrant is no king
at all and could be overthrown. Magna Carta, viewed by many as a cornerstone of
Anglo-American political liberty, explicitly proposes the right to revolt
against the ruler for justice sake. Other documents similar to Magna Carta are
found in other European countries such as Spain and Hungary. European
Renaissance. During the Renaissance secular political philosophy began to
emerge after about a century of theological political thought in Europe. While
the Middle Ages did see secular politics in practice under the rule of the Holy
Roman Empire, the academic field was wholly scholastic and therefore Christian
in nature. Niccolò Machiavelli One of the most influential works during this
burgeoning period was Niccolò Machiavelli's "The Prince", written between
1511–12 and published in 1532, after Machiavelli's death. That work, as well
as "The Discourses", a rigorous analysis of the classical period, did much to
influence modern political thought in the West. A minority (including Jean-
Jacques Rousseau) could interpret The Prince as a satire meant to be given to
the Medici after their recapture of Florence and their subsequent expulsion of
Machiavelli from Florence. Though the work was written for the di Medici family
in order to perhaps influence them to free him from exile, Machiavelli
supported the Republic of Florence rather than the oligarchy of the di Medici
family. At any rate, Machiavelli presents a pragmatic and somewhat
consequentialist view of politics, whereby good and evil are mere means used to
bring about an end, i.e. the secure and powerful state. Thomas Hobbes, well
known for his theory of the social contract, goes on to expand this view at the
start of the 17th century during the English Renaissance. Although neither
Machiavelli nor Hobbes believed in the divine right of kings, they both
believed in the inherent selfishness of the individual. It was necessarily this
belief that led them to adopt a strong central power as the only means of
preventing the disintegration of the social order. John Locke John Locke in
particular exemplified this new age of political theory with his work "Two
Treatises of Government". In it Locke proposes a state of nature theory that
directly complements his conception of how political development occurs and how
it can be founded through contractual obligation. Locke stood to refute Sir
Robert Filmer's paternally founded political theory in favor of a natural
system based on nature in a particular given system. The theory of the divine
right of kings became a passing fancy, exposed to the type of ridicule with
which John Locke treated it. Unlike Machiavelli and Hobbes but like Aquinas,
Locke would accept Aristotle's dictum that man seeks to be happy in a state of
social harmony as a social animal. Unlike Aquinas's preponderant view on the
salvation of the soul from original sin, Locke believes man's mind comes into
this world as tabula rasa. For Locke, knowledge is neither innate, revealed nor
based on authority but subject to uncertainty tempered by reason, tolerance and
moderation. According to Locke, an absolute ruler as proposed by Hobbes is
unnecessary, for natural law is based on reason and seeking peace and survival
for man. European Age of Enlightenment. During the Enlightenment period, new
theories about what the human was and is and about the definition of reality
and the way it was perceived, along with the discovery of other societies in
the Americas, and the changing needs of political societies (especially in the
wake of the English Civil War, the American Revolution and the French
Revolution) led to new questions and insights by such thinkers as Jean-Jacques
Rousseau, Montesquieu and John Locke. These theorists were driven by two basic
questions: one, by what right or need do people form states; and two, what the
best form for a state could be. These fundamental questions involved a
conceptual distinction between the concepts of "state" and "government." It was
decided that "state" would refer to a set of enduring institutions through
which power would be distributed and its use justified. The term "government"
would refer to a specific group of people who occupied the institutions of the
state, and create the laws and ordinances by which the people, themselves
included, would be bound. This conceptual distinction continues to operate in
political science, although some political scientists, philosophers, historians
and cultural anthropologists have argued that most political action in any
given society occurs outside of its state, and that there are societies that
are not organized into states which nevertheless must be considered in
political terms. As long as the concept of natural order was not introduced,
the social sciences could not evolve independently of theistic thinking. Since
the cultural revolution of the 17th century in England, which spread to France
and the rest of Europe, society has been considered subject to natural laws
akin to the physical world. Political and economic relations were drastically
influenced by these theories as the concept of the guild was subordinated to
the theory of free trade, and Roman Catholic dominance of theology was
increasingly challenged by Protestant churches subordinate to each nation-
state, which also (in a fashion the Roman Catholic Church often decried
angrily) preached in the vulgar or native language of each region. However, the
enlightenment was an outright attack on religion, particularly Christianity.
The publication of Denis Diderot's and Jean d'Alembert's "Encyclopédie ou
Dictionnaire raisonné des sciences, des arts et des métiers" marked the
crowning intellectual achievement of the epoch. The most outspoken critic of
the church in France was François Marie Arouet de Voltaire, a representative
figure of the enlightenment. After Voltaire, religion would never be the same
again in France. In the Ottoman Empire, these ideological reforms did not take
place and these views did not integrate into common thought until much later.
As well, there was no spread of this doctrine within the New World and the
advanced civilizations of the Aztec, Maya, Inca, Mohican, Delaware, Huron and
especially the Iroquois. The Iroquois philosophy in particular gave much to
Christian thought of the time and in many cases actually inspired some of the
institutions adopted in the United States: for example, Benjamin Franklin was a
great admirer of some of the methods of the Iroquois Confederacy, and much of
early American literature emphasized the political philosophy of the natives.
Industrialization and the Modern Era. The industrial revolution produced a
parallel revolution in political thought. Urbanization and capitalism greatly
reshaped society. During this same period, the socialist movement began to
form. In the mid-19th century, Marxism was developed, and socialism in general
gained increasing popular support, mostly from the urban working class. Without
breaking entirely from the past, Marx established the principles which would be
used by the future revolutionaries of the 20th century namely Vladimir Lenin,
Mao Zedong, Ho Chi Minh and Fidel Castro. Although Hegel's philosophy of
history is similar to Immanuel Kant's, and Karl Marx's theory of revolution
towards the common good is partly based on Kant's view of history. Marx is said
to have declared that on the whole, he was just trying to straighten out G.
W.F. Hegel who was actually upside down. Unlike Marx who believed in historical
materialism, Hegel believed in the "Phenomenology of Spirit". Be that as it
may, by the late 19th century, socialism and trade unions were established
members of the political landscape. In addition, the various branches of
anarchism, with thinkers such as Mikhail Bakunin, Pierre-Joseph Proudhon or
Peter Kropotkin, and syndicalism also gained some prominence. In the Anglo-
American world, anti-imperialism and pluralism began gaining currency at the
turn of the 19th to 20th century. World War I was a watershed event in human
history. The Russian Revolution of 1917 (and similar, albeit less successful,
revolutions in many other European countries) brought communism - and in
particular the political theory of Leninism, but also on a smaller level
Luxemburgism (gradually) - on the world stage. At the same time, social
democratic parties won elections and formed governments for the first time,
often as a result of the introduction of universal suffrage. However, a group
of central European economists led by Austrians Ludwig von Mises and Friedrich
Hayek identified the collectivist underpinnings to the various new socialist
and fascist doctrines of government power as being different brands of
political totalitarianism. Contemporary political philosophy. From the end of
World War II until 1971, when John Rawls published "A Theory of Justice",
political philosophy declined in the Anglo-American academic world, as analytic
philosophers expressed skepticism about the possibility that normative
judgments had cognitive content, and political science turned toward
statistical methods and behavioralism. In continental Europe, on the other
hand, the postwar decades saw a huge blossoming of political philosophy, with
Marxism dominating the field. This was the time of Jean-Paul Sartre and Louis
Althusser, and the victories of Mao Zedong in China and Fidel Castro in Cuba,
as well as the events of May 1968 led to increased interest in revolutionary
ideology, especially by the New Left. A number of continental European
émigrés to Britain and the United States—including Hannah Arendt, Karl
Popper, Friedrich Hayek, Leo Strauss, Isaiah Berlin, Eric Voegelin and Judith
Shklar—encouraged continued study in political philosophy in the Anglo-
American world, but in the 1950s and 1960s they and their students remained at
odds with the analytic establishment. Communism remained an important focus
especially during the 1950s and 1960s. Colonialism and racism were important
issues that arose. In general, there was a marked trend towards a pragmatic
approach to political issues, rather than a philosophical one. Much academic
debate regarded one or both of two pragmatic topics: how (or whether) to apply
utilitarianism to problems of political policy, or how (or whether) to apply
economic models (such as rational choice theory) to political issues. The rise
of feminism, LGBT social movements and the end of colonial rule and of the
political exclusion of such minorities as African Americans and sexual
minorities in the developed world has led to feminist, postcolonial, and
multicultural thought becoming significant. This led to a challenge to the
social contract by philosophers Charles W. Millsin his book"The Racial
Contract" and Carole Patemen in her book "The Sexual Contract" that the social
contract excluded persons of colour and women respectively. In Anglo-American
academic political philosophy, the publication of John Rawls's "A Theory of
Justice" in 1971 is considered a milestone. Rawls used a thought experiment,
the original position, in which representative parties choose principles of
justice for the basic structure of society from behind a veil of ignorance.
Rawls also offered a criticism of utilitarian approaches to questions of
political justice. Robert Nozick's 1974 book "Anarchy, State, and Utopia",
which won a National Book Award, responded to Rawls from a libertarian
perspective and gained academic respectability for libertarian viewpoints.
Contemporaneously with the rise of analytic ethics in Anglo-American thought,
in Europe several new lines of philosophy directed at critique of existing
societies arose between the 1950s and 1980s. Most of these took elements of
Marxist economic analysis, but combined them with a more cultural or
ideological emphasis. Out of the Frankfurt School, thinkers like Herbert
Marcuse, Theodor W. Adorno, Max Horkheimer, and Jürgen Habermas combined
Marxian and Freudian perspectives. Along somewhat different lines, a number of
other continental thinkers—still largely influenced by Marxism—put new
emphases on structuralism and on a "return to Hegel". Within the (post-
) structuralist line (though mostly not taking that label) are thinkers such as
Gilles Deleuze, Michel Foucault, Claude Lefort, and Jean Baudrillard. The
Situationists were more influenced by Hegel; Guy Debord, in particular, moved a
Marxist analysis of commodity fetishism to the realm of consumption, and looked
at the relation between consumerism and dominant ideology formation. Another
debate developed around the (distinct) criticisms of liberal political theory
made by Michael Sandel and Charles Taylor. The liberal-communitarian debate is
often considered valuable for generating a new set of philosophical problems,
rather than a profound and illuminating clash of perspectives. Charles
Blattberg has offered an account which distinguishes between four different
contemporary political philosophies: neutralism, postmodernism, pluralism, and
patriotism. There is fruitful interaction between political philosophers and
international relations theorists. The rise of globalization has created the
need for an international normative framework, and political theory has moved
to fill the gap. One of the most prominent subjects in recent political
philosophy has been the theory of deliberative democracy. The seminal work is
by Jurgen Habermas in Germany but the most extensive literature has been in
English, led by theorists such as Jane Mansbridge, Joshua Cohen, Amy Gutmann
and Dennis Thompson. Influential political philosophers. A larger list of
political philosophers is intended to be closer to exhaustive. Listed below are
a few of the most canonical or important thinkers, and especially philosophers
whose central focus was in political philosophy and/or who are good
representatives of a particular school of thought.
