Political libel The criminal statutes protecting nobility from criticism in
16th and 17th century England eventually evolved into various categories of
political libel (see slander and libel for the modern incarnation of this law).
Cases of political libel and eventually damages actions were handled by the
infamous Star Chamber until its abolition in 1641. By the end of that century,
many elements of the common law of libel had been established. Modern slander
and libel law evolved since then to mostly eradicate the use of libel laws to
intimidate active political participants during a public debate. Accordingly
this is now a matter of historical interest only in all jurisdictions other
than Canada, where use of the law by government, political and religious groups
is common, and often used against defendants outside Canada. No longer exists
in most English speaking jurisdictions. In most developed countries, a
combination of discouragement to vexatious litigation, general recognition of
chilling effects, and sometimes formal definition of a strategic lawsuit
against public participation, serve to limit politically motivated libel suits.
Many attorneys advise strongly against filing any suit against critics with
political motivations. The McLibel case is usually cited as libel law
backfiring. Canada. However, the direction of Canadian libel law has markedly
differed from that in other English speaking countries. While Canadian lawyers,
like those in other countries, advise strongly and publicly against legal
intimidation of political critics, the "Law of Defamation in Canada" notes that
the common law of defamation has been described by scholars and judges as
“artificial and archaic” and characterized by “absurdities”,
“irrationality”, and “minute and barren distinctions” (p. 1-3). Dan
Burnett argued that "other 'free and democratic societies' have concluded that
the traditional common law requires reform" to avoid infringing free expression
and political freedom, but Canada has not. It also inhibits online journalism.
Burnett says "Internet publication by media outlets opens the door wide to
forum shopping, raising concerns that Canada will become a haven for libel
plaintiffs who likely would not succeed in their more natural forum." Several
online journalism forums in Canada have closed or restricted access drastically
due to the exposure to nuisance or vexatious litigation. Forum shopping. The
definition of libel deviates so significantly in Canada, particularly English
Canada, that plaintiffs outside Canada bring libel suits against non-Canadian
defendants such as the "New York Post" and the "Washington Post" - a practice
known as 'forum shopping'. Burnett says "they likely have good legal advisers
who correctly tell them that Canadian libel laws favour plaintiffs... our libel
laws are the least protective of free speech in the English-speaking world."
p2pnet.net. A suit by the founder of Kazaa, based in Australia, was launched
against p2pnet.net, to silence critics of the company and its founder. The case
was not launched, however, in Australia but in British Columbia, that being
seemingly an example of this forum shopping. Religious plaintiffs. While
religious figures and movements have recourse to other laws including hate
crime legislation, they have made use of the libel law's provisions intended to
stop political critics of powerful church figures. Hill v. Scientology. Despite
Canadian adoption of the US-style written Canadian Charter of Rights and
Freedoms in the 1980s, its courts have rejected US-style limits on libel law.
While it was neither a political case or one about the freedom of religion, in
"Hill v. Church of Scientology of Toronto" S.C.J. No. 64, Justice Peter Cory,
for the Supreme Court of Canada, stated, “I simply cannot see that the law of
defamation is unduly restrictive or inhibiting”. However, other English
speaking countries have ruled differently. From about 1994 to 2006, according
to Burnett, "the highest courts in England, Australia and New Zealand have all
recognized that the traditional law of libel fails to adequately protect free
speech, and they have all issued decisions which begin to right the balance.
Every one, that is, except Canada." Political plaintiffs. An aspect of this
favouring of plaintiffs is unconcern with their political position, and the
viability of political libel suits from Canada that might fail from elsewhere.
In Canada, statements about politics, even from political party leaders in or
on the eve of an election, are subject to the same rules of libel as other
statements made under other circumstances. Martin and Harper. Just prior to the
Canadian federal election, 2006, then Prime Minister of Canada Paul Martin
vowed to sue Leader of the Opposition (Canada) Stephen Harper for stating that
the Liberal Party of Canada's behaviour resembled "organized crime". Harper
continued to mock Martin during the election with political advertising and
public appearances showing money being abused and hinting that Liberals were
inclined to steal taxpayers' money by nature. No lawsuit was filed and Harper
won the election. However, the attempt to curb the language of the Prime
Minister's chief rival on the eve of an election was widely noted. Green Party
of Canada. The "open politics" service openpolitics.ca was sued by Wayne
Crookes and West Coast Title Search in 2006 for permitting republication of
comments and facts made on mailing lists and printed in mainstream news
articles, and additional comment on these. As Crookes was deeply involved in
the Green Party of Canada and the comments focused solely on this involvement,
without mentioning his business activities at all, the case was seemingly
another political libel instance. The party itself had threatened to file at
least one lawsuit during the same election as the Martin-Harper incident,
against former staff member Matthew Pollesel. While the Party claimed that
suits were in response to reports in the press and Elections Canada regarding
the party's internal finances, nothing was ever filed when Pollesel's lawyer
notified the Green Party that, under Canadian libel law, an organization cannot
be libeled. The threatened suit, however, had the effect of demonstrating that
its purpose had been to suppress political comment during the election, and not
an attempt to recover any actual damages from any actual harms suffered.
Stephen Harper vs Liberal Party. PM Stephen Harper launched a lawsuit March 13,
2008 against the Liberals over statements published on the party's website
concerning the Chuck Cadman affair. This was the first time a sitting prime
minister had sued the opposition for libel. The $2.5-million suit names the
Liberal party, the Federal Liberal Agency of Canada and the unnamed author, or
authors, of the statements published on the Liberal website two weeks ago. The
articles at the centre of the lawsuit are headlined "Harper knew of
Conservative bribery" and "Harper must come clean about allegations of
Conservative Bribery". Those statements question Stephen Harper's alleged
involvement in financial "offers" made to Cadman to sway his vote in a crucial
2005 Commons showdown. The suit filed Thursday in the Ontario Superior Court of
Justice does not name Liberal Leader Stéphane Dion or MPs Ralph Goodale and
Michael Ignatieff - whom Harper also threatened to sue. Dona Cadman says that
prior to the May 2005 Budget vote, Tom Flanagan and Doug Finley, two
Conservative Party officials, offered her husband, Chuck Cadman, a million-
dollar life insurance policy in exchange for his vote to bring down the Liberal
government. An audio tape suggests then-opposition leader Stephen Harper was
not only aware of a financial offer to Chuck Cadman but gave it his personal
approval. Government plaintiffs. Common law provinces Government agencies in
Canada have also sometimes used the private defamation lawsuits against their
critics. More recently, the constitutional soundness of such actions have been
examined closely by courts in the provinces of British Columbia (2009) and
Ontario (2006) and these actions have been rejected outright on a preliminary
basis as contrary to section 2 (b) of the Canadian Charter of Rights and
Freedoms. Both the BC Civil Liberties Association and the Canadian Civil
Liberties Association were successful in bringing motions to dismiss Government
claims for alleged defamation on a preliminary basis. In the Dixon v. Powell
River case (2009 - BCSC), the mere threat of civil litigation by a local
government was deemed to have an illicit "chilling effect" on the freedom of
speech, contrary to constitutional protections. The Quebec Contextual approach
- the Rawdon test-case In the Province of Quebec, a civil law jurisdiction, the
common law approach to defamation in other provinces which would lead to the
outright rejection of ill-founded Government defamation claims on a preliminary
basis does not apply automatically. In Quebec, these matters must, in theory,
proceed to trial to determine the factual basis and context of such
allegations. In 2008, a test-case seeking to affirm that local Quebec
municipalities can indeed sue for "alleged civil defamation on a Government"
was initiated by small town of Rawdon, Quebec with funding and other material
support from the "Union des municipalités du Québec" against certain internet
bloggers and others. If successful, the mere threat of such litigation would
thus remain a tool for local municipal councils to silence and intimidate
critics, where such actions would be strictly prohibited in every other
Canadian province. Even before getting to trial, a Superior Court judge in
Quebec issued an unprecedented interim injunction "not to defame the
Municipality of Rawdon pending suit." This unfathomable injunction became the
object of much criticism by academics, the press, Canadian and other civil
liberties groups who note that "freedom of expression, freedom of information,
and freedom of the press cannot be said to co-exist with any such judicial
interim order". The Quebec Court of Appeal is set to address the lawfulness of
any such an interim order in February 2010. Quebec-based newspapers and the
Canadian Civil Liberties Association have intervened in the matter. The Quebec
Court of Appeal may then determine the scope of Quebec's new anti-SLAPP
legislation. Government’s can't sue ! See Halton Hills v. Kerouac, O.J. No.
1473 (S.C.J.) The Superior Court of Justice of Ontario struck the a claim of
alleged defamation brought by the Town of Halton Hills. “It is in the very
nature of a democratic government itself that precludes government from
responding to criticism by means of defamation actions. . . Governments are
accountable to the people through the ballot box, and to judges or juries in
courts of law. When a government is criticized, its recourse is in the public
domain, not the court. . . . Litigation is a form of force, and the government
must not silence its critics by force.” Aurora, Meaford, Georgina and Halton
Hills have all seen municipal governments attempt to use their resources in an
effort to sue outspoken residents who commented on political matters. Despite
the fact that governments can’t legally sue as corporations some councils
have seen fit to fund private lawsuits which appear to effectively circumvent
the intent of other efforts made to protect political free speech as a
fundamentally important cornerstone of democracy. Toronto Port Authority. In
2006 the Toronto Port Authority (a quasi-Federal Government agency) started
against a neighbourhood residents group - Community Air. The group opposed the
Port Authority's support for expanded service at the downtown Toronto City
Centre Airport. The suit claims that the agency and its executive board has
been defamed by comments posted on the advocacy groups website. "This has also
been called a SLAPP suit."
