Policy A policy is typically described as a principle or rule to guide
decisions and achieve rational outcomes. The term is not normally used to
denote what is actually done, this is normally referred to as either procedure
or protocol. Policies are generally adopted by the Board of or senior
governance body within an organization whereas procedures or protocols would be
developed and adopted by senior executive officers. Policies can assist in both
subjective and objective decision making. Policies to assist in subjective
decision making would usually assist senior management with decisions that must
consider the relative merits of a number of factors before making decisions and
as a result are often hard to objectively test e.g. work-life balance policy.
In contrast policies to assist in objective decision making are usually
operational in nature and can be objectively tested e.g. password policy. A
Policy can be considered as a "Statement of Intent" or a "Commitment". For that
reason at least, the decision-makers can be held accountable for their
"Policy". The term may apply to government, private sector organizations and
groups, and individuals. Presidential executive orders, corporate privacy
policies, and parliamentary rules of order are all examples of policy. Policy
differs from rules or law. While law can compel or prohibit behaviors (e.g. a
law requiring the payment of taxes on income), policy merely guides actions
toward those that are most likely to achieve a desired outcome. Policy or
policy study may also refer to the process of making important organizational
decisions, including the identification of different alternatives such as
programs or spending priorities, and choosing among them on the basis of the
impact they will have. Policies can be understood as political, management,
financial, and administrative mechanisms arranged to reach explicit goals. In
public corporate finance, a critical accounting policy is a policy for a firm/
company or an industry which is considered to have a notably high subjective
element, and that has a material impact on the financial statements.'" Impact.
Intended effects. The intended effects of a policy vary widely according to the
organization and the context in which they are made. Broadly, policies are
typically instituted to avoid some negative effect that has been noticed in the
organization, or to seek some positive benefit. Corporate purchasing policies
provide an example of how organizations attempt to avoid negative effects. Many
large companies have policies that all purchases above a certain value must be
performed through a purchasing process. By requiring this standard purchasing
process through policy, the organization can limit waste and standardize the
way purchasing is done. The State of California provides an example of benefit-
seeking policy. In recent years, the numbers of hybrid cars in California has
increased dramatically, in part because of policy changes in Federal law that
provided USD $1,500 in tax credits (since phased out) as well as the use of
high-occupancy vehicle lanes to hybrid owners (no longer available for new
hybrid vehicles). In this case, the organization (state and/or federal
government) created an effect (increased ownership and use of hybrid vehicles)
through policy (tax breaks, highway lanes). Unintended effects. Policies
frequently have side effects or unintended consequences. Because the
environments that policies seek to influence or manipulate are typically
complex adaptive systems (e.g. governments, societies, large companies), making
a policy change can have counterintuitive results. For example, a government
may make a policy decision to raise taxes, in hopes of increasing overall tax
revenue. Depending on the size of the tax increase, this may have the overall
effect of reducing tax revenue by causing capital flight or by creating a rate
so high that citizens are deterred from earning the money that is taxed. (See
the Laffer curve.) The policy formulation process typically includes an attempt
to assess as many areas of potential policy impact as possible, to lessen the
chances that a given policy will have unexpected or unintended consequences.
Because of the nature of some complex adaptive systems such as societies and
governments, it may not be possible to assess all possible impacts of a given
policy. Policy cycle. An eight step policy cycle is developed in detail in "The
Australian Policy Handbook" by Peter Bridgman and Glyn Davis: (now with
Catherine Althaus in its 4th edition - 5th edition in press) The Althaus,
Bridgman & Davis model is heuristic and iterative. It is intentionally
normative and not meant to be diagnostic or predictive. Policy cycles are
typically characterized as adopting a classical approach. Accordingly some
postmodern academics challenge cyclical models as unresponsive and unrealistic,
preferring systemic and more complex models. They consider a broader range of
actors involved in the policy space that includes civil society organisations,
the media, intellectuals, think tanks or [policy research institutes,
corporations, lobbyists, etc. Typologies. Policy addresses the intent of the
organization, whether government, business, professional, or voluntary. Policy
is intended to affect the 'real' world, by guiding the decisions that are made.
Whether they are formally written or not, most organizations have identified
policies. Policies may be classified in many different ways. The following is a
sample of several different types of policies broken down by their effect on
members of the organization. Distributive policies. Distributive policies
extend goods and services to members of an organization, as well as
distributing the costs of the goods/services amongst the members of the
organization. Examples include government policies that impact spending for
welfare, public education, highways, and public safety, or a professional
organization's benefits plan. Regulatory policies. Regulatory policies, or
mandates, limit the discretion of individuals and agencies, or otherwise compel
certain types of behavior. These policies are generally thought to be best
applied when good behavior can be easily defined and bad behavior can be easily
regulated and punished through fines or sanctions. An example of a fairly
successful public regulatory policy is that of a speed limit. Constituent
policies. Constituent policies create executive power entities, or deal with
laws. Constituent policies also deal with Fiscal Policy in some circumstances.
Miscellaneous policies. Policies are dynamic; they are not just static lists of
goals or laws. Policy blueprints have to be implemented, often with unexpected
results. Social policies are what happens 'on the ground' when they are
implemented, as well as what happens at the decision making or legislative
stage. The actions the organization actually takes may often vary significantly
from stated policy. This difference is sometimes caused by political compromise
over policy, while in other situations it is caused by lack of policy
implementation and enforcement. Implementing policy may have unexpected
results, stemming from a policy whose reach extends further than the problem it
was originally crafted to address. Additionally, unpredictable results may
arise from selective or idiosyncratic enforcement of policy. Types of policy
analysis include: These qualifiers can be combined, so for example you could
have a stationary-memoryless-index policy.
