Political geography Political geography is the field of human geography that is
concerned with the study of both the spatially uneven outcomes of political
processes and the ways in which political processes are themselves affected by
spatial structures. Conventionally political geography adopts a three-scale
structure for the purposes of analysis with the study of the state at the
centre, above this is the study of international relations (or geopolitics),
and below it is the study of localities. The primary concerns of the sub-
discipline can be summarised as the inter-relationships between people, state,
and territory. History. The origins of political geography lie in the origins
of human geography itself and the early practitioners were concerned mainly
with the military and political consequences of the relationships between
physical geography, state territories, and state power. In particular there was
a close association with regional geography, with its focus on the unique
characteristics of regions, and environmental determinism with its emphasis on
the influence of the physical environment on human activities. This association
found expression in the work of the German geographer Friedrich Ratzel who, in
1897 in his book "Politische Geographie", developed the concept of Lebensraum
(living space) which explicitly linked the cultural growth of a nation with
territorial expansion, and which was later used to provide academic
legitimation for the imperialist expansion of the German Third Reich in the
1930s. The British geographer Halford Mackinder was also heavily influenced by
environmental determinism and in developing his concept of the 'geopolitical
pivot of history' or heartland (first developed in 1904) he argued that the era
of sea power was coming to an end and that land based powers were in the
ascendant, and, in particular, that whoever controlled the heartland of 'Euro-
Asia' would control the world. This theory involved concepts diametrically
opposed to the ideas of Alfred Thayer Mahan about the significance of "sea
power" in world conflict. The heartland theory hypothesized the possibility of
a huge empire being created which didn't need to use coastal or transoceanic
transport to supply its military industrial complex, and that this empire could
not be defeated by the rest of the world allied against it. This perspective
proved influential throughout the period of the Cold War, underpinning military
thinking about the creation of buffer states between East and West in central
Europe. The heartland theory depicted a world divided into a "Heartland"
(Eastern Europe/Western Russia); "World Island" (Eurasia and Africa);
"Peripheral Islands" (British Isles, Japan, Indonesia and Australia) and "New
World" (The Americas). Mackinder claimed that whoever controlled the Heartland
would have control of the world. He used this warning to politically influence
events such as the Treaty of Versailles, where buffer states were created
between the USSR and Germany, to prevent either of them controlling the
Heartland. At the same time, Ratzel was creating a theory of states based
around the concepts of Lebensraum and Social Darwinism. He argued that states
were analogous to 'organisms' that needed sufficient room in which to live.
Both of these writers created the idea of a political and geographical science,
with an objective view of the world. Pre-World War II political geography was
concerned largely with these issues of global power struggles and influencing
state policy, and the above theories were taken on board by German
geopoliticians (see Geopolitik) such as Karl Haushofer who - perhaps
inadvertently - greatly influenced Nazi political theory. A form of politics
legitimated by 'scientific' theories such as a 'neutral' requirement for state
expansion was very influential at this time. The close association with
environmental determinism and the freezing of political boundaries during the
Cold War led to a considerable decline in the importance of political geography
which was described by Brian Berry in 1968 as 'a moribund backwater'. Although
in other areas of human geography a number of new approaches were invigorating
research, including quantitative spatial science, behavioural studies, and
structural Marxism, these were largely ignored by political geographers whose
main point of reference continued to be the regional approach. As a result much
political geography of this period was descriptive with little attempt to
produce generalisations from the data collected. It was not until 1976 that
Richard Muir could argue that political geography might not be a dead duck but
could in fact be a phoenix. Areas of Study. From the late-1970s onwards,
political geography has undergone a renaissance, and could fairly be described
as one of the most dynamic of the sub-disciplines today. The revival was
underpinned by the launch of the journal "Political Geography Quarterly" (and
its expansion to bi-monthly production as "Political Geography"). In part this
growth has been associated with the adoption by political geographers of the
approaches taken up earlier in other areas of human geography, for example, Ron
J. Johnston's (1979) work on electoral geography relied heavily on the adoption
of quantitative spatial science, Robert Sack's (1986) work on territoriality
was based on the behavioural approach, and Peter Taylor's (e.g. 2007) work on
World Systems Theory owes much to developments within structural Marxism.
However the recent growth in the vitality and importance of the sub-discipline
is also related to changes in the world as a result of the end of the Cold War,
including the emergence of a new world order (which as yet is only poorly
defined), and the development of new research agendas, such as the more recent
focus on social movements and political struggles going beyond the study of
nationalism with its explicit territorial basis. Recently, too, there has been
increasing interest in the geography of green politics (see, for example, David
Pepper's (1996) work), including the geopolitics of environmental protest, and
in the capacity of our existing state apparatus and wider political
institutions to address contemporary and future environmental problems
competently. Political geography has extended the scope of traditional
political science approaches by acknowledging that the exercise of power is not
restricted to states and bureaucracies, but is part of everyday life. This has
resulted in the concerns of political geography increasingly overlapping with
those of other human geography sub-disciplines such as economic geography, and,
particularly, with those of social and cultural geography in relation to the
study of the politics of place (see, for example, the books by David Harvey
(1996) and Joe Painter (1995)). Although contemporary political geography
maintains many of its traditional concerns (see below) the multi-disciplinary
expansion into related areas is part of a general process within human
geography which involves the blurring of boundaries between formerly discrete
areas of study, and through which the discipline as a whole is enriched.
