Politically exposed person PEP is an abbreviation for Politically Exposed
Person, a term that describes a person who has been entrusted with a prominent
public function, or an individual who is closely related to such a person. The
terms PEP, Politically Exposed Person and Senior Foreign Political Figure are
often used interchangeably, particularly in international fora. Although the
term PEP is not used in FinCEN’s regulations, it is to a great extent similar
to the definition of Senior Foreign Political Figure, as defined by section 312
of the USA PATRIOT Act and it is a term recognised (and defined) by the
Wolfsberg Group of eleven global banks. Neither the Financial Action Task Force
on Money Laundering (FATF) definition nor the USA PATRIOT Act definition of
this term are intended to include middle-ranking or more junior individuals in
the categories listed in the below definition or officials of local
governments. As of February 2012, the FATF definition of a PEP was revised to
include domestic PEPs. Although the true number of PEPs globally is not known,
one database of PEPs contains over 1.2 million unique profiles for PEPs. The
term Foreign Official is used by enforcement agencies relating to persons who
have similar characteristics as PEPs, but this term is used in all industries,
not just by financial institutions, and is referenced in the Foreign Corrupt
Practices Act in the United States. By virtue of their position and the
influence that they may hold, a PEP generally presents a higher risk for
potential involvement in bribery and corruption. Most financial institutions
view such clients as potential compliance risks and perform enhanced monitoring
of accounts that fall within this category. The process of screening for PEPs
is usually performed at the beginning of account opening, called initial due
diligence, and screening of accounts periodically is performed as part of
ongoing due diligence. The process of due diligence to uncover PEPs can be time
consuming and requires screening against a reputable database of known PEPs,
usually close to 1 million profiles, against the names, dates of birth,
national identification numbers and photos of clients. Heavy fines have been
imposed on financial institutions such as Riggs Bank for conducting business
with PEPs without following adequate Know Your Customer procedures and enhanced
due diligence processes. PEP-specific compliance legislation underlines the
link between corrupt politicians, money laundering and the financing of
terrorism. Since September 11, 2001, more than 100 countries have changed their
laws related to financial services regulation, with the fight against political
corruption playing a fundamental role. Despite attempts at regulation, certain
political leaders like Muammar Gaddafi and Hosni Mubarak have made news for
having frozen assets located in US banks that did not follow these processes
for these individuals. The designation “Politically Exposed Person” dates
back to the late 1990s in what was known as the “Abacha Affair.” Sani
Abacha was a Nigerian dictator who organized (with his family members and
associates) a network of massive theft of assets from the government of
Nigeria. It is believed that several billion dollars were stolen, and that the
funds were transferred to bank accounts in the United Kingdom and Switzerland.
In 2001, in an effort to recover the money, the Nigerian Government that
succeeded the Abacha Regime lodged complaints with several European agencies,
including the Federal Office of Police (FOP) of Switzerland which, in turn,
investigated close to sixty Swiss banks. In this investigation, the concept of
“Politically Exposed Person” emerged, which was later included in the 2003
United Nations Convention against Corruption. Politically exposed foreign
person or PEFP (Canada). Canadian anti-money laundering legislation requires
financial institutions to determine if clients are Politically Exposed Foreign
Persons (PEFPs). This Canadian term shows a large degree of overlap with the
politically exposed person (PEP) definition used in most other countries in the
world, and is also comparable to the "senior foreign political figure" as
outlined in the USA PATRIOT Act. The Canadian PEFP definition is: "Politically
exposed foreign person - means a person who holds or has ever held one of the
following offices or positions in or on (a) head of state or head of
government; (b) member of the executive council of government or member of a
legislature; (c) deputy minister or equivalent rank; (d) ambassador or attaché
or counsellor of an ambassador; (e) military officer with a rank of general or
above; (f) president of a state-owned company or a state-owned bank; (g) head
of a government agency; (h) judge; (i) leader or president of a political party
represented in a legislature; or (j) holder of any prescribed office or
position." The definition includes any prescribed family member of such a
person. Politically exposed foreign person or PEP (UK). (2) In paragraph (1)
(c), “partner” means a person who is considered by his national law as
equivalent to a spouse.
