Politico-media complex The politico-media complex (PMC, also referred to as the
political-media complex) is a name that has been given to the close,
systematized, symbiotic-like network of relationships between a state's
political and ruling classes, its media industry, and any interactions with or
dependencies upon interest groups with other domains and agencies, such as law
(and its enforcement through the police) and, particularly, corporations -
especially the multinationals. The term PMC is often used to name,
derogatively, the collusion between governments or individual politicians and
the media industry in an attempt to manipulate rather than inform the people.
Early media institutions. Before Johannes Gutenberg invented movable type in
1450, most information was delivered by town criers, ministers from the pulpit,
or bartenders. Town criers spread information and news including royal edicts,
police regulations, important community events and war news. These early
methods of communication were often delivered by messengers on foot, and could
be easily controlled by the ruling class. With the invention of the printing
press news began to be spread in writing. Corantos, which were semi-regular
pamphlets that reported news, are an example of the early politico-media
complex. Popular in England, corantos reported mostly foreign news, as the
royal government attempted to control what domestic news reached the masses.
Corantos eventually would become regular periodicals that were subject to less
political control, and mark one of the earlier forms of industrialized media.
Print. Global print media. The Universal Declaration of Human Rights states:
"Everyone has the right to freedom of opinion and expression; this right
includes freedom to hold opinions without interference, and impart information
and ideas through any media regardless of frontiers". Most of the international
papers present in the world today are national papers re-edited for a wider
audience. Because of this, there can be biases based on nationality. In any
publication there is some sort of bias just from what news is covered and what
stories are shown at the forefront of the publication. Although print media is
said to be struggling in the West, newspapers and magazines in second and third
world countries continue to do well. For countries in which the majority of the
population do not have ready access to the Internet or television, newspapers
and magazines are one of the few ways to get the news. However, the
independence from political influence, and dependability of newsprint is
questionable in many countries. The Reporters Without Borders Press Freedom
Index suggests that even in many first world countries the rights of the press
are not fully respected, and that the press is not completely free to
investigate or criticize the government, though the situation is far worse in
third world or politically unstable nations. The West. Newspapers and magazines
do have a back and forth between readers and journalists. Most studies show
that the print media are more likely to reinforce existing political attitudes
of the masses than change them. This makes it seem like print news is a
mouthpiece for citizens, rather than a tool to oppress them. Of course, the
media can only be a reflection of the masses if the masses are allowed to
express their views. For this, freedom of the press is necessary. One of the
more comprehensive judges of freedom of the press is Reporters Without Borders.
Every year it releases an index, drawing attention to how free the press is in
every country in the world. ‚ÄúIt is disturbing to see European democracies
such as France, Italy and Slovakia fall steadily in the rankings year after
year,‚Äù Reporters Without Borders secretary-general Jean-Fran√ßois Julliard
said at the release of this year's index. ‚ÄúEurope should be setting an
example as regards civil liberties. How can you condemn human rights violations
abroad if you do not behave irreproachably at home? The Obama effect, which has
enabled the United States to recover 16 places in the index, is not enough to
reassure us." Asia. The Communist Chinese government has claimed that Western
freedom of press is illusory because it is controlled by a small wealthy
minority. However, Reporters Without Borders ranks China's press situation as
"very serious," the worst possible ranking on their five-point scale. China's
press was ranked 168th out of 175 countries in the 2009 Freedom of the Press
Index. The Chinese government maintains the legal authority to censor the
press, and in defense of censorship claims that the Communist party in China
has the most freedom of press, since there is no wealthy minority controlling
it. The Middle East and North Africa. Middle Eastern print media is mainly paid
for by private funders, either a specific family or specific government party.
These newspapers and magazines are rather obvious in their political ties, and
clearly display the politico-media complex. Many countries in the Middle East
and Africa have harsh government restrictions as to what can be published when,
for various reasons depending on political and economic circumstances. Iran,
ranked 172 out of 175 is described as highly censored, as the Iranian
government maintains strict control over much of the media, including print.
Israel has experienced a media control crackdown as the government censors the
military action coverage, displaying how governments often limit press freedom
during times of war. According to Reporters Without Borders for 2009, Eritrea
in Northern Africa is the worst ranked country for journalism freedom,
displaying the connection between political stability and media freedom.
Eritrea is currently a one-party "transitional government" which has yet to
enact its ratified constitution. Other African countries at the bottom of the
Press Freedom Index include Syria (165) and Somalia (164). Both countries
exhibit little journalistic freedom, and are both known for their unstable
transitional governments and near constant warfare. Struggles. Where newspapers
used to represent an exclusive connection between readers and advertisers,
print media must now compete with the power of the entire Internet. For reasons
of expense, and reduced audiences, print press is described as declining. Today
a little more than half of Americans read a newspaper every day. However, 55
million newspapers are still sold daily in the United States, and newsprint
still plays a significant role in the politico-media complex. In addition to
economic struggles and readership decline, newsprint has also struggled with
losing readers' trust. Surveys have found that people tend to trust newspapers
less than other news media because they believe commercial issues and political
bias motivate journalists. Most people believe their local and national news
television stations more than their local and national newspapers. The only
news medium that people trust less than newspapers is print magazines. Some
speculation has shown that the youth today are more visually inclined, and are
therefore less likely to be influenced by written political news or propaganda.
One Pew Center study recently found that 28% of this generation read the paper
on a given day, and average only 10 minutes of reading time. Professor Thomas
Patterson concludes his study on young people and news with this insight:
"What's happened over time is that we have become more of a viewing nation than
a reading nation, and the internet is a little of both. My sense is that, like
it or not, the future of news is going to be in the electronic media, but we
don't really know what that form is going to look like." Radio. History of
political radio. The early American radio industry was composed of commercial
shipping companies that used radio for navigation, and amateur radio
enthusiasts, who built radios at home. This mixture of military, industry and
community went unregulated until the Radio Act of 1912, which required all
ships to use radio communication and keep a constant radio watch, amateur users
to be licensed, and began regulating the use of wavelengths for radio
transmissions. This act represents one of the earliest interactions between the
government and the radio media and also set a precedence for later radio
legislation, including the Radio Act of 1927, which established the Federal
Radio Commission and added further regulation to radio users, both commercial
and amateur. Government regulation increased again with the American entrance
into World War I, when President Woodrow Wilson ordered naval control of all
radio stations, and ordered that amateurs cease all radio activity. Jonathan
Reed Winkler, a noted WWI historian, says ‚ÄúIt was only during World War I
that the United States first came to comprehend how a strategic communications
network-the collection of submarine telegraph cables, and long-distance radio
stations used by a nation for diplomatic, commercial and military purposes- was
vital to the global political and economic interests of a great power in the
modern world.‚Äù After World War I radio was introduced to broader civilian
audiences when Westinghouse released the Aeriola Jr. in 1919, and the Radio
Corporation of America (RCA) released the Radiola in 1920. The Aeriola Jr. and
Radiola helped established a new channel for the politico-media complex to
enter into thousand of American homes. By 1919 the oldest licensed American
radio station, KDKA, from Pittsburgh, PA began broadcasting regular music
shows, and soon music, educational programming, sports coverage and eventually
news coverage became popular. Coverage of politics quickly caught on across the
countries, as stations began covering elections, and reporting news of
government actions. The close politico-media complex between government and
radio was finalized in 1924 when the Republican and Democratic National
Conventions were covered, and candidates made eve of election speeches, the
first instance of radio broadcasting that was meant to affect the American
political process. The radio industry's politico-media complex would only
deepen as the years passed. The numbers of radio users exploded, by 1935 about
2 in 3 American homes owned a radio. Politicians quickly learned to reach these
huge audiences. Franklin Delano Roosevelt's Fireside Chats are an excellent
example of the politico-media complex. In his series of informal broadcasts
from 1933 to 1944, Roosevelt developed a comforting rapport with the American
public. The Fireside Chats enabled the President to communicate directly to the
public through one of the most popular media outlets of the time. Politicians
would continue to use the radio in World War II, in which the radio was used
primarily for news transmissions and the spread of propaganda. One example of
radio propaganda and the politico-media complex are Iva Toguri D'Aquino, Ruth
Hayakawa, June Suyamawho, and Myrtle Lipton collectively known as Tokyo Rose.
These women hosted anti-American programming intended to lower American
soldiers' morale and illustrate the use of governments' use of the media to
influence the public, or their enemies. However, many people, such as Iva
Toguri D'Aquino and Allied prisoners of war, were forced against their will to
participate in these programs and worked hard to help Allied forces. After WWII
and throughout the Cold War era, Democratic nations used long-range radio waves
to broadcast news into countries behind the Iron Curtain or otherwise
information-compromised nations. The American international radio program, the
Voice of America, founded during World War II, became a critical part of Cold
War era "public diplomacy," which aimed to spread democratic values, and
popularize American policies abroad. In 1950, President Harry S. Truman
described the Cold War conflict as a "struggle, above all else, for the minds
of men," which the American people would win by getting "the real story across
to people in other countries." in other words, embracing the politico-media
complex and using it to influence foreign listeners. The Voice of America,
operating under the authority of the United States Information Agency,
supported programming in forty five languages, broadcasting over 400 hours of
programming a week. Programming included unbiased news coverage, musical
programs, and Special English broadcasts, which intended to help listeners
master American English. The VOA was not alone in its international
broadcasting efforts, the United States Central Intelligence Agency supported
Radio Free Europe and Radio Liberty, both propagandist radio networks intended
to incite dissent against Communism. Other nations also used international
radio as propaganda, for example, Deutsche Welle, the German international
radio program was a major broadcaster during the Cold War. By 1965 DW was
airing 848 hours of programming to the Soviet Union and abroad and reached 5%
of the USSR population weekly by 1980. Deutsche Welle's mission to ‚Äúpromote
understanding of Germany as an independent nation with its roots in European
culture and as a liberal, democratic, constitutional state based on the rule of
law.‚Äù illustrates German use of the politico-media complex. Modern political
radio. The Golden Age of Radio may have only lasted from 1935‚Äì1950, yet radio
is still an active medium in the politico-media complex. Today there is
extensive radio programming on politics. One notable example is the Rush
Limbaugh Show, which broadcasts the political commentary of Rush Limbaugh,
referred to by listeners as "America's Truth Detector," the "Doctor of
Democracy," and the "Most Dangerous Man in America." The Rush Limbaugh Show has
hosted numerous politicians, illustrating that politicians still use the radio
to affect public opinion and the political process. The Air America Media
company, provides progressive political commentary and news coverage and is
described as "most recognized progressive talk radio network, providing an
independent and unfiltered voice to a grateful listening nation." Air America
programs such as The Rachel Maddow Show, The Lionel Show, and Live in
Washington with Jack Rice discuss recordings of politicians, host politicians
as live guests, and act as a connection between the political classes and the
media. Film. National cinema. One of film's most powerful political and
sociological forms is national cinema, for which there are entire books for
individual countries and varying definitions. Films represent societies and
countries as they are or how they should and should not be. In a way, it is a
cultural gate-keeper that can influence the ideologies and behavior of
citizens. As a form of popular entertainment it thus provides a political group
or government with a powerful and dangerously imperceptible means of
maintaining control over its citizens, though it can also provide non-
governmental groups with the power to make change and galvanize the masses
(where such films are free to be produced and screened.) Nations and
ideological groups can construct and reinforce their collective identities
through film, as well as the identities of foreigners. Cultural politics. Ulf
Hedetoft has observed, "In the real world of politics and influence, certain
nationalisms, cultures, ideas and interpretations are more transnationally
powerful, assertive and successful than others. Where the less influential ones
are not necessarily less self-congratulatory, they are certainly more inward-
looking and always carry the label of national specificity." He goes on,
however, to say that these more transnationally powerful films actually become
de-nationalized as a result of its "national-cultural currency" more widely and
easily dispersed, mixing with other cultures, becoming either a "positive
admixture" to other countries' cultures and identities or a "model for
emulation." He compares national cinema that undergoes such processes to
English becoming a global lingua franca: the cultural sharing that results is
hegemonic and the globalizing process is non-symmetrical. Propaganda.
Propaganda is a way that politics can be represented and manipulated in film.
Leif Furhammar and Folke Isaksson credit Russian producers Sergei Eisenstein
and Vsevolod Pudovkin with the birth of propaganda aesthetics, for which the
underlying assumption was that by manipulating cinematic images representing
reality, they could manipulate spectators' concepts of reality. Documentaries
can be an even more effective form of propaganda than other genre films because
the form of representation claims to mirror reality, making the manipulation of
an audience that much more obscured. Such British newsreels as "The Battle of
the Somme" of World War I were propaganda because they only showed the war from
their own perspective, though it can be argued as being more honest and
objective than more recent war documentaries (for they were edited without
adjustments for dramatic or epic effect. Their photographers remained on their
front lines, therefore presenting at least some truth. According to Furhammar
and Isaksson, it was Russian filmmakers who were the "masters of montage" who
discovered film's power to create convincing illusion with cutting, rhythmic
editing, and a didactic approach. When sound became possible, documentaries
could be all the more politically powerful with the use of speakers' voices and
music. In Nazi Germany, newsreels were just as important as feature films,
while in Fascist Italy propaganda was mostly limited to documentaries. A
comparison of the first three installments of the American series "Why We
Fight" and the Nazi documentary "Sieg im Westen" ("Victory in the West")
demonstrates how convincing even two opposing interpretations of the same
events can be. The first covers years in a couple of hours but its density
disguises any omission of truth while the latter manages to depict war with
real images but without blood or death. The same is found in documentaries
about the Spanish Civil War. Falsification of political matter in documentaries
can be created by lifting shots of events other than the one being dealt with
and including them in the film so that they appear to be a part of the
"reality" it claims to represent. The House Committee on Un-American
Activities, for example, did this with "Operation Abolition" in 1960 and Nazi
newsreels depicted scenes of the Allies' defeat at Dieppe as real scenes from
the Normandy invasion just a few days afterward to convince audience of the
Reich's success. Audience's political affiliations can also be manipulated by
actually staging the ostensibly real events as the 1944 Nazi picture "The
F√ºhrer Gives the Jews a Town" did. World War II propaganda persisted 30 years
after Dachau and Auschwitz such as in the thinly disguised fascist Italian film
"The Night Porter" (1974). The film sought to legitimize the Nazis' genocide,
while glorifying sadism, brutality, and machismo. What amazes Henry Giroux, as
he explains in "Breaking into the Movies," is that such blatant ideological
messages were ignored by critics and the general public. That society may be
incapable of testing the present against the past has implications for post-
industrial oppression in the West and the strategies for resisting it. Despite
the writings of Antonio Gramsci, Herbert Marcuse, and Paulo Freire, the
majority of Americans (at least) do not recognize how important class hegemony,
or cultural domination, is in nations where populations are kept obedient to
governments through ideological means. He argues, "We are not only victims in
the political and material sense, but are also tied emotionally and
intellectually to the prevailing ruling-class norms and values." Though feature
forms of propaganda lack documentaries' ostensible authenticity they can retain
political power because directors' resources are less limited and they can
create the reality of the film. They further compensate for lack of credibility
with intensity. Anti-politics in film. Despite the strong patriotism and
nationalism of Americans, overtly political films have never been popular in
the U.S. while films that have represented politics inconspicuously (such as in
the form of propaganda) have remained popular. Besides Frank Capra, no other
major American filmmaker has seriously presented central themes of citizenship,
participation, and responsibility in civic life amidst the complexities and
corruption of the political world. While Capra sought to "develop a positive
American cinematic vocabulary for political action" of the individual, as
Charles Lindholm and John A. Hall describe, he ultimately failed. Capra's films
are characterized by the same basic formula according to which the fundamental
American values of fairness and honesty are challenged by the corruption and
cruelty of politics. Ironically, Ronald Reagan later extensively quoted the
speech made by Mr. Deeds in "Mr. Deeds Goes to Town" (1936) in which he
expresses his disgust with the complexities of politics and calls for
individual goodness. In his next film "Mr. Smith Goes to Washington", (1939)
Capra reinforces the integrity and decency of the everyman who can transcend
politics despite the power and crookedness of special interest groups. After
the hero of "John Doe" realizes his need for others, he discovers and attempts
to expose a fascist bidder for presidency planning to take advantage of his
club support. He fails, however, in the midst of a violent mob with the
depressing conclusion that the American public is a credulous crowd,
susceptible to manipulation until the John Doe club members come begging his
forgiveness and convince him to return to lead them. The ending of "John Doe"
was unsuccessful amongst audiences and critics, discouraging any more political
films for Capra and no films of merit after "It's a Wonderful Life". Capra's
ultimate fall from filmmaking and his advice that all American filmmakers
should forget politics if they do not want to cut themselves in half signify
the challenge filmmakers face when they attempt to criticize politics. Lindholm
and Hall observe that "the problems that defeated Capra have also undercut
later attempts by American filmmakers to portray the complex relationship
between individualism and citizenship in the United States" and claim that
Hollywood has instead adopted the paranoia of politics that Capra had tried to
overcome. Consequently, political films in the U.S. have followed a trend of
focusing on the flawed character of leaders, such a films like "Citizen Kane"
(1940) and "Nixon" (1995). Otherwise, they show the corruption of power, such
as in "The Candidate" (1972) and "Primary Colors" (1998). Other films, like "A
Face in a Crowd" (1957) and "All the King's Men" (1949), follow "John Doe'"s
warning. "JFK" (1991) and "The Manchurian Candidate" (1962), on the other hand,
are based on the premise that democracy is an illusion and Americans are the
ignorant pawns of various conspiracies involving, for example, the collusion
between the government and the media. The depoliticizing effect of cinema.
While films can be overtly political they can also depoliticize and
oversimplify what is inherently complex, such as class struggle. Film, as it
contributes to mass culture, has been criticized for reducing the concept of
class to stereotypes and predictable formulas that promote superficial
understandings of ideology. Such misrepresentation and the ignorance that it
promotes and perpetuates makes audiences and citizens vulnerable to
manipulative tactics of politicians in a reality that is complex. One of the
exceptions to oversimplification and ideological flattening in cinema is "Norma
Rae" (1979), a film that presents a truer representation than is conventional
of the complexities and politics of the working-class struggle and culture at
the level of everyday life. Television. Role of television in United States
presidential elections. The role of television within the politico-media
complex has only become more powerful its growth has led to such a
transformation in political campaigns that presidential election campaigns now
center on it. Extensive studies have shown that mass media have always
influenced the political process, but never more so than with the innovation of
the television. As the most popular means by which voters obtain information on
candidates and the news in general, television is a powerful means by which
political groups can influence the public. This transformation first kicked off
in the early 1960s, when newscast programs were increased to a thirty-minute
programs, which allowed for greater news coverage and capacity. This expanded
time slot allowed more focus to be given to presidential candidates, and
network news soon became the center of national politics coverage. Because
newscasts were national, the aired political campaigns were able to impact
viewers across the country, enlarging the realm of influence. Rick Shenkman
also analyzes the media‚Äôs impact on politics in his book, "Just How Stupid
Are We?: Facing the Truth About the American Voter", and observes that although
American voters have gained significant political power over the last 50 years,
their knowledge of politics and world affairs have decreased, which makes them
more vulnerable to manipulation. Shenkman finds that this ignorance stems from
the fact that many Americans rely solely on television newscasts for their
information on politics and political campaigns. This means that Americans
primarily get their information on political candidates from their 30-second
campaign commercials, which is very insufficient when considering how vast a
politician's campaign actually is. In the past, Americans' primary source of
information on politics was from the newspapers, which provided much greater
information and detail on the stands of politicians. The great emphasis on
passive entertainment in today‚Äôs competitive, capitalistic society has led
the general public to be far less inclined to sit down and study a newspaper or
an online article to determine what is going on in politics. Instead, they
obtain their information from what they are able to see in the media
entertainment. This method of information gathering has led to the superficial
politics and ignorance of voters in America today. Shenkman demonstrates how
the political-media complex is reinforced as "politicians have repeatedly
misled voters" by "dumbing down of American politics via marketing, spin
machines, and misinformation." Television's role within the politico-media
complex is so powerful that its news media can set a nation‚Äôs political
agenda by focusing public attention on whatever issue network producers and
reporters choose to make the key public issues by broadcasting them. Through
this power of prioritization, the news media play a significant role in
determining the nation‚Äôs political reality; they provide the political
information that will be regarded as fact and indicate to viewers how much
importance to attach to each topic according to how much air time they dedicate
to a given issue and the emphasis they place on it. For example, television
news is able to offer cues on topic salience by deciding what the opening story
on the newscast will be or by altering the length of time devoted a story. When
these cues are repeated broadcast after broadcast, day after day, they are able
to effectively communicate the amount of importance broadcasters want each
topic to have. This illustrates how the news media is able to set the agenda
for the public‚Äôs attention. Political influence on religion via television.
In his book, ‚ÄúPolitics After Television: Religious Nationalism and the
Reshaping of the Public in India,‚Äù Arvind Rajagopal examines Hindu
nationalism during the late 1980s and 1990s in India. Rajagopal analyzed the
role of the media in the public‚Äôs construction of national, cultural, class,
and regional identity. More specifically, he studied the hegemonic role of the
Ram Janmabhumi movement and how the Ram project was played out on Indian
national television. In his study, Rajagopal found that the Ram project played
a role in ‚Äúshaping discourses about national and cultural identities through
the 1990s to the present‚Äù in India. Rajagopal investigated the cultural and
political economy of television in contemporary India. His discussion of
television revolves around the industrial and cultural politics of the
serialized epic Ramayan. The serial epic, which generated unprecedented
viewership, was based on the epic story of the Hindu god Ram and aired on
Doordarshan, India's state-run television. Rajagopal made the argument that the
national telecast of the Hindu religious epic Ramayan during the late 1980s
provided much of the ideological groundwork for the launch of the Ram
Janmabhumi movement. To defend his argument, Rajagopal stated that
‚Äútelevision profoundly changes the context of politics‚Äù (p.¬ 24). The epic
was broadcast on national television, sponsored by the ruling Congress
government. Rajagopal argues that the Congress assumed that the mere
sponsorship of the epic would aid its electoral future by bringing in the
majority Hindu vote. Quite the opposite happened, however. Rather, it was the
electorally weak Hindu nationalist political body, the Bharatiya Janata Party
(BJP), that benefited from the serial's popularity. The BJP did so by avoiding
the media effects framework attempted by Congress and instead articulating a
complex relationship between the televised Hindu epic and its own Hindu
nationalist beliefs. The BJP mobilized the public around the symbol of Ram, the
lead figure of the serial, but strategically reworked the symbol via the Ram
Janmabhumi movement to articulate cultural authenticity, national belonging,
and a renewed sense of national purpose and direction. Articulating the temple
restoration project within its electoral promise, the BJP, not surprisingly,
went on to form the national government in the next general election (p.¬ 43).
This illustrates that, as Rajagopal argues, television is capable of profoundly
impacting politics. Central to the BJP‚Äôs success was the party‚Äôs strategic
use of using both the media and the market, by creating merchandise such as
stickers, buttons, and audio tapes centering on the key figure of the Ram.
Rajagopal argues that the televised epic also dealt with the tension between
the past and the present at many levels. This can be seen in the reworking of
the epic story of the Ram to fit the conventions of modern commercial
television. In addition to this, the epic was laced with twenty minutes of
advertising both before and after the program, which helped the serial to
reconstruct the past through technologies of the present. This key fact
highlights the power of advertisements in the media. Television and politics
around the world. In the ‚ÄúDramas of Nationhood: The Politics of Television in
Egypt,‚Äù Lila Abu-Lughod suggests that a nation‚Äôs television should be
studied to answer larger questions about the culture, power, and modern self-
fashioning of that nation. Abu-Lughod focuses on the Egyptian nation and
investigates the elements of developmentalist ideology and the dreams of
national progress that dominated Egyptian television in the past. She analyzes
the nation‚Äôs television broadcasts and highlights the attempt to depict
authentic national culture and the intentional strategies for fighting
religious extremism. The main cultural form that binds together the Egyptian
nation is, surprisingly, television serials. These serials are melodramatic
programs, similar to American soap operas but more closely tied to political
and social issues than their Western counterparts. Their contents reflect the
changing dynamics of Islam, gender relations, and everyday life in the Middle
Eastern nation of Egypt, while at the same time trying to influence and direct
these changes. Another group who studied the impact of television on politics
included Holli Semetko and Patti Valenburg. In their studies, they analyzed the
framing of press and television news in European politics. For reader
clarification, they provided the best working definitions of news frames as
defined from a wide range of sources. News frames are "conceptual tools which
media and individuals rely on to convey, interpret and evaluate information"
(Neuman et al., 1992, p.¬ 60). They set the parameters "in which citizens
discuss public events" (Tuchman, 1978, p.¬ IV). They are "persistent selection,
emphasis, and exclusion" ( Gitlin, 1980, p.¬ 7). Framing is selecting "some
aspects of a perceived reality" to enhance their salience "in such a way as to
promote a particular problem definition, causal interpretation, moral
evaluation, and/or treatment recommendation" ( Entman, 1993, p.¬ 53). Frames
are to help audiences "locate, perceive, identify, and label" the flow of
information around them (Goffman, 1974, p.¬ 21) and to "narrow the available
political alternatives"(Tuchman, 1978, p.¬ 156).‚Äù In other words, news frames
act to direct the attention of viewers and promote a specific issue or idea.
News frames have what is known as the framing effect. Framing effects are when
relevant attributes of a message¬ ‚Äì such as its organization, content, or
structure¬ ‚Äì make particular thoughts applicable, resulting in their
activation and use in evaluations ( Price et al., 1997, p.¬ 486). Framing has
shown to have large effects on people‚Äôs perceptions, and has also been shown
to shape public perceptions of political issues or institutions. Like agenda-
setting research, framing analysis focuses on the relationship between public
policy issues in the news and the public perceptions of these issues. However,
framing analysis "expands beyond agenda-setting research into what people talk
or think about by examining how they think and talk about issues in the news"
( Pan & Kosicki, 1993, p.¬ 70, emphasis in the original).‚Äù The results of
Semetko and Valenburg‚Äôs research indicate that the attribution of
responsibility frame was most commonly employed by the news. This particular
type of framing focuses on making viewers feel a sense of role responsibility,
in which they feel bound to perform whatever duties are attached to the given
role, and feel a sense of moral accountability for not taking on the role.
After understanding the attribution of responsibility frame, it is easy to see
why it is such a powerful tool to news programs, as it evokes strong emotions
within the viewer. Internet. Impact on political media. The Internet -
particularly in the form of the World Wide Web (the Web) - has given the world
a tool for education, communication, and negotiation in political information
and political roles and its use by individuals and organizations has increased
and continues to increase, greatly. This rapid increase can be compared to the
boom of the television and its impact on politics as a form of media. The
Internet also opens up a world of commentary and criticism which in turn allows
for new and better ideas to circulate amongst many people. It gives
multidirectional communication, which allows people to stay in connection with
organizations or people associated with politics more easily. However, there
are many controversies regarding the Internet with respect to the PMC as it
(the Internet) can encourage and facilitate the practice of providing bits of
information extracted from a far wider context or biased information, which
leads to public cynicism toward the media. The relative ease of entry into
publishing through Internet/Web channels yields opportunities, for those so
inclined, to become, in the extreme, one-person contributors/players, with a
foot on both sides of the fence - politics "and" media - in the PMC (and
sometimes information, placed into the public domain through such channels,
about a political entity (politician, party etc.), being perhap less than
flattering, may be 'adjusted' by one or more "other" entities (individuals,
organizations etc.) with publishing identities that barely, if at all, conceal
a relationship with the political entity in question). For example, Wikipedia
itself is a major global channel, currently being around the eighth most
visited website, in 2009 found its objectivity being compromised at the highest
levels with a 'conflict of interest' of a sitting member of the influential
(ArbCom). It was shown that David Boothroyd - a serving Labour Party Councillor
for Westminster City - had gained a seat on the Arbitration Committee under the
pseudonym of the Wikipedia account 'Sam Blacketer' and also, under this name,
had gone on to make controversial edits to the Wikipedia entry for the then
Leader of the Opposition, now Conservative Prime Minister of the United
Kingdom, David Cameron. Boothroyd was also found to have operated earlier,
before his appointment to the Arbitration Committee, but while an
administrator, other cotemporary accounts - a practice in Wikipedia known as "
- enabling the practitioner to give undue weight, through appearing as
different identities, to a particular point of view as opposed to representing
a neutral point of view (). Given Wikipedia's presence and influence in the
world, the 'affair' attracted main stream media (MSM), and other new media
attention nationally and internationally, contributing damage to Wikipedia's
standing along the way. Boothroyd was forced to step down from the Arbitration
Committee, although he claimed he had already asserted his intention to resign.
There is also, however, a positive aspect on politics and the media on the
Internet in that it gives us the ability to use multiple forms of deliberation
and decision making structures. The advancements of the Internet‚Äôs impact on
politics are notable. This form of media has more current information than
others since it is constantly being updated. Another advancement is its
capacity to have extensive information in one place, like voting records,
periodicals, press releases, opinion polls, policy statements, speeches, etc.
Obtaining a comprehensive understanding of an election, for example, is more
convenient than it has been in the past. Political Information available on the
internet covers every major activity of American politics. Users, nonetheless,
remain susceptible to bias, especially on websites that represent themselves as
objective sources. E-mail has achieved a large scale of usage amongst numerous
levels of government, political groups, and even media companies as a means of
communicating with the public and thus plays a significant role in the
political-media complex. The boom of e-mail hit the Internet and the public in
the mid 1990s as a way to keep in touch with family and friends. Different
governments got a hold of this technology, and in 1993 the United States
Congress and the White House were using this as communication as a means of
communicating with general public. During the Clinton administration a director
for e-mail and electronic publishing was appointed and by the summer of 1993,
the White House was receiving 800 e-mails per day. In order to deal with the
influx of e-mail a more sophisticated system was put in. When an e-mail is sent
there is a standard form and is easily categorized. In a six month period, at
one point, there were half a million e-mails sent to the president and vice
president. Elections. The Internet had given people a great resource for
information about elections like: candidates, issues, and a place to give and
receive opinions and ideas about elections. As the use of the Internet
increases, so do the relationship with candidates and their issues. The ability
of the candidates to reach as many people as they can through the Internet is
becoming a terrific resource in their campaigns. The United States Presidential
campaign in 1996 between sitting-President Bill Clinton and Bob Dole was one of
the first campaigns to utilize the Internet on a national level. With so many
campaigns using the Internet it raises a significant amount of money in a
shorter period of time then with any other method. The web sites are set up
like advertising sites. There are links to click on to watch ads, information
and background on the candidate, photos from the campaign trail, schedules,
donation links, etc. E-mail gives a great low-cost way of connecting with the
campaign trail and voters. During the 2008 United States Presidential election
between John McCain and Barack Obama, the Internet was extensively utilized by
both candidates. Facebook, an Internet social network, was used heavily to give
people the ability to support their views and share information with their
friends. Both sent out messages daily to promote themselves and the issues at
hand, for leverage against the other candidate. Discussion forums. Blogging is
a type of website, usually maintained by an individual with regular entries of
commentary, descriptions of events, or other material such as graphics or
video. Entries are commonly displayed in reverse-chronological order. Blogging
started to become popular at the start of the millennium, and was used mostly
by highly educated, highly paid, males. Around 2004 blogging became more main
stream and was typically used for political interaction. Many political
campaigns use this as a stake in monitoring blogs and actively using them to
spread information about their candidate. The Internet creates a space in which
people can voice their opinions and discuss political issues under the
protection of anonymity. Some discussion forums are actually groups or
organizations that set up discussion for a specific purpose about one issue or
person in politics. Some problems with discussion forums include the lack of
personal contact, which allows people not to take responsibility for posts.
Many times online discussions lead to name calling and rude comments. Bias is
another issue of online discussion forums because many websites attract like-
minded individuals, making it less likely for alternative perspectives to be
introduced. Electronic government. An e-Government is a government that is
inter-networked through digital technology for mass media distribution and
communication for voters, taxpayers, schools, hospitals, etc. This is a radical
new way to transform government programs by closing the gap between distance
and time. This idea gives a more cost effective and convenient way to form
programs around the needs of citizens rather than civil servants. When PMCs
begin to fracture. In perhaps what is the beginning of the first major
reappraisal of the relationship between a political elite/class and the media
in a major modern Western PMC, with respect to the enervation of representative
political and legal processes and the consequent erosion of and dangers to the
public interest in a Western democracy, is captured in excerpts from three
contributions to an emergency three hour debate conducted by members of
parliament (MPs) in the Parliament of the United Kingdom on the afternoon of
the 6 July 2011. House of Commons Hansard Debates for 06 July 2011, Phone
Hacking Chris Bryant, MP. [http://www.publications.parliament.uk/pa/cm201011/
cmhansrd/cm110706/debtext/110706-0002.htm/#column_1540 1540 "Emergency debate
under the Standing Order No. 24". House of Commons Hansard Debates for 06 July
2011, Phone Hacking Zac Goldsmith, MP. [http://www.publications.parliament.uk/
pa/cm201011/cmhansrd/cm110706/debtext/110706-0002.htm/#column_1569 1569
"Emergency debate under the Standing Order No. 24". House of Commons Hansard
Debates for 06 July 2011, Phone Hacking Tom Brake, MP. [http://
www.publications.parliament.uk/pa/cm201011/cmhansrd/cm110706/debtext/110706-
0003.htm/#column_1580 1580 "Emergency debate under the Standing Order No. 24".
These comments refer to the apparent effects of the relationships between the
members of (the UK) parliament and those that form the UK Government, the
Metropolitan police and News International (NI subsidiary of News Corporation )
and the influence, expressed as malign, of the latter organization on the
former two institutions. The debate was precipitated by the type of some of the
information procurement methods found to have been used by a major British
Sunday newspaper (the title is now shut down) ‚Äì the "News of the World" (was
owned by NI). Now known as the (News International) ‚Äòphone hacking affair‚Äô,
the consequences for the British PMC and NI (as part of the world‚Äôs second
largest media empire after The Walt Disney Company) are likely to be unfolding
for some considerable time as new sectors of vulnerable members of British
society subjected to the particular malicious practice are brought to light.
Criticisms. Naming (as a 'complex') points of intersection and apparent
cooperative benefit, to some degree, of diverse, nominally independent, areas
of public faced activity puts us in danger of missing a much more fundamental
and general insight according to linguist and dissident Noam Chomsky. Such
identifiable collaborations/collusions are almost to be expected and are a
natural outcome to the working of the 'industrial system,' as it has evolved in
the West (and then exported to the rest of the world in so-called
'globalization'), having the state (taxpayer) funded sector at its core (that
is as opposed to the contemporary 'conventional wisdom' with a hard and fast
distinction between the state and private sectors - the economist John Kenneth
Galbraith has also argued that the 'two sectors' represent an 'innocent fraud')
and its necessary (but unstated) main reason for existence: the 'socialization
of costs and the privatization of profits' (corporate welfare). Chomsky
discusses the so-called 'military-industrial complex' (MIC) and argues that its
embedded behavior is not just about the 'military' but is about ensuring that
the modern economy, of which that behavior (emptied of particularly military
connotations) is at the heart, is nothing much to do with freedom (of choice)
or democracy either. Using the technology of computing as a prime example,
Chomsky notes that about the time Dwight Eisenhower was making his speech about
the putative MIC, institutions like Harvard University and his own,
Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT), were working, using government
funds (taxpayer dollars), to reduce roomfulls of machinery into a package that
could be sold as a mainframe (computer). Reaching that point, project heads
began to leave to set up manufacturers. Similarly, established notables like
International Business Machines (IBM) were using public funds to advance their
technology from punch card sorting to advanced general purpose computers of
their own around the beginning of the 1960s. None of this was about 'consumer
choice' since the work was being done for government organs such as the
National Security Agency (NSA). It was about two and a half decades, the early
1980s, before these 'private tyrannies' were in a position to take all the
results of public funding and sell them back, at considerable profit, to the
very people who had already paid for them. Observing the prophets of the 'free
market,' such as Alan Greenspan, enthusing about the 'marvels of
entrepreneurial initiative and consumer choice,' Chomsky asserts, in contrast,
that the contribution here during the 'costly and risky period of development'
was precisely nil, almost the entire burden, without any (democratic)
consultation, being placed on the taxpayer (socialized). Chomsky points to the
same script being followed, now, in areas such as biotechnology and
neuroscience and why, from the past, we now have such 'goods' as the Internet,
telecommunications, lasers etc. While it may be 'nice' to have computers (or be
able to command an aircraft by 'thought') the essential point is, assuming
there is some real commitment to freedom (of choice) and democracy in the
elites and structures of power, given a public, such as those in the 1950s, to
ask what they want out of their taxes. Computers in twenty-five years or health
care, good schools and jobs today ? This assumes their being informed, in good
faith, of matters. Chomsky summarizes that anybody/anything deeply embedded in
the interests of the industrial system, with power (such as the corporations),
is 'deathly afraid' of admitting such a state of affairs and that attitudes
must be manipulated towards the 'appropriate' outcomes. Such manipulation is
often best done in an atmosphere of fear and under pretence of external threat.
Edward S. Herman and Chomsky, together, advanced a 'propaganda model' to
accomplish this ", showing the ways in which power and money filter the news
and enable governments and dominant private interests to integrate the behavior
of the citizenry into the structures of the industrial system. Earlier,
political writer George Orwell had noted, "All the papers that matter live off
their advertisements and the advertisers exercise an indirect censorship over
the news." ('Indirect censorship' obviates the need for obvious coercion.) This
observation is at the heart of two of the filters that structure the propaganda
model: advertising (of corporations) as the primary source of income for the
mass media and the dependence upon information provided by government, business
and 'experts' approved and paid for by these primary sources. Herman and
Chomsky see the ideas as being cast as testable hypotheses such that they can
be held in the light of corroboration through empirical evidence and not merely
as assertions out of the blue. Examination of contemporary developments in the
context of the hypotheses is encouraged. Thus the general and fundamental
understanding of the working of the industrial system in the modern economy,
'socialization of costs and privatization of profits,' is met with
corroboration from the heart of the market system (often called the free
market) - a contemporary and 'polite' euphemism for capitalism according to
Galbraith - for example, in the near collapse of the global banking system,
beginning in 2008, spreading in 2011 to the areas of sovereign debt, requiring
almost constant appeal to the 'banker of last resort' - the taxpayer. Under
debt restructuring, 'good debt' is returned to private hands as soon as
possible and the taxpayer is left saddled with the 'bad debt' which is probably
unrecoverable. The shadow that the corporations cast on the media through
advertising (corroboration of Herman and Chomsky's propaganda model filters
through advertising) was illustrated in the closure of News International's 168
year old flagship Sunday title, the "News of the World", when major advertisers
boycotted the paper as a consequence of the 'phone hacking scandal' - the
corporations, understandably, not wishing to be seen associated with a paper
whose production had been based on frequent engagement in serious criminal
activity.(See also When PMCs begin to fracture) From Chomsky's perspective,
then, whatever set of interactions is being named by the term 'politico-media
complex' (PMC) simply instantiates the propaganda model to manufacture consent
in the service of the industrial system.
