Political campaign staff Political campaign staff are the people who formulate
and implement the strategy needed to win an election. Many people have made
careers out of working full-time for campaigns and groups that support them,
but in other campaigns much of the staff might be unpaid volunteers.
(Information on political consultants, people who do not work for the campaign
full-time but still provide assistance in the form of advice and creative
expertise, are discussed in the political consultants article). This article
provides a generic description of a campaign's staff and organization.
Different campaigns have different structures. Structure of a campaign.
Campaigns are usually overseen by a campaign manager. The campaign manager
coordinates the campaign making sure that the rest of the staff and the
campaign's consultants are focused effectively on winning the election. In
small local campaigns, the campaign manager will often be the only paid staff
member and will be responsible for every aspect of the campaign that is not
covered by the candidate or volunteers. In larger campaigns, such as a
presidential campaign, hundreds of staff members will cover the required tasks.
While campaign managers are often the lead strategists in local campaigns, in
the United States larger campaigns hire consultants to serve as strategists and
the campaign manager focuses mostly on coordinating the campaign staff.
Campaign managers will often have deputies who oversee various aspects of the
campaign at a closer level. Directly below the campaign manager on the
organization chart is the deputy campaign manager and directly below them are
department directors who coordinate specific aspects of the campaign. These
staff members often have deputies as well. Below the department level,
campaigns vary widely in their structure. On larger campaigns, there will be
various coordinators for certain functions within each department. For example,
within the fundraising department, there might be a staff member who focuses
only on direct mail fundraising. At the bottom of the totem pole are the
interns and volunteers who perform the least glamorous tasks of the campaign.
These can include addressing envelopes, entering data into databases, and
canvassing voters on behalf of the campaign. Departments and their respective
purposes. Field department. The field department focuses on the "on-the-ground"
organizing that is required in order to personally contact voters through
canvassing, phone calls, and building local events. Voter contact helps
construct and clean the campaign's voter file in order to help better target
voter persuasion and identify which voters a campaign most wants to bring out
on election day. Field is generally also tasked with running local "storefront"
campaign offices as well as organizing phone banks and staging locations for
canvasses and other campaign events. On the state-wide level, field departments
are generally organized by geography with an overall state-wide field director
who oversees the efforts of several regional field directors who in turn manage
several local offices. In addition to voter persuasion and voter
identification, field staff will often provide information for the campaign
headquarters as to what is going on in the communities they work in. Field
staffers are the primary liaison between the campaign and local influentials
such as interest group leaders and prominent community activists. Field
departments are also often primarily responsible for the local distribution of
"swag" i.e. lawn signs, bumper stickers, buttons, and other such materials.
Political / Field department. Researching and developing a set of policies
requires a large team to research and write each plank. Researchers also
provide information to the campaign on issues and the backgrounds of candidates
(including the candidate they work for) in order to be aware of skeletons in
the various candidates' closets. The latter practice is known as opposition
research. On smaller campaigns this is often folded into the communications
department. Fundraising department. The finance department coordinates the
campaign's fundraising operation and ensures that the campaign always has the
money it needs to operate effectively. The techniques employed by this campaign
vary based on the campaign's needs and size. Small campaigns often involve
casual fundraising events and phone calls from the candidate to donors asking
for money. Larger campaigns will include everything from high-priced sit-down
dinners to e-mail messages to donors asking for money. Legal department. The
legal department makes sure that the campaign is in compliance with the law and
files the appropriate forms with government authorities. In Britain and other
Commonwealth countries, such as Canada and India, each campaign must have an
official agent, who is legally responsible for the campaign and is obligated to
make sure the campaign follows all rules and regulations. This department will
also be responsible for all financial tracking, including bank reconciliations,
loans and backup for in-kind donations. They are generally required to keep
both paper and electronic files. Small campaigns will often have one person
responsible for financial disclosure while larger campaigns will have dozens of
lawyers and treasurers making sure that the campaign's activities are legal.
After the election, the compliance and legal department must still respond to
audit requests and, when required, debt retirement. Technology department. The
technology department designs and maintains campaign technology such as voter
file, websites, and social media. While local (County, City, Town, or Village)
campaigns might have a volunteers who know how to use computers, State and
National campaigns will have Information Technology professionals across the
state or country handling everything from websites to blogs to databases.
Scheduling and advance department. The scheduling and advance department makes
sure that the candidate and campaign surrogates are effectively scheduled so as
to maximize their impact on the voters. This department also oversees the
advance people who arrive at events before the candidate to make sure
everything is in order. Often, this department will be a part of the field
department. a)manages the candidate's personal and campaign schedule b)manages
the field and advance team schedules c)gathers important information about all
events the campaign and candidate will attend Candidates and other members of
the campaign must bear in mind that only one person should oversee the details
of scheduling. Fluid scheduling is one of the many keys to making a profound
impact on voters.
