Political compass The political compass is a multi-axis model, used by the
website of the same name, to label or organize political thought on two
dimensions. In its selection and representation of these two dimensions, it is
similar to the Nolan Chart and Pournelle Chart. The term "Political Compass" is
claimed as a trademark by the British website, The Political Compass, which
uses responses to a set of 61 propositions to rate political views on two axes:
"Economic" (Left-Right) and "Social" (Authoritarian-Libertarian). The site also
includes an explanation of the two-axis system they use, a few charts which
place various past and present political figures according to their estimation,
and reading lists for each of the main political orientations. Political model.
The underlying theory of the Political Compass is that political views may be
better measured along two separate and independent axes. The Economic (Left-
Right) axis measures one's opinion of how the economy should be run: "left" is
defined as the view that the economy should be run by a cooperative collective
agency (which can mean the state, but can also mean a network of communes),
while "right" is defined as the view that the economy should be left to the
devices of competing individuals and organizations. The other axis
(Authoritarian-Libertarian) measures one's political opinions in a social
sense, regarding a view of the appropriate amount of personal freedom:
"libertarianism" is defined as the belief that personal freedom should be
maximised, while "authoritarianism" is defined as the belief that authority and
tradition should be obeyed. The labels given to the different fields and axes
on the compass are based on long-standing European and Commonwealth
terminology, which can be different to those used in the politics of the United
States. A number of other multi-axis models of political thought exist. Some
are based on similar axes to the Political Spectrum. A similar chart appeared
in "Floodgates of Anarchy" by Albert Meltzer. Politicalcompass.org. The
Politicalcompass.org website does not reveal the people behind it, beyond the
fact that it seems to be based in the UK. According to the "New York Times",
the site is the work of Wayne Brittenden, a political journalist. According to
Tom Utley, writing in the "Daily Telegraph", the site is connected to One World
Action, a charity founded by Glenys Kinnock, and to Kinnock herself. An early
version of the site was published on One World Action's web server. The website
does not explain its scoring system in detail and some writers have criticised
its validity while others have treated it more as a form of entertainment than
a rigorous analysis.
