Power (social and political) Power is frequently defined by political
scientists as the ability to influence the behavior of others with or without
resistance. The term authority is often used for power perceived as legitimate
by the social structure. Power can be seen as evil or unjust, but the exercise
of power is accepted as endemic to humans as social beings. In the corporate
environment, power is often expressed as upward or downward. With downward
power, a company's superior influences subordinates. When a company exerts
upward power, it is the subordinates who influence the decisions of the leader
(Greiner & Schein, 1988). Often, the study of power in a society is referred to
as politics. The use of power need not involve coercion (force or the threat of
force). At one extreme, it more closely resembles what everyday English-
speakers call "influence", although some authors make a distinction between
power and influence – the means by which power is used (Handy, C. 1993
"Understanding Organisations"). Much of the recent sociological debate on power
revolves around the issue of the enabling nature of power. A comprehensive
account of power can be found in Steven Lukes "Power: A Radical View" where he
discusses the three dimensions of power. Thus, power can be seen as various
forms of constraint on human action, but also as that which makes action
possible, although in a limited scope. Much of this debate is related to the
works of the French philosopher Michel Foucault (1926–1984), who, following
the Italian political philosopher Niccolò Machiavelli (1469–1527), sees
power as "a complex strategic situation in a given society social setting".
Being deeply structural, his concept involves both constraint and enablement.
For a purely enabling (and voluntaristic) concept of power see the works of
Anthony Giddens. Sources. JK Galbraith summarizes the types of power as being
"Condign" (based on force), "Compensatory" (through the use of various
resources) or "Conditioned" (the result of persuasion), and their sources as
"Personality" (individuals), "Property" (their material resources) and
"Organizational" (whoever sits at the top of an organisational power
structure). (Galbraith, "An Anatomy of Power") Theories. Rational choice
framework. Game theory, with its foundations in the theory of Rational Choice,
is increasingly used in various disciplines to help analyze power
relationships. One rational choice definition of power is given by Keith
Dowding in his book "Power". In rational choice theory, human individuals or
groups can be modelled as 'actors' who choose from a 'choice set' of possible
actions in order to try to achieve desired outcomes. An actor's 'incentive
structure' comprises (its beliefs about) the costs associated with different
actions in the choice set, and the likelihoods that different actions will lead
to desired outcomes. This framework can be used to model a wide range of social
interactions where actors have the ability to exert power over others. For
example a 'powerful' actor can take options away from another's choice set; can
change the relative costs of actions; can change the likelihood that a given
action will lead to a given outcome; or might simply change the other's beliefs
about its incentive structure. As with other models of power, this framework is
neutral as to the use of 'coercion'. For example: a threat of violence can
change the likely costs and benefits of different actions; so can a financial
penalty in a 'voluntarily agreed' contract, or indeed a friendly offer.
Marxism. In the Marxist tradition, the Italian writer Antonio Gramsci
elaborated the role of cultural hegemony in ideology as a means of bolstering
the power of capitalism and of the nation-state. Drawing on Niccolò
Machiavelli in The Prince, and trying to understand why there had been no
Communist revolution in Western Europe, whilst there had been in Russia,
Gramsci conceptualised this hegemony as a centaur, consisting of two halves.
The back end, the beast, represented the more classic, material image of power,
power through coercion, through brute force, be it physical or economic. But
the capitalist hegemony, he argued, depended even more strongly on the front
end, the human face, which projected power through 'consent'. In Russia, this
power was lacking, allowing for a revolution. However, in Western Europe,
specifically in Italy, capitalism had succeeded in exercising "consensual"
power, convincing the working classes that their interests were the same as
those of capitalists. In this way revolution had been avoided. While Gramsci
stresses the significance of ideology in power structures, Marxist-feminist
writers such as Michele Barrett stress the role of ideologies in extolling the
virtues of family life. The classic argument to illustrate this point of view
is the use of women as a 'reserve army of labour'. In wartime it is accepted
that women perform masculine tasks, while after the war the roles are easily
reversed. Therefore, according to Barrett, the destruction of capitalist
economic relations is necessary but not sufficient for the liberation of women.
Hohfeld. Professor of jurisprudence Wesley Newcomb Hohfeld defined power more
narrowly as the ability to unilaterally alter rights. Without requiring all
right-holders' consent, such an alteration necessarily entails the use or
threat of force, whether legitimate or not. MIT professor of philosophy Judith
Jarvis Thomson uses this definition extensively in her book The Realm of
Rights. Tarnow. Tarnow considers what power hijackers have over air plane
passengers and draws similarities with power in the military. He shows that
power over an individual can be amplified by the presence of a group. If the
group conforms to the leader's commands, the leader's power over an individual
is greatly enhanced while if the group does not conform the leader's power over
an individual is nil. Lukes. In "Power: A radical view" (1974) Steven Lukes
outlines two dimensions through which power had been theorised in the earlier
part of the twentieth century (dimensions 1 and 2 below) which he critiqued as
being limited to those forms of power that could be seen. To these he added a
third 'critical' dimension which built upon insights from Gramsci and
Althusser. Clegg. Stewart Clegg proposes another three dimensional model with
his "circuits of power" theory. This model likens the production and organizing
of power to an electric circuit board consisting of three distinct interacting
circuits: episodic, dispositional, and facilitative. These circuits operate at
three levels, two are macro and one is micro. The "episodic circuit" is the
micro level and is constituted of irregular exercise of power as agents address
feelings, communication, conflict, and resistance in day-to-day interrelations.
The outcomes of the episodic circuit are both positive and negative. The
"dispositional circuit" is constituted of macro level rules of practice and
socially constructed meanings that inform member relations and legitimate
authority. The "facilitative circuit" is constituted of macro level technology,
environmental contingencies, job design, and networks, which empower or
disempower and thus punish or reward, agency in the episodic circuit. All three
independent circuits interact at “obligatory passage points” which are
channels for empowerment or disempowerment. Toffler. Alvin Toffler's "" argues
that the three main kinds of power are violence, wealth, and knowledge with
other kinds of power being variations of these three (typically knowledge).
Each successive kind of power represents a more flexible kind of power.
Violence can only be used negatively, to punish. Wealth can be used both
negatively (by withholding money) and positively (by advancing/spending money).
Knowledge can be used in these ways but, additionally, can be used in a
transformative way. Such examples are, sharing knowledge on agriculture to
ensure that everyone is capable of supplying himself and his family of food;
Allied nations with a shared identity forming with the spread of religious or
political philosophies, or one can use knowledge as a tactical/strategic
superiority in Intelligence (information gathering). Toffler argues that the
very nature of power is currently shifting. Throughout history, power has often
shifted from one group to another; however, at this time, the dominant form of
power is changing. During the Industrial Revolution, power shifted from a
nobility acting primarily through violence to industrialists and financiers
acting through wealth. Of course, the nobility used wealth just as the
industrial elite used violence, but the "dominant" form of power shifted from
violence to wealth. Today, a "The Third Wave" (Toffler) of shifting power is
taking place with wealth being overtaken by knowledge. Gene Sharp. Gene Sharp,
an American professor of political science, believes that power depends
ultimately on its bases. Thus a political regime maintains power because people
accept and obey its dictates, laws and policies. Sharp cites the insight of
Étienne de La Boétie. Sharp's key theme is that power is not monolithic; that
is, it does not derive from some intrinsic quality of those who are in power.
For Sharp, political power, the power of any state - regardless of its
particular structural organization - ultimately derives from the subjects of
the state. His fundamental belief is that any power structure relies upon the
subjects' obedience to the orders of the ruler(s). If subjects do not obey,
leaders have no power. His work is thought to have been influential in the
overthrow of Slobodan Milosevic, in the 2011 Arab Spring, and other passive
revolutions. Björn Kraus. Björn Kraus deals with the epistemological
perspective upon power regarding the question about possibilities of
interpersonal influence by developing a special form of constructivism
(“Machtanalytischer Konstruktivismus”). Instead of focussing on the
valuation and distribution of power, he asks first and foremost what the term
can describe at all. Coming from Max Weber’s definition of power, he realizes
that the term of power has to be split into “instructive power” and
“destructive power”. More precisely, instructive power means the chance to
determine the actions and thoughts of another person, whereas destructive power
means the chance to diminish the opportunities of another person. How
significant this distinction really is, becomes evident by looking at the
possibilities of rejecting power attempts: Rejecting instructive power is
possible – rejecting destructive power isn’t. By using this distinction,
proportions of power can be analyzed in a more sophisticated way, helping to
sufficiently reflect on matters of responsibility. This perspective permits to
get over an “either-or-postiion” (either there is power, or there isn’t),
which is common especially in epistemological discourses about power theories,
and to introduce the possibility of an “as well as-position”. Unmarked
categories. The idea of "unmarked categories" originated in feminism. The
theory analyzes the culture of the powerful. The powerful comprise those people
in society with easy access to resources, those who can exercise power without
considering their actions. For the powerful, their culture seems obvious; for
the powerless, on the other hand, it remains out of reach, élite and
expensive. The "unmarked category" can form the identifying mark of the
powerful. The unmarked category becomes the standard against which to measure
everything else. For most Western readers, it is posited that if a
protagonist's race is not indicated, it will be assumed by the reader that the
protagonist is Caucasian; if a sexual identity is not indicated, it will be
assumed by the reader that the protagonist is heterosexual; if the gender of a
body is not indicated, will be assumed by the reader that it is male; if a
disability is not indicated, it will be assumed by the reader that the
protagonist is able bodied, just as a set of examples. One can often overlook
unmarked categories. Whiteness forms an unmarked category not commonly visible
to the powerful, as they often fall within this category. The unmarked category
becomes the norm, with the other categories relegated to deviant status. Social
groups can apply this view of power to race, gender, and disability without
modification: the able body is the neutral body. Counterpower. The term
'counter-power' (sometimes written 'Counterpower') is used in a range of
situations to describe the countervailing force that can be utilised by the
oppressed to counterbalance or erode the power of elites. In the book
"Counterpower: Making Change Happen", a definition rooted in the political
science literature is offered. Reflecting the categories of power presented by
Mann (ideological, economic, military), Toffler (knowledge, wealth, violence),
Gramsci and others, Gee asserts that movements can use 'Idea Counterpower',
'Economic Counterpower' and 'Physical Counterpower' to challenge the power of
ruling elites. A more general definition has been provided by the
anthropologist David Graeber as 'a collection of social institutions set in
opposition to the state and capital: from self-governing communities to radical
labor unions to popular militias'. Graeber also notes that counter-power can
also be referred to as 'anti-power' and 'when institutions counter-power
maintain themselves in the face of the state, this is usually referred to as a
'dual power' situation'. Although the term has come to prominence through its
use by participants in the global justice/anti-globalization movement of the
1990s onwards, the word has been used for at least 60 years; for instance
Martin Buber's 1949 book 'Paths in Utopia' includes the line 'Power abdicates
only under counter-power'. Problems with representation. Gilles Deleuze, the
twentieth century French philosopher, compared voting for political
representation with being taken hostage. A representational government assumes
that people can be divided into categories with distinct shared interests. The
representative is regarded as embodying the interests of the group. Many social
movements have been successful in gaining access to governments: the working
class, women, young people and ethnic minorities are part of the government in
many nation-states. However, there is no government where the government
represents the population along the characteristics of the categories. The
problem of finding suitable representatives relates to an individual's
membership of different categories at the same time. The only truly
representative government for a population is the population itself. Six bases
of power. Social psychologists John R. P. French and Bertram Raven, in a now-
classic study (1959), developed a schema of sources of power by which to
analyse how power plays work (or fail to work) in a specific relationship.
According to French and Raven, power must be distinguished from influence in
the following way: power is that state of affairs which holds in a given
relationship, A-B, such that a given influence attempt by A over B makes A's
desired change in B more likely. Conceived this way, power is fundamentally
"relative" – it depends on the specific understandings A and B each apply to
their relationship, and, interestingly, requires B's recognition of a quality
in A which would motivate B to change in the way A intends. A must draw on the
'base' or combination of bases of power appropriate to the relationship, to
effect the desired outcome. Drawing on the wrong power base can have unintended
effects, including a reduction in A's own power. French and Raven argue that
there are five significant categories of such qualities, while not excluding
other minor categories. Further bases have since been adduced – in particular
by Morgan (1986: ch.6), who identifies 14, while others have suggested a
simpler model for practical purposes – for example, Handy (1976), who
recommends three. Tactics. People use more than rewards, threats, and
information to influence others. In everyday situations people use a variety of
power tactics to push or prompt others into particular action. There are plenty
of examples of power tactics that are quite common and employed every day. Some
of these tactics include bullying, collaboration, complaining, criticizing,
demanding, disengaging, evading, humor, inspiring, manipulating, negotiating,
socializing, and supplicating. These power tactics can be classified along
three different dimensions: softness, rationality, and laterality (Falbo &
Pepalu, 1980; Raven et al., 1998). People tend to vary in their use of power
tactics, with different types of people opting for different tactics. For
instance, interpersonally oriented people tend to use soft and rational tactics
(Falbo, 1997). Machiavellians, however, tend to use nonrational tactics.
Moreover, extraverts use a greater variety of power tactics than do introverts
(Butkovic & Bratko, 2007). Further, men tend to use bilateral and direct
tactics, whereas women tend to use unilateral and indirect tactics (Falbo &
Peplau, 1980). People will also choose different tactics based on the group
situation, and based on who they are trying to influence. It is interesting to
note that people also tend to shift from soft to hard tactics when they face
resistance (Carson, Carson, & Roe, 1993; Teppner, 2006) Balance of power.
Because power operates both relationally and reciprocally, sociologists speak
of the balance of power between parties to a relationship: all parties to all
relationships have "some" power: the sociological examination of power concerns
itself with discovering and describing the relative strengths: equal or
unequal, stable or subject to periodic change. Sociologists usually analyse
relationships in which the parties have relatively equal or nearly equal power
in terms of "constraint" rather than of power. Thus 'power' has a connotation
of unilateralism. If this were not so, then all relationships could be
described in terms of 'power', and its meaning would be lost. Given that power
is not innate and can be granted to others, to acquire power you must possess
or control a form of power currency. Psychological research. Recent
experimental psychology suggests that the more power one has, the less one
takes on the perspective of others, implying that the powerful have less
empathy. Adam Galinsky, along with several coauthors, found that when those who
are reminded of their powerlessness are instructed to draw Es on their
forehead, they are 3 times more likely to draw them such that they are legible
to others than those who are reminded of their power. Powerful people are also
more likely to take action. In one example, powerful people turned off an
irritatingly close fan twice as much as less powerful people. Researchers have
documented the bystander effect: they found that powerful people are three
times as likely to first offer help to a "stranger in distress". A study
involving over 50 college students suggested that those primed to feel powerful
through stating 'power words' were less susceptible to external pressure, more
willing to give honest feedback, and more creative. Empathy gap and power.
“Power is defined as a possibility to influence others” The use of power
has evolved from centuries. Gaining prestige, honor and reputation is one of
the central motives of gaining power in human nature. Power also relates with
empathy gap because it limits the interpersonal relationship and compares the
power differences. Having power and not having power can affect a number of
psychological consequences. It leads to strategic versus social
responsibilities. Research experiments were done in past, as early as 1968, to
explore power conflict. Past research. Earlier, research proposed that
increased power is related to increased rewards and leads one to approach
things more frequently. In contrast, decreased power is related more
constraint, threat and punishment which leads one to inhibitions. It was
concluded that being powerful leads one to successful outcome, develop
negotiation strategies and make more self-serving offers. Later, research
proposed that differences in power lead to strategic considerations. Being
strategic can also mean to defend when one is opposed or to hurt the decision
maker. It was concluded that facing one with more power leads to strategic
consideration whereas facing one with less power leads to a social
responsibility. Bargaining games. Bargaining games were explored in year 2003
and year 2004. These studies compared behavior done in different power given
situation. Ultimatum game. In an ultimatum game, the person in given power
offers an ultimatum and the recipient would have to accept that offer or else
both the proposer and the recipient will receive no reward. Dictator game. In a
dictator game, the person in given power offers a proposal and the recipient
would have to accept that offer. The recipient has no choice of rejecting the
offer. Bargaining games, conclusion. The dictator game gives no power to the
recipient whereas the ultimatum game gives some power to the recipient. The
behavior observed was that the person offering the proposal would act less
strategically than would the one offering in the ultimatum game. Self-serving
also occurred and a lot of pro-social behavior was observed. When the
counterpart recipient is completely powerless, lack of strategy, social
responsibility and moral consideration is often observed from the behavior of
the proposal given (the one with the power).
