Political media Political media are communication vehicles owned, ruled,
managed, or otherwise influenced by political entities, meant to propagate
views of the related entity. A similar term, "normative media", emphasizes
technical and social characteristics of the media itself in shaping decisions.
Harold Innis and later Marshall McLuhan,both Canadian media theorists, were
influential in developing this theory. While it is simple to recognize a
political medium in an official newspaper, magazine, TV channel that directly
declares to belong to a group, deep concerns might regard submission of
communications to political interests and impartiality of media that do not
declare their party alliances. This influence is not always conspicuous and
causes people to accept ideas put forth by those who wish to control
communication for the good of society, or causes those who support freedom of
communication and minority empowerment to oppose them. Some believe that big
societies actually need to canalize communication. In this sense political
media would often be meant to form or at least influence public opinion, a
least-common-denominator for all members of society. They are a one-way street
and sometimes misused. The Greeks could learn from the Egypt of the Pharaos
that some risks could be suffered when "medium" and executives occur in
personal union, concentrating too much power in one hand. This, however,
implies the acceptation of a concept of media as power, which is widely but not
generally shared. Opponents do argue that the simple fact of producing a
communication is not by itself leading to a direct result on the public
opinion, unless this one is considered as a merely passive mass in front of an
irresistible communication... Modern Democratic theories and implementations,
especially after Montesquieu's theories, rely on the separation of powers:
Executive (government and police), legislative (parliament) and judicial
(court) branches of power are separated. Commonly in recent times, and
especially in journalistic jargon, media are however defined as an alleged
fourth power, and a difference from the others is often outlined in the fact
that the power to (eventually) influence the public opinion using media is not
much controlled, because media are so "ethereal", and it would be hard to
weight them. Others instead suggest that this would not be a difference, since
the control over official powers is extremely hard to be verified in practice.
Often it is not easy, indeed, to find out who really controls a medium and how
much potential efficacy it effectively could have for such goals. It is then
argued that when one of the three "canonic" Montesquieu's powers gains an
additional power on media, this would be extremely dangerous for the survival
of democracy, and an eventual conflict of interests is contested. As a matter
of fact, private media companies became very powerful since the invention of
the printing press, cinema, radio and TV, and in history the age of
"amanuenses" (the manual copysts of Middle Ages) is perhaps characteristic in
demonstrating the attention that usually official powers attribute to
communication. Back to our times, in some cases people in media careers have
been previously selected by ruling apparatus, and often openly declared their
political beliefs, admitting a lack of impartiality. Their work has sometimes
been seen as becoming a part of the executive or parliamentar communication. It
is indeed very often said that media could be useful (in the point of view of
someone looking for a control over the forming of consensus) in order to
discipline the popular sentiments, by detracting the public from the
apocalyptic problems of mankind (e.g. global warming, ozone hole, radioactive
waste, ...), and by the "psychological warfare" threatening their own public
until it accepts foreign or external interventions. But, as said, this needs to
encounter an audience mainly composed by people without sufficient means to
"resist" this intellectual pression. The lack of a sufficient individual
education, due to a perhaps intentionally provoked low quality of school, is
then considered one of the major reasons for the success of such attempts.
Education is by some included in social media, and in this sense it could
eventually be used as a powerful mean to introduce in individuals some
"politically useful" concepts: what a man learns in his youth, in the phasis in
which the fundaments of character are created (which many believe will seldom
greatly vary after), is brought to him by family, schools and other clubs, and
mass media. Apart from the studies of facts, education could be used (some
suggest) as a mean for conditioning, usually practiced by emotional and
mechanical learning. Education could be then interwoven with political media,
although the respective effects of a conditioning in these two fields might be
much different, in the average (and admitting many exceptions) for different
classes of society. This matter is however very hard to distinguish from a
cultural bias, which is a common argument for "ordinary" media too. The power
of technology is also be recalled sometimes, since western civilizations use
media to carry forth knowledge and enable technical progression. Some
civilization critics point out that modern societies rely on technology to
invent and promote new technology, often resulting in a degree of pro-
technology propaganda, and this backpropagation would mean that mankind hands
over control to a living machine. As with any self-reproducing system, this
dynamic makes it hard to control. Some view this as leading to the so-called
technological singularity as persuasion technology advocates the creation of
more persuasion technology until all are persuaded to do nothing but work on
improving technology - handing effective control of society to it. At present,
however, many view this process as being benevolent - the internet is both a
mass and a personal medium, flexible and scalable. The internet enables a way
of communication which was impossible to be foreseen in past societies.As
McLuhan has written, "In this electric age we see ourselves being translated
more and more into the form of information, moving toward the technological
extension of consciousness (McLuhan, 86)." The software could potentially allow
to cement structures which stand against democracy and competition of ideas, as
well as structures which could gain a quite complete control over private
communications and isolate eventual dissenting voices. Currently the Net is not
completely identifiable as a political medium, given the lack of a central
authority and a common political communication. Locally, governments could in
the reality use censorship, the first experiments of which have been received
with relatively little scandal. McLuhan, Marshall. "Understanding Media: The
Extensions of Man." Giddings, Seth and Martin Lister. The New Media and
Technocultures Reader. New York: Routledge, 2011. 79-91. Document. See also:
anti-globalization movement, Indymedia, Wikimedia, Second Superpower
