Spectacle (critical theory) The spectacle is a central notion in the
Situationist theory, developed by Guy Debord in his 1967 book, "The Society of
the Spectacle". In its limited sense, "spectacle" means the mass media, which
are "its most glaring superficial manifestation." Debord said that the society
of the spectacle came to existence in the late 1920s. The critique of the
"spectacle" is a development and application of Karl Marx's concept of
fetishism of commodities, reification and alienation., and the way it was
reprised by György Lukács in 1923. In the society of the spectacle, the
commodities rule the workers and the consumers instead of being ruled by them.
The consumers are passive subjects that contemplate the reified spectacle.
History and influences. Bernays and Adorno. In its limited sense, "spectacle"
means the mass media, which are "its most glaring superficial manifestation."
Debord said that the society of the spectacle came to existence in the late
1920s. This is the period in which modern advertising and public relations were
introduced, most significantly with the innovative techniques developed by
Edward Bernays in his campaigns for the tobacco industry. In his 1928 book
"Propaganda", Bernays theorized the "conscious and intelligent manipulation of
the organized habits and opinions of the masses." The critique of the society
of the spectacle shares many assumptions and arguments with the critique of the
"culture industry" made by Adorno and Horkheimer in 1944. Marx and Lukács.
With "The Society of the Spectacle", Debord attempted to provide the
Situationist International (SI) with a Marxian critical theory. The concept of
"the spectacle" expanded to all society the Marxist concept of reification
drawn from the first section of Karl Marx's "Capital", entitled "The Fetishism
of Commodities and the Secret thereof" and developed by György Lukács in his
work, "History and Class Consciousness". This was an analysis of the logic of
commodities whereby they achieve an ideological autonomy from the process of
their production, so that “social action takes the form of the action of
objects, which rule the producers instead of being ruled by them.” Developing
this analysis of the logic of the commodity, "The Society of the Spectacle"
generally understood society as divided between the passive subject who
consumes the spectacle and the reified spectacle itself. In the opening of "Das
Kapital", Marx makes the observation that within the capitalist mode of
production we evaluate materials not by what purpose they serve or what they're
actually useful for, but we instead recognize them based on their value in the
market. In capitalist society, virtually identical products often have vastly
different values simply because one has a more recognizable or prestigious
brand name. The value of a commodity is abstract and not tied to its actual
characteristics. Much in the same way capitalism commodifies the material
world, the situationists assert that advanced capitalism commodifies experience
and perception. The spectacle is the unified, ever-increasing mass of image-
objects and commodified experience detached from every aspect of life, fused in
a common stream in which the unity of this life can no longer be reestablished.
Reality considered partially unfolds, in its own general unity, as a pseudo-
world apart, an object of mere contemplation. The specialization of images of
the world is completed in the world of the autonomous image, where the liar has
lied to himself. The spectacle in general, as the concrete inversion of life,
is the autonomous movement of the non-living. Features and aspects of the
Spectacle. Recuperation. As early as 1958, in the situationist manifesto,
Debord described official culture as a "rigged game", where conservative powers
forbid subversive ideas to have direct access to the public discourse. Such
ideas get first trivialized and sterilized, and then they are safely
incorporated back within mainstream society, where they can be exploited to add
new flavors to old dominant ideas. This technique of the spectacle is sometimes
called "recuperation". To survive, the spectacle must maintain social control
and effectively handle all threats to the social order. Recuperation, a concept
first proposed by Guy Debord, is the process by which the spectacle intercepts
socially and politically radical ideas and images, commodifies them, and safely
incorporates them back within mainstream society. More broadly, it may refer to
the appropriation or co-opting of any subversive works or ideas by mainstream
media. It is the opposite of détournement, in which conventional ideas and
images are commodified with radical intentions. Debord discusses the close link
between revolution and culture and everyday life, and the reason why
conservative powers are interested in forbidding them "any direct access to the
rigged game of official culture." Debord recalls that worldwide revolutionary
movements that emerged during the 1920s were followed by "an ebbing of the
movements that had tried to advance a liberatory new attitude in culture and
everyday life," and that such movements were brought to a "complete social
isolation." Different forms. The concentrated spectacle. The spectacle
associated with concentrated bureaucracy. Debord associated this spectacular
form mostly with the Eastern Bloc and Fascism, although today mixed backward
economies import it, and even advanced capitalist countries in times of crisis.
Every aspect of life, like property, music, and communication is concentrated
and is identified with the bureaucratic class. The concentrated spectacle
generally identifies itself with a powerful political leader. The concentrated
spectacle is made effective through a state of permanent violence and police
terror. The diffuse spectacle. The diffuse spectacle is more effective than the
concentrated spectacle. The diffuse spectacle operates mostly through
seduction, while the concentrated spectacle operates mostly through violence.
Because of this, Debord argues that the diffuse spectacle is more effective at
suppressing non-spectacular opinions than the concentrated spectacle. The
integrated spectacle. The spectacle associated with modern capitalist
countries. The integrated spectacle borrows traits from the diffuse and
concentrated spectacle to form a new synthesis. Debord argues that this is a
very recent form of spectacular manifestation, and that it was pioneered in
France and Italy. According to Debord, the integrated spectacle goes by the
label of liberal democracy. This spectacle introduces a state of permanent
general secrecy, where experts and specialists dictate the morality,
statistics, and opinions of the spectacle. Terrorism is the invented enemy of
the spectacle, which specialists compare with their "liberal democracy",
pointing out the superiority of the latter one. Debord argues that without
terrorism, the integrated spectacle wouldn't survive, for it needs to be
compared to something in order to show its "obvious" perfection and
superiority. We live in a spectacular society, that is, our whole life is
surrounded by an immense accumulation of spectacles. Things that were once
directly lived are now lived by proxy. Once an experience is taken out of the
real world it becomes a commodity. As a commodity the spectacular is developed
to the detriment of the real. It becomes a substitute for experience. (Larry
Law, "Images And Everyday Life") Legacy. A long tradition of work exists in
political science on the "political spectacle" started with Debord;Wedeen, Lisa
(1999) "Ambiguities of Domination: Politics, Rhetoric, and Symbols in
Contemporary Syria". many literary critics and philosophers in the 20th century
contributed to this analysis. According to anthropologist Meg McLagan, "Debord
analyzes the penetration of the commodity form into mass communication, which
he argues results in the spectacle". Andrew Hussey claims in his biography of
Debord that the term spectacle began life not in a Marxist context, but was
first borrowed from Nietzsche and his concept of the mass secret. The critic
Sadie Plant argues that later theories of postmodernism, particularly those of
Baudrillard and Lyotard, owe much to Debord's theory, and represent a
apolitical appropriation of its criticism of the unreality of life under late
capitalism. Debord was a rebel to his core and despised academic
commodification of his ideas and their integration into the diffuse spectacle.
Throughout his life he fought to make his ideas truly revolutionary. His ideas
appear to be gaining more and more relevance and interest. Web sites such as
the Bureau of Public Secrets which is maintained by Ken Knabb and Not Bored are
increasingly visited. Debord's ideas have also been used to interpret right
wing and populist attitudes to mental illness.
