Policy analysis Policy analysis is "determining which of various alternative
policies will most achieve a given set of goals in light of the relations
between the policies and the goals". However, policy analysis can be divided
into two major fields. Analysis of policy is analytical and descriptive—i.e.,
it attempts to explain policies and their development. Analysis for policy is
prescriptive—i.e., it is involved with formulating policies and proposals
(e.g., to improve social welfare). The area of interest and the purpose of
analysis determines what type of analysis is conducted. A combination of policy
analysis together with program evaluation would be defined as Policy studies.
Policy Analysis is frequently deployed in the public sector, but is equally
applicable to other kinds of organizations. Policy analysis has its roots in
systems analysis as instituted by United States Secretary of Defense Robert
McNamara during the Vietnam War. Approaches. Although various approaches to
policy analysis exist, three general approaches can be distinguished: the
analycentric, the policy process, and the meta-policy approach. The
analycentric approach focuses on individual problems and their solutions; its
scope is the micro-scale and its problem interpretation is usually of a
technical nature. The primary aim is to identify the most effective and
efficient solution in technical and economic terms (e.g. the most efficient
allocation of resources). The policy process approach puts its focal point onto
political processes and involved stakeholders; its scope is the meso-scale and
its problem interpretation is usually of a political nature. It aims at
determining what processes and means are used and tries to explain the role and
influence of stakeholders within the policy process. By changing the relative
power and influence of certain groups (e.g., enhancing public participation and
consultation), solutions to problems may be identified. The meta-policy
approach is a systems and context approach; i.e., its scope is the macro-scale
and its problem interpretation is usually of a structural nature. It aims at
explaining the contextual factors of the policy process; i.e., what are the
political, economic and socio-cultural factors influencing it. As problems may
result because of structural factors (e.g., a certain economic system or
political institution), solutions may entail changing the structure itself.
Methodology. Policy analysis is methodologically diverse using both qualitative
methods and quantitative methods, including case studies, survey research,
statistical analysis, and model building among others. One common methodology
is to define the problem and evaluation criteria; identify all alternatives;
evaluate them; and recommend the best policy agenda per favor. Models. Many
models exist to analyze the creation and application of public policy. Analysts
use these models to identify important aspects of policy, as well as explain
and predict policy and its consequences. Institutional model. Public policy is
determined by political institutions, which give policy legitimacy. Government
universally applies policy to all citizens of society and monopolizes the use
of force in applying policy. The legislature, executive and judicial branches
of government are examples of institutions that give policy legitimacy. Process
model. This model, however, has been criticized for being overly linear and
simplistic. In reality, stages of the policy process may overlap or never
happen. Also, this model fails to take into account the multiple actors
attempting to influence the process itself as well as each other, and the
complexity this entails. Rational model. "See Rational planning model for a
fuller discussion" The rational model of decision-making is a process for
making logically sound decisions in policy making in the public sector,
although the model is also widely used in private corporations. Herbert A.
Simon, the father of rational models, describes rationality as “a style of
behavior that is appropriate to the achievement of given goals, within the
limits imposed by given conditions and constraints”. It is important to note
the model makes a series of assumptions in order for it to work, such as: "In
its purest form, the Rational Actor approach presumes that such a figure
Constantine has complete freedom of action to achieve goals that he or she has
articulated through a careful process of rational analysis involving full and
objective study of all pertinent information and alternatives. At the same
time, it presumes that this central actor is so fully in control of the
apparatus of government that a decision once made is as good as implemented.
There are no staffs on which to rely, no constituencies to placate, no generals
or governors to cajole. By attributing all decision making to one central
figure who is always fully in control and who acts only after carefully
weighing all options, the Rational Actor method allows scholars to filter out
extraneous details and focus attention on central issues". Furthermore, as we
have seen, in the context of policy rational models are intended to achieve
maximum social gain. For this purpose, Simon identifies an outline of a step by
step mode of analysis to achieve rational decisions. Ian Thomas describes
Simon's steps as follows: The approach of Wiktorowicz and Deber is similar to
Simon and they assert that the rational model tends to deal with “the
facts” (data, probabilities) in steps 1 to 3, leaving the issue of assessing
values to the final step. According Wiktorowicz and Deber values are introduced
in the final step of the rational model, where the utility of each policy
option is assessed. "There is no better illustration of the dilemmas of
rational policy making in America than in the field of health…the first
obstacle to rationalism is defining the problem. Is our goal to have good
health — that is, whether we live at all (infant mortality), how well we live
(days lost to sickness), and how long we live (life spans and adult mortality)?
Or is our goal to have good medical care — frequent visits to the doctor,
wellequipped and accessible hospitals, and equal access to medical care by rich
and poor alike?" The problems faced when using the rational model arise in
practice because social and environmental values can be difficult to quantify
and forge consensus around. Furthermore, the assumptions stated by Simon are
never fully valid in a real world context. However, as Thomas states the
rational model provides a good perspective since in modern society rationality
plays a central role and everything that is rational tends to be prized. Thus,
it does not seem strange that “we ought to be trying for rational decision-
making”. Decision Criteria for Policy Analysis — Step 2. As illustrated in
Figure 1, rational policy analysis can be broken into 6 distinct stages of
analysis. Step 2 highlights the need to understand which factors should be
considered as part of the decision making process. At this part of the process,
all the economic, social, and environmental factors that are important to the
policy decision need to be identified and then expressed as policy decision
criteria. For example, the decision criteria used in the analysis of
environmental policy is often a mix of — Some criteria, such as economic
benefit, will be more easily measurable or definable, while others such as
environmental quality will be harder to measure or express quantitatively.
Ultimately though, the set of decision criteria needs to embody all of the
policy goals, and overemphasising the more easily definable or measurable
criteria, will have the undesirable impact of biasing the analysis towards a
subset of the policy goals. The process of identifying a suitably comprehensive
decision criteria set is also vulnerable to being skewed by pressures arising
at the political interface. For example, decision makers may tend to give
""more weight to policy impacts that are concentrated, tangible, certain, and
immediate than to impacts that are diffuse, intangible, uncertain, and
delayed"."^8. For example, with a cap-and-trade system for carbon emissions the
net financial cost in the first five years of policy implementation is a far
easier impact to conceptualise than the more diffuse and uncertain impact of a
country's improved position to influence global negotiations on climate change
action. Decision Methods for Policy Analysis — Step 5. Displaying the impacts
of policy alternatives can be done using a policy analysis matrix (PAM) such
that shown in Table 1. As shown, a PAM provides a summary of the policy impacts
for the various alternatives and examination of the matrix can reveal the
tradeoffs associated with the different alternatives. Table 1. Policy analysis
matrix (PAM) for SO2 emissions control. Once policy alternatives have been
evaluated, the next step is to decide which policy alternative should be
implemented. This is shown as step 5 in Figure 1. At one extreme, comparing the
policy alternatives can be relatively simple if all the policy goals can be
measured using a single metric and given equal weighting. In this case, the
decision method is an exercise in benefit cost analysis (BCA). At the other
extreme, the numerous goals will require the policy impacts to be expressed
using a variety of metrics that are not readily comparable. In such cases, the
policy analyst may draw on the concept of utility to aggregate the various
goals into a single score. With the utility concept, each impact is given a
weighting such that 1 unit of each weighted impact is considered to be equally
valuable (or desirable) with regards to the collective well-being. Weimer and
Vining also suggest that the ""go, no go"" rule can be a useful method for
deciding amongst policy alternatives^8. Under this decision making regime, some
or all policy impacts can be assigned thresholds which are used to eliminate at
least some of the policy alternatives. In their example, one criterion ""is to
minimize SO2 emissions"" and so a threshold might be a reduction SO2 emissions
"of at least 8.0 million tons per year". As such, any policy alternative that
does not meet this threshold can be removed from consideration. If only a
single policy alternative satisfies all the impact thresholds then it is the
one that is considered a "go" for each impact. Otherwise it might be that all
but a few policy alternatives are eliminated and those that remain need to be
more closely examined in terms of their trade-offs so that a decision can be
made. Case Study Example of Rational Policy Analysis Approach. To demonstrate
the rational analysis process as described above, let’s examine the policy
paper “Stimulating the use of biofuels in the European Union: Implications
for climate change policy” by Lisa Ryan where the substitution of fossil
fuels with biofuels has been proposed in the European Union (EU) between
2005–2010 as part of a strategy to mitigate greenhouse gas emissions from
road transport, increase security of energy supply and support development of
rural communities. Group model. The political system's role is to establish and
enforce compromise between various, conflicting interests in society. Elite
model. Policy is a reflection of the interests of those individuals within a
society that have the most power, rather than the demands of the mass. Six-step
model. See policy cycle for a five-step and an eight-step approach.
