Political criticism Political criticism (also referred to as political
commentary or political discussion) is criticism that is specific of or
relevant to politics, including policies, politicians, political parties, and
types of government. Controversy. There is great controversy over the relevance
and importance of political criticism in civilizations, particularly democratic
societies. Those who contend that it is of vast importance assert that
political discussion creates and promotes the variety of opinions necessary for
a true democracy. The American constitution is often pointed to as support for
the belief, ensuring for all peoples under its administration such maxims as
free speech. Critics of this philosophy affirm instead that the general public
(and, on a more individual basis, the "Average Joe") lacks the resources and
capability to conceive opinions that are educated enough to be taken seriously.
Thus, the abundance and fervent promotion of such opinions merely confuses and
complicates political matters that, given an appropriate amount of factual
education, are either easily understood or should be discussed only by those
with sufficient intelligence to do the matter justice. Methods. Books.
Throughout history one of the most influential methods (arguably the most
influential method) of promoting political opinions has been literary. This
peculiar pattern of books influencing the thinking of the masses, reinstated
with such books as the Bible, Uncle Tom's Cabin, the Qur'an, "The Diary of a
Young Girl", "Nineteen Eighty-Four" and many others, has been attributed to
many of the characteristics of writing. While it has been proven that a well-
written book can indeed appeal to one's intellect with reasoning and ideas
sprung from common sense, the drive of literature and writing is most commonly
considered to be derivative of the emotional impact of the text, guiding people
to think a certain way by making them feel a certain way. This often has great
political consequences, most particularly when the subject of the emotional
reaction is a plea for moral justice, as can be seen (to use America as an
example once more) in the aftermath of the publication of Uncle Tom's Cabin
concerning American views about slavery. It is from this correlation between
books and politics that the phrase, "the pen is mightier than the sword",
derives. Television and films. Since their development in this past century,
both television and films have often had far-reaching political effects
throughout the world. Influential films and television events include Countdown
with Keith Olbermann, Citizen Kane, the works of Walt Disney, and such
political satire as that found in The Simpsons. Like literature (see above), a
movie or television event has the capacity to have emotional impact on its
viewers, making it an invaluable tool for politics. This attribute is noticed
and used frequently by politicians and ordinary citizens alike; political
propaganda on the screen now has an effect on everything from a nation's
outlook on its economy to the smallest of elections and political decisions.
Political cartoons. Political cartoons (also known as "editorial cartoons") are
infamous for their ability to promote political views through satirical means.
With cartoons the fight for the minds of the public is not a verbal but a
visual one, and leaving strong impressions with the use of powerful symbols or
metaphors in order to communicate the artist's messages. News Media. Since many
people know only a very little about their civilization and its present state
except for what is told to them by the media, the potential for influence is
extremely high with the publication of newspapers, news broadcasts, etc. Any
bias in these mediums alters people's impressions of current events into
different understandings and opinions than those that may have been chosen with
more accurate information. Internet. With the recent invention of the Internet,
political criticism has been greatly extended to anyone with a connection to
the World Wide Web. In a few decades already this has revolutionized politics
to the extent that the public now has a virtually unlimited education quite
literally at its fingertips, allowing people to choose with less work what
aspects of current politics they wish to research. The many means of exchanging
ideas, including blogs and internet forums, has extended the political debate
to anyone that cares to contribute. This ability and speed that which ideas can
flow has literally changed the way that political parties stay connected to
constituents.
