Political campaign A political campaign is an organized effort which seeks to
influence the decision making process within a specific group. In democracies,
political campaigns often refer to electoral campaigns, wherein representatives
are chosen or referendums are decided. In modern politics, the most high
profile political campaigns are focused on candidates for head of state or head
of government, often a President or Prime Minister. Campaign message. The
message of the campaign contains the ideas that the candidate wants to share
with the voters. The message often consists of several talking points about
policy issues. The points summarize the main ideas of the campaign and are
repeated frequently in order to create a lasting impression with the voters. In
many elections, the opposition party will try to get the candidate "off
message" by bringing up policy or personal questions that are not related to
the talking points. Most campaigns prefer to keep the message broad in order to
attract the most potential voters. A message that is too narrow can alienate
voters or slow the candidate down with explaining details. For example, in the
2008 American presidential election John McCain originally used a message that
focused on his patriotism and political experience: "Country First"; later the
message was changed to shift attention to his role as "The Original Maverick"
within the political establishment. Barack Obama ran on a consistent, simple
message of "change" throughout his campaign. If the message is crafted
carefully, it will assure the candidate a victory at the polls. For a winning
candidate, the message is refined and then becomes his or her political agenda
in office... Campaign finance. Fundraising techniques include having the
candidate call or meet with large donors, sending direct mail pleas to small
donors, and courting interest groups who could end up spending millions on the
race if it is significant to their interests. Organization. In a modern
political campaign, the campaign organization (or 'machine') will have a
coherent structure of personnel in the same manner as any business of similar
size. Campaign manager. Successful campaigns usually require a campaign manager
to coordinate the campaign's operations. Apart from a candidate, they are often
a campaign's most visible leader. Modern campaign managers may be concerned
with executing strategy rather than setting it - particularly if the senior
strategists are typically outside political consultants such as primarily
pollsters and media consultants. Political consultants. Political consultants
advise campaigns on virtually all of their activities, from research to field
strategy. Consultants conduct candidate research, voter research, and
opposition research for their clients. Activists. Activists are the 'foot
soldiers' loyal to the cause, the true believers who will carry the run by
volunteer activists. Such volunteers and interns may take part in activities
such as canvassing door-to-door and making phone calls on behalf of the
campaign. Campaign Ethics and Campaign Time. Modern political campaigns have
set new standards for how successful campaigns are conducted day-to-day. The
campaign is conducted in what would seem to the public like pseudo-military
style, with a strict chain of command, zero tolerance for certain prohibited
actions, and an extended daily schedule that starts early and ends much later
than most "day jobs." Prohibited actions may include, but are not limited to:
lying about numbers generated (e.g. phone calls made, doors knocked, volunteers
recruited, etc.) - this is increasingly an issue in offices that are wirelessly
connected, without direct oversight; going outside the chain of command (e.g.
talking to a superior's superior who happens to be a friend in order to get
special favors or report information); non-press-shop members talking to the
press; blogging (considered another form of "talking to the press," which can
interfere with message discipline); and being arrested (or otherwise becoming a
potential easy target for opponent smear campaigns). The daily schedule of a
political campaign is hyperextended, and often has no definite beginning or
end, only a series of tasks to be completed by certain benchmark times, or,
most often, "COB" ("Close of Business"). COB for political campaigns is
generally defined as "the time at night at which your supervisor is required to
report his/her numbers" (or shortly beforehand), so that your numbers reporting
(generally the last action a political campaigner takes before COB) can be
factored into theirs. For example, a Field Organizer may have collected 9 new
committed volunteers for an event during the day; he will be required to report
this at 8:45pm to his Regional Field Director, so that the Regional can report
that all Field Organizers in the region recruited 52 total volunteers for said
event; which needs to be reported to the Deputy State Field Director by 9:00,
so that THEY can speak to the State Field Director at 9:15 and report that 827
volunteers have been recruited for events around the state; and so on, up the
chain of command. Once each of these reporting sequences is finished,
organizers at all levels may do paperwork, send emails, call friends, and do
other things which are not effective to do during business hours or "voter
contact time." Political campaigns are generally about contacting voters and
volunteers at the nuts-and-bolts level; and so dependent on state law, local
peculiarities and the preferences of campaign organizers and volunteers, a
certain block of time (usually ending at 8pm or 9pm) is set aside each night
for "voter/volunteer contact." (Violation of this block of time to conduct
other activities often cannot happen or needs a strong justification, such as
attending an important meeting.) Only a very small fraction of campaign workers
(such as people who deal with vendors) do the bulk of their work during
traditional business hours. Techniques. A campaign team (which may be as small
as one inspired individual, or a heavily-resourced group of professionals) must
consider how to communicate the message of the campaign, recruit volunteers,
and raise money. Campaign advertising draws on techniques from commercial
advertising and propaganda. The avenues available to political campaigns when
distributing their messages is limited by the law, available resources, and the
imagination of the campaigns' participants. These techniques are often combined
into a formal strategy known as the campaign plan. The plan takes account of a
campaign's goal, message, target audience, and resources available. The
campaign will typically seek to identify supporters at the same time as getting
its message across. Campaign communication. Election campaign communication
refers to party-controlled communication, e.g. campaign advertising, and party-
uncontrolled communication, e.g. media coverage of elections. Campaign
advertising. Campaign advertising is the use of paid media (newspapers, radio,
television, etc.) to influence the decisions made for and by groups. These ads
are designed by political consultants and the campaign's staff. Media
management. The public media (in US parlance 'free media' or 'earned media')
may run the story that someone is trying to get elected or to do something
about such and such. Mass meetings, rallies and protests. Holding protests,
rallies and other similar public events (if enough people can be persuaded to
come) may be a very effective campaign tool. Holding mass meetings with
speakers is powerful as it shows visually, through the number of people in
attendance, the support that the campaign has. Modern technology and the
internet. The internet is now a core element of modern political campaigns.
Communication technologies such as e-mail, web sites, and podcasts for various
forms of activism to enable faster communications by citizen movements and
deliver a message to a large audience. These Internet technologies are used for
cause-related fundraising, lobbying, volunteering, community building, and
organizing. Individual political candidates are also using the internet to
promote their election campaign. Signifying the importance of internet
political campaigning, Barack Obama’s presidential campaign relied heavily on
social media, and new media channels to engage voters, recruit campaign
volunteers, and raise campaign funds. The campaign brought the spotlight on the
importance of using internet in new-age political campaigning by utilizing
various forms of social media and new media (including Facebook, YouTube and a
custom generated social engine) to reach new target populations. The campaign's
social website, my.BarackObama.com, utilized a low cost and efficient method of
mobilizing voters and increasing participation among various voter populations.
This new media was incredibly successful at reaching the younger population
while helping all populations organize and promote action. Husting. A husting,
or the hustings, was originally a physical platform from which representatives
presented their views or cast votes before a parliamentary or other election
body. By metonymy, the term may now refer to any event, such as debates or
speeches, during an election campaign where one or more of the representative
candidates are present. Campaign types. Informational campaign. An
informational campaign is a political campaign designed to raise public
awareness and support for the positions of a candidate (or his party). It is
more intense than a paper campaign, which consists of little more than filing
the necessary papers to get on the ballot, but is less intense than a
competitive campaign, which aims to actually win election to the office. An
informational campaign typically focuses on low-cost outreach such as news
releases, getting interviewed in the paper, making a brochure for door to door
distribution, organizing poll workers, etc. Modern election campaigns in the
United States. Types of elections. The United States is unusual in that dozens
of different offices are filled by election, from drain commissioner to the
President of the United States. Elections happen every year on many different
dates in many different areas of the country. All federal elections (that is,
elections for President and Vice President as well as elections to the House of
Representatives and Senate, are partisan. Elections to most (but not all)
statewide offices are partisan as well, and all state legislatures except for
Nebraska are partisan. Some state and local offices are non-partisan - these
often include judicial elections, special district elections (the most common
of which are elections to the school board, and elections to municipal (town
council, city commission, mayor) and county (county commission, district
attorney, sheriff) office. In some cases, candidates of the same political
party challenging each other and in many cases without any campaign references
to political parties, while in other cases, even non-partisan races may take on
partisan overtones. Process of campaigning. Major campaigns in the United
States are often much longer than those in other democracies. Campaigns start
anywhere from several months to several years before election day. The first
part of any campaign for a candidate is deciding to run. Prospective candidates
will often speak with family, friends, professional associates, elected
officials, community leaders, and the leaders of political parties before
deciding to run. Candidates are often recruited by political parties and lobby
groups interested in electing like-minded politicians. During this period,
people considering running for office will consider their ability to put
together the money, organization, and public image needed to get elected. Many
campaigns for major office do not progress past this point as people often do
not feel confident in their ability to win. However, some candidates lacking
the resources needed for a competitive campaign proceed with an inexpensive
paper campaign or informational campaign designed to raise public awareness and
support for their positions. Once a person decides to run, they will make a
public announcement. This announcement could consist of anything from a simple
press release to concerned media outlets to a major media event followed by a
speaking tour. It is often well-known to many people that a candidate will run
prior to an announcement being made. Campaigns will often be announced and then
only officially "kicked off" months after active campaigning has begun. Being
coy about whether a candidacy is planned is often a deliberate strategy by a
prospective candidate, either to "test the waters" or to keep the media's
attention. One of the most important aspects of the major American political
campaign is the ability to raise large sums of money, especially early on in
the race. Political insiders and donors often judge candidates based on their
ability to raise money. Not raising enough money early on can lead to problems
later as donors are not willing to give funds to candidates they perceive to be
losing, a perception based on their poor fundraising performance. Also during
this period, candidates travel around the area they are running in and meet
with voters; speaking to them in large crowds, small groups, or even one-on-
one. This allows voters to get a better picture of who a candidate is than that
which they read about in the paper or see on television. Campaigns sometimes
launch expensive media campaigns during this time to introduce the candidate to
voters, although most wait until closer to election day. Campaigns often
dispatch volunteers into local communities to meet with voters and persuade
people to support the candidate. The volunteers are also responsible for
identifying supporters, recruiting them as volunteers or registering them to
vote if they are not already registered. The identification of supporters will
be useful later as campaigns remind voters to cast their votes. Late in the
campaign, campaigns will launch expensive television, radio, and direct mail
campaigns aimed at persuading voters to support the candidate. Campaigns will
also intensify their grassroots campaigns, coordinating their volunteers in a
full court effort to win votes. Voting in the United States often starts weeks
before election day as mail-in ballots are a commonly used voting method.
Campaigns will often run two persuasion programs, one aimed at mail-in voters
and one aimed at the more traditional poll voters. Campaigns for minor office
may be relatively simple and inexpensive - talking to local newspapers, giving
out campaign signs, and greeting people in the local square. Political
consultants. Political campaigns in the United States are not merely a civic
ritual and occasion for political debate, but a multi-billion dollar industry,
dominated by professional political consultants using sophisticated campaign
management tools, to an extent far greater than elsewhere in the world. Though
the quadrennial presidential election attracts the most attention, the United
States has a huge number of elected offices and there is wide variation between
different states, counties, and municipalities on which offices are elected and
under what procedures. Moreover, unlike democratic politics in much of the rest
of the world, the US has relatively weak parties. While parties play a
significant role in fundraising and occasionally in drafting people to run,
campaigns are ultimately controlled by the individual candidates themselves.
Other issues and criticisms. Cost of campaign advertising. American political
campaigns have become heavily reliant on broadcast media and direct mail
advertising (typically designed and purchased through specialized consultants).
Though virtually all campaign media are sometimes used at all levels (even
candidates for local office have been known to purchase cable TV ads), smaller,
lower-budget campaigns are typically more focused on direct mail, low-cost
advertising (such as lawn signs), and direct voter contact. This reliance on
expensive advertising is a leading factor behind the rise in the cost of
running for office in the United States. This rising cost is considered by some
to discourage those without well-monied connections, or money themselves, from
running for office. Independent expenditures. Money is raised and spent not
only by candidate's campaign, but also by party committees, political action
committees, and other groups (in the 2004 election cycle, much controversy has
focused on a new category of organization, 527 groups). This is sometimes done
through independent expenditures made in support or opposition of specific
candidates but without any candidate's cooperation or approval. The lack of an
overt connection between a candidate and third party groups allows one side of
a campaign to attack the other side while avoiding criticism for going
negative. A memorable example are the Swift Boat Veterans who criticized John
Kerry in the 2004 Presidential campaign. Future developments. Many political
players and commentators agree that American political campaigns are currently
undergoing a period of change, due to increased use of the internet (which has
become a valuable fundraising tool) and the apparently declining effectiveness
of television advertising. However, as modern technology continues to adapt to
changes in society, Internet campaigning will never be able to serve as a
complete replacement for traditional political campaigning without reducing the
significant barriers to entry. Internet political campaigning leaves out entire
portions of each population because it only is accessible to a certain portion
of the population, leaving those without this access disconnected. For example,
during Obama’s recent presidential campaign, Internet political campaigning
was effective at reaching the younger population, as they remain engaged with
social websites and new media. Because of the limits of technology, Obama’s
Internet campaign failed to reach older generations who didn’t use this new
media, as well as significant amounts of the population who didn’t have
access. History. Political campaigns have existed as long as there have been
informed citizens to campaign amongst. Often mass campaigns are started by the
less privileged or anti-establishment viewpoints (as against more powerful
interests whose first resort is lobbying). The phenomenon of political
campaigns are tightly tied to lobby groups and political parties. The first
'modern' campaign is thought to be William Ewart Gladstone's Midlothian
campaign in the 1880s, although there may be earlier recognizably modern
examples from the 19th century. Democratic societies have regular election
campaigns, but political campaigning can occur on particular issues even in
non-democracies so long as freedom of expression is allowed. American election
campaigns in the 19th century created the first mass-base political parties and
invented many of the techniques of mass campaigning. In the 1790-1820s, the
Federalist Party and the Democratic-Republican Party battled it out in the so-
called "First Party System". Alternatives to campaigning. Not all democratic
elections involve political campaigning. Indeed, some democratic elections
specifically rule out campaigning on the grounds that campaigning may
compromise the democratic character of the elections, perhaps because of
campaigns' susceptibility to the influence of money, or to the influence of
special interest groups.
