Political economy Political economy was the original term used for studying
production, buying, and selling, and their relations with law, custom, and
government, as well as with the distribution of national income and wealth.
"Political economy" originated in moral philosophy. It developed in the 18th
century as the study of the economies of states, "polities", hence the term
"political" economy. In the late 19th century, the term "economics" came to
replace "political economy", coinciding with publication of an influential
textbook by Alfred Marshall in 1890. Earlier, William Stanley Jevons, a
proponent of mathematical methods applied to the subject, advocated "economics"
for brevity and with the hope of the term becoming "the recognised name of a
science." Today, political economy, where it is not used as a synonym for
economics, may refer to very different things, including Marxian analysis,
applied public-choice approaches emanating from the Chicago school and the
Virginia school, or simply the advice given by economists to the government or
public on general economic policy or on specific proposals. A rapidly-growing
mainstream literature from the 1970s has expanded beyond the model of economic
policy in which planners maximize utility of a representative individual toward
examining how political forces affect the choice of policies, especially as to
distributional conflicts and political institutions. It is available as an area
of study in certain colleges and universities. Etymology. Originally,
"political economy" meant the study of the conditions under which production or
consumption within limited parameters was organized in the nation-states. In
that way, political economy expanded the emphasis of economics, which comes
from the Greek "oikos" (meaning "home") and "nomos" (meaning "law" or "order");
thus political economy was meant to express the laws of production of wealth at
the state level, just as economics was the ordering of the home. The phrase
"économie politique" (translated in English as "political economy") first
appeared in France in 1615 with the well known book by Antoine de
Montchrétien: "Traité de l’economie politique". French physiocrats, Adam
Smith, David Ricardo and German philosopher and social theorist Karl Marx were
some of the exponents of political economy. The world's first professorship in
political economy was established in 1754 at the University of Naples Federico
II, Italy (then capital city of the Kingdom of Naples); the Neapolitan
philosopher Antonio Genovesi was the first tenured professor; in 1763 Joseph
von Sonnenfels was appointed a Political Economy chair at the University of
Vienna, Austria. In 1805, Thomas Malthus became England's first professor of
political economy, at the East India Company College, Haileybury,
Hertfordshire. In the United States, political economy first was taught at the
College of William and Mary; in 1784, Adam Smith's "The Wealth of Nations" was
a required textbook. The University of Glasgow, where Smith was Professor of
Logic and Moral Philosophy, changed the name of its Department of Political
Economy to the Department of Economics (ostensibly to avoid confusing
prospective undergraduates) in academic year 1997–98, making the class of
1998 the last to be graduated with a Scottish Master of Arts degree in
Political Economy.
