Political theatre In the history of theatre, there is long tradition of
performances addressing issues of current events and central to society itself,
encouraging consciousness and social change. The political satire performed by
the comic poets at the theatres, had considerable influence on public opinion
in the Athenian democracy. Those earlier Western dramas, arising out of the
polis, or democratic city-state of Greek society, were performed in
amphitheatres, central arenas used for theatrical performances, religious
ceremonies and political gatherings; these dramas had a ritualistic and social
significance that enhanced the relevance of the political issues being
examined. And one must marvel at the open-minded examination of controversial
and critical topics that took place right in the political heart of Athenian
society, allowing a courageous self-examination of the first democracy trying
to develop and refine itself further Shakespeare is an author of political
theatre according to some academic scholars, who observe that his history plays
examine the machinations of personal drives and passions determining political
activity and that many of the tragedies such as "King Lear" and "Macbeth"
dramatize political leadership and complexity subterfuges of human beings
driven by the lust for power; for example, they observe that class struggle in
the Roman Republic is central to Coriolanus. Historically in Soviet Russia, the
term political theatre was sometimes referred to as agitprop theatre or simply
agitprop, after the Soviet term agitprop. Recent political drama. In later
centuries, political theatre has sometimes taken a different form. Sometimes
associated with cabaret and folk theatre, it has offered itself as a theatre
'of, by, and for the people'. In this guise, political theatre has developed
within the civil societies under oppressive governments as a means of actual
underground communication and the spreading of critical thought. Often
political theatre has been used to promote specific political theories or
ideals, for example in the way agitprop theatre has been used to further
Marxism and the development of communist sympathies. Russian agitprop theater
was noted for its cardboard characters of perfect virtue and complete evil, and
its coarse ridicule. But Marxist theatre wasn't always this directly
agitational. Bertolt Brecht developed a highly elaborate and sophisticated new
aesthetics--epic theater--to address the spectator in a more rational way.
Brecht's aesthetics have influenced political playwrights throughout the world,
especially in India and Africa. Augusto Boal developed the Brechtian form of
"Lehrstücke" into his internationally acclaimed "Theatre of the Oppressed",
with its now-widespread techniques of --'forum theatre' and 'invisible
theatre'--to further social change. Boal's work in this area has contributed to
the emergence of the Theatre for Development movement across the world. In the
sixties playwrights like Peter Weiss adopted a more 'documentary' approach
towards political theatre, following on from the example of Erwin Piscator in
the twenties. Weiss wrote plays closely based on historical documents like the
proceedings of the Auschwitz trial in Frankfurt. Less radical versions of
political theatre have become established within the mainstream modern
repertory - such as the realist dramas of Arthur Miller ("The Crucible" and
"All My Sons"), which probe the behavior of human beings as social and
political animals. A new form of political theatre emerged in the twentieth
century with feminist authors like Elfriede Jelinek or Caryl Churchill, who
often make use of the non-realistic techniques detailed above.. During the
1960s and 1970s, new theatres emerged addressing women's issues. These theatres
went beyond producting feminist plays, but also sought to give women
opportunities and work experience in all areas of theaterical production which
had heretofore been dominated by men. In addition to playwright, producers, and
actors, there were opportunities for women electricians, set designers, musical
director, stage managers, etc. These NYC based groups included the Westbeth
Playwrights Feminist Collective, It's Allright to be a Woman, Spiderwoman
Theater, Women's Interart Center, and the New Feminist Theater. The Living
Theatre, created by Judith Malina and her husband Julian Beck in 1947, which
had its heyday in the 1960s, during the Vietnam War, is a primary example of
politically oriented Brechtian performance art in the United States. Their
original productions of Kenneth Brown's "The Brig" (c. 1964), also filmed, and
of Jack Gelber's controversial play "The Connection" and its 1961 film rely
upon and illustrate the dramaturgy of Brechtian alienation effect
("Verfremdungseffekt") that most political theatre uses to some extent, forcing
the audience to take a "critical perspective" on events being dramatized or
projected on screen(s) and building on aspects of the Theatre of Cruelty, which
developed from the theory and practice of French early surrealist and proto-
absurdist Antonin Artaud. In American regional theatre, a politically oriented
social orientation occurs in Street theatre, such as that produced by the San
Francisco Mime Troupe and ROiL. The Detroit Repertory Theatre has been among
those regional theaters at the forefront of political comedy, staging plays
like Jacob M. Appel's Arborophilia, in which a lifelong Democrat prefers that
her daughter fall in love with a poplar tree instead of a Republican activist.
John McGrath, founder of the Scottish popular theatre company , argued that
"the theatre can never 'cause' a social change. It can articulate pressure
towards one, help people celebrate their strengths and maybe build their self-
confidence… Above all, it can be the way people find their voice, their
solidarity and their collective determination". In another context, that of
real-life politics, or what some refer to, more pejoratively, as "Realpolitik",
in recent speeches U.S. President George W. Bush has denounced some political
action taken by Democrats opposed to his agenda as "political theatre". The
Iraq War is the focus of some recent British political drama; for example,
"Stuff Happens", by David Hare. David Edgar and Mark Ravenhill also satirize
contemporary socio-political realities in their recent dramatic works. Banner
Theatre in Birmingham, England, in the United Kingdom, is an example of a
specific kind of political theatre called Documentary theatre. Contemporary
Context of "Political Theatre": Theatrics as Protest Politics (as opposed to
Politics in Theatre). All of the above refers to politics in theatre or
theatrics in poliltics, but a more contemporary meaning of the term "Political
Theatre" refers to theatrical acts of protest performed by surprise in public
to draw attention to political issues. The practitioners most famous for the
art are Abbie Hoffman and other Yippies. Bare-breasted women at Occupy
protests, the 2012 campaign of Presidential candidate Vermin Supreme, and (in
some cases) flash mobs are other examples.
