Policy by press release Policy by press release refers to the act of attempting
to influence public policy through press releases intended to alarm the public
into demanding action from their elected officials. The practice is frowned
upon, but remains effective and widely used. In modern times, the term is used
to dismiss an opponent's claims, suggesting they are lacking in substance and
created to generate media attention. Use during the Cold War. Perhaps the most
common use of the term refers to an infamous period during the Eisenhower
administration when "leaked" documents were a common way for the various
branches of the US Military to attempt to garner funding for their pet projects
when traditional chains of command failed, or actively ended them. Practically
any idea, no matter how outlandish, could gain some traction by simply claiming
that the Soviet Union was working on a similar device. The first, and most
costly, example of this behavior was the mythical "bomber gap". After seeing
the latest Soviet designs in 1955, a clamor broke out in Washington about the
Soviets developing a lead in deploying strategic bombers, with estimates that
hundreds would be available shortly. The result was a massive expansion of the
US's own building program, which led to the eventual introduction of about
2,500 jet bombers. Although it was not revealed at the time, US intelligence
services had actually made real estimates of the size of the Soviet fleet as
early as 1956, placing it around twenty aircraft. Nevertheless, the tactic of
claiming the gap existed, and then brushing aside any criticism as being "weak
on defense", was so successful it led to a wave of similar claims. Another
famous case was a claim that suggested the Soviets were working on a global-
range nuclear aircraft. An article, complete with "leaked images", appeared in
the December 1958 issue of "Aviation Week". The article described a system that
was suspiciously similar to some of the designs currently under consideration
by large US aviation companies. Concerns were soon expressed in Washington that
""the Russians were from three to five years ahead of the US in the field of
atomic aircraft engines and that they would move even further ahead unless the
US pressed forward with its own program"". In fact, the entire article was a
hoax: the aircraft appearing in the pictures was later revealed through 3rd
parties to be the entirely conventional Myasishchev M-50 "Bounder", which never
entered production. The rumored aircraft was a nuclear-powered version of the
Tupolev Tu-95 bomber, called Tupolev Tu-119. The controversy managed to secure,
for a time, continued funding of US efforts, culminating in the NB-36 testbed
aircraft. Another apparent case of policy by press release during this period
was the famous "Look" article on flying saucers. At the time the US Air Force
and (later) the US Army were funding the development of the Avrocar at Avro
Canada in Toronto. The article, in the 14 June 1955 edition, suggested that the
recent wave of saucer reports were possibly due to Soviet flying saucers, and
went on to describe them and their capabilities. It included several images
that appeared to be provided to them by Avro Canada, or someone in contact with
them, including a description of the control system which was identical to the
one used on the Avrocar. In the end the concept proved unfeasible, and the
Avrocar project was eventually cancelled in 1961. This article nevertheless
remains famous to this day, as it is often presented as a US Government
misinformation campaign to deflect attention away from "real" UFO's, although
to exactly what end varies. Contemporary use. The term is more commonly used
today, especially in the U.S., in reference to environmental policy, although
it is still used in discussions of defense policy. Myriad claims asserting
global warming or ozone depletion have been described by editorialists such as
Mark Martin and the Chronicle Sacramento Bureau, and Dr. Hugh Ellsaesser as
"policy by press release". Likewise, the implication that Iraq was involved in
the 9-11 attacks, or had Weapons of Mass Destruction based on evidence the
CIA's own reports dismissed, was described as "policy by press release" by John
Kerry and Lou Dobbs. A related term, "public health by press release," is
occasionally used ironically to imply official pronouncements or media
campaigns belie inadequate effort or funding, though it appeared in an article
warning against a pitfall from the opposite direction (potential mis-assessment
of limited clinical studies by press and policymakers).
