Polynesia Polynesia (from Greek: œÄŒøŒªœçœÇ "polys" "many" + ŒΩ·øÜœÉŒøœÇ
"nƒìsos" "island") is a subregion of Oceania, made up of over 1,000 islands
scattered over the central and southern Pacific Ocean. The indigenous people
who inhabit the islands of Polynesia are termed Polynesians and they share many
similar traits including language, culture and beliefs. Historically, they were
experienced sailors and used stars to navigate during the night. The term
"Polynesia" was first used in 1756 by French writer Charles de Brosses, and
originally applied to all the islands of the Pacific. In 1831, Jules Dumont
d'Urville proposed a restriction on its use during a lecture to the
Geographical Society of Paris. Geography. Geology. Polynesia is characterized
by a small amount of land spread over 70.1 million square miles of Pacific
Ocean. Most Polynesian islands and archipelagos, including the Hawaiian islands
and Samoa, are composed of volcanic islands built by hotspots. New Zealand,
Norfolk Island, and Ouv√©a, the Polynesian outlier near New Caledonia, are the
unsubmerged portions of the largely sunken continent of Zealandia. Zealandia is
believed to have mostly sunken by 23 mya and resurfaced geologically recently
due to a change in the movements of the Pacific Plate in relation to the Indo-
Australian plate, which served to uplift the New Zealand portion. At first, the
Pacific plate was subducted under the Australian plate. The Alpine Fault that
traverses the South Island is currently a transform fault while the convergent
plate boundary from the North Island Northwards is a subduction zone called the
Kermadec-Tonga Subduction Zone. The volcanism associated with this subduction
zone is the origin of the Kermadec and Tongan island archipelagos. Out of about
117,000 or 118,000 square miles of land, over 103,000 square miles are within
New Zealand; about half the remainder comprises the Hawaiian archipelago. The
Zealandia continent has approximately 1.4 million square miles of continental
shelf. The oldest rocks in the region are found in New Zealand and are believed
to be about 510 million years old. The oldest Polynesian rocks outside of
Zealandia are to be found in the Hawaiian Emperor Seamount Chain, and are 80
million years old. Geographic area. Polynesia is generally defined as the
islands within the Polynesian Triangle although there are some islands that are
inhabited by Polynesian people situated outside the Polynesian Triangle.
Geographically, the Polynesian Triangle is drawn by connecting the points of
Hawaii, New Zealand and Easter Island. The other main island groups located
within the Polynesian Triangle are Samoa, Tonga, the Cook Islands, Tuvalu,
Tokelau, Niue, Wallis and Futuna and French Polynesia. There are also small
Polynesian settlements in Papua New Guinea, the Solomon Islands, The Caroline
Islands, and in Vanuatu. An island group with strong Polynesian cultural traits
outside of this great triangle is Rotuma; situated north of Fiji. The people of
Rotuma have many common Polynesian traits but speak a non-Polynesian language.
Some of the Lau Islands to the southeast of Fiji have strong historic and
cultural links with Tonga. However, in essence, Polynesia is a cultural term
referring to one of the three parts of Oceania (the others being Micronesia and
Melanesia). DNA studies suggest that the indigenous Pacific Islands population
migrated from Taiwan thousands of years ago and dispersed throughout the region
into three distinct cultural groups. Island groups. The following are the
islands and island groups, either nations or overseas territories of former
colonial powers, that are of native Polynesian culture or where archaeological
evidence indicates Polynesian settlement in the past. Some islands of
Polynesian origin are outside the general triangle that geographically defines
the region. History of the Polynesian people. Mainstream theories. The
Polynesian people are considered to be by linguistic, archaeological and human
genetic ancestry a subset of the sea-migrating Austronesian people and tracing
Polynesian languages places their prehistoric origins, ultimately, in Taiwan.
At about 2000 BC speakers of Austronesian languages began spreading from Taiwan
into Island Southeast Asia. Their speech of the time was not clearly related to
Chinese speech of the time and Chinese speakers were all further north on the
mainland at the turn of the second and third millennia BC. Taiwan was only
later Sinicized via large-scale immigration accompanied by much assimilation of
the Austronesian speaking indigenous people during the 17th century AD. In the
archaeological record there are well-defined traces of this expansion which
allow the path it took to be followed and dated with some certainty. It is
thought that by roughly 1400 BC, "Lapita Peoples", so-named after their pottery
tradition, appeared in the Bismarck Archipelago of northwest Melanesia. This
culture is seen as having adapted and evolved through time and space since its
emergence "Out of Taiwan". They had given up rice production, for instance,
after encountering and adapting to breadfruit in the Bird's Head area of New
Guinea. In the end, the most eastern site for Lapita archaeological remains
recovered so far has been through work on the archaeology in Samoa. The site is
at Mulifanua on Upolu. The Mulifanua site, where 4,288 pottery shards have been
found and studied, has a "true" age of c. 1000 BC based on C14 dating. Other
long work by other respected archaeologists places the beginning of the human
archaeological sequences of Polynesia in Tonga at 900 B.C., the small
differences in dates with Samoa being due to differences in radiocarbon dating
technologies between 1989 and 2010, the Tongan site apparently predating the
Samoan site by some few decades in real time. Within a mere three or four
centuries between about 1300 and 900 BC, the Lapita archaeological culture
spread 6,000¬ km further to the east from the Bismarck Archipelago, until it
reached as far as Fiji, Tonga, and Samoa which were first populated around
3,000 years ago as mentioned previously. A cultural divide began to develop
between Fiji to the west, and the distinctive Polynesian language and culture
emerging on Tonga and Samoa to the east. Where there was once faint evidence of
uniquely shared developments in Fijian and Polynesian speech, most of this is
now called "borrowing" and is thought to have occurred insidiously in those and
later years more than as a result of continuing unity of their earliest
dialects on those far flung lands. Contacts were mediated especially through
the eastern Lau Islands of Fiji and this is where most Fijian-Polynesian
linguistic interaction occurred. Tiny populations seem to have been involved at
first. They were matrilineal and matrilocal peoples upon arrival to Fiji, Tonga
and Samoa and had been through at least some goodly portion of their time in
the Bismarck Archipelago. The modern Polynesians, in their profound isolation
from the world beyond, still show the human genetic results of a culture, when
their ancestors were still in Melanesia, that allowed indigenous men, but not
women, to "marry in" - deadly useful evidence for matrilocality. Matrilocality
and matrilineality went by-the-bye at some early time but Polynesians and most
other Austronesian speakers in the Pacific Islands were/are still highly
"matricentric" in their traditional jurisprudence. The Lapita pottery for which
the general archaeological complex of the earliest "Oceanic" Austronesian
speakers in the Pacific Islands are named also went by-the-bye in Western
Polynesia and language, social life and material culture were very distinctly
"Polynesian" by the time Eastern Polynesia began to be settled after a "Pause"
of 1000 years or perhaps well more in Western Polynesia. The dating of the
settlement of Eastern Polynesia including Hawai'i, Easter Island, and New
Zealand is not agreed upon in every instance. Most recently a 2010 study using
meta-analysis of the most reliable radiocarbon dates available suggested that
the colonization of Eastern Polynesia (including Hawaii and New Zealand)
proceeded in two short episodes: in the Society Islands from 1025‚Äì1120 AD and
further afield from 1190‚Äì1290 AD, with Easter Island being settled around
1200. Other archeological models developed in recent decades, which are
challenged by that recent set of radiocarbon dating interpretations, have
pointed to dates of between 300 and 500 AD, or alternatively 800 AD (as
supported by Jared Diamond) for the settlement of Easter Island, and similarly,
a date of 500 AD has been suggested for Hawaii. Linguistically, there is a very
distinct "East Polynesian" subgroup with many shared innovations not seen in
other Polynesian languages. Easter Island Rapa Nui is mysteriously the first to
have established itself outside the group. The Marquesas dialects seem to be
the source of the oldest Hawaiian speech which is overlaid by Tahitian variety
speech, as Hawaiian oral histories would suggest. The earliest varieties of New
Zealand Maori speech may have had multiple sources from around central Eastern
Polynesia as Maori oral histories would suggest. Much linguistic and
archaeological work has been done since World War II but it will apparently
take a good deal more to resolve the "oldest", "only", and "never" sorts of
questions the linguists, archaeologists, geneticists and others have been able
to resolve to some extent for Western Polynesia. Political history of
Polynesia. Perhaps the oldest extensive political entity was that of the Samoa-
based Tu'i Manu'a Confederacy, ruled by the holders of the Tu'i Manu'a title,
which may well be the oldest chieftain title in Polynesia. This confederacy
likely included much of Western Polynesia and some outliers at the height of
its power in the 10th and 11th centuries; most notably: the Samoa, Tonga, Lau
Islands and perhaps the main islands of Fiji. The Tongans revolted around 1000
years ago and formed their own Tu'i Tonga empire that came to dominate Samoa,
Tonga, and Fiji, with an influence stretching from Nauru in the Northwest, to
Niue in the East. The empire ruled for much of the Medieval period, until the
Samoan revolt and subsequent rise of the Malietoa dynasties in Samoa, and ended
with their capitulation to the Tongan Tu'i Ha'atakalaua dynasty in the 15th
century. Tonga 1500s‚Äìpresent. After a bloody civil war, political power in
Tonga eventually fell under the Tu'i Kanokupolu dynasty in the 16th century. In
1845 the ambitious young warrior, strategist, and orator TƒÅufa ªƒÅhau united
Tonga into more Western-style kingdom. He held the chiefly title of Tu ªi
Kanokupolu, but had been baptisedwhom? with the name Jiaoji ("George") in 1831.
In 1875, with the help of missionary Shirley Waldemar Baker, he declared Tonga
a constitutional monarchy, formally adopted the western royal style,
emancipated the "serfs", enshrined a code of law, land tenure, and freedom of
the press, and limited the power of the chiefs. Tonga became a British-
protected state under a Treaty of Friendship on 18 May 1900, when European
settlers and rival Tongan chiefs tried to oust the second king. Within the
British Empire, which posted no higher permanent representative on Tonga than a
British Consul (1901‚Äì1970), Tonga formed part of the British Western Pacific
Territories (under a colonial High Commissioner, residing on Fiji) from 1901
until 1952. Despite being under the protectorate, Tonga retained its monarchy
without interruption. On June 4, 1970 the Kingdom of Tonga received
independence from the British protectorate. Samoa Malietoa‚Äìpresent. Samoa
remained under Malietoa chieftains until its East-West division by Tripartite
Convention (1899) subsequent annexation by the German Empire and the United
States. The German-controlled Western portion of Samoa (the consisting of the
bulk of Samoan territory) was occupied by New Zealand in WWI, and administered
by it under a Class C League of Nations Mandate until receiving independence on
January 1, 1962. The new Independent State of Samoa was not a monarchy, though
the Malietoa title-holder remained very influential. It officially ended,
however with the death of Malietoa Tanumafili II on May 11, 2007. Tahiti. See:
Pomare Dynasty. Hawaii. See: Kingdom of Hawaii. New Zealand Maori. On October
28, 1835 members of the NgƒÅ Puhi and surrounding iwi issued a "declaration of
independence", as a "confederation of tribes" to resist potential French
colonization efforts and to prevent the ships and cargo of Maori merchants from
being seized at foreign ports. They received recognition from the British
monarch in 1836. (See United Tribes of New Zealand, New Zealand Declaration of
Independence, James Busby.) Using the Treaty of Waitangi and right of discovery
as a basis, the United Kingdom annexed New Zealand as a part of New South Wales
in 1840. In response to the actions of the colonial government, Maori looked to
form monarchy inclusive of all Maori tribes in order to reduce vulnerability to
the British divide-and-conquer strategy. P≈çtatau Te Wherowhero high priest and
chief of the NgƒÅti Mahuta tribe of the Waikato iwi was crowned as the Maori
king in 1858. The king's territory consisted primarily of the lands in the
center of the North Island, and the iwi constituted from the most powerful non-
signatories of the Treaty of Waitangi, with Te Wherowhero also never having
signed it. (See Kingitanga.) All tribes were pressed into subjection to the
colonial government by the late 19th century. Although Maori were given the
privilege of being legally enfranchised subjects of the British Empire under
the Treaty, Maori culture and language were actively suppressed by the colonial
government and by economic and social pressures from the Pakeha society until
efforts were made to preserve indigenous culture starting in the late 1950s and
culminating in the Waitangi Tribunal's interpretation of language and culture
being included in the treasures set to be preserved under the Treaty of
Waitangi. Moving from a low point of 15,000 speakers in the 1970s, there are
now over 157,000 people who have some proficiency in the standard MƒÅori
language according to the 2006 census in New Zealand, due in large part to
government recognition and promotion of the language. Maori are very much
integrated into New Zealand society, and many are of mixed Maori and European,
Asian, or Pacific Islander heritage. The New Zealand Defense forces are over
half Maori, and the New Zealand Special Forces are 2/3 Maori. Jerry Mateparae,
the former chief of the armed forces, now serves as Governor-General of New
Zealand. However, despite major achievements towards equality, Maori are still
under-represented in many fields. Fiji. The Lau islands had after the Tu'i
Mana'u dynasty were subject to periods of Tongan and then Fijian control until
their eventual conquest by Seru Epenisa Cakobau of the Kingdom of Fiji by 1871.
In around 1855 a Tongan prince, Enele Ma'afu, proclaimed the Lau islands as his
kingdom, and took the title Tui Lau. Fiji itself had been ruled by numerous
divided chieftains until Cakobau unified the landmass. The Lapita culture, the
ancestors of the Polynesians, existed in Fiji from 3500 BCE until they were
displaced by the Melanesians about a thousand years later. (Interestingly,
Samoans and subsequent Polynesian cultures adopted Melanesian face painting
methods.) In 1873, Cakobau ceded a Fiji heavily indebted to foreign creditors
to the United Kingdom. It became independent on 10 October 1970 and a republic
on 28 September 1987. Cook Islands. See: Kingdom of Rarotonga. Tuvalu. The
stories as to the ancestors of the Tuvaluans vary from island to island. On
Funafuti and Vaitupu the founding ancestor is described as being from Samoa;
whereas on Nanumea the founding ancestor is described as being from Tonga.
These stories can be linked to what is known about the Samoa-based Tu'i Manu'a
Confederacy, ruled by the holders of the Tu'i Manu'a title, which confederacy
likely included much of Western Polynesia and some outliers at the height of
its power in the 10th and 11th centuries. The extent of influence of the Tu ªi
Tonga line of Tongan kings, which originated in the 10th century is understood
to have extended to some of the islands of Tuvalu in the mid-13th century.
However the existence of the Tu ªi Tonga Empire is disputed. The history of
Niutao recalls that in the 15th century Tongan warriors were defeated in a
battle on the reef of Niutao, Tongan warriors also invaded Niutao later in the
15th century and again were repelled. A third and fourth invasion of Tongan
occurred in the late 16th century, again with the Tongans being defeated. (See:
History of Tuvalu.) Polynesian links to the Americas. The sweet potato, called
"k≈´mara" in MƒÅori, which is native to the Americas, was widespread in
Polynesia when Europeans first reached the Pacific. Remains of the plant have
been radiocarbon-dated in the Cook Islands to 1000 AD, and current thinking is
that it was brought to central Polynesia circa 700 CE and spread across
Polynesia from there, possibly by Polynesians who had traveled to South America
and back. Thor Heyerdahl proposed in the mid-20th century that the Polynesians
had migrated from South America on balsa-log boats. Many anthropologists have
criticised Heyerdahl's theory, including Wade Davis in his book "The
Wayfinders". Davis says that Heyerdahl "ignored the overwhelming body of
linguistic, ethnographic, and ethnobotanical evidence, augmented today by
genetic and archaeological data, indicating that he was patently wrong."
Cultures of Polynesia. Polynesia divides into two distinct cultural groups,
East Polynesia and West Polynesia. The culture of West Polynesia is conditioned
to high populations. It has strong institutions of marriage and well-developed
judicial, monetary and trading traditions. It comprises the groups of Tonga,
Niue, Samoa and the northwestern Polynesian outliers. Eastern Polynesian
cultures are highly adapted to smaller islands and atolls, principally the Cook
Islands, Tahiti, the Tuamotus, the Marquesas, Hawaii, Rapa Nui and smaller
central-pacific groups. The large islands of New Zealand were first settled by
Eastern Polynesians who adapted their culture to a non-tropical environment.
Unlike in Melanesia, leaders were chosen in Polynesia based on their hereditary
bloodline. Samoa however, had another system of government that combines
elements of heredity and real-world skills to choose leaders. This system is
called Fa'amatai. According to Ben R. Finney and Eric M. Jones, "On Tahiti, for
example, the 35,000 Polynesians living there at the time of European discovery
were divided between high-status persons with full access to food and other
resources, and low-status persons with limited access." Religion, farming,
fishing, weather prediction, out-rigger canoe (similar to modern catamarans)
construction and navigation were highly developed skills because the population
of an entire island depended on them. Trading of both luxuries and mundane
items was important to all groups. Periodic droughts and subsequent famines
often lead to war. Many low-lying islands could suffer severe famine if their
gardens were poisoned by the salt from the storm-surge of a hurricane. In these
cases fishing, the primary source of protein, would not ease loss of food
energy. Navigators, in particular, were highly respected and each island
maintained a house of navigation with a canoe-building area. Settlements by the
Polynesians were of two categories: the hamlet and the village. Size of the
island inhabited determined whether or a not a hamlet would be built. The
larger volcanic islands usually had hamlets because of the many zones that
could be divided across the island. Food and resources were more plentiful and
so these settlements of four to five houses (usually with gardens) were
established so that there would be no overlap between the zones. Villages, on
the other hand, were built on the coasts of smaller islands and consisted of
thirty or more houses‚Äîin the case of atolls, on only one of the group so that
food cultivation was on the others. Usually these villages were fortified with
walls and palisades made of stone and wood. However, New Zealand demonstrates
the opposite: large volcanic islands with fortified villages. As well as being
great navigators these people were artists and artisans of great skill. Simple
objects, such as fish-hooks would be manufactured to exacting standards for
different catches and decorated even when the decoration was not part of the
function. Stone and wooden weapons were considered to be more powerful the
better they were made and decorated. In some island groups weaving was a strong
part of the culture and gifting woven articles an ingrained practice. Dwellings
were imbued with character by the skill of their building. Body decoration and
jewellery is of international standard to this day. The religious attributes of
Polynesians were common over the whole Pacific region. While there are some
differences in their spoken languages they largely have the same explanation
for the creation of the earth and sky, for the gods that rule aspects of life
and for the religious practices of everyday life. People travelled thousands of
miles to celebrations that they all owned communally. Due to relatively large
numbers of competitive sects of Christian missionaries in the islands, many
Polynesian groups have been converted to Christianity. Polynesian languages.
Polynesian languages are all members of the family of Oceanic languages, a sub-
branch of the Austronesian language family. Polynesian languages show a
considerable degree of similarity. The vowels are generally the same‚Äîa, e, i,
o, and u, pronounced as in Italian, Spanish, and German‚Äîand the consonants
are always followed by a vowel. The languages of various island groups show
changes in consonants. "R" and "v" are used in central and eastern Polynesia
whereas "l" and "v" are used in western Polynesia. The glottal stop is
increasingly represented by an inverted comma or 'okina. In the Society
Islands, the original Proto-Polynesian *"k" and *"ng" have merged as glottal
stop; so the name for the ancestral homeland, deriving from Proto-Nuclear
Polynesian "*sawaiki", becomes Havai'i. In New Zealand, where the original *"w"
is used instead of "v", the ancient home is Hawaiki. In the Cook Islands, where
the glottal stop replaces the original *"s" (with a likely intermediate stage
of *"h"), it is ‚ÄòAvaiki. In the Hawaiian islands, where the glottal stop
replaces the original "k", the largest island of the group is named Hawai‚Äòi.
In Samoa, where the original "s" is used instead of "h", "v" replaces "w", and
the glottal stop replaces the original "k", the largest island is called
Savai'i. Economy. With the exception of New Zealand, the majority of
independent Polynesian islands derive much of their income from foreign aid and
remittances from those who live in other countries. Some encourage their young
people to go where they can earn good money to remit to their stay-at-home
relatives. Many Polynesian locations, such as Easter Island, supplement this
with tourism income. Some have more unusual sources of income, such as Tuvalu
which marketed its '.tv' internet top-level domain name or the Cooks that
relied on stamp sales. Political union. After several years of discussing a
potential regional grouping, three sovereign states (Samoa, Tonga and Tuvalu)
and five self-governing but non-sovereign territories formally launched, in
November 2011, the Polynesian Leaders Group, intended to cooperate on a variety
of issues including culture and language, education, responses to climate
change, and trade and investment. It does not, however, constitute a political
or monetary union. Polynesian navigation. Polynesia comprised islands diffused
throughout a triangular area with sides of four thousand miles. The area from
the Hawaiian Islands in the north, to Easter Island in the east and to New
Zealand in the south were all settled by Polynesians. Navigators traveled to
small inhabited islands using only their own senses and knowledge passed by
oral tradition from navigator to apprentice. In order to locate directions at
various times of day and year, navigators in Eastern Polynesia memorized
important facts: the motion of specific stars, and where they would rise on the
horizon of the ocean; weather; times of travel; wildlife species (which
congregate at particular positions); directions of swells on the ocean, and how
the crew would feel their motion; colors of the sea and sky, especially how
clouds would cluster at the locations of some islands; and angles for
approaching harbors. These wayfinding techniques, along with outrigger canoe
construction methods, were kept as guild secrets. Generally each island
maintained a guild of navigators who had very high status; in times of famine
or difficulty these navigators could trade for aid or evacuate people to
neighboring islands. To this day, original traditional methods of Polynesian
Navigation are still taught in the Polynesian outlier of Taumako Island in the
Solomon Islands. A published, apparently pre-Columbian, Chilean specimen and
six pre-European Polynesian specimens also cluster with the same European/
Indian subcontinental/Southeast Asian sequences, providing no support for a
Polynesian introduction of chickens to South America. In contrast, sequences
from two archaeological sites on Easter Island group with an uncommon
haplogroup from Indonesia, Japan, and China and may represent a genetic
signature of an early Polynesian dispersal. Modeling of the potential marine
carbon contribution to the Chilean archaeological specimen casts further doubt
on claims for pre-Columbian chickens, and definitive proof will require further
analyses of ancient DNA sequences and radiocarbon and stable isotope data from
archaeological excavations within both Chile and Polynesia. Knowledge of the
traditional Polynesian methods of navigation were largely lost after contact
with and colonization by Europeans. This left the problem of accounting for the
presence of the Polynesians in such isolated and scattered parts of the
Pacific. By the late 19th century to the early 20th century a more generous
view of Polynesian navigation had come into favor, perhaps creating a romantic
picture of their canoes, seamanship and navigational expertise. In the mid to
late 1960s, scholars began testing sailing and paddling experiments related to
Polynesian navigation: David Lewis sailed his catamaran from Tahiti to New
Zealand using stellar navigation without instruments and Ben Finney built a 40-
foot replica of a Hawaiian double canoe "Nalehia" and tested it in Hawaii.
Meanwhile, Micronesian ethnographic research in the Caroline Islands revealed
that traditional stellar navigational methods were still in every day use.
Recent re-creations of Polynesian voyaging have used methods based largely on
Micronesian methods and the teachings of a Micronesian navigator, Mau Piailug.
It is probable that the Polynesian navigators employed a whole range of
techniques including use of the stars, the movement of ocean currents and wave
patterns, the air and sea interference patterns caused by islands and atolls,
the flight of birds, the winds and the weather. Scientists think that long-
distance Polynesian voyaging followed the seasonal paths of birds. There are
some references in their oral traditions to the flight of birds and some say
that there were range marks onshore pointing to distant islands in line with
these flyways. One theory is that they would have taken a frigatebird with
them. These birds refuse to land on the water as their feathers will become
waterlogged making it impossible to fly. When the voyagers thought they were
close to land they may have released the bird, which would either fly towards
land or else return to the canoe. It is likely that the Polynesians also used
wave and swell formations to navigate. It is thought that the Polynesian
navigators may have measured the time it took to sail between islands in
"canoe-days‚Äô‚Äô or a similar type of expression. Also, people of the Marshall
Islands used special devices called stick charts, showing the places and
directions of swells and wave-breaks, with tiny seashells affixed to them to
mark the positions of islands along the way. Materials for these maps were
readily available on beaches, and their making was simple; however, their
effective use needed years and years of study.
