Polybius Polybius (; c. 200‚Äì118 BC), Greek ) was a Greek historian of the
Hellenistic Period noted for his work, "The Histories", which covered the
period of 264‚Äì146 BC in detail. The work describes in part the rise of the
Roman Republic and its gradual domination over Greece. Polybius is also
renowned for his ideas concerning the separation of powers in government, later
used in Montesquieu's "The Spirit of the Laws" and in the drafting of the
United States Constitution. Polybius was born in Arcadia around 200 BC. He was
the son of Lycortas, a Greek politician who became Cavalry Commander of the
Achaean League. His father's opposition to Roman control of Macedonia resulted
in his imprisonment. Polybius was then deported to Rome, where Lucius Aemilius
Paulus employed him to tutor his two sons. Polybius had the opportunity to
return to Macedonia in 152 BC; he elected to stay, however, in Rome, as by that
time he had placed his allegiance in the Roman Republic. He became a close
friend of the Roman military commander Scipio Aemilianus, accompanying the
general to Hispania and Africa. Polybius's "The Histories" provides a detailed
account of Rome's ascent to empire and included his eyewitness account of the
Sack of Carthage in 146 BC. Polybius held that historians should only chronicle
events whose participants the historian was able to interview, and was among
the first to champion the notion of having factual integrity in historical
writing, while avoiding bias. Origins. Polybius was born around 200 BC in
Megalopolis, Arcadia, at which time was an active member of the Achaean League.
His father, Lycortas, was a prominent, land-owning politician and member of the
governing class. Consequently, Polybius was able to observe first hand the
political and military affairs of Megalopolis. He developed an interest in
horse riding and hunting, diversions that later commended him to his Roman
captors. In 182 BC, he was given quite an honor when he was chosen to carry the
funeral urn of Philopoemen, one of the most eminent Achaean politicians of his
generation. In either 169 BC or 170 BC, Polybius was elected "hipparchus", or
cavalry leader, election to which often presaged election to the annual
"strategia" or post of chief general. His early political career was devoted
largely towards maintaining the independence of Megalopolis. Personal
experiences. Polybius‚Äô father, Lycortas, was a prominent advocate of
neutrality during the Roman war against Perseus of Macedonia. Lycortas
attracted the suspicion of the Romans, and Polybius subsequently was one of the
1,000 Achaean nobles who were transported to Rome as hostages in 167 BC, and
was detained there for 17 years. In Rome, by virtue of his high culture,
Polybius was admitted to the most distinguished houses, in particular to that
of Aemilius Paulus, the conqueror in the Third Macedonian War, who entrusted
Polybius with the education of his sons, Fabius and Scipio Aemilianus (who had
been adopted by the eldest son of Scipio Africanus). As the former tutor of
Scipio Aemilianus, Polybius remained on cordial terms with his former pupil and
remained a counselor to vanquisher of the Carthaginians in the Third Punic War.
The younger Scipio eventually destroyed Carthage in 146 BC. When the Achaean
hostages were released in 150 BC, Polybius was granted leave to return home,
but the next year he went on campaign with Scipio Aemilianus to Africa, and was
present at the capture of Carthage, which he later described. Following the
destruction of Carthage, Polybius likely journeyed along the Atlantic coast of
Africa, as well as Spain. Following the destruction of Corinth in the same
year, Polybius returned to Greece, making use of his Roman connections to
lighten the conditions there. Polybius was charged with the difficult task of
organizing the new form of government in the Greek cities, and in this office
he gained great recognition. Rome. In the succeeding years, Polybius resided in
Rome, completing his historical work while occasionally undertaking long
journeys through the Mediterranean countries in the furtherance of his history,
in particular with the aim of obtaining firsthand knowledge of historical
sites. He apparently interviewed veterans to clarify details of the events he
was recording and was similarly given access to archival material. Little is
known of Polybius' later life; he most likely accompanied Scipio to Spain,
acting as his military advisor during the Numantine War. He later wrote about
this war in a lost monograph. Polybius probably returned to Greece later in his
life, as evidenced by the many existent inscriptions and statues of him in
Greece. The last event mentioned in his "Histories" seems to be the
construction of the Via Domitia in southern France in 118 BC, which suggests
the writings of Pseudo-Lucian may have some grounding in fact when he states, "
fell from his horse while riding up from the country, fell ill as a result and
died at the age of eighty-two". "The Histories". The substance of Polybius‚Äô
work is based on historical information and conveys his role as a historian.
His "The Histories" starts in 264 BC and finishes off in 146 BC. He mainly
discusses the years in which Ancient Rome rose to superpower status from 220 BC
to 167 BC, describing Rome's efforts in subduing its arch enemy, Carthage, and
thereby becoming the dominant Mediterranean force. Books I through V of "The
Histories" are the introduction for the years during his lifetime, describing
the politics in each powerful nation, including ancient Greece and Egypt. In
Book VI, Polybius describes the way of the Romans; he discusses the powers of
the different parts of the republic, as well as the rights of the plebeian. He
describes the First and Second Punic Wars. Polybius concludes the Romans are
the pre-eminent power because they are a diverse society in which much of the
public have a voice and contribute. Therefore, the society's thinking becomes
more varied, sparking more individuality and creativity, and ultimately
contributing to the greater good of Rome. Also chronicled are the conflicts
between Hannibal and Cornelius Publius Scipio Africanus such as the Battle of
Ticinus, the Battle of the Trebia, the Siege of Saguntum, the Battle of
Lilybaeum,and the Battle of Rhone Crossing. In Book XII, Polybius discusses the
worth of Timaeus‚Äô account of the same period of history. He asserts Timaeus'
point of view is inaccurate, invalid, and biased in favor of Rome. Therefore,
Polybius's "The Histories" is also useful in analyzing the different
Hellenistic versions of history and of use as a credible illustration of actual
events during the Hellenistic period. Sources. In the seventh volume of his
book "The Histories", Polybius defines the historian's job as the analysis of
documentation, the review of relevant geographical information, and political
experience. In Polybius' time, the profession of a historian required political
experience (which aided in differentiating between fact and fiction) and
familiarity with the geography surrounding one's subject matter to supply an
accurate version of events. Polybius himself exemplified these principles as he
was traveled and possessed political and military experience. He did not
neglect written sources that proved essential material for his histories from
the period from 264 BC to 220 BC. When addressing events after 220 BC, he
conferred with Greek and Roman historians to acquire credible sources of
information, but rarely did he name those sources. As historian. Polybius wrote
several works, the majority of which are lost. His earliest work was a
biography of the Greek statesman Philopoemen; this work was later used as a
source by Plutarch when composing his Parallel Lives, however the original
Polybian text is lost. In addition, Polybius wrote an extensive treatise
entitled "Tactics", which may have detailed Roman and Greek military tactics.
Small parts of this work may survive in his major "Histories", but the work
itself is lost, as well. Another missing work was a historical monograph on the
events of the Numantine War. The largest Polybian work was, of course, his
"Histories", of which only the first five books survive entirely intact, along
with a large portion of the sixth book and fragments of the rest. Along with
Cato the Elder (234-149 BC), he can be considered one of the founding fathers
of Roman historiography. Livy made reference to and uses Polybius' "The
Histories" as source material in his own narrative. Polybius was among the
first historians to attempt to present history as a sequence of causes and
effects, based upon a careful examination and criticism of tradition. He
narrated his history based upon first-hand knowledge. "The Histories" capture
the varied elements of the story of human behavior: nationalism, xenophobia,
duplicitous politics, war, brutality, loyalty, valour, intelligence, reason,
and resourcefulness. Aside from the narrative of the historical events Polybius
chose to examine, he also included three books of digressions. Book 34 was
entirely devoted to questions of geography and included some trenchant
criticisms of Eratosthenes, whom he accused of passing on popular
preconceptions or "laodogmatika". Book 12 was a disquisition on the writing of
history, citing extensive passages of lost historians, such as Callisthenes and
Theopompus. Most influential was Book 6, which describes the military and
political organization of Rome; it presented Rome as a state in which
monarchical, aristocratic, and popular elements were in a stable equilibrium.
This enabled Rome to escape the cycle of eternal revolutions ("anacyclosis").
While Polybius was not the first to advance this view, his account provides the
most cogent illustration of the ideal for later political theorists. A key
theme of "The Histories" is the good statesman is virtuous and composed. The
character of the Polybian statesman exemplified in that of Philip II. His
beliefs as to the character of a good statesman led Polybius to reject
historian Theopompus' description of Philip's private, drunken debauchery. For
Polybius, it was inconceivable that such an able and effective statesman could
have had an immoral and unrestrained private life as described by Theopompus.
Other important themes running through "The Histories" are the role of Fortune
in the affairs of nations, his insistence that history should be demonstratory,
or "apodeiktike", providing lessons for statesmen, and that historians should
be "men of action" ("pragmatikoi"). Polybius is considered by some to be the
successor of Thucydides in terms of objectivity and critical reasoning, and the
forefather of scholarly, painstaking historical research in the modern
scientific sense. According to this view, his work sets forth the course of
history's occurrences with clearness, penetration, sound judgment, and among
the circumstances affecting the outcomes, lays especial emphasis on the
geographical conditions. Modern historians are especially impressed with the
manner in which Polybius used his sources, and in particular documents, his
citation and quotation of his sources. Furthermore, there is some admiration of
Polybius's meditation on the nature of historiography in Book 12. His work
belongs, therefore, amongst the greatest productions of ancient historical
writing. The writer of the "Oxford Companion to Classical Literature" (1937)
praises him for his "earnest devotion to truth" and for his systematic pursuit
of causation. It has long been acknowledged that Polybius's writings are prone
to a certain hagiographic tone when writing of his friends, such as Scipio, and
subject to a vindictive tone when detailing the exploits of his enemies, such
as Callicrates, the Achaean statesman responsible for his Roman exile. First as
a hostage in Rome, then as client to the Scipios, and finally as a collaborator
with Roman rule after 146 BC, Polybius was not in a position to freely express
any negative opinions of Rome. Peter Green advises us to recall that Polybius
was chronicling Roman history for a Greek audience, with the aim of convincing
them of the necessity of accepting Roman rule¬ ‚Äì which he believed was
inevitable. Nonetheless, for Green, Polybius's "Histories" remain invaluable
and are the best source for the era they cover. Ron Mellor also sees Polybius
as partisan who, out of loyalty to Scipio, vilified Scipio's opponents.
Similarly, Adrian Goldsworthy frequently mentions Polybius' connections with
Scipio when he uses Polybius as a source for Scipio's generalship. Polybius has
been noted to be hostile to some of his subject material. H Ormerod considers
that Polybius cannot be regarded as an 'altogether unprejudiced witness' in
relation to his "betes noirs", the Aetolians, the Carthaginians, and the
Cretans. Other historians agree Polybius' treatment of Crete is biased in a
negative sense. On the other hand, Hansen notes that Polybius' exposition of
Crete supplied an extremely detailed account of ancient Crete. In fact,
observations made by Polybius, in conjunction with passages from Strabo and
Scylax, allowed the discovery of the location of the lost city of Kydonia on
Crete. Cryptography. Polybius was responsible for a useful tool in telegraphy
that allowed letters to be easily signaled using a numerical system (mentioned
in Hist. X.45.6¬ ff.). This idea also lends itself to cryptographic
manipulation and steganography. This was known as the "Polybius square", where
the letters of the alphabet were arranged left to right, top to bottom in a 5 x
5 square, (when used with the modern 26 letter alphabet, the letters "I" and
"J" are combined). Five numbers were then aligned on the outside top of the
square, and five numbers on the left side of the square vertically. Usually
these numbers were arranged 1 through 5. By cross-referencing the two numbers
along the grid of the square, a letter could be deduced. In the "The
Histories", he specifies how this cypher could be used in fire signals, where
long-range messages could be sent by means of torches raised and lowered to
signify the column and row of each letter. This was a great leap forward from
previous fire signaling, which could send prearranged codes only (such as, 'if
we light the fire, it means that the enemy has arrived'). Other writings of
scientific interest include detailed discussions of the machines Archimedes
created for the defense of Syracuse against the Romans, where he praises the
'old man' and his engineering in the highest terms, and an analysis of the
usefulness of astronomy to generals (both in the "Histories"). Influence.
Polybius was considered a poor stylist, even described by one author as
impossible to finish. Nevertheless, clearly he was widely read by Romans and
Greeks alike. He is quoted extensively by Strabo writing in the 1st century BC
and Athenaeus in the 3rd century AD. His emphasis on explaining causes of
events rather than just recounting events, influenced the historian Sempronius
Asellio. Polybius is mentioned by Cicero and mined for information by Diodorus,
Livy, Plutarch and Arrian. Much of the text that survives today from the later
books of "The Histories" was preserved in Byzantine anthologies. His works
reappeared in the West first in Renaissance Florence. Polybius gained a
following in Italy, and although poor Latin translations hampered proper
scholarship on his works, they contributed to the city's historical and
political discourse. Niccol√≤ Machiavelli in his "Discourses on Livy" evinces
familiarity with Polybius. Vernacular translations in French, German, Italian
and English first appeared during the 16th century. Consequently in the late
16th century, Polybius's works found a greater reading audience among the
learned public. Study of the correspondence of such men as Isaac Casaubon,
Jacques Auguste de Thou, William Camden, and Paolo Sarpi reveals a growing
interest in Polybius' works and thought during the period. Despite the
existence of both printed editions in the vernacular and increased scholarly
interest, however, Polybius remained an "historian's historian", not much read
by the public at large. Printings of his work in the vernacular remained few in
number ‚Äî seven in French, five in English, and five in Italian. Polybius'
political beliefs have had a continuous appeal to republican thinkers from
Cicero to Charles de Montesquieu to the Founding Fathers of the United States.
John Adams, for example, considered him one of the most important teachers of
constitutional theory. Since the Enlightenment, Polybius has in general held
appeal to those interested in Hellenistic Greece and early Republican Rome,
while his political and military writings have lost influence in academia. More
recently, thorough work on the Greek text of Polybius, and his historical
technique, has increased the academic understanding and appreciation of him as
a historian. According to Edward Tufte, he was also a major source for Charles
Joseph Minard's figurative map of Hannibal's overland journey into Italy during
the Second Punic War. In his "Meditations On Hunting", Spanish philosopher Jose
Ortega y Gasset calls Polybius "one of the few great minds that the turbid
human species has managed to produce", and says the damage to the "Histories"
is "without question one of the gravest losses that we have suffered in our
Greco-Roman heritage". References and external links. Modern works. -- "Philip
V of Macedon", the Hare Prize Essay 1939 (Cambridge University Press, 1940) -
- "A Historical Commentary on Polybius" (Oxford University Press) Vol.I (1957)
Commentary on Books I-VI Vol.II (1967) Commentary on Books VII-XVIII Vol.III
(1979) Commentary on Books XIX-XL -- "Polybius" (University of California
Press, 1972) -- "Polybius, Rome and the Hellenistic World: Essays and
Reflections" (Cambridge University Press, 2002) ISBN 0-521-81208-9 -- V (1974)
"The Historian's Skin‚Äù, 77-88 (Momigliano Bibliography no.531) -- VI (1973)
‚ÄúPolibio, Posidonio e l'imperialismo Romano‚Äù, 89 (Momigliano Bibliography
no.525)
