Pompidou Group Co-operation Group to Combat Drug Abuse and Illicit Trafficking
in Drugs (Pompidou Group) is an inter-governmental body formed in 1971 at the
suggestion of the late French President Georges Pompidou. History. Initially,
this informal forum consisted of seven European countries – France, Belgium,
Germany, Italy, Luxembourg, Netherlands, United Kingdom – looking to share
their experience of combating drug abuse and drug trafficking. The cooperation
was subsequently extended to include new countries and at present the Pompidou
Group comprises 36 member states (Austria, Azerbaijan, Belgium, Bulgaria,
Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Germany,
Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Macedonia, Malta, Morocco, Netherlands,Norway, Poland, Portugal, Romania,
Russian Federation, San Marino, Serbia, Slovak Republic, Slovenia, Spain,
Sweden, Switzerland, Turkey). The Commission of the European Communities has
taken part in the Group's activities since 1986, to improve coordination
between the two organisations and is represented by a permanent correspondent.
The United Kingdom withdrew from the group on 1 January 2011. Morocco, which
joined the agreement on 1 July 2011, is the first non-European member State. In
1980 the Group was incorporated into the institutional framework of the Council
of Europe as a Partial Agreement, and today it is part of DG III, the
Directorate General of Social Cohesion. Shortly after joining the Council of
Europe, the Group embarked on one of the key features of its work: compiling
and harmonising information so that trends in drug addiction could be closely
monitored. Since 1990, technical co-operation has been extended to countries of
central and eastern Europe which are not members of the Pompidou Group.
Furthermore, non-European countries, like Canada and the USA, have also been
invited to take part in past activities. Today. The Pompidou Group’s core
mission is to contribute to the development of multidisciplinary, innovative,
effective and evidence-based drug policies in its member states. It seeks to
link Policy, Practice and Science and focuses especially on the realities of
local implementation of drug programmes. The shifting, dynamic nature of the
drug phenomenon has required the Group to adapt its role in order to deal with
emerging problems and changes in the drug situation. Flexibility and capacity
for innovation are two key attributes that have assisted the Group in meeting
this challenge. Against an international background characterized by the
presence of many European and international bodies working on drugs, the
Pompidou Group provides a multidisciplinary forum at the wider European level
where it is possible for policy-makers, professionals and researchers to
discuss and exchange information and ideas on the whole range of drug misuse
and trafficking problems. In order to carry out this mission, it adopts a
multidisciplinary, integrated approach to all drug problems and employs a
variety of working methods. Because of its links with the Council of Europe it
also ensures that policy recommendations are consistent with public policy as
elaborated in other fields of Council work, such as public health, social
cohesion and penal policy, with particular emphasis on ethical issues. In
addition, the Pompidou Group undertakes a bridging role both between EU and
non-EU European countries and towards neighbouring countries in the
Mediterranean region. The accession of Morocco in 2011 has been presented as a
move to reduce Morocco's role as a supplier of cannabis. For many years Morocco
was the world's main cannabis supplier. Further reading. ARNOULD, Michel :
Finding answers to addiction : Pompidou Group. - In : Forum (Council of Europe)
(June 1994), p.18 BRULE, C. : The role of the Pompidou Group of the Council of
Europe in combating drug abuse and illicit drug trafficking. - In : Bull Narc,
vol. 35, no. 4 (Oct.-Dec. 1983, pp.73-77) HARTNOLL, R. ET AL. : A multi-city
study of drug use in Europe. - In : Bull Narc, vol. 41, nos. 1-2 (1989), pp.3-
27 LUCKETT, Christopher : Le Groupe de coopération du Conseil de l'Europe en
matière de lutte contre l'abus et le trafic illicite de stupéfiants (Groupe
Pompidou). - In : Echanges santé-social, n° 81 (mars 1996), pp.10-11 NAGLER,
N.A. : The Council of Europe Co-operation Group to Combat Drug Abuse and
Illicit Trafficking in Drugs (the Pompidou Group). - In : Bull Narc, vol. 39,
no. 1 (Jan.-Mar. 1987), pp.31-40
