Populism Populism has been viewed as a political ideology, political
philosophy, or as a type of discourse. Generally, populists tend to claim that
they side with "the people" against "the elites". While for much of the
twentieth century, populism was considered to be a political phenomenon mostly
affecting Latin America, since the 1980s populist movements and parties have
enjoyed degrees of success in First World democracies such as the USA, Canada,
Italy, the Netherlands and Scandinavian countries. Academic definitions.
Academic and scholarly definitions of populism have varied widely over the past
decades and the term has often been employed in loose and inconsistent ways to
denote appeals to ‘the people’, ‘demagogy’ and ‘catch-all’ politics
or as a receptacle for new types of parties whose classification is unclear. A
factor traditionally held to diminish the value of ‘populism’ as a category
has been that, as Margaret Canovan notes in her 1981 study "Populism", unlike
conservatives or socialists, populists rarely call themselves ‘populists’
and usually reject the term when it is applied to them. Nonetheless, in recent
years academic scholars have produced definitions of populism which enable
populist identification and comparison. Daniele Albertazzi and Duncan McDonnell
define populism as an ideology that "pits a virtuous and homogeneous people
against a set of elites and dangerous ‘others’ who were together depicted
as depriving (or attempting to deprive) the sovereign people of their rights,
values, prosperity, identity, and voice". Rather than viewing populism in terms
of specific social bases, economic programs, issues, or electorates — as
discussions of right-wing populism have tended to do — this type of
definition is in line with the approaches of scholars such as Ernesto Laclau,
Pierre-Andre Taguieff, Yves Meny and Yves Surel, who have all sought to focus
on populism "per se", rather than treating it simply as an appendage of other
ideologies. Although in the US and Europe, it currently tends to be associated
with right-wing parties, the central tenet of populism that democracy should
reflect the pure and undiluted will of the people, means it can sit easily with
ideologies of both right and left. However, while leaders of populist movements
in recent decades have claimed to be on either the left or the right of the
political spectrum, there are also many populists who reject such
classifications and claim to be neither "left wing", "centrist" nor "right
wing." Although "populist" is often used pejoratively in the media and in
political debate, exceptions to this do exist, notably in the United States. In
this case, it appears likely that this is due to the memories and traditions of
earlier democratic movements (for example, farmers' movements, New Deal reform
movements, and the civil rights movement) that were often called populist, by
supporters and outsiders alike. It may also be due to linguistic confusions of
populism with terms such as "popular". Styles and methods. Some scholars argue
that populist organizing for empowerment represents the return of older
"Aristotelian" politics of horizontal interactions among equals who are
different, for the sake of public problem solving. Populism has taken left-
wing, right-wing, and even centrist forms, as well as forms of politics that
bring together groups and individuals of diverse partisan views. The use of
populist rhetoric in the United States has recently included references such as
"the powerful trial lawyer lobby", "the liberal elite", or "the Hollywood
elite". Examples of populist rhetoric on the other side of the political
spectrum is the anti-corporate greed views of the Occupy Wall Street movement
and the theme of "Two Americas" in the 2004 Presidential Democratic Party
campaign of John Edwards. Agrarian Political In addition to Canovan's list that
only lists right-wing political populist reactions, leftist movements such as
the Cultural Revolution and Cambodia's "Year Zero" campaign would also be
examples of political populism. Nazism and populism. Fritzsche 1990: 233–235
History in Europe. Classical populism. The word populism is derived from the
Latin word "populus", which means "people" in English (in the sense of "folk",
"nation", as in: "The Roman People" ("populus Romanus"), "not" in the sense of
"multiple individual persons" as in: "There are people visiting us today").
Therefore, populism espouses government by the people as a whole (that is to
say, the masses). This is in contrast to elitism, aristocracy, synarchy or
plutocracy, each of which is an ideology that espouse government by a small,
privileged group above the masses. Populism has been a common political
phenomenon throughout history. The Populares were an unofficial faction in the
Roman senate whose supporters were known for their populist agenda. Some of the
best known of these were Tiberius Gracchus, Gaius Marius, Julius Caesar and
Caesar Augustus, all of whom eventually used referendums to bypass the Roman
Senate and appeal to the people directly. Early modern period. Populism rose
during the Reformation; Protestant groups like the Anabaptists formed ideas
about ideal theocratic societies, in which peasants would be able to read the
Bible themselves. Attempts to establish these societies were made during the
German Peasants' War (1524–1525) and the Münster Rebellion (1534–1535).
The peasant movement ultimately failed as cities and nobles made their own
peace with the princely armies, which restored the old order under the nominal
overlordship of the Holy Roman Emperor Charles V, represented in German affairs
by his younger brother Ferdinand. The same conditions contributed to the
outbreak of the English Revolution of 1642–1651, also known as the English
Civil War. Conditions led to a proliferation of ideologies and political
movements among peasants, self-employed artisans, and working-class people in
England. Many of these groups had a dogmatic Protestant religious bent. They
included Puritans and the Levellers. Religious revival. Romanticism, the
anxiety against rationalism, broadened after the beginnings of the European and
Industrial Revolutions because of cultural, social, and political insecurity.
Romanticism led directly to a strong popular desire to bring about religious
revival, nationalism and populism. The ensuing religious revival eventually
blended into political populism and nationalism, becoming at times a single
entity and a powerful force of public will for change. This paradigm shift was
marked by people looking for security and community because of a strong
emotional need to escape from anxiety and to believe in something larger than
themselves. The revival of religiosity all over Europe played an important role
in bringing people to populism and nationalism. In France, François-René de
Chateaubriand provided the opening shots of Catholic revivalism as he opposed
enlightenment's materialism with the "mystery of life", the human need for
redemption. In Germany, Friedrich Daniel Ernst Schleiermacher promoted pietism
by stating that religion was not the institution, but a mystical piety and
sentiment with Christ as the mediating figure raising the human consciousness
above the mundane to God's level. In England, John Wesley's Methodism split
with the Anglican church because of its emphasis on the salvation of the masses
as a key to moral reform, which Wesley saw as the answer to the social problems
of the day. Rejection of ultramontanism. Chateaubriand's beginning brought
about two Catholic Revivals in France: first, a conservative revival led by
Joseph de Maistre, which defended ultramontanism, which is a religious
philosophy placing strong emphasis on the supremacy of the Pope, and a second
populist revival led by Hugues Felicité Robert de Lamennais, an excommunicated
priest. This religious populism opposed ultramontanism and emphasized a church
community dependent upon all the people, not just the elite. It stressed that
church authority should come from the bottom up and that the church should
alleviate suffering, not merely accept it. Both of these religious principles
are based on populism. Latin America. Populism has been an important force in
Latin American political history, where many charismatic leaders have emerged
since the beginning of the 20th century, as the paramountcy of agrarian
oligarchies had been dislocated by the onset of industrial capitalism, allowing
for the emergence of an industrial bourgeoisie and the activation of an urban
working class, causing the emergence of reformist and multi-class nationalist
politics, centered on a charismatic leadership, such as Aprismo in Peru, the
MNR in Bolivia, and the political movements gravitating around Getúlio Vargas
in Brazil, Perón in Argentina, Lázaro Cárdenas in Mexico, Ecuador's Velasco
Ibarra and others. Ideologically, Latin American populism, with its emphasis on
nation-building under an authoritarian leadership as a prerequisite for
technological modernization, betrayed the earlier influence of Comtean
positivism. Socially, for many authors—such as Brazil's Octavio
Ianni—populism should be understood as the political alliance between an
emerging industrial bourgeoisie and a newly organizing urban working class, in
which the former accepts social reforming for the latter's sake as long as the
working class remains politically subordinated to both a more or less
authoritarian State and private enterprise, in a process of controlled
inclusion of the "masses" into the political system, a co-opting process some
Marxist authors like Brazil's Francisco Weffort ascertain was accepted by the
newly urbanized working class given their lack of a previously developed class
consciousness. Despite efforts to charter an ideological pedigree to Populism
in Latin America, as has been attempted by some, working, e.g., with concepts
taken from Perón's Third Position., Latin American countries have not always
had a clear and consistent political ideology under populism. Populist
practitioners and movements in Latin America usually adapt politically to the
prevailing mood of the nation, moving within the ideological spectrum from left
to right many times during their political lives. If populist movements in
1930s and 1940s Latin America had apparent fascist overtones and based
themselves on authoritarian politics, as was the case of Vargas' "Estado Novo"
dictatorship in Brazil (1937–1945), or of some of Peron's openly expressed
sympathies, in the 1950s populism adapted—not without considerable unease
from its political leadership—to heightened levels of working-class
mobilization. Therefore the fact that 1960s populism was associated mainly with
radical, left-leaning petty-bourgeois nationalism, which emptied the State of
its function as a coercive class-rule apparatus and saw it instead as an organ
of representation of the Nation as a whole. Such was the case, for instance, of
the Goulart government (1961–1964) in Brazil, Goulart being described as a
fiery populist who identified—mainly rhetorically—with the dispossessed and
tried to foster a reformist agenda through ties to the organized Left. The fact
that Goulart was eventually ousted by the military points, in the views of some
authors, to the fact that he, as well as other populist leaders of the time,
faced a jeopardy: they were reformists who, in the pursuit of their agenda, had
to encourage popular mobilization and class conflict they ultimately abhorred.
Therefore the fact that populism was eventually identified by the 1970s
military dictatorships as "demagogery" and as a risk to the stability of the
existing social order. If "left", reformist and nationalist populism never died
out altogether during the 1970s Latin American military dictatorships—as
offered proof by the prompt and successful return of a populist like Brazil's
Leonel Brizola to electoral politics in the early 1980s—a different streak of
populism appeared in the post-military dictatorship era.This 1980s populism, in
the persons of leaders like Argentina's Carlos Menem or Brazil's Fernando
Collor, adapted itself to prevailing neoliberal policies of economic
adjustment, setting aside nationalistic reforms and retaining the need for
charismatic leadership policies, mass support and a concern for the plight of
the "common people". In the 1990s and 2000s, with the emergence of Hugo Chávez
in Venezuela—albeit Chavez refuses himself to be labelled as
"populist"—reformist and nationalism Latin American populism has resurfaced
with new patterns, as what is called by some authors socialist populism that
appeals to masses of poor by promising redistributive policies and state
control of the nation's energy resources.—a blueprint that had already
appeared, however—albeit with no openly "socialist" rhetoric, viz., in the
nationalist policies—including the launch of the State-owned oil-company
Petrobrás—that were the hallmark of Vargas' second term as Brazil's
democratically elected president (1951–1954) and that led to his eventual
suicide. In some countries, Populism has been fiscally supported in Latin
America during periods of growth such as the 1950s and 1960s and during
commodity price booms such as in oil and precious metals. Political leaders
could gather followers among the popular classes with broad redistributive
programs during these boom times. Conversely, in others countries, Populism has
been historically associated with countering the relative decline of export
agriculture with deficit spending and import-substitution policies aimed at
developing an internal market for industrial consumer goods. Populism in Latin
America has been sometimes criticized for the fiscal policies of many of its
leaders, but has also been defended for having allowed historically weak states
to alleviate disorder and achieve a tolerable degree of stability while
initiating large-scale industrialization. Though populist fiscal and monetary
policies may be criticized by conservative economic historians and policy
makers, who seem in it the ultimately dysfunctional subordination of economic
policy to political goals, some authors acknowledge populism to have allowed
non-radical leaders and parties to co-opt the radical ideas of the masses so as
to redirect them in a non revolutionary direction.—something that would
exclude from the spectrum of "populism" governments committed to the social
revolution blueprint, such as Allende's Unidad Popular government in Chile and
Ortega's first revolutionary government in Nicaragua. It's generally regarded
that populists hope "to reform the system, not to overthrow it". Often adapting
a nationalist vocabulary and rhetorically convincing, populism was used to
appeal to broad masses while remaining ideologically ambivalent.
Notwithstanding, there have been notable exceptions. 21st century Latin-
American populist leaders have had a decidedly—even if mostly
rhetorical—socialist bent. When populists take strong positions on economic
philosophies such as capitalism versus socialism, the position sparks strong
emotional responses regarding how best to manage the nation's current and
future social and economic position. Mexico's 2006 Presidential election was
hotly debated among supporters and opponents of populist candidate Andrés
Manuel López Obrador. Inequality. Populism in Latin American countries has
both an economic and an ideological edge. Populism in Latin America has mostly
addressed the problem, not of capitalist economic development as such but its
"inclusiveness", in the backdrop of highly unequal societies in which people
are divided between a relative few wealthy groups and masses of poor, even in
the case of societies such as Argentina, where strong and educated middle
classes are a significant segment of the population. Therefore the key role of
the State in Latin American populism, as an institution mediating between
traditional elites and the "people" in general. In appealing to the masses of
poor people prior to gaining power, populists may promise widely-demanded food,
housing, employment, basic social services, and income redistribution. Once in
political power, they may not always be financially or politically able to
fulfill all these promises. However, they are very often successful in
providing many broad and basic services. US policy. Since one of the
ideological hallmarks of Latin American populism was the empowerment of the
"national" and its identification with the state, including nationalization of
the land, natural resources and key industries as common practice, it was seen
almost from the start by American policy makers to offer a challenge to US
hegemony over the Americas. The US has intervened in Latin American governments
on many occasions where populism was seen threatening its interests: the 1954
Guatemalan coup d'état, when the populist Arbenz government was overthrown by
a coup backed by the American company United Fruit and the American ambassador
in 1954, and the support given by the US to the 1964 Brazilian coup d'état are
just two cases of American intervention. Another example of US intervention has
been seen in Colombia, particularly since the assassination of the populist
leader Jorge Eliécer Gaitán in April 1948. Gaitán supported land reform and
other populist initiatives, and his murder is assumed to have foreclosed
subsequent development of populism in mainstream Colombian politics. Populist
"socialism". Populism has remained a significant force in Latin America.
Populism has recently been reappearing on the left with promises of far-
reaching socialist changes as seen in Venezuela under Hugo Chávez, and in
Bolivia under Evo Morales- a process, however, seen by some as contradictory in
that it tries to meld the populist traditional celebration of folk wisdom and
charismatic leadership with doctrinaire socialism. And, in fact, "socialist"
changes in today's Venezuela have mostly included the expenditure of oil
revenue to benefit the working poor as a form of social welfare to help enable
an eventual (and imprecise) socialist transformation. For some authors, as far
as ideology is concerned, Chávez's political blueprint is more of a
"throwback" to traditional populist nationalism and redistributivism. The
Venezuelan government often spars verbally with the United States and accuses
it of attempting to overthrow Chavez after supporting a failed coup against
him. Chavez has been one of the most outspoken and blunt critics of U.S.
foreign policy. Nevertheless, a large commodity trade continues between
Venezuela and the U.S. because of the economic constraints of oil delivery and
the proximity of the two countries. As populist tradition ascertains the
paramountcy of the "people" (instead of class) as a political subject, it
suffices to say that, in the 21st century, the large numbers of voters living
in extreme poverty in Latin America has remained a bastion of support for new
populist candidates. By early 2008 governments with varying forms of populism
and with some form of left leaning (albeit vague)social democratic or
democratic socialist platform had come to dominate virtually all Latin American
nations with the exceptions of Colombia, El Salvador and Mexico. This political
shift includes both more developed nations such as Argentina's Front for
Victory and Chile with its Socialist Party, and smaller income countries like
Bolívia with its Movement towards Socialism and Paraguay with the Patriotic
Alliance for Change. Even in middle-income Mexico, a populist candidate like
López Obrador, albeit defeated, nevertheless appeared as part of a strong
neopopulist reaction. Nevertheless, populist candidates have been more
successful in poorer Latin American countries such as Bolivia (under Morales),
Ecuador (under Correa) and Nicaragua (under Ortega). By the use of broad
grassroots movements populist groups have managed to gain power from better
organized, funded and entrenched groups such as the Bolivian Nationalist
Democratic Action and the Paraguayan Colorado Party. Countries in Latin America
with high rates of poverty, whose governments maintain and support unpopular
privatizations and more orthodox economic policies that don't deliver general
societal gains, will be under pressure from populist politicians and movements
accusing them of benefiting the upper and upper-middle classes and of being
allied to foreign and business interests. Mexico. In Mexico, Andres Manuel
López Obrador's candidacy sparked very emotional debates throughout the
country regarding policies that affect ideology, class, equality, wealth, and
society. Andres Manuel López Obrador's most controversial economic policies
included his promise to expand monthly stipends to the poor and elderly from
Mexico City to the rest of the country and to re-negotiate the North American
Free Trade Agreement to protect the Mexican poor. The ruling party in Mexico,
the National Action Party (PAN), portrayed him as a danger to Mexico's hard-
earned economic stability. In criticizing his redistributive promises that
would create new entitlement programs somewhat similar to social security in
the US (though not as broad in scope) and his trade policies that would not
fully uphold prior agreements (such as NAFTA), the economic debate between
capitalists and socialists became a major part of the debate. Felipe Calderón,
the PAN candidate, portrayed himself as not just a standard-bearer for recent
economic policy, but as a more proactive candidate, to distance himself from
the main criticisms of his predecessor Vicente Fox regarding inaction. He
labeled himself the "jobs president" and promised greater national wealth for
all through steady future growth, fiscal prudence, international trade, and
balanced government spending. During the immediate aftermath of the tight
elections in which the country's electoral court was hearing challenges to the
vote tally that had Calderon winning, López Obrador showed the considerable
influence over the masses that are a trademark of populist politicians. He
effectively led huge demonstrations, filling the central plaza with masses of
sympathizers who supported his challenge. The demonstrations lasted for several
months and eventually dissipated after the electoral court did not find
sufficient cause from the challenges presented to overturn the results. United
States. There have been several versions of a populist party in the United
States, some inspired by the Populist Party of the 1890s. This was the party of
the early U.S. populist movement in which millions of farmers and other working
people successfully enacted their anti-trust agenda. Other early populist
political parties in the United States included the Greenback Party, the
Progressive Party of 1912 led by Theodore Roosevelt, the Progressive Party of
1924 led by Robert M. La Follette, Sr., and the Share Our Wealth movement of
Huey Long in 1933–35. George Wallace, Four-Term Governor of Alabama, led a
populist movement that carried five states and won 13.5% of the popular vote in
the 1968 presidential election. Campaigning against intellectuals and liberal
reformers, Wallace gained a large share of the white working class vote in
Democratic primaries in 1972. Populism continues to be a force in modern U.S.
politics, especially in the 1992 and 1996 third-party presidential campaigns of
billionaire Ross Perot. The 1996, 2000, 2004, and the 2008 presidential
campaigns of Ralph Nader had a strong populist cast. The 2004 campaigns of
Dennis Kucinich and Al Sharpton also had populist elements. The 2004 and 2008
Democratic presidential candidate John Edwards has been described by many (and
by himself) as a "one economic community, one commonwealth" populist.
Comparison between earlier surges of populism and those of today are
complicated by shifts in what are thought to be the interests of the common
people. In 1984, the Populist Party name was revived by Willis Carto, and was
used in 1988 as a vehicle for the presidential campaign of former Ku Klux Klan
leader, and later member of both the Republican Party and the Democratic Party,
David Duke. Right-wing Patriot movement organizer Bo Gritz was briefly Duke's
running mate. This incarnation of populism was widely regarded as a vehicle for
white supremacist recruitment. In this instance, populism was maligned by the
use of a definition of "the people" that was not the prevailing definition.
Another populist mechanism was the initiative and referendum driven term limits
movement of the early 1990s. In every state where term limits were on the
ballot, the measure to limit incumbency in Congress passed. The average vote
was 67% in favor. However, the U.S. Supreme Court struck down term limits in
1995 in the court case U.S. Term Limits, Inc. v. Thornton. In 1995, the Reform
Party of the United States of America (RPUSA) was organized after the populist
presidential campaign of Ross Perot in 1992. In the year 2000, an intense fight
for the presidential nomination made Patrick J. Buchanan the RPUSA standard
bearer. As result of his nomination as party candidate there were many party
splits, not only from Buchanan supporters after he left the party, but also
moderates, progressivists and libertarians around Jesse Ventura who refused to
collaborate with the Buchanan candidacy. Since then the party's fortunes have
markedly declined. In the 2000s, new populist parties were formed in America.
One was the Populist Party of America in 2002; another was the Populist Party
of Maryland formed to support Ralph Nader in 2004, which ran candidates for
governor, lieutenant governor, U.S. Senate and state delegate in the 2006
elections. Other examples are the American Populist Party, founded in 2009, and
the American Populist Renaissance, founded in 2005. The American Moderation
Party, also formed in 2005, adopted several populist ideals, chief among them
working against multinational neo-corporatism. Much of the Tea Party movement
has used populist rhetoric, particularly in areas and states where Democrats
are in power. For instance, in New York, Carl Paladino and his conservative-
populist Taxpayers Party of New York have used the motto "Paladino for the
People" and have attempted to woo common people to vote for them by pitting
them against the state government and the special interests that have influence
in it. In the most recent example of populist movements and the ongoing attempt
to pit "the people" (the have-nots) against "the elite" (the haves),
participants of the Occupy movement define themselves by the phrase we are the
99%. The Occupy leadership adopted the concept of the 1%, to refer to the Wall
Street elite, who they insist are the source of systemic instability and
directly responsible for undermining the social safety nets implemented during
the New Deal. Political science professors Joe Lowndes and Dorian Warren have
asked, "Occupy Wall Street: A Twenty-First Century Populist Movement?". They
conclude it is the "first major populist movement on the U.S. left since the
1930s." Economic issues, have returned to center stage, making more like the
1890s or 1930s than the New Left uprising of the 1960s. Germany. Friedrich
Ludwig Jahn, a Lutheran Minister, a professor at the University of Berlin and
the "father of gymnastics", introduced the concept of Volkstum, a racial notion
that draws on the essence of a people that was lost in the Industrial
Revolution. The Nazis expressed the populist yearnings of middle–class
constituents and at the same time advocated a strong and resolutely anti-
Marxist mobilization... Against "unnaturally" divisive parties and querulous
organized interest groups, National Socialists cast themselves as
representatives of the commonwealth, of an allegedly betrayed and neglected
German public...reaking social barriers of status and caste, and celebrating at
least rhetorically the populist ideal of the people's community... France. In
the late 18th century, the French Revolution, though led by wealthy
intellectuals, could also be described as a manifestation of populist sentiment
against the elitist excesses and privileges of the Ancien Régime. In France,
the populist and nationalist picture was more mystical, metaphysical and
literarian in nature. Historian Jules Michelet (sometimes called a populist)
fused nationalism and populism by positing the people as a mystical unity who
are the driving force of history in which the divinity finds its purpose.
Michelet viewed history as a representation of the struggle between spirit and
matter; he claims France has a special place because the French became a people
through equality, liberty, and fraternity. Because of this, he believed, the
French people can never be wrong. Michelet's ideas are not socialism or
rational politics, and his populism always minimizes, or even masks, social
class differences. In the 1950s, Pierre Poujade was the leader of the right-
wing populist movement Union de Defense Commercants et Artisans (UDCA). Jean
Marie Le Pen (who was UDCA's youngest deputy in the 1950s) can be characterized
as right-wing populist or extreme-right populist. Italy. Another example of
modern populism can be studied in current Italian politics. When Silvio
Berlusconi entered in politics in 1994 with his new party Forza Italia, he
created a new kind of populism focused on the media's control.
