Postal voting Postal voting describes the method of voting in an election
whereby ballot papers are distributed or returned by post to electors, in
contrast to electors voting in person at a polling station or electronically
via an electronic voting system. It is of benefit to people who may not be able
to attend a polling station in person, either through a physical disability or
absence from the locality. This method of voting is available to voters upon
application (sometimes with restrictions) in statutory elections in many
democratic nations. On the other hand, concerns about postal voting have been
raised as to whether it complies with the requirements of a secret ballot, in
that people cast their vote outside the security of a polling station, and
whether voters can cast their vote privately free from another person's
coercion. There have been cases of electoral fraud with postal votes in the
United Kingdom (including in Birmingham at the 2004 European and local
government elections in the UK). History of postal voting by Country. United
Kingdom. Voting at elections originally took place by way of a public show of
hands or by a public ballot. The right to vote by secret ballot was introduced
by the "Parliamentary and Municipal Elections Act 1872" (the "Ballot Act").
After this voting took place at polling stations where voters marked their
votes in secret and placed their ballot papers in a closed box. Absent voting
was first introduced for the immediate post-war period in 1918 for servicemen
and others prevented "‘by reason of the nature of their occupation…from
voting at a poll"’ by the "Representation of the People Act 1918". Armed
forces still serving overseas at the end of World War I were allowed to vote by
post, and permanent arrangements were made for proxy voting by servicemen. The
"Representation of the People Act 1945" again made temporary provision for
postal voting by service voters. Postal voting was not extended to civilians
until 1948 when the "Representation of the People Act 1948" granted postal
voting facilities to both service personnel and to certain groups of civilians
including those who were physically incapacitated, those unable to vote without
making a journey by sea or air or because of the nature of their occupation,
and those who were no longer residing at their qualifying address. All had to
provide an address in the UK to which ballot papers could be sent. Service
personnel could, alternatively, vote by proxy if they were likely to be at sea
or abroad on polling day. In 1983, in its review of electoral law, the Home
Affairs Select Committee criticised the categories of absent voters who were
allowed to vote by post. The Committee made clear that they would not wish
absent voting facilities to be made available to everybody on demand but
recommended that "‘the Home Office should review the existing criteria for
eligibility for absent voting facilities, and in particular we suggest that it
would be permissible to apply for a postal vote due to absence “"by reason of
employment”", without the necessity to distinguish between one type of
employment or another.’" The Committee also called for voters absent on
holiday to have the right to apply for a postal vote. The Government responded
to the Committee’s report in January 1984 and expressed some concern at the
increased opportunities for electoral abuse offered by absent voting
(especially postal voting) and in particular by the standing arrangements made
for those allowed an absent vote for an indefinite period. However, the
Government’s response was summed up as follows: The "Representation of the
People Act 1985" subsequently made provision for these extensions to the right
to apply for an absent vote. The proposals did not apply to Northern Ireland
where there was already widespread concern, shared by the Government, at the
extent and nature of electoral abuse, including the abuse of postal voting.
Further amendments were made to the rules governing absent voting in the
"Representation of the People Act 1989". By 1999 the system of postal and proxy
voting for those unable to vote at polling stations was seen as cumbersome and
complex. A Working Party on Electoral Procedures chaired by George Howarth,
Minister of State at the Home Office, published its report in October 1999. The
working party recommended that The "Representation of the People Act 2000"
implemented the Howarth report’s recommendations. "The Representation of the
People (England & Wales) Regulations 2001" introduced the changes to the absent
voting arrangements from 16 February 2001. The main change was to allow postal
voting on demand. All-postal voting. "All-postal" voting is a variant of postal
voting, where all electors receive their ballot papers through the post.
Depending on the system applied, electors may have to return their ballot
papers by post, or there may be an opportunity to deliver them by hand to a
specified location. There is some evidence that this method of voting leads to
higher turnout than one where people vote in person or have to apply for a
postal vote. Critics suggest that this is only a temporary impact, and that
there are dangers in people using ballot papers intended for other electors. It
has been tested by a large number of local authorities in the United Kingdom
for their elections, and in 2004 it was used for elections to the European
Parliament and local authorities in four of the English regions (see below for
more details). Experience of postal voting and all-postal voting by country.
Switzerland. Swiss federal law allows postal voting in all federal elections
and referenda, and all cantons also allow it for cantonal ballot issues. All
voters receive their personal ballot by mail and may either cast it at a
polling station or mail it back. United States. Vote-by-mail is a variation of
postal voting in the United States in which a ballot is mailed to the home of a
registered voter, the voter fills it out and returns it via postal mail. This
process eliminates the requirements to staff and run a polling center during an
election, and can result in considerable cost savings to the state. Balloting
materials may be sent via the United States Postal Service without prepayment
of postage. Ballots are sent out, usually, three weeks before the election
date, after a voter's pamphlet has been distributed. To vote by mail, an
individual marks the ballot for their choice of the candidates (or writes in
their name), places the ballot in a secrecy envelope, seals it, places it in
the provided mailing envelope, seals it and signs and dates the back of the
mailing envelope. This envelope is then either stamped and mailed at any
mailbox, or dropped off (postage free) at a local ballot collection center.
There is a cut off date for mailing ballots and it is determined by the local
voting jurisdiction. In some jurisdictions, postmarks do not count, and ballots
must be received by a certain time on election day. In other jurisdictions, a
ballot must have a postmark on or before the day of the election and be
received prior to the date of certification. Many vote-by-mail jurisdictions
enlist the help of volunteers to take ballots in walk up "Drop off Booths" or
drive-up "Quick Drop" locations. The Help America Vote Act requires some
polling options, often at central election headquarters, with machines designed
for voting by those disabled who cannot vote a normal ballot. In Texas,
electoral fraud occurring over the years involves political operatives engaged
by candidates illegally aid those eligible to vote by mail, usually voters over
65 years of age or voters with a disability. States with all vote-by-mail
elections. In 1998, voters in Oregon passed an initiative requiring that all
elections be conducted by mail. Voters may also drop their ballots off at a
county designated official drop site. Oregon has since reduced the cost of
elections, and the time available to tally votes has increased. In 2011, the
Washington legislature passed a law requiring all counties to conduct vote-by-
mail elections. Local governments in Washington had the option to do so since
1987, and statewide elections had permitted it since 1993. By 2009, 38 of the
state's 39 counties (all except Pierce County) had conducted all elections by
mail. In the Washington system, ballots must be postmarked by election day, so
complete results are delayed by several days. Many states allow no-excuse
voting by mail. United Kingdom. Since 2001, any elector has been entitled to
request a postal vote (known as "postal voting on demand") without giving a
reason, apart from in Northern Ireland, where postal voting is available only
if it would be unreasonable to expect a voter to go to a polling station on
polling day as a result of employment, disability or education restrictions.
Prior to 2001, postal votes had been available since 1948 only to those unable
to attend a polling station for reasons of ill health, employment or planned
holiday away from home and to some electors living on small islands where they
would need to cross water to reach their polling station. Before 1985, holidays
were not a sufficient reason, and the employment criterion allowed only some
professions. Procedure. Registered voters who wish to vote by post must submit
an additional application form to the Electoral Registration Officer at their
local authority (or to the Electoral Office for Northern Ireland if in Northern
Ireland) stating whether they want their ballot paper to be sent for one single
election, all elections until a specified date or indefinitely. They must also
submit their date of birth, and signature specimen on the form (or apply for a
grant of a signature waiver due to a disability or inability to read or write).
In addition, if a person eligible to vote in the United Kingdom is chosen by
another voter to be his/her proxy, the proxy can apply to vote by post. To
receive a postal vote for an election, the postal vote application must have
been received by the Electoral Registration Officer by 5 p.m. eleven working
days before polling day. Returning officers issue and despatch postal ballot
packs at 5 p.m. on the eleventh working day before polling day at the earliest.
Issue of postal ballots is not open to the scrutiny of candidates and their
agents; by law, only the returning officers, their staff, representatives of
the Electoral Commission and observers accredited by the Electoral Commission
are permitted to attend. Some returning officers produce postal ballot packs in
house, whilst others outsource the process to an external company. When issuing
each postal ballot paper, the officer marks on a list (called the corresponding
number list) next to the postal ballot's unique identification number the
elector number of the voter to whom the postal ballot is sent, and then makes a
mark next to the voter's name in a separate list of postal voters. The unique
identification number of the postal ballot paper is also marked on the postal
voting statement sent within the postal ballot pack. The local authority name
and address and the name of the constituency/ward are printed on both envelopes
"A" and "B". Once all ballot papers for an election have been issued by the
returning officer, the corresponding number list is sealed in a packet which
can only be opened upon the order of a court when an election result is
challenged. Upon receipt of the postal ballot pack, the voter completes the
ballot paper according to the instructions and seals it inside the envelope
marked "A". A separate postal voting statement must be filled in by the voter
with his/her date of birth and signature (unless a signature waiver has been
granted or if the voter is an anonymous elector). It is strongly recommended
that postal voting statement and envelope "A" (containing the ballot paper) be
placed and sealed inside the larger envelope "B" when returned, although this
is not a requirement. The voter can be posted back to the returning officer at
the local authority address (postage is prepaid when returned from within the
United Kingdom), or returned in person to the returning officer at the local
authority office, or directly handed in to a polling station on polling day
(but only one which is situated within the constituency/ward marked on
envelopes "A"/"B"). For the vote to be counted, it must "reach" the returning
officer/polling station by the close of poll (usually 10 p.m. on polling day).
Upon receipt of a postal ballot pack in the post (or of the postal ballot paper
and postal voting statement if sent separately), the returning officer places
it inside the postal voters' ballot box allocated to the particular
constituency/ward. If a presiding officer receives a postal ballot pack in a
polling station, it is sealed inside a packet which is later delivered to the
returning officer at the close of poll together with a form recording the
number of postal ballot packs received by the presiding officer. Candidates and
their agents, representatives of the Electoral Commission and observers
accredited by the Electoral Commission and entitled to observe the opening of
postal ballot packs - the returning officer must give candidates and their
agents at least 48 hours' written notice of the time and location of every
opening session of postal ballot packs. After emptying the postal voters'
ballot box, the postal voting statements and envelopes marked "A"/loose postal
ballot papers are separated into two different groups. The returning officer is
required to verify the date of birth and signature filled in on at least 20% of
the postal voting statements from each postal voters ballot box with the
details provided on the original postal vote application forms. If the details
do not match, then the postal voting statement is rejected. The returning
officer makes a mark next to the name of the voter on the postal voters list
for each postal voting statement received, even if it is selected for
verification and rejected. On a separate list, the returning officer must write
down the unique identification numbers of postal voting statements which were
chosen for verification and subsequently rejected. The returning officer then
compiles all loose postal ballot papers together with postal ballot papers
having been removed from envelopes marked "A". The unique identification
numbers of all rejected postal ballot papers are noted on a list. The postal
ballot papers are counted and finally placed in the postal ballot box(es),
except for rejected postal ballot papers and postal ballot papers which have
the same unique identification number as rejected postal voting statements. The
postal ballot box is securely sealed by the returning officer (candidates and
agents can also apply their own seals). At the count, the postal ballot boxes
have their seals broken, are opened and then the postal ballot papers are
counted. Voters can contact the returning officer to check that their postal
voting packs (or their postal voting statements and their postal ballot papers)
have been received - however a response can only be given after an opening
session since the returning officer will have to refer to the postal voters
list. At the end of an election, the marked postal voter lists are open for
public inspection and also can be purchased by the Electoral Commission,
candidates, elected representatives, government departments, police forces,
registered political parties and local constituency parties. Controversy. There
have been cases of electoral fraud with postal votes in the UK (including at
the 2004 European and local government elections in Birmingham). All-postal
voting pilots. In 2000, the UK government passed legislation to permit local
authorities to apply to pilot innovations in the method of voting at local
elections (including all-postal voting, electronic voting, and voting at
weekends), with the first pilot elections being held in May that year. In May
2000, 2002 and 2003, many local authorities piloted all-postal voting at their
local elections. In May 2003, 35 local authorities did so. The outcome of those
pilots was a recommendation from the Electoral Commission that all-postal
voting should be adopted as the normal method of voting at local elections in
the UK. This reflected the positive impact on voter turnout at these elections
(in some places, turnout doubled) and the fact that there was no evidence of an
increase in electoral fraud. The local elections scheduled for May 2004 were
postponed to June and combined with the European Parliament elections. The UK
government used this opportunity to trial all-postal voting in these elections
across four regions: North East, North West, East Midlands, and Yorkshire and
the Humber. The government faced heavy criticism from opposition parties due to
the decision to over-rule the Electoral Commission's recommendation for no more
than three regions to be trialled. There were numerous reports of problems, and
due to the delays in passing the legislation many ballot papers were received
quite late. However, apart from one ward in Hull where the election had to be
re-run, the pilot elections were completed successfully and the turnout in the
four regions doubled compared to 1999. In the other regions, turnout increased
by half. Again, there was no evidence of an increase in electoral fraud in the
pilot regions, though postal voting fraud did occur in other regions (see
above). Nevertheless, the Electoral Commission report into these elections drew
back from their earlier recommendation because its research showed that a large
minority of people wished to retain the option of voting at polling stations.
Thus, the Commission recommended that a new model of multiple voting methods
should be developed, including postal voting, rather than proceeding with
elections run entirely by all-postal voting. Debate. Project Vote published
their findings in an article titled "Vote-by-Mail Doesn't Deliver" by Michael
Slater and Teresa James. The article's conclusion states, In Malaysia,
opposition leader and former deputy prime minister Anwar Ibrahim alleged that
postal votes have been used by the ruling Barisan Nasional coalition in
securing seats in certain constituencies. He also said that in one particular
constituency (Setiawangsa), he claimed that his Parti Keadilan Rakyat had
actually won during the 2008 elections, before 14,000 postal votes came in
awarding the incumbent BN parliamentarian the seat with a majority of 8,000
votes. In Malaysia, only teachers, military personnel, and policemen based away
from their constituencies are eligible to submit postal votes. Alternatives.
Some states in the USA have recently allowed drive-thru voting. In the process
voters leave their absentee ballots in a drop box at designated locations. Some
locations allow drop-off voting 24/7.
