Post-war consensus The post-war consensus is a name given by historians to an
era in British political history which lasted from the end of World War II in
1945 to the election of Margaret Thatcher as Prime Minister of the United
Kingdom in 1979. The foundations of the post-war consensus (also sometimes
referred to as "Butskellism") can be traced to the reports of William
Beveridge, who in 1942 formulated the concept of a more comprehensive welfare
state in the United Kingdom. Shortly after the surrender of Germany in May
1945, a general election was held in the UK. The result was a landslide victory
for the Labour Party, whose leader was Clement Attlee. The policies undertaken
and implemented by this Labour government laid the base of the consensus. The
Conservative Party accepted many of these changes and promised not to reverse
them in its 1947 "Industrial Charter". The post-war consensus can be
characterised as a belief in Keynesian economics, a mixed economy with the
nationalisation of major industries, the establishment of the National Health
Service and the creation of the modern welfare state in Britain. The policies
were instituted by all governments (both Labour and Conservative) in the post-
war period. Between 1947 and 1975, post-war consensus economic strategies
created 28 consecutive years of budget surpluses, despite the massive reduction
in the size of the British Empire during the period. We used to think that you
could spend your way out of a recession and increase employment by cutting
taxes and boosting government spending. I tell you in all candour that that
option no longer exists, and in so far as it ever did exist, it only worked on
each occasion since the war by injecting a bigger dose of inflation into the
economy, followed by a higher level of unemployment as the next step. Yet
despite this, some elements of the post-war consensus continued. However, in
the 1970s the consensus was increasingly seen by those on the right wing as
being the cause of the UK's relative economic decline. Believers in New Right
political beliefs saw their ideology as the solution to Britain's economic
dilemmas in the 1970s. When the Conservative Party won the 1979 general
election in the wake of the 1978-79 Winter of discontent, they implemented New
Right ideas and brought the post-war consensus to an end. During the period
1947-1979 the post-war consensus economic model allowed successive Labour and
Conservative governments to reduce government borrowing from an all time high
of 237% of GDP in the aftermath of war down to 43.6% when the Conservatives
abandoned the Keynesian style mixed economy and began shifting the balance of
the national economy towards free-market capitalism through the privatisation
of state-controlled infrastructure. New Zealand. The 'post-war consensus' is
also regarded as an era of New Zealand political history, from the first New
Zealand Labour Party government of the 1930s until the election of a
fundamentally changed Labour party in 1984, following years of mostly New
Zealand National Party rule. As in the UK, it was built around a 'historic
compromise' between the different classes in society: the rights, health and
security of employment for all workers would be guaranteed, in return for co-
operation between unions and employers. The key ideological tenets of
governments of the period were Keynesian economic policy, heavy
interventionism, economic regulation and a very powerful welfare state.
