Post-structuralism Post-structuralism is a label formulated by American
academics to denote the heterogeneous works of a series mid-20th-century French
and continental philosophers and critical theorists who came to international
prominence in the 1960s and '70s. Poststructuralism stresses that the author's
intended meaning is secondary to the meaning that the reader perceives. Post-
structuralism is a response to structuralism. Structuralism is an intellectual
movement developed in Europe from the early to mid-20th century. It argued that
human culture may be understood by means of a structure-—modeled on language
(i.e., structural linguistics)—that is distinct both from the organizations
of reality and the organization of ideas and imagination—a "third order". The
precise nature of the revision or critique of structuralism differs with each
post-structuralist author, though common themes include the rejection of the
self-sufficiency of the structures that structuralism posits and an
interrogation of the binary oppositions that constitute those structures.
Writers whose work is often characterised as post-structuralist include Jacques
Derrida, Michel Foucault, Gilles Deleuze, Judith Butler, Jacques Lacan, and
Julia Kristeva. The movement is closely related to postmodernism. As with
structuralism, antihumanism is often a central tenet. Existential phenomenology
is a significant influence; Colin Davis has argued that post-structuralists
might just as accurately be called "post-phenomenologists". Some commentators
have criticized poststructuralism for being radically relativistic or
nihilistic; others have objected to its extremity and linguistic complexity.
Others see it as a threat to traditional values or professional scholarly
standards. Many theorists who have been called "post-structuralist" have
rejected the label. Theory. Destabilized meaning. In the post-structuralist
approach to textual analysis, the reader replaces the author as the primary
subject of inquiry. This displacement is often referred to as the
"destabilizing" or "decentering" of the author, though it has its greatest
effect on the text itself. Without a central fixation on the author, post-
structuralists examine other sources for meaning (e.g., readers, cultural
norms, other literature, etc.). These alternative sources are never
authoritative, and promise no consistency. Deconstruction. A major theory
associated with Structuralism was binary opposition. This theory proposed that
there are certain theoretical and conceptual opposites, often arranged in a
hierarchy, which human logic has given to text. Such binary pairs could include
Enlightenment/Romantic, male/female, speech/writing, rational/emotional,
signifier/signified, symbolic/imaginary. Post-structuralism rejects the notion
of the essential quality of the dominant relation in the hierarchy, choosing
rather to expose these relations and the dependency of the dominant term on its
apparently subservient counterpart. The only way to properly understand these
meanings is to deconstruct the assumptions and knowledge systems that produce
the illusion of singular meaning. This « deconstruction can explain how male
can become female, how speech can become writing, and how rational can become
emotional. Post-structuralism and structuralism. Structuralism was an
intellectual movement in France in the 1950s and 1960s that studied the
underlying structures in cultural products (such as texts) and used analytical
concepts from linguistics, psychology, anthropology, and other fields to
interpret those structures. It emphasized the logical and scientific nature of
its results. Post-structuralism offers a way of studying how knowledge is
produced and critiques structuralist premises. It argues that because history
and culture condition the study of underlying structures, both are subject to
biases and misinterpretations. A post-structuralist approach argues that to
understand an object (e.g., a text), it is necessary to study both the object
itself and the systems of knowledge that produced the object. Historical vs.
descriptive view. Post-structuralists generally assert that post-structuralism
is historical, and they classify structuralism as descriptive. This terminology
relates to Ferdinand de Saussure's distinction between the views of historical
(diachronic) and descriptive (synchronic) reading. From this basic distinction,
post-structuralist studies often emphasize history to analyze descriptive
concepts. By studying how cultural concepts have changed over time, post-
structuralists seek to understand how those same concepts are understood by
readers in the present. For example, Michel Foucault's "Madness and
Civilization" is both a history and an inspection of cultural attitudes about
madness. The theme of history in modern Continental thought can be linked to
such influences as Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel, Friedrich Nietzsche's "On the
Genealogy of Morals" and Martin Heidegger's "Being and Time". Structuralists
also seek to understand the historical interpretation of cultural concepts, but
focus their efforts on understanding how those concepts were understood by the
author in his or her own time, rather than how they may be understood by the
reader in the present. Scholars between both movements. The uncertain distance
between structuralism and post-structuralism is further blurred by the fact
that scholars generally do not label themselves as post-structuralists. Some
scholars associated with structuralism, such as Roland Barthes, also became
noteworthy in post-structuralism. Three of the most prominent post-
structuralists were first counted among the so-called "Gang of Four" of
structuralism par excellence: Jacques Lacan, Roland Barthes, and Michel
Foucault. The works of Jacques Derrida, Gilles Deleuze, and Julia Kristeva are
also counted as prominent examples of post-structuralism. The critical reading
carried out by these thinkers sought to find contradictions that an author
includes, supposedly inevitably, in his work. Those inconsistencies are used to
show that the interpretation and criticism of any literature is in the hands of
the reader and includes that reader's own cultural biases and assumptions.
While many structuralists first thought that they could tease out an author's
intention by close scrutiny, they soon argued that textual analysis discovered
so many disconnections that it was obvious that their own experiences lent a
view that was unique to them. Some observers from outside the post-
structuralist camp have questioned the rigor and legitimacy of the field.
American philosopher John Searle argued in 1990 that "The spread of
'poststructuralist' literary theory is perhaps the best known example of a
silly but noncatastrophic phenomenon." Similarly, physicist Alan Sokal in 1997
criticized "the postmodernist/poststructuralist gibberish that is now hegemonic
in some sectors of the American academy." Literature scholar Norman Holland
argued that post-structuralism was flawed due to reliance on Saussure's
linguistic model, which was seriously challenged by the 1950s and was soon
abandoned by linguists: "Saussure's views are not held, so far as I know, by
modern linguists, only by literary critics and the occasional philosopher.
adherence to Saussure has elicited wrong film and literary theory on a grand
scale. One can find dozens of books of literary theory bogged down in
signifiers and signifieds, but only a handful that refer to Chomsky." History.
Post-structuralism emerged in France during the 1960s as a movement critiquing
structuralism. According to J.G. Merquior a love–hate relationship with
structuralism developed amongst many leading French thinkers in the 1960s. The
period was marked by political anxiety, as students and workers alike rebelled
against the state in May 1968, nearly causing the downfall of the French
government. At the same time, however, the support of the French Communist
Party (FCP) for the oppressive policies of the USSR contributed to popular
disillusionment with orthodox Marxism. As a result, there was increased
interest in alternative radical philosophies, including feminism, western
Marxism, anarchism, phenomenology, and nihilism. These disparate perspectives,
which Michel Foucault later labeled "subjugated knowledges," were all linked by
being critical of dominant Western philosophy and culture. Post-structuralism
offered a means of justifying these criticisms, by exposing the underlying
assumptions of many Western norms. Two key figures in the early post-
structuralist movement were Jacques Derrida and Roland Barthes. In a 1966
lecture "Structure, Sign, and Play in the Discourse of the Human Sciences",
Jacques Derrida presented a thesis on an apparent rupture in intellectual life.
Derrida interpreted this event as a "decentering" of the former intellectual
cosmos. Instead of progress or divergence from an identified centre, Derrida
described this "event" as a kind of "play." Although Barthes was originally a
structuralist, during the 1960s he increasingly favored post-structuralist
views. In 1967, Barthes published “The Death of the Author” in which he
announced a metaphorical event: the "death" of the author as an authentic
source of meaning for a given text. Barthes argued that any literary text has
multiple meanings, and that the author was not the prime source of the work's
semantic content. The "Death of the Author," Barthes maintained, was the "Birth
of the Reader," as the source of the proliferation of meanings of the text.
Post-structuralist philosophers like Derrida and Foucault did not form a self-
conscious group, but each responded to the traditions of phenomenology and
structuralism. Phenomenology, often associated with two German philosophers
Edmund Husserl and Martin Heidegger, rejected previous systems of knowledge and
attempted to examine life "just as it appears" (as phenomena). Both movements
rejected the idea that knowledge could be centred on the human knower, and
sought what they considered a more secure foundation for knowledge. In
phenomenology this foundation would be experience itself; in structuralism,
knowledge is founded on the "structures" that make experience possible:
concepts, and language or signs. Post-structuralism, in turn, argues that
founding knowledge either on pure experience (phenomenology) or systematic
structures (structuralism) is impossible. This impossibility was meant not a
failure or loss, but a cause for "celebration and liberation." Major works. Eco
and the open text. When "The Open Work" was written by Umberto Eco (1962) it
was in many (or all) senses post-structuralist. The influence of this work is,
however, complex: Eco worked closely with Barthes, and in the second Preface to
the book (1967), Eco explicitly states his post-structuralist position and the
assonance with his friend's position. The entire book is a critique of a
certain concept of "structure" and "form," giving to the reader a strong power
in understanding the text. Barthes and the need for metalanguage. Although many
may have felt the necessity to move beyond structuralism, there was clearly no
consensus on how this ought to occur. Much of the study of post-structuralism
is based on the common critiques of structuralism. Roland Barthes is of great
significance with respect to post-structuralist theory. In his work, "Elements
of Semiology" (1967), he advanced the concept of the "metalanguage". A
metalanguage is a systematized way of talking about concepts like meaning and
grammar beyond the constraints of a traditional (first-order) language; in a
metalanguage, symbols replace words and phrases. Insofar as one metalanguage is
required for one explanation of first-order language, another may be required,
so metalanguages may actually replace first-order languages. Barthes exposes
how this structuralist system is regressive; orders of language rely upon a
metalanguage by which it is explained, and therefore deconstruction itself is
in danger of becoming a metalanguage, thus exposing all languages and discourse
to scrutiny. Barthes' other works contributed deconstructive theories about
texts. Derrida's lecture at Johns Hopkins. The occasional designation of post-
structuralism as a movement can be tied to the fact that mounting criticism of
structuralism became evident at approximately the same time that structuralism
became a topic of interest in universities in the United States. This interest
led to a 1966 conference at Johns Hopkins University, which invited scholars
thought to be prominent post-structuralists, including Derrida, Barthes, and
Lacan. Derrida's lecture at that conference, "Structure, Sign, and Play in the
Human Sciences," often appears in collections as a manifesto against
structuralism. Derrida's essay was one of the earliest to propose some
theoretical limitations to structuralism, and to attempt to theorize on terms
that were clearly no longer structuralist. The element of "play" in the title
of Derrida's essay is often erroneously interpreted as "play" in a linguistic
sense, based on a general tendency towards puns and humour, while social
constructionism as developed in the later work of Michel Foucault is said to
create a sense of strategic agency by laying bare the levers of historical
change. Many see the importance of Foucault's work as in its synthesis of this
social/historical account of the operations of power (see governmentality).
Judith Butler and Gender Trouble. A major American thinker associated with post
structuralist thought is Judith Butler. Trained in Continental philosophy and
published on Hegel, Butler is better known for her engagement with feminist
theory and as the 'mother' (along with English literature scholar Eve Sedgwick)
of Queer Theory. In "Gender Trouble: Feminism and the Subversion of Identity",
Butler explored the persistence of biological sex in feminist theory as the
source and cause of the unequal social treatment and status of women. Using
ideas about power and subjectification first broached by Michel Foucault in
Discipline and Punish, and the linguistic theories of J. L. Austin, Butler
argued that sex was an effect rather than the cause of social gender
difference, and that the fiction of a stable core gender identity was
maintained through socially coerced performances of gender. Butler's ideas
depend greatly on the notion of "performativity" and she is widely credited
with introducing the term into gender studies. Austin described performative
words as those that both describe and produce a thing. The classic example is a
minister's statement, "I now pronounce you husband and wife," which both
describes and produces two people as married. Similarly, Butler argued that
repetitive socially coerced gender performances, which aspire to replicate a
normative gender ideal, actually produce the sexed body and gender identity. In
"Gender Trouble", Butler also relied on deconstructionist language theory and
Freudian psychoanalysis to argue that heterosexuality is structured in an
ongoing series of losses stemming from a repudiation of homosexuality; as such
homosexuality can be seen as constitutive of heterosexuality, necessitating its
repeated repudiations. Butler embraced the Foucauldian notion that there is no
"outside" to culture, and therefore resistance—even consciousness, volition,
the self—to forms of oppression is always already structured in terms of that
oppression. Therefore, resistance can only take the form of failed imitations
of social norms, whose very failure reveals the structures of power that often
masquerade as natural or inevitable. For this reason, Butler's work has been
taken up by gay, lesbian, bisexual, and transgender people because it re-
imagines sexual and gender non-conformity—not to mention the way that
heterosexual and cisgender norms are often reproduced in gay and lesbian
culture and relationships—as a form of resistance to a heteronormative
society that attempts (but always fails) to naturalize the relationships among
sex, gender, and sexual orientation.
