Power (international relations) Modern discourse generally speaks in terms of
state power, indicating both economic and military power. Those states that
have significant amounts of power within the international system are referred
to as middle powers, regional powers, great powers, superpowers, or
hyperpowers/hegemons, although there is no commonly accepted standard for what
defines a powerful state. Entities other than states can also acquire and wield
power in international relations. Such entities can include multilateral
international organizations, military alliance organizations (e.g. NATO),
multinational corporations, non-governmental organizations, or other
institutions such as the Roman Catholic Church, Wal-Mart, or the Hanseatic
League. Power as a goal. Primary usage of "power" as a goal in international
relations belongs to political theorists, such as Niccolò Machiavelli and Hans
Morgenthau. Especially among Classical Realist thinkers, power is an inherent
goal of mankind and of states. Economic growth, military growth, cultural
spread etc. can all be considered as working towards the ultimate goal of
international power. Power as influence. Political scientists principally use
"power" in terms of an actor's ability to exercise influence over other actors
within the international system. This influence can be coercive, attractive,
cooperative, or competitive. Mechanisms of influence can include the threat or
use of force, economic interaction or pressure, diplomacy, and cultural
exchange. Spheres, blocs, and alliances. Under certain circumstances, states
can organize a sphere of influence or a bloc within which they exercise
predominant influence. Historical examples include the spheres of influence
recognized under the Concert of Europe, or the recognition of spheres during
the Cold War following the Yalta Conference. The Warsaw Pact, the "Free World",
and the Non-Aligned Movement were the blocs that arose out of the Cold War
contest. Military alliances like NATO and the Warsaw Pact are another forum
through which influence is exercised. However, "realist" theory often attempts
to stay away from the creation of powerful blocs/spheres that can create a
hegemon within the region. British foreign policy, for example, has always
sided against the hegemonic forces on the European continent, i.e. Nazi
Germany, Napoleonic France or Habsburg Austria. Power as security. "Power" is
also used when describing states or actors that have achieved military
victories or security for their state in the international system. This general
usage is most commonly found among the writings of historians or popular
writers. For instance, a state that has achieved a string of combat victories
in a military campaign against other states can be described as powerful. An
actor that has succeeded in protecting its security, sovereignty, or strategic
interests from repeated or significant challenge can also be described as
powerful. Power as capability. "Power" is also used to describe the resources
and capabilities of a state. This definition is quantitative and is most often
used by geopoliticians and the military. Capabilities are thought of in
tangible terms—they are measurable, weighable, quantifiable assets. Thomas
Hobbes spoke of power as "present means to obtain some future apparent good."
Hard power can be treated as a potential and is not often enforced on the
international stage. Chinese strategists have such a concept of national power
that can be measured quantitatively using an index known as comprehensive
national power. Hard versus soft power. Some political scientists distinguish
between two types of power: Hard and Soft. The former is coercive while the
latter is attractive. Hard power refers to coercive tactics: the threat or use
of armed forces, economic pressure or sanctions, assassination and subterfuge,
or other forms of intimidation. Hard power is generally associated to the
stronger of nations, as the ability to change the domestic affairs of other
nations through military threats. Realists and neorealists, such as John
Mearsheimer, are advocates of the use of such power for the balancing of the
international system. Joseph Nye is the leading proponent and theorist of soft
power. Instruments of soft power include debates on cultural values, dialogues
on ideology, the attempt to influence through good example, and the appeal to
commonly accepted human values. Means of exercising soft power include
diplomacy, dissemination of information, analysis, propaganda, and cultural
programming to achieve political ends. Power as status. Much effort in academic
and popular writing is devoted to deciding which countries have the status of
"power", and how this can be measured. If a country has "power" (as influence)
in military, diplomatic, cultural, and economic spheres, it might be called a
"power" (as status). There are several categories of power, and inclusion of a
state in one category or another is fraught with difficulty and controversy.
Categories of Power. Other types of power. The term energy superpower describes
a country that has immense influence or even direct control over much of the
world's energy supplies. Saudi Arabia and Russia, are generally acknowledged as
the world's current energy superpowers, given their abilities to globally
influence or even directly control prices to certain countries. Canada and
Australia are potential future energy superpowers. The term "cultural/
entertainment superpower" describes a country in which has immense influence or
even direct control over much of the world's entertainment or has an immense
large cultural influence on much of the world. Although this is debated on who
meets such criteria, many agree that the United Kingdom, United States, India
and Japan are generally acknowledged as the entertainment and cultural
superpowers, given their abilities to distribute their entertainment and
cultural innovations worldwide. Hollywood, the largest film industry in the
world by revenue, is main factor behind the spread of western culture besides
well known US brands such as MTV, Coca-Cola etc. Indian Film industry,
primarily known by Bollywood, is the largest film industry in the world by the
number of films produced, and is the prime source for spread of Indian culture
around the globe besides Yoga and Indian Cuisine. South Korea, is generally
considered potential entertainment and cultural superpower. Modern Age European
powers. From the 15th century to the early 18th century the five major powers
in Europe were England, France, Portugal, Spain and the Ottoman Empire. During
the 17th and 18th centuries the Habsburg monarchy and the Dutch Republic were
added to the group, whilst Portugal, Spain and the Ottomans progressively lost
their power and influence. In 1707 Great Britain (created by the unification of
the kingdoms of England and Scotland) replaced England, and progressively
became more powerful during the 18th century, becoming embroiled with other
European powers, particularly France, for control of territory outside of
Europe, such as North America and India. In the second half of the 18th century
Russia and Prussia gained major status. During Early Modern European Age a
group of other states including Sweden, the Kingdom of the Two Sicilies, the
Papal States, Denmark–Norway, the Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth and
Bavaria were recognised as having important impact on the European balance of
power. From the late 18th century and during all the 19th century, there was an
informal convention recognising Five Great Powers in Europe: France, Great
Britain, Russia, Austria (later Austro-Hungary) and the Kingdom of Prussia
(later the German Empire). From the late 19th century Italy was added to this
group. Eventually two extra non-European powers, Japan and the United States,
were able to gain the same great power status from the start of 20th century.
Reconciliation Statecraft. Nayef Al-Rodhan argues that statecraft in the 21st
century involves the reconciliation of many interests and demands that a
statesman must look beyond purely national interests. The contemporary
statesman, he maintains, is constantly torn between competing interests,
whether they come from other individuals, states, groups of individuals and
groups of states, or more general global interests such as the interests of the
international community or the planet as a whole. Reconciliation statecraft
identifies the eight interests that are of particular relevance to contemporary
statesman ship as individual, group, national, regional, cultural, global,
planetary, and moral. Although Al-Rodhan argues that these interests are not
necessarily mutually exclusive, he also cautions that they can conflict with
each other. In these instances, a state must consider its long-term interest
and to consider universal values of justice in order to make the right policy
decisions. According to Al-Rodhan, it is only through reconciling all of these
interests that future generations will be able to live in peace, security, and
prosperity. History has shown that looking at international relations through
the prism of only one of the eight levels of interest is not comprehensive. Al-
Rodhan argues that no one level can be singled out as the determining or
driving force of international relations. Although he maintains that the eight
levels of interest do not necessarily compete with each other, he also notes
that some conflicts can arise. Reconciliation statecraft holds that the way to
ensure peace and stability in the 21st century is for the international
community to reconcile all eight interests. Thus, at the core of Al-Rodhan’s
principle is the idea that states that cooperate with the international
community benefit their own interests as well as those of the broader global
community. The Eight Levels of Reconciliation. Individual Interests.
Individuals in all parts of the world have certain interests they seek to
pursue. In general, Nayef Al-Rodhan argues that it is the task of the national
government to enable citizens to freely pursue these interests, which may
include making a decent living and having a certain quality of life. For most
citizens, this will include employment, affordable housing, public and private
safety, good schools, affordable health care, and state social services. Once
citizens have achieved a certain degree of social security, Al-Rodhan argues
they may pursue less material interests like contributing to world peace
missions and encouraging their governments to avoid war. However, individuals
who suffer from state brutality may welcome foreign pressure if it means a
better chance of ensuring individual human rights. Group Interests. The second
level of reconciliation is group interests. Referring to it is an
acknowledgement of the fact that international borders do not always correspond
with ethnic and religious settlement patterns. Therefore, a 21st century
statesman must consider the rights of groups of peoples. With regards to ethnic
groups, this might entail ensuring the group’s right to maintain a common
language and culture. Other key groups include women and people with
disabilities. Nayef Al-Rodhan stresses that groups can sometimes oppose the
individual, especially if a group’s cultural practice violates the rights or
freedoms of a member of the group. Al-Rodhan says that tensions between the
individual and the group can never be eliminated but notes that if a
society’s laws are fair, both interests will find their interests protected.
National Interests. Nayef Al-Rodhan defines national interests as interests
shaped by the values of the people and governments of each individual state,
noting that these values can be influenced by the geographic location of
natural resources in the state, the cultural and historical experience of the
state’s inhabitants, and the material needs of the state’s population. For
the most part, Al-Rodhan argues that the state’s main interests are to
preserve its territorial integrity and political independence. In today’s
interconnected world, a state must also work to project a positive image abroad
and to be a positive force in international affairs. This is a key point for
Al-Rodhan as it indicates that the long-term national interests of the state
are increasingly in line with the interests of the international community as a
whole. However, the state’s national interests may conflict with individual
interests in the case of a dictatorial regime. Similarly, some of a state’s
economic interests may conflict with or supersede individuals’ needs. In some
cases, special interest groups may dominate the state’s agenda to the
detriment of other groups or individuals. Regional Interests. Although regions
can be somewhat difficult to delineate, they generally include countries that
share a common geographic space, history, cultural affinity, and strong
economic relations. According to Nayef Al-Rodhan, regional approaches can be
especially effective in dealing with transnational threats, and regions have
more agility and can generally move faster than larger, more global
organizations. However, individuals and groups within a state may find their
needs neglected if the state prioritizes the needs and interests of the
regional group over those of its citizens. Cultural Interests. According to
Nayef Al-Rodhan, members of a culture often have a strong interest or desire to
perpetuate their cultural practices among their members in an unhampered way.
This may include language, religion, and traditional economic base. Cultures
may be threatened by migration, demographic pressure, and competition for
limited resources. They may also be threatened by more dominant cultures.
Therefore, Al-Rodhan argues that policymakers must find the balance between
encouraging cultural diversity and limiting cultural exclusivity. Global
Interests. Nayef Al-Rodhan defines these interests as the common interests of
the international community of states and those of the world population as a
whole. To fulfill global interests, states must work closely together through
multilateral institutions and pursue win-win solutions rather than behaving as
though they are in a zero-sum game. For instance, the United Nations is an
organization that has done much to help the welfare and well-being of peoples
around the world, particularly through the UN’s Millenium Development Goals.
According to Al-Rodhan, another global interest is the promotion of
international prosperity. This involves, for example, increasing the standard
of living in poor countries. By extension, this will improve the conditions of
rich countries because poverty often breeds transnational criminal activity
that ends up affecting even wealthy nations. Overall, global interests will
best be served if all states obey international laws and norms and refrain from
acting unilaterally. Planetary Interests. Nayef Al-Rodhan identifies planetary
interests as the preservation of the biosphere and biodiversity. This includes
maintaining ecological equilibrium, reversing global warming, and preventing
the further destruction of the environment from things like deforestation and
air and water pollution. Biodiversity and ecological balance must be maintained
both because biodiversity is valuable in and of itself and because it serves a
vital function in the day-to-day activities of human life. Thus, in looking at
the different interests of various human entities, reconciliation statecraft
must take into account the interest of the planet on which all life depends.
Moral Interests. Moral interests refer to a set of universal moral principles
that all cultures can agree upon. Some of these morals have already been
enshrined in international humanitarian law and cites the belief that innocent
civilians should be protected during times of armed conflict as an example.
Although Nayef Al-Rodhan argues that humans are naturally amoral, he also
maintains that the state and the global system can encourage humans to behave
morally. A key way to do this is to ensure that all individuals’ basic needs
are met. In this way, humans can begin thinking beyond their survival instincts
and begin behaving morally. External links. Powermetrics Information Network
