Power vacuum A power vacuum is, in its broadest sense, an expression for a
condition that exists when someone has lost control of something and no one has
replaced them. It is usually used to refer to a political situation that can
occur when a government has no identifiable central authority. The metaphor
implies that, like a physical vacuum, other forces will tend to "rush in" to
fill the vacuum as soon as it is created, perhaps in the form of an armed
militia or insurgents, military coup, warlord or dictator. Fernand Braudel,
"Capitalism and Material Life", New York, Harper & Row, 1967, vol. I, p.57
During or following a civil war there is often a power vacuum of some sort. For
example, the war-torn nation of Somalia is currently mired in a power vacuum,
with no central government or president exercising control over the supposed
"Republic of Somalia". The start of civil war in Bosnia in 1992 was marked with
a power vacuum following disintegration of Yugoslavia. A power vacuum can also
occur following a constitutional crisis in which large portions of the
government resign or are removed, creating unclear issues regarding succession
to positions of power. After the Second World War, there was a power vacuum in
Europe. Along with the division of East and West Germany, Stalin's diplomacy
and governance, the development of the atomic bomb, policies of containment of
communism, the expansionism of the USSR and USA and a growing lack of trust
(fear of a hegemony) were seen to be factors in the emergence of the Cold War.
More recently, the tight control which Saddam Hussein's Baath party exerted on
Iraq could have been exploited during a transitional hand-over period following
the 2003 invasion of Iraq. Instead, the US Government's policy of purging Baath
party members from the Iraqi government after the invasion created a power
vacuum which was quickly filled by insurgents, who then began to attack
American service personnel using improvised explosive devices and snipers. The
general concept of a "power vacuum" is relevant to many personal and
organizational situations. In the criminal world many drug lords are able to
become untouchable because of fear of any backlash occurring in a power vacuum
situation.
