Power transition theory The Power transition theory is a theory about the
cyclical nature of war, in relation to the power in international relations.
Created by A.F.K. Organski, and originally published in his textbook, "World
Politics" (1958), power transition theory today describes international
politics as a hierarchy, with 4 degrees of power between states. The objective
of the theory is to investigate the cyclic condition of wars, and how
transition of power in terms of machtpolitik affect the occurrence of these
wars. Overview. Organski 1980, 19 There are further nuances to the theory: for
instance, the sources of power transition vary in their volatility, population
change being the least volatile and political capacity (defined as the ability
of the government to control resources internal to the country) the most
volatile. Employing the metaphor of a pyramid, Organski illustrates how there
are many weak but few strong states. The very strongest of states is called the
"dominant power". This is the one with the largest proportion of power
resources. This is commonly defined as the possession of resources. These
resources include population, territory, natural resources, military forces,
economic size, and political stability, among others. In addition to this
dominant and "hegemonic" state, there are also some "great powers," a
collection of potential rivals to the dominant state and who share in the tasks
of maintaining the system and controlling the allocation of power resources.
Then there are some "middle powers" of regional significance similar to the
dominant state, but unable to challenge the dominant state or the system
structure, and "small powers," the rest. These dominant powers, or hegemons,
commonly arise and use their power to create a set of political and economic
structures and norms of behaviour that enhance the stability of the system at
the same time that they advance their own security. In other words, this state
is interested in maintaining the "status quo" of the international system.
Organski and Jacek Kugler defined status quo states as those that have
participated in designing "the rules of the game" and stand to benefit from
these rules. Challengers, or "revisionist states”, want "a new place for
themselves in the international society" commensurate with their power.
Revisionist states express a "general dissatisfaction" with their "position in
the system", and they have a "desire to redraft the rules by which relations
among nations work". Since the international status quo is defended by the
dominant power, only the very strongest of great powers can plausibly threaten
to change the status quo. The argument accompanying the power pyramid implies
that only the dissatisfied state is roughly equal in power to the dominant
state should it perceive that it has the willingness for war. Thus, power
transition theory's war hypothesis is that wars among great powers are most
likely when a power transition occurs between the dominant state and the
dissatisfied challenger. Such a war can be termed a "hegemonic war". The most
important consequence of a hegemonic war is that it changes the system in
accordance with the new international distribution of power; it brings about a
reordering of the basic components of the system. Victory and defeat re-
establish an unambiguous hierarchy of prestige congruent with the new
distribution of power in the system. The war determines who will govern the
international system, and whose interests will be primarily served by the new
international order. Contrary to the traditional “Balance of power theory”,
with its power parity hypothesis, which claim that an equality in power is
conductive to peace, “Power transition theory” reach the opposite
conclusion claiming the probability of war between the rising challenger and
the dominant state peaks near the point of power transition between them. Prior
to attaining parity, the rising, dissatisfied great power has little incentive
to attack a dominant power that is still viewed as too powerful. The challenger
essentially lacks the capability to do something about its dissatisfaction.
Long after surpassing the once-dominant power, the rising, dissatisfied great
power no longer has much incentive to attack a now inferior, former rival.
Thus, the greatest risk of warfare is when the two states have attained rough
equality in power (parity), after one state that is dissatisfied with the
international order has caught up with a formerly more powerful state
(overtaking) that was most responsible for creating the status quo. According
to Rapkin and Thompson (2003), this is the dangerous zone of power transition.
The probability of conflict between the dissatisfied great power and the
dominant power will be greatest when the relative capabilities of these two
states are characterized by parity—the “zone of contention and probable
war” wherein the ratio of the dissatisfied great power’s and the dominant
state’s capabilities lies between 4:5 and 6:5, according to Tammen et al.
(2000). Hierarchy. AFK Organski organized the world into 4 types of states. The
transition of power was to occur between a dominant state and a great power (in
most cases), leading to a war. Historical application. The theory leads to the
"long cycle theory" of war and seeks to explain trends between warring states
in the past 500 years. The general trend is that a nation achieves hegemonic
power and then is challenged by a great power. This leads to a war which, in
the past, has created a transition between the two powers. Eugene R. Wittkopf
explores past wars and their relation to Power Transition theory in his book
"World Politics: Trend and Transformation". He explains this using George
Modelski's Seapower Concentration Index. At 1518, Portugal assumed a hegemonic
position in world politics. However, as the Netherlands (which was experiencing
the Dutch Golden Age) rose in power, a series of struggles led to the
destruction of Spain's power and a transition to Dutch hegemony. Dutch hegemony
was brought into question again in 1688 with the Wars of Louis XIV, which
resulted in what is referred to as the "Britain I Cycle", the Napoleonic Wars
interrupted this cycle and questioned the hegemony Britain possessed. However,
Britain's victory resulted in maintenance of power and the "Britain II Cycle".
This cycle ended with the World Wars and Wittkopf shows the period of 1914-1945
as one of particular turbulence in which no power maintained hegemony, even
after the Treaty of Versailles. After the second World War, a drastic increase
in seapower concentration by the United States was experienced and it (along
with the Soviet Union) became the world's first superpowers. In general,
hegemonic periods last approximately 60 to 90 years and conflicts which result
in a period stabilization of power distribution last approximately 20 years.
This can be explained through war weariness and the tendency (although this was
broken in the first half of the 20th century) for nations not to engage
themselves in another conflict after being involved in a power transition.
