Prague Party Conference The Prague Party Conference was the sixth party
conference of Vladimir Lenin's Bolshevik faction of the Russian Social
Democratic Labour Party. It was in Prague January 5-17 1912, 18 Bolsheviks
attended. Stalin and Sverdlov were in exile at the time and couldn't attend.
Georgi Plekhanov claimed he was too ill to attend. At the conference, Lenin and
his supporters broke away from the rest of the party and formed their own,
purely Bolshevik, party. The conference was meant to be secret (Lenin
instructed: "No-one, no organisation must know about this.") but every detail
was known by the Okhrana. Seven people were elected to the Central Committee:
Lenin, Zinoviev, Malinovsky (later revealed to be a spy for the Okhrana),
Ordzhonikidze, Spandaryan (Stalin's best friend), Sverdlov (Soviet president
1917-19) and Goloshchekin. The latter four set up a Russian Bureau to direct
the party along with Kalinin and Stalin, who led the Bureau. This ensured the
domination of Bolsheviks in Russia as opposed to the emigres who were
considered "null and void" by Ordzhonikidze. Spandaryan called for the emigre
group to be dissolved. After the conference, on Lenin and Zinoviev's
recommendation, Joseph Stalin was co-opted to the Bolshevik Central Committee.
Elena Stasova was made Secretary to the Russian Bureau. Stepan Shahumyan and
Mikhail Kalinin (Soviet president 1919-46) became candidate Central Committee
members. Ironically, Kalinin was suspected of being an Okhrana agent so was not
a full member. Both were Stalin's comrades in the Caucasus. Lenin wrote to
Maxim Gorky: "At last we have succeeded, in spite of the Liquidator scum, in
restoring the Party and its Central Committee. I hope you will rejoice with us
over the fact." Stalin said: "This conference was of the utmost importance in
the history of our Party, for it drew a boundary line between the Bolsheviks
and the Mensheviks and amalgamated the Bolshevik organizations all over the
country into a united Bolshevik Party."
