Prebendalism Richard A. Joseph, director of The Program of African Studies at
Northwestern University, is usually credited with first using the term
prebendalism to describe patron-client or neopatrimonialism in Nigeria. Since
then the term has commonly been used in scholarly literature and textbooks.
"The Catholic Encyclopedia" defines a prebend as the "right of member of
chapter to his share in the revenues of a cathedral." Joseph used the term to
describe the sense of entitlement that many people in Nigeria feel they have to
the revenues of the Nigerian state. Elected officials, government workers, and
members of the ethnic and religious groups to which they belong feel they have
a right to a share of government revenues. Joseph wrote in 1996, "According to
the theory of prebendalism, state offices are regarded as prebends that can be
appropriated by officeholders, who use them to generate material benefits for
themselves and their constituents and kin groups..." As a result of that kind
of patron-client or identity politics, Nigeria has regularly been one of the
lowest ranked nations for political transparency by Transparency International
in its Corruption Perceptions Index. Other results include the corruption
investigations into the activities of 31 out of 36 Nigerian governors, the
frequent comments in the Nigerian press about the problems of corruption (for
example, Victor E. Dike's article in the "Daily Champion" of Lagos, "Nigeria:
Governance and Nigeria's Ailing Economy") and the common defenses of
prebendalism as necessary for justice and equality in government funding (for
example Oliver O. Mbamara's editorial, "In Defense of Nigeria: Amidst the
Feasting of Critics" at "Africa Events". Prebendalism has also been used to
describe the nature of state-derived rights over capital held by state
officials in parts of India in the early 18th Century. Such rights were equally
held to be of a patron-client nature and thus volatile. They were thus
converted where possible into hereditary entitlements. Max Weber discussed the
prebendalism of India in the early Middle Ages in his 1958 book "The Religion
of India": Weber had previously discussed the prebendalism of China in the
early Middle Ages in his 1951 book "The Religion of China".
