Order of succession An order of succession is a formula or algorithm that
determines who inherits an office upon the death, resignation, or removal of
its current occupant. Monarchies and nobility. In hereditary monarchies the
order of succession determines who becomes the new monarch when the incumbent
sovereign dies or vacates the throne. Such orders of succession generally
specify a selection process, by law or tradition, which is applied to indicate
which relative of the previous monarch, or other person, has the strongest
claim to succeed, and will therefore assume the throne when the vacancy occurs.
Often, the line of succession is restricted to persons of the blood royal (but
see morganatic marriage), that is, to those legally recognized as born into or
descended from the reigning dynasty or a previous sovereign. The persons in
line to succeed to the throne are called "dynasts". Constitutions, statutes,
house laws, and norms may regulate the sequence and eligibility of potential
successors to the throne. In the past, the order of succession was sometimes
superseded or reinforced by the coronation of a selected heir as co-monarch
during the life of the reigning monarch. Examples include Henry the Young King
and the heirs of elective monarchies, such as the use of the title King of the
Romans for the Habsburg emperors. In the partially elective system of tanistry,
the heir or "tanist" was elected from the qualified males of the royal family.
Different monarchies use different algorithms or formulas to determine the line
of succession. Hereditary monarchies have used a variety of methods and
algorithms to calculate the order of succession among possible candidates
related by blood or marriage. An advantage of employing such formulae is that
dynasts may, from early youth, receive grooming, education, protection,
resources and retainers suitable for the future dignity and responsibilities
associated with the crown of a particular nation or people. Such systems may
also enhance political stability by establishing clear, public expectations
about the sequence of rulers, potentially reducing competition and channeling
cadets into other roles or endeavors. Some hereditary monarchies have had
unique selection processes, particularly upon the accession of a new dynasty.
Imperial France established male primogeniture within the descent of Napoleon
I, but failing male issue the constitution allowed the emperors to choose who
among their brothers or nephews would follow them upon the throne. The Kingdom
of Italy was designated a secundogeniture for the second surviving son of
Napoleon I Bonaparte but, failing such, provided for the emperor's stepson,
Eugène de Beauharnais, to succeed, even though the latter had no blood
relationship to the House of Bonaparte. Serbia's monarchy was hereditary by
primogeniture for male descendants in the male line of Prince Alexander I, but
upon extinction of that line, the reigning king could choose any among his male
relatives of the House of Karađorđević. In Romania, on the other hand, upon
extinction of the male line descended from Carol I of Romania, the constitution
stipulated that the male-line of his brother, Leopold, Prince of Hohenzollern,
would inherit the throne and, failing other male line issue of that family, a
prince of a "Western European" dynasty was to be chosen by the Romanian king
and parliament. By contrast, older European monarchies tended to rely upon
succession criteria that only called to the throne descendants of past monarchs
according to fixed rules rooted in one or another pattern of laws or
traditions. Primogeniture. In primogeniture (or more precisely "male
primogeniture"), the monarch's eldest son and his descendants take precedence
over his siblings and their descendants. Elder sons take precedence over
younger sons, but all sons take precedence over all daughters. Children
represent their deceased ancestors, and the senior line of descent always takes
precedence over the junior line, within each gender. The right of succession
belongs to the eldest son of the reigning sovereign (see heir apparent), and
then to the eldest son of the eldest son. This is the system in the
Commonwealth realms, Spain, and Monaco. Fiefs or titles granted "in tail
general" or to "heirs general" follow this system for sons, but daughters are
considered equal co-heirs, at least in modern British practice. This can result
in the condition known as abeyance. In the medieval period, actual practice
varied with local custom. While women could inherit manors, power was usually
exercised by their husbands ("jure uxoris") or their sons ("jure matris").
Absolute primogeniture. Absolute primogeniture is a law in which the eldest
child of the sovereign succeeds to the throne, regardless of gender, and where
females (and their descendants) enjoy the same right of succession as males.
This is currently the system in Sweden (since 1980), the Netherlands (since
1983), Norway (since 1990), Belgium (since 1991), Denmark (since 2009) and
Luxembourg (since 2011). The Succession to the Crown Bill of 2004 proposed
changing the rules of succession to the British throne to absolute
primogeniture. In October 2011 it was agreed that absolute primogeniture will
be introduced in the Commonwealth realms at a future date. Agnatic succession.
Agnatic (or semi-Salic) succession, prevalent in much of Europe since ancient
times, is the restriction of succession to those descended from or related to a
past or current monarch exclusively through the male line of descent:
descendants through females were ineligible to inherit unless no males of the
patrilineage remained alive. In this form of succession, the succession is
reserved firstly to all the male dynastic descendants of all the eligible
branches by order of primogeniture, then upon total extinction of these male
descendants to a female member of the dynasty. The only current monarchy that
operated under semi-Salic law until recently is Luxembourg, which changed to
absolute primogeniture in 2011. Former monarchies that operated under semi-
Salic law included Austria (later Austria-Hungary), Bavaria, Hanover,
Württemberg, Russia, Saxony, Tuscany, and the Kingdom of the Two Sicilies. If
a female descendant should take the throne, she will not necessarily be the
senior heiress by primogeniture, but usually the nearest relative to the last
male monarch of the dynasty by proximity of blood. Examples include Christian I
of Denmark's succession to Schleswig-Holstein, Maria Theresa of Austria
(although her right ultimately was confirmed in consequence of her victory in
the War of the Austrian Succession launched over her accession), Marie-Adelaide
and Charlotte of Luxembourg, Anne of Brittany, and Maria Vladimirovna, Grand
Duchess of Russia, as well as Christian IX of Denmark's succession in the right
of his wife, Louise of Hesse. Salic law. The Salic law, a form of agnatic
succession, restricted the pool of potential heirs to males of the
patrilineage, altogether excluding females of the dynasty and their descendants
from the succession. The Salic law applied to the former royal or imperial
houses of Albania, France, Italy, Romania, Yugoslavia, and Prussia/German
Empire. It currently applies to the house of Liechtenstein. In 1830 in Spain
the question whether or not the Salic law applied - and therefore, should
Ferdinand VII be followed by his daughter Isabella or by his brother Charles -
led to a series of civil wars and the formation of a pretender rival dynasty
which exists up to the present. Generally, hereditary monarchies that operate
under the Salic law also use primogeniture among male descendants in the male
line to determine the rightful successor, although in earlier history agnatic
seniority was more usual than primogeniture. Fiefs and titles granted "in tail
male" or to "heirs male" follow this primogenitural form of succession. (Those
granted to "heirs male of the body" are limited to the male-line descendants of
the grantee; those to "heirs male general" may be inherited, after the
extinction of the grantee's male-line descendants, by the male-line descendants
of his father, paternal grandfather, etc.) Rota system. The rota system, from
the Old Church Slavic word for "ladder" or "staircase", was a system of
collateral succession practiced (though imperfectly) in Kievan Rus' and later
Appanage and early Muscovite Russia. In this system the throne passed not
linearly from father to son, but laterally from brother to brother (usually to
the fourth brother) and then to the eldest son of the eldest brother who had
held the throne. The system was begun by Yaroslav the Wise, who assigned each
of his sons a principality based on seniority. When the Grand Prince died, the
next most senior prince moved to Kiev and all others moved to the principality
next up the ladder. Appointment, election, tanistry, and rotation. Order of
succession can be arranged by appointment: either the incumbent monarch or some
electoral body appoints an heir or a list of heirs before vacancy occurs. A
monarchy may be generally elective, although in a way that the next holder will
be elected only after it becomes vacant. In history, quite often, but not
always, appointments and elections favored, or were limited to, members of a
certain dynasty or extended family. There may have been genealogical rules to
determine who all are entitled to succeed, and who will be favored. This has
led sometimes to an order of succession that balances branches of a dynasty by
rotation. It currently applies, with variations, to the Holy See, Malaysia,
Cambodia, Kuwait, the UAE, Andorra, Swaziland, and Samoa. Seniority. In
seniority successions, a monarch's or fiefholder's next sibling, actually it
means almost always "brother", succeeds; not his children. And, if the royal
house is more extensive, (male) cousins and so forth succeed, in order of
seniority, which may depend upon actual age or upon the seniority between their
fathers. Partible inheritance. In some societies, a monarchy or a fief was
inherited in a way that all entitled heirs had a right to a share of it. The
most prominent examples of this practice are the multiple divisions of the
Frankish Empire under the Merovingian and Carolingian dynasties. Proximity of
blood. Proximity of blood is a system wherein the person closest in degree of
kinship to the sovereign succeeds, preferring males over females and elder over
younger siblings. This is sometimes used as a gloss for "pragmatic" successions
in Europe; it had somewhat more standing during the Middle Ages everywhere in
Europe. In Outremer it was often used to choose regents, and it figured in some
of the succession disputes over the Kingdom of Jerusalem. It was also
recognized in that kingdom for the succession of fiefs, under special
circumstances: if a fief was lost to the Saracens and subsequently re-
conquered, it was to be assigned to the heir in proximity of blood of the last
fief-holder. Ultimogeniture. Ultimogeniture is an order of succession where the
subject is succeeded by the youngest son (or youngest child). This serves the
circumstances where the youngest is "keeping the hearth", taking care of the
parents and continuing at home, whereas elder children have had time to succeed
"out in the world" and provide for themselves. Lateral succession. Lateral or
fraternal system of succession mandates principles of seniority among members
of a dynasty or dynastic clan, with a purpose of election a best qualified
candidate for the leadership. The leaders are elected as being the most mature
elders of the clan, already in possession of military power and competence.
Fraternal succession is preferred to ensure that mature leaders are in charge,
removing a need for regents. The lateral system of succession may or may not
exclude male descendants in the female line from succession. In practice, when
no male heir is mature enough, a female heir is usually determined
"pragmatically", by proximity to the last monarch, like Boariks of the
Caucasian Huns or Tamiris of Massagetes in Middle Asia. The lateral monarch is
generally elected after the leadership throne becomes vacant. In the early
years of the Mongol empire, the death of the ruling monarchs, Genghis Khan and
Ögedei Khan, immediately stopped the Mongol western campaigns because of the
upcoming elections. In East Asia, the Lateral succession system is first
recorded in the pre-historical period starting with the late Shang Dynasty's
Wai Bing succeeding his brother Da Ding, and then in connection with a conquest
by the Zhou of the Yin Shang, when Wu Ding was succeeded by his brother Zu Geng
in 1189 BC and then by another brother Zu Jia in 1178 BC. A drawback of the
lateral succession is that, while ensuring a most competent leadership for the
moment, the system inherently created derelict prince lines not eligible for
succession. Any scion of an eligible heir that did not live long enough to
ascend to the throne was cast aside as not eligible, creating a pool of
discontented pretenders called "Tegin" in Turkic and "Izgoi" in Rus dynastic
lines. The unsettled pool of derelict princes was eventually bringing havoc to
the succession order, and dismemberment to the state. Matrilinear succession.
In matrilinear succession (also known as Marumakathayam), practiced in Kerala
by the Nair nobility and royal families, a man's wealth and title is inherited
by his sister's children, and his own children receive their inheritance from
their own maternal uncles. The Maharajah of Travancore is therefore succeeded
by his sister's son, and his own son receives a courtesy title but has no place
in the line of succession. Since Indian Independence and the passing of several
acts such as the Hindu Succession Act (1956), this form of inheritance is no
longer recognised by law. Regardless, the pretender to the Travancore throne is
still determined by matrilinear succession. Succession crises. When a monarch
dies without a clear successor, a succession crisis often results. For example,
when King Charles IV of France died, the Hundred Years War erupted between
Charles' cousin, Philip VI of France, and Charles' nephew, Edward III of
England, to determine who would succeed Charles as the King of France.
Republics. In republics, a desire to ensure a continuity of operations at all
times has resulted in most offices having some formalized order of succession.
In a country with fixed-term elections, the head of state (president) is
sometimes succeeded following death or resignation by the vice president or
prime minister, in turn followed by various office holders of the legislative
assembly, and/or other government ministers. For example, if both the President
of the United States and Vice President of the United States are unable to
serve, the Speaker of the United States House of Representatives takes over as
acting President. Next in line is the President pro tempore of the United
States Senate, who is followed by the Secretary of State, and other cabinet
officials. In many republics, however, a new election takes place some period
after the demise of the incumbent president. For more information on the
succession process in the United States of America, "see United States
presidential line of succession". In contrast, in Finland, the president's
temporary successor is the prime minister and then the ministers in the order
of days spent in office, instead of a prefixed order. Since there is no vice
president, a new president has to be elected if the president dies or resigns.
