Price–specie flow mechanism The price–specie flow mechanism is a logical
argument by David Hume against the Mercantilist (1700–1776) idea that a
nation should strive for a positive balance of trade, or net exports. The
argument considers the effects of international transactions in a gold
standard, a system in which gold is the official means of international
payments and each nation’s currency is in the form of gold itself or of paper
currency fully convertible into gold. Hume argued that when a country with a
gold standard had a positive balance of trade, gold would flow into the country
in the amount that the value of exports exceeds the value of imports.
Conversely, when such a country had a negative balance of trade, gold would
flow out of the country in the amount that the value of imports exceeds the
value of exports. Consequently, in the absence of any offsetting actions by the
central bank on the quantity of money in circulation (called sterilization),
the money supply would rise in a country with a positive balance of trade and
fall in a country with a negative balance of trade. Using a theory called the
quantity theory of money, Hume argued that in countries where the quantity of
money increases, inflation would set in and the prices of goods and services
would tend to rise while in countries where the money supply decreases,
deflation would occur as the prices of goods and services fell. The higher
prices would, in the countries with a positive balance of trade, cause exports
to decrease and imports to increase, which will alter the balance of trade
downwards towards a neutral balance. Inversely, in countries with a negative
balance of trade, the lower prices would cause exports to increase and imports
to decrease, which will heighten the balance of trade towards a neutral
balance. These adjustments in the balance of trade will continue until the
balance of trade equals zero in all countries involved in the exchange. The
price–specie flow mechanism can also be applied to a state's entire balance
of payments, which accounts not only for the value of net exports and similar
transactions (the current account), but also the financial account, which
accounts for flows of financial assets across countries, and the capital
account, which accounts for non-market and other special international
transactions. But under a gold standard, transactions in the financial account
would be conducted in gold or currency convertible into gold, which would also
affect the quantity of money in circulation in each country.
