Prime minister A prime minister is the most senior minister of cabinet in the
executive branch of government in a parliamentary system. In many systems, the
prime minister selects and may dismiss other members of the cabinet, and
allocates posts to members within the government. In most systems, the prime
minister is the presiding member and chairman of the cabinet. In a minority of
systems, notably in semi-presidential systems of government, a prime minister
is the official who is appointed to manage the civil service and execute the
directives of the head of state. In parliamentary systems fashioned after the
Westminster system, the prime minister is the presiding and actual head of the
government and head of the executive branch. In such systems, the head of state
or the head of state's official representative (i.e. the monarch, president, or
governor-general) usually holds a largely ceremonial position, although often
with reserve powers. The prime minister is often, but not always, a member of
parliament and is expected with other ministers to ensure the passage of bills
through the legislature. In some monarchies the monarch may also exercise
executive powers (known as the royal prerogative) which are constitutionally
vested in the crown and may be exercised without the approval of parliament. As
well as being head of government, a prime minister may have other roles or
titles—the Prime Minister of the United Kingdom, for example, is also First
Lord of the Treasury and Minister for the Civil Service. Prime ministers may
take other ministerial posts—for example during the Second World War, Winston
Churchill was also Minister of Defence (although there was then no Ministry of
Defence). Etymology. The first actual usage of the term "prime minister" or
"Premier Ministre" was used by Cardinal Richelieu when in 1625 he was named to
head the royal council as prime minister of France. Louis XIV and his
descendants generally attempted to avoid giving this title to their chief
ministers. The term prime minister in the sense that we know it originated in
the 18th century in the United Kingdom. History. Since medieval times monarchs
of England and the United Kingdom had ministers in whom they placed special
trust and who were regarded as the head of the government. Examples were Thomas
Cromwell under Henry VIII; William Cecil, Lord Burghley under Elizabeth I;
Clarendon under Charles II and Godolphin under Queen Anne. These ministers held
a variety of formal posts, but were commonly known as "the minister", the
"chief minister", the "first minister" and finally the "prime minister". The
power of these ministers depended entirely on the personal favour of the
monarch. Although managing the parliament was among the necessary skills of
holding high office, they did not depend on a parliamentary majority for their
power. Although there was a cabinet, it was appointed entirely by the monarch,
and the monarch usually presided over its meetings. When the monarch grew tired
of a first minister, he or she could be dismissed, or worse: Cromwell was
executed and Clarendon driven into exile when they lost favour. Kings sometimes
divided power equally between two or more ministers to prevent one minister
from becoming too powerful. Late in Anne's reign, for example, the Tory
ministers Harley and St John shared power. Post-English Civil War
(1642–1651). In the mid 17th century, after the English Civil War and the
Protectorate, Parliament had strengthened its position and it emerged even more
powerful after the Glorious Revolution of 1688. The monarch could not establish
any law or impose any tax without its permission. Thus it has been said that
the House of Commons became a part of the government and it has been only a
further step of this development that a new kind of prime minister should
emerge. This turning point in the evolution of the prime ministership came with
the death of Anne in 1714 and the accession of George I. George spoke no
English, spent much of his time at his home in Hanover, and had neither
knowledge of nor interest in the details of English government. In these
circumstances it was inevitable that the king's first minister would become the
de facto head of the government. From 1721 this was the Whig politician Robert
Walpole, who held office for twenty-one years. Walpole chaired cabinet
meetings, appointed all the other ministers, dispensed the royal patronage and
packed the House of Commons with his supporters. Under Walpole, the doctrine of
cabinet solidarity developed. Walpole required that no minister other than
himself have private dealings with the king, and also that when the cabinet had
agreed on a policy, all ministers must defend it in public or resign. As a
later prime minister, Lord Melbourne, said: "It matters not what we say,
gentlemen, so long as we all say the same thing." Walpole always denied that he
was "prime minister", and throughout the 18th century parliamentarians and
legal scholars continued to deny that any such position was known to the
Constitution. The title was first referred to on government documents during
the administration of Benjamin Disraeli but did not appear in the formal
British Order of precedence until 1905. George II and George III made strenuous
efforts to reclaim the personal power of the monarch, but the increasing
complexity and expense of government meant that a minister who could command
the loyalty of the Commons was increasingly necessary. The long tenure of the
wartime Prime Minister Pitt the Younger (1783–1801), combined with the mental
illness of George III, consolidated the power of the post. The prestige of
British institutions in the 19th century and the growth of the British Empire
saw the British model of cabinet government, headed by a prime minister, widely
copied, both in other European countries and in British colonial territories as
they developed self-government. In some places alternative titles such as
"premier", "chief minister", "first minister of state", "president of the
council" or "chancellor" were adopted, but the essentials of the office were
the same. By the late 20th century the majority of the world's countries had a
prime minister or equivalent minister, holding office under either a
constitutional monarchy or a ceremonial president. The main exceptions to this
system have been the United States and the presidential republics in Latin
America, modelled on the U.S. system, in which the president directly exercises
executive authority. Bahrain's Prime Minister, Sheikh Khalifah bin Sulman Al
Khalifah has been in the post since 1971, making him the longest serving non-
elected Prime Minister.
