Principles of Economics Principles of Economics (1871) (in German, "Grundsätze
der Volkswirtschaftslehre") is a book by economist Carl Menger which is
credited with the founding of the Austrian School of economics. It was one of
the first modern treatises to advance the theory of marginal utility. Summary.
Menger advanced his theory that the marginal utility of goods, rather than the
labor inputs that went into making them, is the source of their value. This
marginalist theory solved the diamond-water paradox that had been puzzling
classical economists: the fact that mankind finds diamonds to be far more
valuable than water although water is far more important. Menger stressed
uncertainty in the making of economic decisions, rather than relying on "homo
economicus" or the rational man who was fully informed of all circumstances
impinging on his decisions. This was a deviation from classical and
neoclassical economic thought. Menger asserted that such perfect knowledge
never exists, and that therefore all economic activity implies risk. The
entrepreneurs' role was to collect and evaluate information and to act on those
risks. Menger saw that time was the root of uncertainty within economics. As
production takes time then producers have no certainty on the supply or demand
for their product. Thus the price of the finished product bears no resemblance
to the costs of production, since the two represent market conditions at very
different points in time. The labour theory of value was the explanation that
had been reached by Adam Smith among others, and the Marxist school of
economics still relies on this theory. The Labour theory of value was that the
value of an object was reliant on the labour that had gone into producing it,
including any training or investment that supplemented the labour. According to
Neo-Classical economists the Labour theory of value could not explain
fluctuating values for different kinds of labour, nor did it explain how found
goods could be more valuable than extracted goods. As the price of a commodity
is the average cost of production, it includes the fact that a tiny proportion
of commodities may be found, although finding goods is hardly typical of modern
manufacturing processes. Marginal utility as the source of value meant that the
perceived need for an object was seen to be dictating the value, on an
individual rather than a general level. The implication was that the individual
mind is the source of economic value. Although Menger accepted the marginal
utility theory, he made deviations from the work of other neoclassical
pioneers. Most importantly he fundamentally rejected the use of mathematical
methods insisting that the function of economics was to investigate the
essences rather than the specific quantities of economic phenomena. Reactions.
Ludwig von Mises called the book the best introduction to thinking like an
Austrian economist.
