Princeton University Princeton University is an American private Ivy League
research university located in Princeton, New Jersey, United States. It is one
of the eight universities of the Ivy League, and one of the nine Colonial
Colleges founded before the American Revolution. Princeton provides
undergraduate and graduate instruction in the humanities, social sciences,
natural sciences and engineering. Princeton does not have schools of medicine,
law, divinity, or business, but it does offer professional degrees through the
Woodrow Wilson School of Public and International Affairs, the Princeton
University School of Engineering and Applied Science and the School of
Architecture. Founded in 1746 in Elizabeth, New Jersey, as the College of New
Jersey, the university moved to Newark in 1747, then to Princeton in 1756 and
was renamed Princeton University in 1896. The present-day College of New Jersey
in nearby Ewing Township, New Jersey, is an unrelated institution. Princeton
was the fourth chartered institution of higher education in the American
colonies. Princeton had close ties to the Presbyterian Church, but has never
been affiliated with any denomination and today imposes no religious
requirements on its students. The university has ties with the Institute for
Advanced Study, Princeton Theological Seminary, and the Westminster Choir
College of Rider University. Princeton has been associated with 35 Nobel
Laureates, 17 National Medal of Science winners, and three National Humanities
Medal winners. On a per-student basis, Princeton has the largest university
endowment in the world. History. New Light Presbyterians founded the College of
New Jersey, later Princeton University, in 1746 in order to train ministers.
The college was the educational and religious capital of Scots-Irish America.
In 1756, the college moved to Princeton, New Jersey. Its home in Princeton was
Nassau Hall, named for the royal house of William III of England. Following the
untimely deaths of Princeton's first five presidents, John Witherspoon became
President in 1768 and remained in that office until his death in 1794. During
his presidency, Witherspoon shifted the college's focus from training ministers
to preparing a new generation for leadership in the new American nation. To
this end, he tightened academic standards and solicited investment in the
college. Witherspoon's presidency constituted a long period of stability for
the college, interrupted by the American Revolution and particularly the Battle
of Princeton, during which British soldiers briefly occupied Nassau Hall;
American forces, led by George Washington, fired cannon on the building to rout
them from it. Before the construction of Stanhope Hall in 1803, Nassau Hall was
the college's sole building. The cornerstone of the building was laid on
September 17, 1754. During the summer of 1783, the Continental Congress met in
Nassau Hall, making Princeton the country's capital for four months. Over the
centuries and through two redesigns following major fires, (1802 and 1855)
Nassau Hall's role shifted from an all-purpose building, comprising office,
dormitory, library, and classroom space; to classroom space exclusively; to its
present role as the administrative center of the University. The class of 1879
donated twin lion sculptures that flanked the entrance until 1911, when that
same class replaced them with tigers. Nassau Hall's iconic bell rang after the
halls construction however the fire of 1802 melted the bell. The bell was then
recast and melted again in the fire of 1855. James McCosh took office as the
college's president in 1868 and lifted the institution out of a low period that
had been brought about by the American Civil War. During his two decades of
service, he overhauled the curriculum, oversaw an expansion of inquiry into the
sciences, and supervised the addition of a number of buildings in the High
Victorian Gothic style to the campus. McCosh Hall is named in his honor. In
1879, the first thesis for PhD was submitted by James F. Williamson, Class of
1877. In 1896, the college officially changed its name from the College of New
Jersey to Princeton University to honor the town in which it resides. During
this year, the college also underwent large expansion and officially became a
university. In 1900, the Graduate school was established. In 1902, Woodrow
Wilson graduate of the Class of 1879 is elected the 13th president of the
University. Under Woodrow Wilson, Princeton introduced the preceptorial system
in 1905, a then-unique concept that augmented the standard lecture method of
teaching with a more personal form in which small groups of students, or
precepts, could interact with a single instructor, or preceptor, in their field
of interest. In 1906, Lake Carnegie was created by Andrew Carnegie. A
collection of Historical photographs of the building of the lake is housed at
the Seeley G. Mudd Manuscript Library on Princeton's campus. On October 2,
1913, the Princeton University Graduate College is dedicated. In 1914, the
Palmer Stadium construction is completed. In 1919 the School of Architecture
was established. In 1933, Albert Einstein becomes a lifetime member of the
Institute for Advanced Study with an office on the Princeton campus.
Coeducation at Princeton University. In 1969, Princeton University first
admitted women as undergraduates. In 1887, the university had actually
maintained and staffed a sister college, Evelyn College for Women, in the town
of Princeton on Evelyn and Nassau streets. It was closed after roughly a decade
of operation. After abortive discussions with Sarah Lawrence College to
relocate the women's college to Princeton and merge it with the University in
1967, the administration decided to admit women and turned to the issue of
transforming the school's operations and facilities into a female-friendly
campus. The administration had barely finished these plans in April 1969 when
the admissions office began mailing out its acceptance letters. Its five-year
coeducation plan provided $7.8 million for the development of new facilities
that would eventually house and educate 650 women students at Princeton by
1974. Ultimately, 148 women, consisting of 100 freshmen and transfer students
of other years, entered Princeton on September 6, 1969 amidst much media
attention. (Princeton enrolled its first female graduate student, Sabra Follett
Meserve, as a PhD candidate in Turkish history in 1961. A handful of
undergraduate women had studied at Princeton from 1963 on, spending their
junior year there to study "critical languages" in which Princeton's offerings
surpassed those of their home institutions. They were considered regular
students for their year on campus, but were not candidates for a Princeton
degree.) As a result of a 1979 lawsuit by Sally Frank, Princeton's eating clubs
were required to go coeducational in 1991, after Tiger Inn's appeal to the U.S.
Supreme Court was denied. Campus. The main campus sits on about split between
two municipalities, the Borough of Princeton and Princeton Township. The James
Forrestal Campus is split between nearby Plainsboro and South Brunswick. The
University also owns some property in West Windsor Township. The campuses are
situated about one hour from both New York City and Philadelphia. The first
building on campus was Nassau Hall, completed in 1756, and situated on the
northern edge of campus facing Nassau Street. The campus expanded steadily
around Nassau Hall during the early and middle 19th century. The McCosh
presidency (1868–88) saw the construction of a number of buildings in the
High Victorian Gothic and Romanesque Revival styles; many of them are now gone,
leaving the remaining few to appear out of place. At the end of the 19th
century Princeton adopted the Collegiate Gothic style for which it is known
today. Implemented initially by William Appleton Potter and later enforced by
the University's supervising architect, Ralph Adams Cram, the Collegiate Gothic
style remained the standard for all new building on the Princeton campus
through 1960. A flurry of construction in the 1960s produced a number of new
buildings on the south side of the main campus, many of which have been poorly
received. Several prominent architects have contributed some more recent
additions, including Frank Gehry (Lewis Library), I.M. Pei (Spelman Halls),
Demetri Porphyrios (Whitman College, a Collegiate Gothic project), Robert
Venturi (Frist Campus Center, among several others), and Rafael Viñoly (Carl
Icahn Laboratory). A group of 20th-century sculptures scattered throughout the
campus forms the Putnam Collection of Sculpture. It includes works by Alexander
Calder ("Five Disks: One Empty"), Jacob Epstein ("Albert Einstein"), Henry
Moore ("Oval With Points"), Isamu Noguchi ("White Sun"), and Pablo Picasso
("Head of a Woman"). Richard Serra's "The Hedgehog and The Fox" is located
between Peyton and Fine halls next to Princeton Stadium and the Lewis Library.
At the southern edge of the campus is Lake Carnegie, a man-made lake named for
Andrew Carnegie. Carnegie financed the lake's construction in 1906 at the
behest of a friend who was a Princeton alumnus. Carnegie hoped the opportunity
to take up rowing would inspire Princeton students to forsake football, which
he considered "not gentlemanly." The Shea Rowing Center on the lake's shore
continues to serve as the headquarters for Princeton rowing. Cannon Green.
Buried in the ground at the center of the lawn south of Nassau Hall is the "Big
Cannon," which was left in Princeton by British troops as they fled following
the Battle of Princeton. It remained in Princeton until the War of 1812, when
it was brought to New Brunswick. In 1836 the cannon was returned to Princeton
and placed at the eastern end of town. It was removed to the campus under cover
of night by Princeton students in 1838 and buried in its current location in
1840. A second "Little Cannon" is buried in the lawn in front of nearby Whig
Hall. This cannon, which may also have been captured in the Battle of
Princeton, was stolen by students of Rutgers University in 1875. The theft
ignited the Rutgers-Princeton Cannon War. A compromise between the presidents
of Princeton and Rutgers ended the War and forced the return of the Little
Cannon to Princeton. The protruding cannons are occasionally painted scarlet by
Rutgers students who continue the traditional dispute. In years when the
Princeton football team beats the teams of both Harvard University and Yale
University in the same season, Princeton celebrates with a bonfire on Cannon
Green. This occurred most recently in 2006, ending a twelve-year drought.
Buildings. Nassau Hall. Nassau Hall is the oldest building on campus. Begun in
1754 and completed in 1756, it was the first seat of the New Jersey Legislature
in 1776, was involved in the battle of Princeton in 1777, and was the seat of
the Congress of the Confederation (and thus capitol of the United States) from
June 30, 1783 to November 4, 1783. It now houses the office of the university
president and other administrative offices, and remains the symbolic center of
the campus. The front entrance is flanked by two bronze tigers, a gift of the
Princeton Class of 1879. Commencement is held on the front lawn of Nassau Hall
in good weather. In 1966, Nassau Hall was added to the National Register of
Historic Places. Residential colleges. Princeton has six undergraduate
residential colleges, each housing approximately 500 freshmen, sophomores, some
juniors and seniors, and a handful of junior and senior resident advisers. Each
college consists of a set of dormitories, a dining hall, a variety of other
amenities—such as study spaces, libraries, performance spaces, and
darkrooms—and a collection of administrators and associated faculty. Two
colleges, Wilson College and Forbes College (formerly Princeton Inn College),
date to the 1970s; three others, Rockefeller, Mathey, and Butler Colleges, were
created in 1983 following the Committee on Undergraduate Residential Life
(CURL) report, which suggested the institution of residential colleges as a
solution to an allegedly fragmented campus social life. The construction of
Whitman College, the university's sixth residential college, was completed in
2007. Rockefeller and Mathey are located in the northwest corner of the campus;
Princeton brochures often feature their Collegiate Gothic architecture. Like
most of Princeton's Gothic buildings, they predate the residential college
system and were fashioned into colleges from individual dormitories. Wilson and
Butler, located south of the center of the campus, were built in the 1960s.
Wilson served as an early experiment in the establishment of the residential
college system. Butler, like Rockefeller and Mathey, consisted of a collection
of ordinary dorms (called the "New New Quad") before the addition of a dining
hall made it a residential college. Widely disliked for their edgy modernist
design, the dormitories on the Butler Quad were demolished in 2007. Butler is
now reopened as a four year residential college, housing both under- and
upperclassmen. Forbes is located on the site of the historic Princeton Inn, a
gracious hotel overlooking the Princeton golf course. The Princeton Inn,
originally constructed in 1924, played regular host to important symposia and
gatherings of renowned scholars from both the university and the nearby
Institute for Advanced Study for many years. Forbes currently houses over 400
undergraduates and a number of resident graduate students in its residential
halls. Butler and most of Forbes are in a different municipality, Princeton
Township, from the rest of the main campus, which is in Princeton Borough. In
2003, Princeton broke ground for a sixth college named Whitman College after
its principal sponsor, Meg Whitman, who graduated from Princeton in 1977. The
new dormitories were constructed in the Collegiate Gothic architectural style
and were designed by architect Demetri Porphyrios. Construction finished in
2007, and Whitman College was inaugurated as Princeton's sixth residential
college that same year. The precursor of the present college system in America
was originally proposed by university president Woodrow Wilson in the early
20th century. For over 800 years, however, the collegiate system had already
existed in Britain at Oxford University and Cambridge University. Wilson's
model was much closer to Yale's present system, which features four-year
colleges. Lacking the support of the trustees, the plan languished until 1968.
That year, Wilson College was established to cap a series of alternatives to
the eating clubs. Fierce debates raged before the present residential college
system emerged. The plan was first attempted at Yale, but the administration
was initially uninterested; an exasperated alum, Edward Harkness, finally paid
to have the college system implemented at Harvard in the 1920s, leading to the
oft-quoted aphorism that the college system is a Princeton idea that was
executed at Harvard with funding from Yale. Princeton has one graduate
residential college, known simply as the Graduate College, located beyond
Forbes College at the outskirts of campus. The far-flung location of the G.C.
was the spoil of a squabble between Woodrow Wilson and then-Graduate School
Dean Andrew Fleming West. Wilson preferred a central location for the College;
West wanted the graduate students as far as possible from the campus.
Ultimately, West prevailed. The Graduate College is composed of a large
Collegiate Gothic section crowned by Cleveland Tower, a local landmark that
also houses a world-class carillon. The attached New Graduate College departs
in its design from Collegiate Gothic; it is reminiscent of the former
dormitories of Butler College, the newest of the five pre-Whitman residential
colleges. McCarter Theatre. Tony-award-winning McCarter Theatre was built by
the Princeton Triangle Club, a student performance group, using club profits
and a gift from Princeton University alumnus Thomas McCarter. Today, the
Triangle Club performs its annual freshmen revue and spring musicals in
McCarter. McCarter is also recognized as one of the leading regional theaters
in the United States. Art Museum. The Princeton University Art Museum was
established in 1882 to give students direct, intimate, and sustained access to
original works of art that complement and enrich instruction and research at
the university. This continues to be a primary function, along with serving as
a community resource and a destination for national and international visitors.
Numbering over 72,000 objects, the collections range from ancient to
contemporary art and concentrate geographically on the Mediterranean regions,
Western Europe, China, the United States, and Latin America. There is a
collection of Greek and Roman antiquities, including ceramics, marbles,
bronzes, and Roman mosaics from faculty excavations in Antioch. Medieval Europe
is represented by sculpture, metalwork, and stained glass. The collection of
Western European paintings includes examples from the early Renaissance through
the 19th century, with masterpieces by Monet, Cézanne, and Van Gogh, and
features a growing collection of 20th-century and contemporary art, including
iconic paintings such as Andy Warhol's Blue Marilyn. One of the best features
of the museums is its collection of Chinese art, with important holdings in
bronzes, tomb figurines, painting, and calligraphy. Its collection of pre-
Columbian art includes examples of Mayan art, and is commonly considered to be
the most important collection of Pre-Columbian art outside of Latin America.
The museum has collections of old master prints and drawings and a
comprehensive collection of over 27,000 original photographs. African art and
Northwest Coast Indian art are also represented. The Museum also oversees the
outdoor Putnam Collection of Sculpture. University Chapel. The Princeton
University Chapel is located on the north side of campus, near Nassau Street.
It was built between 1924 and 1928, at a cost of US$2.3 million, approximately
US$ million in dollars. Ralph Adams Cram, the University's supervising
architect, designed the Chapel, which he viewed as the crown jewel for the
Collegiate Gothic motif he had championed for the campus. At the time of its
construction, it was the second largest university chapel in the world, after
King's College Chapel, Cambridge. It underwent a two-year, US$10 million
restoration campaign between 2000 and 2002. Measured on the exterior, the
Chapel is long, wide at its transepts, and high. The exterior is Pennsylvania
sandstone, with Indiana limestone used for the trim. The interior is mostly
limestone and Aquia Creek sandstone. The design evokes an English church of the
Middle Ages. The extensive iconography, in stained glass, stonework, and wood
carvings, has the common theme of connecting religion and scholarship. The
Chapel seats almost 2,000. It hosts weekly ecumenical Christian services, daily
Roman Catholic mass, and several annual special events. Apartment facilities.
Princeton university has several apartment facilities for graduate students and
their dependents. They are Butler Apartments, Lawrence Apartments, and
Stanworth Apartments. Sustainability. Published in 2008, Princeton's
Sustainability Plan highlights three priority areas for the University's Office
of Sustainability: reduction of greenhouse gas emissions; conservation of
resources; and research, education, and civic engagement. Princeton has
committed to reducing its carbon dioxide emissions to 1990 levels by 2020
without the purchase of offsets. The University published its first
Sustainability Progress Report in November 2009. The University has adopted a
green purchasing policy and recycling program that focuses on paper products,
construction materials, lightbulbs, furniture, and electronics. Its dining
halls have set a goal to purchase 20% sustainable food products. The student
organization "Greening Princeton" seeks to encourage the University
administration to adopt environmentally friendly policies on campus.
Organization. The Trustees of Princeton University, a 40-member board, is
responsible for the overall direction of the University. It approves the
operating and capital budgets, supervises the investment of the University's
endowment and oversees campus real estate and long-range physical planning. The
trustees also exercise prior review and approval concerning changes in major
policies, such as those in instructional programs and admission, as well as
tuition and fees and the hiring of faculty members. With an endowment of
US$17.1 billion, Princeton University is among the wealthiest universities in
the world. Ranked in 2010 as the third largest endowment in the United States,
the university has the greatest per-student endowment in the world (over US$2
million for undergraduates). Such a significant endowment is sustained through
the continued donations of its alumni and is maintained by investment advisers.
Some of Princeton's wealth is invested in its art museum, which features works
by Claude Monet, Vincent van Gogh, Jackson Pollock, and Andy Warhol among other
prominent artists. Academics. Undergraduates fulfill general education
requirements, choose among a wide variety of elective courses, and pursue
departmental concentrations and interdisciplinary certificate programs.
Required independent work is a hallmark of undergraduate education at
Princeton. Students graduate with either the Bachelor of Arts (A.B.) or the
Bachelor of Science in engineering (B.S.E.). The graduate school offers
advanced degrees spanning the humanities, social sciences, natural sciences,
and engineering. Doctoral education is available in all disciplines. It
emphasizes original and independent scholarship whereas master's degree
programs in architecture, engineering, finance, and public affairs and public
policy prepare candidates for careers in public life and professional practice.
Undergraduate. Undergraduate courses in the humanities are traditionally either
seminars or lectures held 2 or 3 times a week with an additional discussion
seminar that is called a "precept." To graduate, all A.B. candidates must
complete a senior thesis and, in most departments, one or two extensive pieces
of independent research that are known as "junior papers." Juniors in some
departments, including architecture and the creative arts, complete independent
projects that differ from written research papers. A.B. candidates must also
fulfill a three or four semester foreign language requirement and distribution
requirements with a total of 31 classes. B.S.E. candidates follow a parallel
track with an emphasis on a rigorous science and math curriculum, a computer
science requirement, and at least two semesters of independent research
including an optional senior thesis. All B.S.E. students must complete at least
36 classes. A.B. candidates typically have more freedom in course selection
than B.S.E. candidates because of the fewer number of required classes.
Nonetheless, in the spirit of a liberal arts education, both enjoy a
comparatively high degree of latitude in creating a self-structured curriculum.
Undergraduates agree to adhere to an academic integrity policy called the Honor
Code, established in 1893. Under the Honor Code, faculty do not proctor
examinations; instead, the students proctor one another and must report any
suspected violation to an Honor Committee made up of undergraduates. The
Committee investigates reported violations and holds a hearing if it is
warranted. An acquittal at such a hearing results in the destruction of all
records of the hearing; a conviction results in the student's suspension or
expulsion. The signed pledge required by the Honor Code is so integral to
students' academic experience that the Princeton Triangle Club performs a song
about it each fall. Out-of-class exercises fall under the jurisdiction of the
Faculty-Student Committee on Discipline. Undergraduates are expected to sign a
pledge on their written work affirming that they have not plagiarized the work.
Admissions and financial aid. Princeton's undergraduate program is highly
selective, admitting 7.86% of undergraduate applicants in the 2011–12
admissions cycle (for the Class of 2016). In September 2006, the university
announced that all applicants for the Class of 2012 would be considered in a
single pool. In this way, the early decision program was effectively ended. In
February 2011, following decisions by the University of Virginia and Harvard
University to reinstate their early admissions programs, Princeton announced it
would institute an early action program, starting with applicants for the Class
of 2016. In 2011, the Business Journal rated Princeton as the most selective
college in the Eastern United States in terms of admission selectivity. In
2001, expanding on earlier reforms, Princeton became the first university to
eliminate loans for all students who qualify for financial aid. All
demonstrated need is met with combinations of grants and campus jobs. In
addition, all admissions are need-blind. "U.S. News & World Report" and
Princeton Review both cite Princeton as the university that has the fewest of
graduates with debt even though 60% of incoming students are on some type of
financial aid. "Kiplinger" magazine ranks Princeton as the best value among
private universities, noting that the average graduating debt is US$4,957,
"about one fifth the average debt of students who borrow at all private
schools." Grade deflation policy. In 2004, Nancy Weiss Malkiel, the Dean of the
College, implemented a grade deflation policy to curb the number of A-range
grades undergraduates received. Malkiel's argument was that an A was beginning
to lose its meaning as a larger percentage of the student body received them.
While the number of A's has indeed decreased under the policy, many argue that
this is hurting Princeton students when they apply to jobs or graduate school.
Malkiel has said that she sent pamphlets to inform institutions about the
policy so that they consider Princeton students equally, but students argue
that Princeton graduates can apply to other institutions that know nothing
about it. They argue further that as other schools purposefully inflate their
grades, Princeton students' GPAs will look low by comparison. Further, studies
have shown that employers prefer high grades even when they are inflated. The
policy remained in place even after Malkiel steped down at the end of the
2010–2011 school year. The policy deflates grades only relative to their
previous levels; indeed, as of 2009, or five years after the policy was
instituted, the average graduating GPA saw a marginal decrease, from 3.46 to
3.39. Graduate. Princeton offers postgraduate research degrees in many fields
in the social sciences, engineering, natural sciences, and humanities. Although
Princeton offers professional graduate degrees in engineering, architecture,
and finance, it has no medical school, law school, or business school like
other research universities. The university's most famous professional school
is the Woodrow Wilson School of Public and International Affairs, founded in
1930 as the School of Public and International Affairs and renamed in 1948
after university president (and US President) Woodrow Wilson. Libraries. The
university's library system houses over eleven million holdings including six
million bound volumes. The main university library, Firestone Library, which
houses almost four million volumes, is one of the largest university libraries
in the world and among the largest "open stack" libraries in existence. Its
collections include the Blickling homilies. In addition to Firestone library,
many individual disciplines have their own libraries, including architecture,
art history, East Asian studies, engineering, geology, international affairs
and public policy, Near Eastern studies, and psychology. Seniors in some
departments can register for enclosed carrels in the main library for workspace
and the private storage of books and research materials. In February 2007,
Princeton became the 12th major library system to join Google's ambitious
project to scan the world's great literary works and make them searchable over
the Web. Rankings. From 2001 to 2012, Princeton University was ranked either
first or second among national universities by "U.S. News & World Report"
(USNWR), holding the No. 1 spot for 10 of those 12 years. After being at second
place in 2008-9, Princeton returned to the number one spot in 2010, tying with
Harvard University. It has been ranked sixth among world universities by
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, In the 2012 Times Higher Education World
University Rankings Princeton was ranked 6th in the world. In the 2012 "QS
World University Rankings" it was ranked 9th overall in the world, making it
5th among US universities. Its three highest subject rankings were: 7th in Arts
& Humanities, 8th in Natural Sciences, and 12th in Social Sciences. In THE's
2012-2013 World University Ranking of Universities, Princeton placed 2nd above
MIT and behind Caltech in Engineering and Technology. In the "America's Best
Colleges" rankings by "Forbes" in 2012, Princeton University was ranked first
among all national colleges and universities. The Forbes" ranking also takes
into consideration national awards won by students and faculty, as well as
number of alumni in the 2008 "Who's Who in America" register. Princeton
Graduate School programs are also highly ranked among universities in the
United States. In the 2009 "U.S. News & World Report" "Graduate School
Rankings", all fourteen of Princeton's doctoral programs evaluated were ranked
in their respective top 20, 7 of them in the top 5, and 4 of them in the top
spot (Mathematics, Economics, History, Political Science). In "Princeton
Review"'s rankings of "softer" aspects of students' college experience,
Princeton University was ranked first in "Students Happy with Financial Aid"
and third in "Happiest Students", behind Clemson and Brown Universities. The
university's individual academic departments have been highly ranked in their
respective fields. The Department of Psychology has been ranked fifth in the
nation and its individual graduate programs have received high national
rankings as well. The behavioral neuroscience program has been ranked sixth and
the social psychology program has been ranked seventh. The Department of
History is currently ranked first in the world. Princeton University also
participates in the (NAICU)'s University and College Accountability Network (U-
CAN). Princeton University has an IBM BlueGeneL supercomputer, called
"Orangena", which was ranked as the 89th fastest computer in the world in 2005
(LINPACK performance of 4713 compared to 12250 for other U.S. universities and
280600 for the top-ranked supercomputer, belonging to the U.S. Department of
Energy). Student life and culture. housing is guaranteed to all undergraduates
for all four years. More than 98 percent of students live on campus in
dormitories. Freshmen and sophomores must live in residential colleges, while
juniors and seniors typically live in designated upperclassman dormitories. The
actual dormitories are comparable, but only residential colleges have dining
halls. Nonetheless, any undergraduate may purchase a meal plan and eat in a
residential college dining hall. Recently, upperclassmen have been given the
option of remaining in their college for all four years. Juniors and seniors
also have the option of living off-campus, but high rent in the Princeton area
encourages almost all students to live in university housing. Undergraduate
social life revolves around the residential colleges and a number of
coeducational eating clubs, which students may choose to join in the spring of
their sophomore year. Eating clubs, which are not officially affiliated with
the university, serve as dining halls and communal spaces for their members and
also host social events throughout the academic year. Princeton's six
residential colleges host a variety of social events and activities, guest
speakers, and trips. The residential colleges also sponsor trips to New York
for undergraduates to see ballets, operas, Broadway shows, sports events, and
other activities. The eating clubs, located on Prospect Avenue, are co-ed
organizations for upperclassmen. Most upperclassmen eat their meals at one of
the eleven eating clubs. Additionally, the clubs serve as evening and weekend
social venues for members and guests. Princeton hosts two Model United Nations
conferences, PMUNC in the fall for high school students and PICSim in the
spring for college students. It also hosts the Princeton Invitational Speech
and Debate tournament each year at the end of November. Princeton also runs
Princeton Model Congress, an event that is held once a year in mid-November.
The 4-day conference has high school students from around the country as
participants. Although the school's admissions policy is need blind, Princeton,
based on the proportion of students who receive Pell Grants, was ranked as a
school with little economic diversity among all national universities ranked by
"U.S. News & World Report". While Pell figures are widely used as a gauge of
the number of low-income undergraduates on a given campus, the rankings article
cautions "the proportion of students on Pell Grants isn't a perfect measure of
an institution's efforts to achieve economic diversity," but goes on to say
that "still, many experts say that Pell figures are the best available gauge of
how many low-income undergrads there are on a given campus." Athletics.
Princeton supports organized athletics at three levels: varsity
intercollegiate, club intercollegiate, and intramural. It also provides "a
variety of physical education and recreational programs" for members of the
Princeton community. According to the athletics program's mission statement,
Princeton aims for its students who participate in athletics to be "'student
athletes' in the fullest sense of the phrase." Most undergraduates participate
in athletics at some level. Princeton's colors are orange and black. The
school's athletes are known as "Tigers", and the mascot is a tiger. The
Princeton administration considered naming the mascot in 2007, but the effort
was dropped in the face of alumni opposition. Varsity. Princeton is an NCAA
Division I school. Its athletic conference is the Ivy League. Princeton hosts
38 men's and women's varsity sports. The largest varsity sport is rowing, with
almost 150 athletes. Princeton's football team has a long and storied history.
Princeton played against Rutgers University in the first intercollegiate
football game in the U.S. on Nov 6, 1869. By a score of 6–4, Rutgers won the
game, which was played by rules similar to modern rugby. Today Princeton is a
member of the Football Championship Subdivision of NCAA Division I. As of the
end of the 2010 season, Princeton had won 26 national football championships,
more than any other school. The men's basketball program is noted for its
success under Pete Carril, the head coach from 1967 to 1996. During this time,
Princeton won 13 Ivy League titles and made 11 NCAA tournament appearances.
Carril introduced the Princeton offense, an offensive strategy that has since
been adopted by a number of college and professional basketball teams. Carril's
final victory at Princeton came when the Tigers beat UCLA, the defending
national champion, in the opening round of the 1996 NCAA tournament, in what is
considered one of the greatest upsets in the history of the tournament.
Recently Princeton tied the record for the fewest points in a Division I game
since the institution of the three-point line in 1986–87, when the Tigers
scored 21 points in a loss against Monmouth University on Dec 14, 2005. The
men's water polo team is currently a dominant force in the Collegiate Water
Polo Association, having reached the Final Four in two of the last three years.
Similarly, the men's lacrosse program enjoyed a period of dominance
1992–2001, during which time it won six national championships. Club and
intramural. In addition to varsity sports, Princeton hosts about 35 club sports
teams. Princeton's rugby team is organized as a club sport. Each year, nearly
300 teams participate in intramural sports at Princeton. Intramurals are open
to members of Princeton's faculty, staff, and students, though a team
representing a residential college or eating club must consist only of members
of that college or club. Several leagues with differing levels of
competitiveness are available. Songs. Notable among a number of songs commonly
played and sung at various events such as commencement, convocation, and
athletic games is Princeton Cannon Song, the Princeton University fight song.
Bob Dylan wrote "Day of The Locusts" about his experience of receiving an
honorary doctorate from the University. It is a reference to the negative
experience he had and it mentions the cicada infestation of Princeton. "Old
Nassau". "" has been Princeton University's anthem since 1859. Its words were
written that year by a freshman, Harlan Page Peck, and published in the March
issue of the "Nassau Literary Review" (the oldest student publication at
Princeton and also the second oldest undergraduate literary magazine in the
country). The words and music appeared together for the first time in "Songs of
Old Nassau", published in April 1859. Before the Langlotz tune was written, the
song was sung to "Auld Lang Syne"'s melody, which also fits. However, Old
Nassau does not only refer to the university's anthem. It can also refer to
Nassau Hall, the building that was built in 1756 and named after William III of
the House of Orange-Nassau. When built, it was the largest college building in
North America. It served briefly as the capitol of the United States when the
Continental Congress convened there in the summer of 1783. By metonymy, the
term can refer to the university as a whole. Finally, it can also refer to a
chemical reaction that is dubbed "Old Nassau reaction" because the solution
turns orange and then black. Notable alumni and faculty. U.S. Presidents James
Madison and Woodrow Wilson graduated from Princeton, as did Michelle Obama, the
current First Lady of the United States. Former Chief Justice of the United
States Oliver Ellsworth was an alumnus, as are current U.S. Supreme Court
Associate Justices Samuel Alito, Elena Kagan, and Sonia Sotomayor. Notable
graduates of Princeton's School of Engineering and Applied Science include
Amazon CEO and founder Jeff Bezos, Google executive Eric Schmidt and Lisa P.
Jackson, administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency. Actor Jimmy
Stewart graduated from Princeton. Writers F. Scott Fitzgerald and Eugene
O'Neill attended but did not graduate; Selden Edwards and Will Stanton
graduated with an English degree. Notable graduate alumni include Richard
Feynman, John Nash, Alan Mathison Turing and David Petraeus. Notable faculty
members include Paul Krugman, Joyce Carol Oates, Peter Singer, and Andrew
Wiles. Notable former faculty members include Ben Bernanke, Joseph Henry, Toni
Morrison, John P. Lewis and Woodrow Wilson, who served as president of the
University 1902–1910. Albert Einstein, though on the faculty at the Institute
for Advanced Study rather than at Princeton, came to be associated with the
university through frequent lectures and visits on the campus. 508 Princetonia.
The asteroid 508 Princetonia is named for Princeton University by R. S. Dugan,
which he found during his time at Königstuhl Observatory with Max Wolf in
Heidelberg, Germany. He discovered it in 1903 while working on his PhD from
Heidelberg University. The asteroid is located in the main asteroid belt and is
about in diameter according to IRAS data.
