Principate The Principate (27 BC – 284 AD) is the second period of the Roman
Empire, extending from the beginning of the reign of Caesar Augustus to the
Crisis of the Third Century, after which it was replaced with the Dominate. The
Principate is characterized by a concerted effort on the part of the Emperors
to preserve the illusion of the formal continuance of the Roman Republic.
Etymology. It is etymologically derived from the Latin word "princeps", meaning
"chief" or "first", the political regime dominated by such a political leader,
whether or not he is formally head of state and/or head of government. This
reflects the Principate Emperors' assertion that they were merely "first among
equals" among the citizens of Rome. In practice, the Principate was a period of
enlightened absolutism, with occasional forays into quasi-constitutional
monarchy; Emperors tended not to flaunt their power and usually respected the
rights of citizens (although they never let this fact bind them). History. The
title, in full, "princeps senatus" / "princeps civitatis" (first amongst the
senators, "viz.", amongst the citizens), was first adopted by Octavian Caesar
Augustus (27 BC-AD 14), the first Roman 'Emperor', who chose – like the
assassinated dictator Julius Caesar – not to reintroduce a legal monarchy.
The purpose was to establish the political stability desperately needed after
the exhausting civil wars by a "de facto" dictatorial regime within the
constitutional framework of the Roman Republic as an alternative to the hated
early Roman Kingdom. The title itself derived from the position of the
"princeps senatus", traditionally the oldest member of the Senate who had the
right to be heard first on any debate. Although dynastic pretenses crept in
from the start, formalizing this in a monarchic style remained politically
unthinkable. Often, in a more limited and precise "chronological" sense, the
term is applied either to the Empire (in the sense of the post-Republican Roman
state) or specifically the earlier of the two phases of 'Imperial' government
in the ancient Roman Empire, extending from when Augustus claimed "auctoritas"
for himself as "princeps" until Rome's military collapse in the West (fall of
Rome) in 476, leaving the Byzantine Empire sole heir, or, depending on the
source, up to the rule of Commodus, of Maximinus Thrax or of Diocletian.
Afterwards, Imperial rule in the Empire is designated as the "Dominate", which
is subjectively more like an (absolute) monarchy while the earlier "Principate"
is still more 'Republican'. Under this 'Principate "stricto sensu"', the
political reality of autocratic rule by the Emperor was still scrupulously
masked by forms and conventions of oligarchic self-rule inherited from the
political period of the 'uncrowned' Roman Republic (509 BC-27 BC) under the
motto "Senatus Populus Que Romanus" or SPQR. Initially, the theory implied the
'first citizen' had to earn his extraordinary position ("de facto" evolving to
nearly absolute monarchy) by merit in the style that Augustus himself had
gained the position of "auctoritas". Imperial propaganda developed a
'paternalistic' ideology, presenting the "Princeps" as the very incarnation of
all virtues attributed to the ideal ruler (much like a Greek "tyrannos"
earlier), such as clemency and justice, and in turn placing the impetus upon
the "Princeps" to play this designated role within Roman society, as his
political insurance as well as a moral duty. What specifically was expected of
the "Princeps" seems to have varied according to the times; Tiberius, who
amassed a huge surplus for the city of Rome, was criticized as a miser, while
Caligula was criticized for his lavish spending on games and spectacles.
Generally speaking it was expected of the Emperor to be generous but not
frivolous, not just as a good ruler but also with his personal fortune (as in
the proverbial "bread and circuses" – "panem et circenses" ) providing
occasional public games, gladiators, horse races and artistic shows. Large
distributions of food for the public and charitable institutions were also
means that served as popularity boosters while the contstruction of public
works provided paid employment for the poor. Redefinition under Vespasian. With
the fall of the Julio-Claudian dynasty, the "Principate" was redefined in
formal terms under the Emperor Vespasian. The position of "Princeps" became a
distinct entity within the broader - formally still republican - Roman
constitution. While many of the cultural and political expectations remained,
the "Princeps" was no longer a position extended on the basis of merit, or
"auctoritas", but on a firmer basis, allowing Vespasian and future emperors to
designate their own heir without those heirs having to earn the position
through years of success and public favor. Under the Antonine dynasty, it was
the norm for the Emperor to appoint a successful and politically promising
individual as his successor. In modern historical analysis this is treated by
many authors as an "ideal" situation; the individual who was most capable was
promoted to the position of Princeps. Of the Antonine dynasty, Edward Gibbon
famously wrote that this was the happiest and most productive period in human
history, and credited the system of succession as the key factor. The
"Dominate". This first phase was to be followed by, or rather evolved into, the
so-called "Dominate". Starting with the Emperor Diocletian, oriental type of
styles like "dominus" ('Lord, Master', suggesting the citizens became "servi",
servants or slaves) became current, though not legal, but there could by
definition never be a clear, constitutional turning point, so this appreciation
remains subjective. The reality is gradual development. This process is also
said to be established by the Emperor Septimius Severus; while the Severan
dynasty initially began the terminology of the "Dominate" in reference to the
emperor, the various emperors and their usurpers throughout the 3rd century
appealed to the people as both military "dominus" and political "princeps".
After the Crisis of the Third Century almost resulted in the Roman Empire's
political collapse, the Emperor Diocletian replaced the one-headed "Principate"
with the tetrarchy (c. 300 AD, two "Augusti" ranking above two "Caesares"), in
which the remaining pretense of the old Republican forms was largely abandoned.
The title of "princeps" was abandoned - like the territorial unity of the
Empire -, in favor of "dominus", and the position of the Emperor(s), especially
in the Western Roman Empire, was entirely dependent on his control of the armed
forces. The "Dominate" developed more and more, especially in the Byzantine
Empire, along the lines of an oriental absolute monarchy, where the subjects,
and even diplomatic allies, could be termed "servus" or "doulos" 'servant/
slave' to express the exalted position of the Emperor as second only to God,
and on earth to none.
