Princeton Project 55 Princeton Project 55 is a nonprofit organization
established by members of the Class of 1955 at Princeton University to mobilize
alumni and students, and others who share their concerns, to provide civic
leadership and to develop and implement solutions to systemic problems that
affect the public interest. It was born of the realization that there is a vast
untapped resource, available for the public good, among groups of college
alumni. Princeton Project 55 (PP55) is an independent nonprofit 501(c)(3)
organization dedicated to providing opportunities for college alumni to improve
our society. By bringing alumni together with students and recent graduates,
Princeton Project 55 provides many opportunities for building the commitment,
leadership, and mentoring needed to solve critical issues affecting the public
interest. They work through a variety of approaches including matching recent
graduates with year-long fellowships in public-service organizations, providing
mentors and professional development; supporting alumni from other universities
engaged in similar initiatives; and collaborating with on-campus programs to
raise the profile of civic engagement among current undergraduates. Princeton
Project 55 was founded in 1989 by the Princeton Class of 1955 and their
spouses. So far, Princeton Project 55's Fellowship Programs have placed more
than 1,100 students and recent Princeton graduates in paid fellowships and
internship programs around the country. More than 20 other colleges and
universities have developed similar programs based on the Princeton Project 55
model and are supported by The Alumni Network, our outreach initiative. Today,
Princeton Project 55 is a multigenerational organization led by a Board of
Directors consisting of Princeton alumni in classes ranging from 1955 to 2002.
Opportunities exist for substantial involvement by both undergraduates and
alumni from all classes. Public Interest Program. Project 55's flagship
initiative, the Public Interest Program, engages recent Princeton graduates by
placing them in yearlong fellowships across the country. Fellowships are
primarily located in six locations: New York, Boston, Chicago, San Francisco,
Connecticut, and Washington, DC. In each location, an all volunteer area
committee exposes fellows to various issues in their community through regular
seminars. The area committee also works to develop an ethos of civic leadership
by providing opportunities for professional development and access to a network
of mentors. Princeton Project 55's Public Interest Program provides recent
graduates with professional experience and exposure to a wide range of fields
including: community development, education, employment/welfare, environmental
issues, advocacy, health and medicine, housing, women's issues, and youth
services through year-long paid fellowships. Through their work, Project 55
fellows contribute directly to the participating organization's mission.
Organizations that participate in the Public Interest Program gain access to a
motivated and diverse pool of applicants with excellent writing, research, and
analytical skills; strong work ethic; creativity; initiative; the ability to
work in a team; and the ability to meet deadlines. http://www.project55.org/
