Private property Private property is the employment, control, ownership,
ability to dispose of, and bequeath land, capital, and other forms of property
by legal persons and privately owned firms. Private property is distinguishable
from public property and collective property, which refers to assets owned by a
state, community or government rather than by individuals or a business entity.
Private property emerged as the dominant form of property in the means of
production and land during the Industrial Revolution in the early 18th century,
displacing feudal property, guilds, cottage industry and craft production,
which were based on ownership of the tools for production by individual
laborers or guilds of craftspeople. In Marxian economics and socialist
politics, there is distinction between "private property" and "personal
property". The former is defined as the means of production in reference to
private ownership over an economic enterprise based on socialized production
and wage labor; the latter is defined as consumer goods or goods produced by an
individual. Prior to the 18th century, private property usually referred to
land ownership. The concept of property is not equivalent to that of
possession. According to Phillip O'Hara, property and ownership refer to a
socially constructed circumstance conferred upon individuals or collective
entities by the state, whereas possession is a physical phenomenon. Roles of
private property in society. Economic liberal perspective. Economic liberals
(defined as those who support a private sector-driven market economy) consider
private property to be essential for the construction of a prosperous society.
They believe private ownership of land ensures the land will be put to
productive use and its value protected by the landowner. If the owners must pay
property taxes, this forces the owners to maintain a productive output from the
land to keep taxes current. Private property also attaches a monetary value to
land, which can be used to trade or as collateral. Private property thus is an
important part of capitalization within the economy. Private property gives its
owners stability, as well as a vested interest in the enforcement of property
law. Citizens that own private property have a vested interest in fighting
corruption of government officials as in cases where corruption is a direct
threat to private property and the laws that govern maintaining private
property. Socialist perspective. In general, socialists view private property
relations as limiting the potential of productive forces in the economy. They
believe private property becomes obsolete when it concentrates into
centralized, socialized institutions based on private appropriation of revenue
until the role of the capitalist becomes redundant. With largely reduced
capital accumulation from the original class of owners, private property in the
means of production is to be replaced with a free association based on public
or common ownership of socialized assets. Marxist perspective. Marxists define
private property as the right of an individual, or group of individuals, to
exclude others from the use of an object. In its undeveloped form, private
property is the simple relation of the individual to the natural world in which
their individuality finds objective expression. Private property finds its
ultimate expression only in the relation of wage-labor and capital. According
to Norman Levine, when Marx called for the abolition of private property, he
was not referring to privately owned personal property such as clothing and
furniture that was not used to produce the "social wealth," but to productive
property. Austrian School perspective. Austrian School economists Ludwig Von
Mises and Friedrich August Hayek argued that private property rights are a
requisite for what they called rational economic calculation and that the
prices of goods and services cannot be determined accurately enough to make
efficient economic calculation without clearly defined private-property rights.
Personal property versus the means of production. In general, personal property
is almost an extension of one's person and does include property from which one
has the right to exclude others. Personal property is different to private
property, however, in that it refers to things that are personal: objects with
which one has a personal connection, making them important to one person while
potentially worthless to the next. These objects can range from CDs to houses,
depending on one's perspective, but definitions tend to include personal items
such as clothing, books, food, or records. From the socialist perspective,
private property refers to capital or means of production that is owned by a
business or few individuals and operated for their profit. Personal property
refers to tangible items and possessions individuals own, as mentioned above.
Socialism does not advocate the abolition of personal property, believing that
it is an acceptable form of ownership of an item, unlike private property. From
the Marxist perspective, which is very similar to the socialist perspective,
private property is a social relationship, not (as with personal property) a
relationship between person and thing. It also describes personal property, as
above, as those objects which are personal, or an extension of one's self. The
Marxist perspective also does not advocate the abolition of personal property:
it believes that it is only private property that should be done away with. In
capitalism there is little distinction between personal and private property.
