Privatization Privatization, also spelled privatisation, can have several
meanings. Primarily, it is the process of transferring ownership of a business,
enterprise, agency, public service or public property from the public sector (a
government) to the private sector, either to a business that operates for a
profit or to a non-profit organization. The term can also mean government
outsourcing of services or functions to private firms, e.g. revenue collection,
law enforcement, and prison management. Privatization has also been used to
describe two unrelated transactions. The first is the buying of all outstanding
shares of a publicly traded company by a single entity, taking the company
private. This is often described as private equity. The second is a
demutualization of a mutual organization or cooperative to form a joint stock
company. Forms of privatization. Choice of sale method is influenced by the
capital market, political and firm-specific factors. SIPs are more likely to be
used when capital markets are less developed and there is lower income
inequality. Share issues can broaden and deepen domestic capital markets,
boosting liquidity and (potentially) economic growth, but if the capital
markets are insufficiently developed it may be difficult to find enough buyers,
and transaction costs (e.g. underpricing required) may be higher. For this
reason, many governments elect for listings in the more developed and liquid
markets, for example Euronext, and the London, New York and Hong Kong stock
exchanges. As a result of higher political and currency risk deterring foreign
investors, asset sales occur more commonly in developing countries. Voucher
privatization has mainly occurred in the transition economies of Central and
Eastern Europe, such as Russia, Poland, the Czech Republic, and Slovakia.
Additionally, Privatization from below is/has been an important type of
economic growth in transition economies. A substantial benefit of share or
asset-sale privatizations is that bidders compete to offer the highest price,
creating income for the state in addition to tax revenues. Voucher
privatizations, on the other hand, could be a genuine transfer of assets to the
general population, creating a real sense of participation and inclusion. If
the transfer of vouchers is permitted, a market in vouchers could be created,
with companies offering to pay money for them. Secured borrowing. Some
privatization transactions can be interpreted as a form of a secured loan and
are criticized as a "particularly noxious form of governmental debt". In this
interpretation, the upfront payment from the privatization sale corresponds to
the principal amount of the loan, while the proceeds from the underlying asset
correspond to secured interest payments – the transaction can be considered
substantively the same as a secured loan, though it is structured as a sale.
This interpretation is particularly argued to apply to recent municipal
transactions in the United States, particularly for fixed term, such as the
2008 sale of the proceeds from Chicago parking meters for 75 years. It is
argued that this is motivated by "politicians' desires to borrow money
surreptitiously", due to legal restrictions on and political resistance to
alternative sources of revenue, viz, raising taxes or issuing debt. Etymology.
"The Economist" magazine introduced the term in the 1930s in covering Nazi
German economic policy. The economist Sidney D Merlin introduced the English
word as an academic term in 1943, in the Quarterly Journal of Economics,
writing that the Nazi Party ‘facilitates the accumulation of private fortunes
and industrial empires by its foremost members and collaborators through
“privatisation” and other measures, thereby intensifying centralisation of
economic affairs and government in an increasingly narrow group that may for
all practical purposes be termed the national socialist elite’. History. The
history of privatization dates from Ancient Greece, when governments contracted
out almost everything to the private sector. In the Roman Republic private
individuals and companies performed the majority of services including tax
collection (tax farming), army supplies (military contractors), religious
sacrifices and construction. However, the Roman Empire also created state-owned
enterprises—for example, much of the grain was eventually produced on estates
owned by the Emperor. Some scholars suggest that the cost of bureaucracy was
one of the reasons for the fall of the Roman Empire. Perhaps one of the first
ideological movements towards privatization came during China's golden age of
the Han dynasty. Taoism came into prominence for the first time at a state
level, and it advocated the laissez-faire principle of Wu wei (無為),
literally meaning "do nothing". The rulers were counseled by the Taoist clergy
that a strong ruler was virtually invisible. During the Renaissance, most of
Europe was still by and large following the feudal economic model. By contrast,
the Ming dynasty in China began once more to practice privatization, especially
with regards to their manufacturing industries. This was a reversal of the
earlier Song dynasty policies, which had themselves overturned earlier policies
in favor of more rigorous state control. In Britain, the privatization of
common lands is referred to as enclosure (in Scotland as the Lowland Clearances
and the Highland Clearances). Significant privatizations of this nature
occurred from 1760 to 1820, coincident with the industrial revolution in that
country. In more recent times, Winston Churchill's government privatized the
British steel industry in the 1950s, and West Germany's government embarked on
large-scale privatization, including selling its majority stake in Volkswagen
to small investors in a public share offering in 1961. In the 1970s General
Pinochet implemented a significant privatization program in Chile. However, it
was in the 1980s under the leaderships of Margaret Thatcher in the UK and
Ronald Reagan in the USA, that privatization gained worldwide momentum. In the
UK this culminated in the 1993 privatization of British Rail under Thatcher's
successor, John Major; British Rail having been formed by prior nationalization
of private rail companies. Significant privatization of state owned enterprises
in Eastern and Central Europe and the former Soviet Union was undertaken in the
1990s with assistance from the World Bank, the U.S. Agency for International
Development, the German Treuhand, and other governmental and nongovernmental
organizations. A major ongoing privatization, that of Japan Post, involves the
Japanese post service and the largest bank in the world. This privatization,
spearheaded by Junichiro Koizumi, started in 2007 following generations of
debate. The privatization process is expected to last until 2017. Results.
Literature reviews find that in competitive industries with well-informed
consumers, privatization consistently improves efficiency. The more competitive
the industry, the greater the improvement in output, profitability, and
efficiency. Such efficiency gains mean a one-off increase in GDP, but through
improved incentives to innovate and reduce costs also tend to raise the rate of
economic growth. Although typically there many costs associated with these
efficiency gains, many economists argue that these can be dealt with by
appropriate government support through redistribution and perhaps retraining.
Privatizations in Russia and Latin America were accompanied by large-scale
corruption during the sale of the state-owned companies. Those with political
connections unfairly gained large wealth, which has discredited privatization
in these regions. While media have reported widely the grand corruption that
accompanied the sales, one study has argued that in addition to increased
operating efficiency, daily petty corruption is, or would be, larger without
privatization, and that corruption is more prevalent in non-privatized sectors,
and that there is evidence to suggest that extralegal and unofficial activities
are more prevalent in countries that privatized less. Opinion. Support. Studies
show that private market factors can more efficiently deliver many goods or
service than governments due to free market competition. Over time this tends
to lead to lower prices, improved quality, more choices, less corruption, less
red tape, and/or quicker delivery. Many proponents do not argue that everything
should be privatized. According to them, market failures and natural monopolies
could be problematic. However, anarcho-capitalists prefer that every function
of the state be privatized, including defense and dispute resolution.
Opposition. Opponents of certain privatizations believe that certain public
goods and services should remain primarily in the hands of government in order
to ensure that everyone in society has access to them (such as law enforcement,
basic health care, and basic education). There is a positive externality when
the government provides society at large with public goods and services such as
defense and disease control. Some national constitutions in effect define their
governments' "core businesses" as being the provision of such things as
justice, tranquility, defense, and general welfare. These governments' direct
provision of security, stability, and safety, is intended to be done for the
common good (in the public interest) with a long-term (for posterity)
perspective. As for natural monopolies, opponents of privatisation claim that
they aren't subject to fair competition, and better administrated by the state.
Likewise, private goods and services should remain in the hands of the private
sector. Some would also point out that privatizing certain functions of
government might hamper coordination, and charge firms with specialized and
limited capabilities to perform functions which they are not suited for. In
rebuilding a war torn nation's infrastructure, for example, a private firm
would, in order to provide security, either have to hire security, which would
be both necessarily limited and complicate their functions, or coordinate with
government, which, due to a lack of command structure shared between firm and
government, might be difficult. A government agency, on the other hand, would
have the entire military of a nation to draw upon for security, whose chain of
command is clearly defined. Opponents would say that this is a false assertion:
numerous books refer to poor organization between government departments (for
example the Hurricane Katrina incident). Notable examples. The largest
privatization in history involved Japan Post. It was the nation's largest
employer and one third of all Japanese government employees worked for Japan
Post. Japan Post was often said to be the largest holder of personal savings in
the world. Japan Post was thought to be inefficient and a source for
corruption. In September 2003, Prime Minister Junichiro Koizumi's cabinet
proposed splitting Japan Post into four separate companies: A bank, an
insurance company, a postal service company, and a fourth company to handle the
post offices as retail storefronts of the other three. After the Upper House
rejected privatization, Koizumi scheduled nationwide elections for September
11, 2005. He declared the election to be a referendum on postal privatization.
Koizumi subsequently won this election, gaining the necessary supermajority and
a mandate for reform, and in October 2005, the bill was passed to privatize
Japan Post in 2007. Nippon Telegraph and Telephone's privatization in 1987
involved the largest share-offering in financial history at the time. Fifteen
of the world's 20 largest public share offerings have been privatizations of
telecoms. The United Kingdom's largest public-share offerings were
privatizations of British Telecom and British Gas during the 1980s under the
Conservative government of Margaret Thatcher, when many state-run firms were
sold off to the private sector. This attracted very mixed views from the public
and parliament, and even a former Conservative prime minister, Harold
Macmillan, was critical of the policy; likening it to "selling the family
silver". There were around 3,000,000 shareholders in Britain when Thatcher took
office in 1979, but the subsequent sale of state-run firms saw the level of
shareholders double to 6,000,000 by 1985 and by the time of her resignation as
prime minister in 1990 there were more than 10,000,000 shareholders in Britain.
However, by 2012 the influence of these small British shareholders over the
overwhelmingly non-British owners (mainly the publicly owned French company
EDF) of the firms that generate and distribute power in Britain is negligible.
The largest public-share offering in France was France Telecom. Egypt undertook
widespread privatization under President Hosni Mubarak. After his overthrow in
the 2011 revolution, the association of the newly private businesses with the
crony capitalism of the old regime along with the new look at long-festering
labor and police-state issues have led to calls for re-nationalization.
