Pro forma The term pro forma, Latin for "as a matter of form" or "for the sake
of form", is a term applied to practices or documents that are done as a pure
formality, , or seek to satisfy the minimum requirements or to conform to a
convention or doctrine. It has different meanings in different fields.
Accounting. The "pro forma" accounting is a statement of the company's
financial activities while excluding "unusual and nonrecurring transactions"
when stating how much money the company actually made. Expenses often excluded
from pro forma results include company restructuring costs, a decline in the
value of the company's investments, or other accounting charges, such as
adjusting the current balance sheet to fix faulty accounting practices in
previous years. There was a boom in the reporting of pro forma results in the
USA starting in the late 1990s, with many dot-com companies using the technique
to recast their losses as profits, or at least to show smaller losses than the
US GAAP accounting showed. The U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission requires
publicly traded companies in the United States to report US GAAP-based
financial results, and has cautioned companies that using pro forma results to
obscure US GAAP results would be considered fraud if used to mislead investors.
Business. Financial statements. In business, "pro forma" financial statements
are prepared in advance of a planned transaction, such as a merger, an
acquisition, a new capital investment, or a change in capital structure such as
incurrence of new debt or issuance of equity. The "pro forma" models the
anticipated results of the transaction, with particular emphasis on the
projected cash flows, net revenues and (for taxable entities) taxes.
Consequently, "pro forma" statements summarize the projected future status of a
company, based on the current financial statements. For example, when a
transaction with a material effect on a company's financial condition is
contemplated, the Finance Department will prepare, for management and Board
review, a business plan containing "pro forma" financial statements
demonstrating the expected effect of the proposed transaction on the company's
financial viability. Lenders and investors will require such statements to
structure or confirm compliance with debt covenants such as debt service
reserve coverage and debt to equity ratios. Similarly, when a new corporation
is envisioned, its founders will prepare "pro forma" financial statements for
the information of prospective investors. "Pro forma" figures should be clearly
labeled as such and the reason for any deviation from reported past figures
clearly explained. Invoices. In trade transactions, a "pro forma" invoice is a
document that states a commitment from the seller to sell goods to the buyer at
specified prices and terms. It is used to declare the value of the trade. It is
not a true invoice, because it is not used to record accounts receivable for
the seller and accounts payable for the buyer. Simply, a 'Proforma Invoice' is
a "Confirmed Purchase Order" where buyer and Supplier agree on the Product
Detail and cost to be shipped to buyer. A sales quote is prepared in the form
of a "pro forma" invoice which is different from a commercial invoice. It is
used to create a sale and is sent in advance of the commercial invoice. The
content of a pro forma invoice is almost identical to a commercial invoice and
is usually considered a binding agreement although the price may change in
advance of the final sale. A pro forma invoice can also be used for shipments
containing items that "are not" being bought or sold, such as gifts, samples
and personal belongings, whereas a Commercial Invoice is used when the
commodities shipped "are" being bought or sold. Banks usually prefer a pro
forma invoice to a quotation for establishment of a letter of credit or for
advance payment by the importer through his bank. In some countries, customs
may accept a "pro forma" invoice (generated by the importer and not the
exporter) if the required commercial invoice is not available at the time when
filing entry documents at the port of entry to get goods released from customs.
The U.S. Customs and Border Protection, for example, uses "pro forma" invoices
to assess duty and examine goods, but the importer on record is required to
post a bond and produce a commercial invoice within 120 days from the date of
entry. If the required commercial invoice is needed for statistical purposes,
the importer has to produce the commercial invoice within 50 days from the date
Customs releases the goods to the importer. Law. In law, "pro forma" court
rulings are intended merely to facilitate the legal process (to move matters
along). "Pro forma" audiences are used to obey a formal demand. For example,
one "pro forma" audience may be heard for a judge to order the production of a
certain proof or to schedule another date. Engineering. In engineering, "pro
forma" drawings are used to facilitate the drawing release of imaginary pieces.
Government.  In the Parliament of the United Kingdom, the equivalents are the
Outlawries Bill in the House of Commons and the Select Vestries Bill in the
House of Lords. In the Parliament of Canada, such bills are titled Bill C-1, An
Act respecting the Administration of Oaths of Office, and Bill S-1, An Act
relating to Railways in the Canadian House of Commons and Canadian Senate,
respectively. In the Parliament of Australia and the parliaments of the
Australian states and territories, the "pro forma" bills consist only of a
short title, and do not proceed beyond the first reading stage. United States.
In the United States federal government, either house of the Congress (the
House of Representatives or the Senate) can hold a "pro forma" session at which
no formal business is expected to be conducted. This is usually to fulfill the
obligation under the Constitution "that neither chamber can adjourn for more
than three days without the consent of the other." "Pro forma" sessions can
also be used to prevent the President pocket-vetoing bills, or calling the
Congress into special session. They have also been used to prevent presidents
from making recess appointments. However, in 2012, President Barack Obama made
four appointments during a "pro forma" session, calling the practice of
blocking recess appointments into question. Similar practices exist in the
state legislatures, and for similar reasons; for example, in Minnesota,
legislative bodies have the same every-three-days meeting requirement that
Congress has. "Pro forma" sessions are held to meet this requirement. Pakistan.
In Pakistan, the term is only used in educational communities and not in
government. International Trade. A pro forma invoice is much the same as a
commercial invoice which, when used in international trade, represents the
details of an international sale to customs authorities. A pro forma invoice is
presented in the place of a commercial invoice when there is no sale between
the sender and the importer (for example, in the case of an RMA for replacement
goods), or if the terms of the sale between the seller and the buyer are such
that a commercial invoice is not yet available at the time of the international
shipment. A pro forma invoice is required to state the same facts that the
commercial invoice would and the content is prescribed by the governments who
are a party to the transaction.
