Product bundling Product bundling is a marketing strategy that involves
offering several products for sale as one combined product. This strategy is
very common in the software business (for example: bundle a word processor, a
spreadsheet, and a database into a single office suite), in the cable
television industry (for example, basic cable in the United States generally
offers many channels at one price), and in the fast food industry in which
multiple items are combined into a complete meal. A bundle of products is
sometimes referred to as a package deal or a compilation or an anthology.
Bundling is most successful when: Product bundling is most suitable for high
volume and high margin (i.e., low marginal cost) products. Research by Yannis
Bakos and Erik Brynjolfsson found that bundling was particularly effective for
digital "information goods" with close to zero marginal cost, and could enable
a bundler with an inferior collection of products to drive even superior
quality goods out of the market place. In oligopolistic and monopolistic
industries, product bundling can be seen as an unfair use of market power
because it limits the choices available to the consumer. In these cases it is
typically called product tying. Venkatesh and Mahajan (2009) review the
research on bundle design and pricing in their book chapter. Pure bundling
occurs when a consumer can only purchase the entire bundle or nothing, mixed
bundling occurs when consumers are offered a choice between the purchasing the
entire bundle or one of the separate parts of the bundle. Pure bundling can be
further divided into two cases: in joint bundling, the two products are offered
together for one bundled price, and, in leader bundling, a leader product is
offered for discount if purchased with a non-leader product. Mixed-leader
bundling is a variant of leader bundling with the added possibility of buying
the leader product on its own. Bundling in political economy is a type of
product bundling in which the product is a candidate in an election who markets
his bundle of attributes and positions to the voters.
