Production–possibility frontier In economics, a production–possibility
frontier (PPF), sometimes called a production–possibility curve, production-
possibility boundary or product transformation curve, is a graph that compares
the production rates of two commodities that use the same fixed total of the
factors of production. Graphically bounding the production set, the PPF curve
shows the maximum specified production level of one commodity that results
given the production level of the other. By doing so, it defines productive
efficiency in the context of that production set. A period of time is specified
as well as the production technologies. The commodity compared can either be a
good or a service. PPFs are normally drawn as bulging upwards ("concave") from
the origin but can also be represented as bulging downward or linear
(straight), depending on a number of factors. A PPF can be used to represent a
number of economic concepts, such as scarcity of resources (i.e., the
fundamental economic problem all societies face), opportunity cost (or marginal
rate of transformation), productive efficiency, allocative efficiency, and
economies of scale. In addition, an outward shift of the PPF results from
growth of the availability of inputs such as physical capital or labour, or
technological progress in our knowledge of how to transform inputs into
outputs. Such a shift allows economic growth of an economy already operating at
its full productivity (on the PPF), which means that more of "both" outputs can
be produced during the specified period of time without sacrificing the output
of either good. Conversely, the PPF will shift inward if the labor force
shrinks, the supply of raw materials is depleted, or a natural disaster
decreases the stock of physical capital. However, most economic contractions
reflect not that less can be produced, but that the economy has started
operating below the frontier—typically both labor and physical capital are
underemployed. The combination represented by the point on the PPF where an
economy operates shows the priorities or choices of the economy, such as the
choice between producing more capital goods and fewer consumer goods, or vice
versa. Indicators. Efficiency. A PPF shows all possible combinations of two
goods that can be produced simultaneously during a given period of time,
"ceteris paribus". Commonly, it takes the form of the curve on the right. For
an economy to increase the quantity of one good produced, production of the
other good must be sacrificed. Here, butter production must be sacrificed in
order to produce more guns. PPFs represent how much of the latter must be
sacrificed for a given increase in production of the former. Such a two-good
world is a theoretical simplification, due to the difficulty of graphical
analysis of multiple goods. If we are interested in one good, a composite score
of the other goods can be generated using different techniques. Furthermore,
the production model can be generalised using higher-dimensional techniques
such as Principal Component Analysis (PCA) and others. For example, assume that
the supply of the economy's factors of production does not change over time, in
order to produce more butter, producing "guns" needs to be sacrificed. If
production is efficient, the economy can choose between combinations (i.e.
points) on the PPF: "B" if guns are of interest, "C" if more butter is needed,
"D" if an equal mix of butter and guns is required. In the PPF, all points "on"
the curve are points of maximum productive efficiency (i.e., no more output can
be achieved from the given inputs); all points inside the frontier (such as
"A") can be produced but productively "inefficient"; all points outside the
curve (such as "X") cannot be produced with the given, existing resources. Not
all points on the curve are Pareto efficient, however; only in the case where
the marginal rate of transformation is equal to all consumers' marginal rate of
substitution and hence equal to the ratio of prices will it be impossible to
find any trade that will make no consumer worse off. Opportunity cost. If there
is no increase in productive resources, increasing production of a first good
entails decreasing production of a second, because resources must be
transferred to the first and away from the second. Points along the curve
describe the trade-off between the goods. The sacrifice in the production of
the second good is called the "opportunity cost" (because increasing production
of the first good entails losing the opportunity to produce some amount of the
second). Opportunity cost is measured in the number of units of the second good
forgone for one or more units of the first good. In the context of a PPF,
opportunity cost is directly related to the shape of the curve (see below). If
the shape of the PPF curve is straight-line, the opportunity cost is constant
as production of different goods is changing. But, opportunity cost usually
will vary depending on the start and end point. In the diagram on the right,
producing 10 more packets of butter, at a low level of butter production, costs
the opportunity of 5 guns (as with a movement from "A" to "B"). At point C, the
economy is already close to its maximum potential butter output. To produce 10
more packets of butter, 50 guns must be sacrificed (as with a movement from "C"
to "D"). The ratio of opportunity costs is determined by the "marginal rate of
transformation." Marginal rate of transformation. The slope of the
production–possibility frontier (PPF) at any given point is called the
marginal rate of transformation (MRT). The slope defines the rate at which
production of one good can be redirected (by re-allocation of production
resources) into production of the other. It is also called the (marginal)
"opportunity cost" of a commodity, that is, it is the opportunity cost of "X"
in terms of "Y" at the margin. It measures how much of good Y is given up for
one more unit of good X or vice versa. The shape of a PPF is commonly drawn as
concave from the origin to represent increasing opportunity cost with increased
output of a good. Thus, MRT increases in absolute size as one moves from the
top left of the PPF to the bottom right of the PPF. The marginal rate of
transformation can be expressed in terms of either commodity. The marginal
opportunity costs of guns in terms of butter is simply the reciprocal of the
marginal opportunity cost of butter in terms of guns. If, for example, the
(absolute) slope at point "BB" in the diagram is equal to 2, then, in order to
produce one more packet of butter, the production of 2 guns must be sacrificed.
If at "AA", the marginal opportunity cost of butter in terms of guns is equal
to 0.25, then, the sacrifice of one gun could produce four packets of butter,
and the opportunity cost of guns in terms of butter is 4. Therefore Opportunity
cost plays a major role in society. Shape. The production–possibility
frontier can be constructed from the contract curve in an Edgeworth production
box diagram of factor intensity. The example used above (which demonstrates
increasing opportunity costs, with a curve concave from the origin) is the most
common form of PPF. It represents a disparity in the factor intensities and
technologies of the two production sectors. That is, as an economy specializes
more and more into one product (e.g., moving from point "B" to point "D"), the
opportunity cost of producing that product increases, because we are using more
and more resources that are less efficient in producing it. With increasing
production of butter, workers from the gun industry will move to it. At first,
the least qualified (or most general) gun workers will be transferred into
making more butter, and moving these workers has little impact on the
opportunity cost of increasing butter production: the loss in gun production
will be small. But the cost of producing successive units of butter will
increase as resources that are more and more specialized in gun production are
moved into the butter industry. If opportunity costs are constant, a straight-
line (linear) PPF is produced. This case reflects a situation where resources
are not specialised and can be substituted for each other with no added cost.
Products requiring similar resources (bread and pastry, for instance) will have
an almost straight PPF, hence almost constant opportunity costs. More
specifically, with constant returns to scale, there are two opportunities for a
linear PPF: firstly, if there was only one factor of production to consider, or
secondly, if the factor intensity ratios in the two sectors were constant at
all points on the production-possibilities curve. With varying returns to
scale, however, it may not be entirely linear in either case. With economies of
scale, the PPF would appear inward, with opportunity costs falling as more is
produced of each respective product. Specialisation in producing successive
units of a good determines its opportunity cost (say from mass production
methods or specialization of labor). Position. The two main determinants of the
position of the PPF at any given time are the state of technology and
management expertise (which are reflected in the available production
functions) and the available quantities and productivity of factors of
production. Only points on or within a PPF are actually possible to achieve in
the short run. In the long run, if technology improves or if the productivity
or supply of factors of production increases, the economy's capacity to produce
both goods increases, i.e., economic growth occurs. This increase is shown by a
shift of the production-possibility frontier to the right. Conversely, a
natural, military or ecological disaster might move the PPF to the left, in
response to a reduction in an economy's productivity. Thus all points on or
within the curve are part of the production set, i.e., combinations of goods
that the economy could potentially produce. If the two production goods
depicted are capital investment (to increase future production possibilities)
or current consumption goods, the PPF can represent, how the higher investment
this year, the more the PPF would shift out in following years. It can also
represent how a technological progress that more favors production
possibilities of one good, say Guns, shifts the PPF outwards more along the Gun
axis, "biasing" production possibilities in that direction. Similarly, if one
good makes more use of say capital and if capital grows faster than other
factors, growth possibilities might be biased in favor of the capital-intensive
good. Other applications. In microeconomics, the PPF shows the options open to
an individual, household, or firm in a two-good world. By definition, each
point on the curve is productively efficient, but, given the nature of market
demand, some points will be more profitable than others. Equilibrium for a firm
will be the combination of outputs on the PPF that is most profitable. From a
macroeconomic perspective, the PPF illustrates the production possibilities
available to a nation or economy during a given period of time for broad
categories of output. However, an economy may achieve productive efficiency
without necessarily being allocatively efficient. Market failure (such as
imperfect competition or externalities) and some institutions of social
decision-making (such as government and tradition) may lead to the wrong
combination of goods being produced (hence the wrong mix of resources being
allocated between producing the two goods) compared to what consumers would
prefer, given what is feasible on the PPF.
