Production theory Production theory is the study of production, or the economic
process of converting inputs into outputs. Production uses resources to create
a good or service that is suitable for use, gift-giving in a gift economy, or
exchange in a market economy. This can include manufacturing, storing,
shipping, and packaging. Some economists define production broadly as all
economic activity other than consumption. They see every commercial activity
other than the final purchase as some form of production. A production process
can be defined as any activity that increases the similarity between the
pattern of demand for goods and services, and the quantity, form, shape, size,
length and distribution of these goods and services available to the market
place. Factors of production. In the “long run”, all of these factors of
production can be adjusted by management. The “short run”, however, is
defined as a period in which at least one of the factors of production is
fixed. A fixed factor of production is one whose quantity cannot readily be
changed. Examples include major pieces of equipment, suitable factory space,
and key managerial personnel. A variable factor of production is one whose
usage rate can be changed easily. Examples include electrical power
consumption, transportation services, and most raw material inputs. In the
short run, a firm’s “scale of operations” determines the maximum number
of outputs that can be produced. In the long run, there are no scale
limitations. Total, average, and marginal product. The total product (or total
physical product) of a variable factor of production identifies what outputs
are possible using various levels of the variable input. This can be displayed
in either a chart that lists the output level corresponding to various levels
of input, or a graph that summarizes the data into a “total product curve”.
The diagram shows a typical total product curve. In this example, output
increases as more inputs are employed up until point A. The maximum output
possible with this production process is Qm. (If there are other inputs used in
the process, they are assumed to be fixed.) The average physical product is the
total production divided by the number of units of variable input employed. It
is the output of each unit of input. If there are 10 employees working on a
production process that manufactures 50 units per day, then the average product
of variable labour input is 5 units per day. The average product typically
varies as more of the input is employed, so this relationship can also be
expressed as a chart or as a graph. A typical average physical product curve is
shown (APP). It can be obtained by drawing a vector from the origin to various
points on the total product curve and plotting the slopes of these vectors. The
marginal physical product of a variable input is the change in total output due
to a one unit change in the variable input (called the discrete marginal
product) or alternatively the rate of change in total output due to an
infinitesimally small change in the variable input (called the continuous
marginal product). The discrete marginal product of capital is the additional
output resulting from the use of an additional unit of capital (assuming all
other factors are fixed). The continuous marginal product of a variable input
can be calculated as the derivative of quantity produced with respect to
variable input employed. The marginal physical product curve is shown (MPP). It
can be obtained from the slope of the total product curve. Because the marginal
product "drives" changes in the average product, we know that when the average
physical product is falling, the marginal physical product must be less than
the average. Likewise, when the average physical product is rising, it must be
due to a marginal physical product greater than the average. For this reason,
the marginal physical product curve must intersect the maximum point on the
average physical product curve. Notes: MPP keeps increasing until it reaches
its maximum. Up until this point every additional unit has been adding more
value to the total product than the previous one. From this point onwards,
every additional unit adds less to the total product compared to the previous
one – MPP is decreasing. But the average product is still increasing till MPP
touches APP. At this point, an additional unit is adding the same value as the
average product. From this point onwards, APP starts to reduce because every
additional unit is adding less to APP than the average product. But the total
product is still increasing because every additional unit is still contributing
positively. Therefore, during this period, both, the average as well as
marginal products, are decreasing, but the total product is still increasing.
Finally we reach a point when MPP crosses the x-axis. At this point every
additional unit starts to diminish the product of previous units, possibly by
getting into their way. Therefore the total product starts to decrease at this
point. This is point A on the total product curve. (Courtesy: Dr. Shehzad
Inayat Ali). Diminishing returns. Diminishing returns can be divided into three
categories: Putting it in a chronological order, at first the marginal returns
start to diminish, then the average returns, followed finally by the total
returns. Diminishing marginal returns. These curves illustrate the principle of
diminishing marginal returns to a variable input (not to be confused with
diseconomies of scale which is a long term phenomenon in which all factors are
allowed to change). This states that as you add more and more of a variable
input, you will reach a point beyond which the resulting increase in output
starts to diminish. This point is illustrated as the maximum point on the
marginal physical product curve. It assumes that other factor inputs (if they
are used in the process) are held constant. An example is the employment of
labour in the use of trucks to transport goods. Assuming the number of
available trucks (capital) is fixed, then the amount of the variable input
labour could be varied and the resultant efficiency determined. At least one
labourer (the driver) is necessary. Additional workers per vehicle could be
productive in loading, unloading, navigation, or around the clock continuous
driving. But at some point the returns to investment in labour will start to
diminish and efficiency will decrease. The most efficient distribution of
labour per piece of equipment will likely be one driver plus an additional
worker for other tasks (2 workers per truck would be more efficient than 5 per
truck). Resource allocations and distributive efficiencies in the mix of
capital and labour investment will vary per industry and according to available
technology. Trains are able to transport much more in the way of goods with
fewer "drivers" but at the cost of greater investment in infrastructure. With
the advent of mass production of motorized vehicles, the economic niche
occupied by trains (compared with transport trucks) has become more specialized
and limited to long haul delivery. P.S.: There is an argument that if the
theory is holding everything constant, the production method should not be
changed, i.e., division of labour should not be practiced. However, the rise in
marginal product means that the workers use other means of production method,
such as in loading, unloading, navigation, or around the clock continuous
driving. For this reason, some economists think that the “keeping other
things constant” should not be used in this theory. Many ways of expressing
the production relationship. The total, average, and marginal physical product
curves mentioned above are just one way of showing production relationships.
They express the quantity of output relative to the amount of variable input
employed while holding fixed inputs constant. Because they depict a short run
relationship, they are sometimes called short run production functions. If all
inputs are allowed to be varied, then the diagram would express outputs
relative to total inputs, and the function would be a long run production
function. If the mix of inputs is held constant, then output would be expressed
relative to inputs of a fixed composition, and the function would indicate long
run economies of scale. Rather than comparing inputs to outputs, it is also
possible to assess the mix of inputs employed in production. An isoquant (see
below) relates the quantities of one input to the quantities of another input.
It indicates all possible combinations of inputs that are capable of producing
a given level of output. Rather than looking at the inputs used in production,
it is possible to look at the mix of outputs that are possible for any given
production process. This is done with a production possibilities frontier. It
indicates what combinations of outputs are possible given the available factor
endowment and the prevailing production technology. Isoquants. An isoquant
represents those combinations of inputs, which will be capable of producing an
equal quantity of output; the producer would be indifferent between them. The
isoquants are thus contour lines, which trace the loci of equal outputs. As the
production remains the same on any point of this line, it is also called equal
product curve. Let Q0 = f(L,K) be a production factor, where Q0 = A is a fixed
level of production. L = Labour K = Capital If three combinations of labour and
capital A, B and C produces 10 units of product, then the isoquant will be like
Figure 1. Here we see that the combination of L1 labour and K3 capital can
produce 10 units of product, which is A on the isoquant. Now to increase the
labour keeping the production the same the organization has to decrease
capital. In Figure 1 B is the point where capital decreases to K2, while labour
increases to L2. Similarly, 10 units of product may be produced at point C on
the isoquant with capital K1 and labour L3. Each of the factor combinations A,
B and C produces the same level of output, 10 units. The marginal rate of
technical substitution. "Marginal Rate of Technical Substitution" Isoquants are
typically convex to the origin reflecting the fact that the two factors are
substitutable for each other at varying rates. This rate of substitutability is
called the “marginal rate of technical substitution” (MRTS) or occasionally
the “marginal rate of substitution in production”. It measures the
reduction in one input per unit increase in the other input that is just
sufficient to maintain a constant level of production. For example, the
marginal rate of substitution of labour for capital gives the amount of capital
that can be replaced by one unit of labour while keeping output unchanged. To
move from point A to point B in the diagram, the amount of capital is reduced
from Ka to Kb while the amount of labour is increased only from La to Lb. To
move from point C to point D, the amount of capital is reduced from Kc to Kd
while the amount of labour is increased from Lc to Ld. The marginal rate of
technical substitution of labour for capital is equivalent to the absolute
slope of the isoquant at that point (change in capital divided by change in
labour). It is equal to 0 where the isoquant becomes horizontal, and equal to
infinity where it becomes vertical. The opposite is true when going in the
other direction (from D to C to B to A). In this case we are looking at the
marginal rate of technical substitution capital for labour (which is the
reciprocal of the marginal rate of technical substitution labour for capital).
It can also be shown that the marginal rate of substitution labour for capital,
is equal to the marginal physical product of labour divided by the marginal
physical product of capital. In the unusual case of two inputs that are perfect
substitutes for each other in production, the isoquant would be linear (linear
in the sense of a function formula_1). If, on the other hand, there is only one
production process available, factor proportions would be fixed, and these
zero-substitutability isoquants would be shown as horizontal or vertical lines.
