Production function In microeconomics and macroeconomics, a production function
is a function that specifies the output of a firm, an industry, or an entire
economy for all combinations of inputs. This function is an assumed
technological relationship, based on the current state of engineering
knowledge; it does not represent the result of economic choices, but rather is
an externally given entity that influences economic decision-making. Almost all
economic theories presuppose a production function, either on the firm level or
the aggregate level. In this sense, the production function is one of the key
concepts of mainstream neoclassical theories. Some non-mainstream economists,
however, reject the very concept of an aggregate production function.
Q=A.L^a.K^b.Kf^1-a-b where Kf is foreign investment. Concept of production
functions. In micro-economics, a production function is a function that
specifies the output of a firm for all combinations of inputs. A meta-
production function (sometimes metaproduction function) compares the practice
of the existing entities converting inputs into output to determine the most
efficient practice production function of the existing entities, whether the
most efficient feasible practice production or the most efficient actual
practice production."clarification needed" In either case, the maximum output
of a technologically-determined production process is a mathematical function
of one or more inputs. Put another way, given the set of all technically
feasible combinations of output and inputs, only the combinations encompassing
a maximum output for a specified set of inputs would constitute the production
function. Alternatively, a production function can be defined as the
specification of the minimum input requirements needed to produce designated
quantities of output, given available technology. It is usually presumed that
unique production functions can be constructed for every production technology.
By assuming that the maximum output technologically possible from a given set
of inputs is achieved, economists using a production function in analysis are
abstracting from the engineering and managerial problems inherently associated
with a particular production process. The engineering and managerial problems
of technical efficiency are assumed to be solved, so that analysis can focus on
the problems of allocative efficiency. The firm is assumed to be making
allocative choices concerning how much of each input factor to use and how much
output to produce, given the cost (purchase price) of each factor, the selling
price of the output, and the technological determinants represented by the
production function. A decision frame in which one or more inputs are held
constant may be used; for example, (physical) capital may be assumed to be
fixed (constant) in the short run, and labour and possibly other inputs such as
raw materials variable, while in the long run, the quantities of both capital
and the other factors that may be chosen by the firm are variable. In the long
run, the firm may even have a choice of technologies, represented by various
possible production functions. The relationship of output to inputs is non-
monetary; that is, a production function relates physical inputs to physical
outputs, and prices and costs are not reflected in the function. But the
production function is not a full model of the production process: it
deliberately abstracts from inherent aspects of physical production processes
that some would argue are essential, including error, entropy or waste.
Moreover, production functions do not ordinarily model the business processes,
either, ignoring the role of management. (For a primer on the fundamental
elements of microeconomic production theory, see production theory basics). The
primary purpose of the production function is to address allocative efficiency
in the use of factor inputs in production and the resulting distribution of
income to those factors. Under certain assumptions, the production function can
be used to derive a marginal product for each factor, which implies an ideal
division of the income generated from output into an income due to each input
factor of production. Specifying the production function. A production function
can be expressed in a functional form as the right side of If "Q" is not a
matrix (i.e. a scalar, a vector, or even a diagonal matrix), then this form
does not encompass joint production, which is a production process that has
multiple co-products. On the other hand, if "f" maps from Rn to Rk then it is a
joint production function expressing the determination of "k" different types
of output based on the joint usage of the specified quantities of the "n"
inputs. The Leontief production function applies to situations in which inputs
must be used in fixed proportions; starting from those proportions, if usage of
one input is increased without another being increased, output will not change.
This production function is given by Other forms include the constant
elasticity of substitution production function (CES), which is a generalized
form of the Cobb-Douglas function, and the quadratic production function. The
best form of the equation to use and the values of the parameters (formula_9)
vary from company to company and industry to industry. In a short run
production function at least one of the formula_10's (inputs) is fixed. In the
long run all factor inputs are variable at the discretion of management.
Production function as a graph. Any of these equations can be plotted on a
graph. A typical (quadratic) production function is shown in the following
diagram under the assumption of a single variable input (or fixed ratios of
inputs so the can be treated as a single variable). All points above the
production function are unobtainable with current technology, all points below
are technically feasible, and all points on the function show the maximum
quantity of output obtainable at the specified level of usage of the input.
From the origin, through points A, B, and C, the production function is
rising,ve beyond point X. From point A to point C, the firm is experiencing
positive but decreasing marginal returns to the variable input. As additional
units of the input are employed, output increases but at a decreasing rate.
Point B is the point beyond which there are diminishing average returns, as
shown by the declining slope of the average physical product curve (APP) beyond
point Y. Point B is just tangent to the steepest ray from the origin hence the
average physical product is at a maximum. Beyond point B, mathematical
necessity requires that the marginal curve must be below the average curve (See
production theory basics for further explanation.). Stages of production. To
simplify the interpretation of a production function, it is common to divide
its range into 3 stages. In Stage 1 (from the origin to point B) the variable
input is being used with increasing output per unit, the latter reaching a
maximum at point B (since the average physical product is at its maximum at
that point). Because the output per unit of the variable input is improving
throughout stage 1, a price-taking firm will always operate beyond this stage.
In Stage 2, output increases at a decreasing rate, and the average and marginal
physical product are declining. However, the average product of fixed inputs
(not shown) is still rising, because output is rising while fixed input usage
is constant. In this stage, the employment of additional variable inputs
increases the output per unit of fixed input but decreases the output per unit
of the variable input. The optimum input/output combination for the price-
taking firm will be in stage 2, although a firm facing a downward-sloped demand
curve might find it most profitable to operate in Stage 1. In Stage 3, too much
variable input is being used relative to the available fixed inputs: variable
inputs are over-utilized in the sense that their presence on the margin
obstructs the production process rather than enhancing it. The output per unit
of both the fixed and the variable input declines throughout this stage. At the
boundary between stage 2 and stage 3, the highest possible output is being
obtained from the fixed input. Shifting a production function. By definition,
in the long run the firm can change its scale of operations by adjusting the
level of inputs that are fixed in the short run, thereby shifting the
production function upward as plotted against the variable input. If fixed
inputs are lumpy, adjustments to the scale of operations may be more
significant than what is required to merely balance production capacity with
demand. For example, you may only need to increase production by a million
units per year to keep up with demand, but the production equipment upgrades
that are available may involve increasing productive capacity by 2 million
units per year. If a firm is operating at a profit-maximizing level in stage
one, it might, in the long run, choose to reduce its scale of operations (by
selling capital equipment). By reducing the amount of fixed capital inputs, the
production function will shift down. The beginning of stage 2 shifts from B1 to
B2. The (unchanged) profit-maximizing output level will now be in stage 2.
Homogeneous and homothetic production functions. There are two special classes
of production functions that are often analyzed. The production function
formula_11 is said to be homogeneous of degree n, if given any positive
constant formula_12, formula_13. If formula_14, the function exhibits
increasing returns to scale, and it exhibits decreasing returns to scale if
formula_15. If it is homogeneous of degree 1, it exhibits constant returns to
scale. The presence of increasing returns means that a one percent increase in
the usage levels of all inputs would result in a greater than one percent
increase in output; the presence of decreasing returns means that it would
result in a less than one percent increase in output. Constant returns to scale
is the in-between case. In the Cobb-Douglas production function referred to
above, returns to scale are increasing if formula_16, decreasing if formula_17,
and constant if formula_18. If a production function is homogeneous of degree
one, it is sometimes called "linearly homogeneous". A linearly homogeneous
production function with inputs capital and labour has the properties that the
marginal and average physical products of both capital and labour can be
expressed as functions of the capital-labour ratio alone. Moreover, in this
case if each input is paid at a rate equal to its marginal product, the firm's
revenues will be exactly exhausted and there will be no excess economic profit.
Homothetic functions are functions whose marginal technical rate of
substitution (the slope of the isoquant, a curve drawn through the set of
points in say labour-capital space at which the same quantity of output is
produced for varying combinations of the inputs) is homogeneous of degree zero.
Due to this, along rays coming from the origin, the slopes of the isoquants
will be the same. Homothetic functions are of the form formula_19 where
formula_20 is a monotonically increasing function (the derivative of formula_20
is positive (formula_22)), and the function formula_23 is a homogeneous
function of any degree. Aggregate production functions. In macroeconomics,
aggregate production functions for whole nations are sometimes constructed. In
theory they are the summation of all the production functions of individual
producers; however there are methodological problems associated with aggregate
production functions, and economists have debated extensively whether the
concept is valid. Criticisms of production functions. There are two major
criticisms of the standard form of the production function. On the history of
production functions, see Mishra (2007). On the concept of capital. During the
1950s, '60s, and '70s there was a lively debate about the theoretical soundness
of production functions. (See the Capital controversy.) Although the criticism
was directed primarily at aggregate production functions, microeconomic
production functions were also put under scrutiny. The debate began in 1953
when Joan Robinson criticized the way the factor input capital was measured and
how the notion of factor proportions had distracted economists. According to
the argument, it is impossible to conceive of capital in such a way that its
quantity is independent of the rates of interest and wages. The problem is that
this independence is a precondition of constructing an isoquant. Further, the
slope of the isoquant helps determine relative factor prices, but the curve
cannot be constructed (and its slope measured) unless the prices are known
beforehand. On the empirical relevance. As a result of the criticism on their
weak theoretical grounds, it has been claimed that empirical results firmly
support the use of neoclassical "well behaved" aggregate production functions.
Nevertheless, Anwar Shaikh has demonstrated that they also have no empirical
relevance, as long as alleged good fit outcomes from an accounting identity,
not from any underlying laws of production/distribution. Natural resources.
Often natural resources are omitted from production functions. When Solow and
Stiglitz sought to make the production function more realistic by adding in
natural resources, they did it in a manner that economist Georgescu-Roegen
criticized as a "conjuring trick" that failed to address the laws of
thermodynamics, since their variant allows capital and labour to be infinitely
substituted for natural resources. Neither Solow nor Stiglitz addressed his
criticism, despite an invitation to do so in the September 1997 issue of the
journal Ecological Economics. For more recent retrospectives, see Cohen and
Harcourt and Ayres-Warr (2009).
