Productivism Productivism is the belief that measurable economic productivity
and growth is the purpose of human organization (e.g., work), and that "more
production is necessarily good". Arguments for productivism. Although
productivism is often meant pejoratively as a general problem in politics and
economics, it remains that most countries and economies are productivist in
nature (sources?). While critics of productivism and its political/economic
variants, notably capitalism and socialism, challenge the notions of
conventional political economy, and argue for an economic policy more
compatible with humanity, these views are often dismissed as 'utopian' by
economists and political scientists, who hold that there is no conflict between
the role of the worker and of the citizen, father and mother, etc. That is,
that conventional economics and particularly macroeconomics already accounts
for the relationship between productivity and the freedom to enjoy that
productivity. Criticism of productivism. Although 'productivism' can be
considered pejorative, as it is unacceptable to many individuals and ideologies
it describes, these same individuals and ideologies often use phrases like
"productivity", "growth", "economic sense" and "common sense" without argument,
presupposing the "primacy of industry"(Giddens, 1994). According to those who
use the term 'productivism', the difference between themselves and the
promoters of conventional neoclassical economics is that a productivist does
not believe in the idea of "uneconomic growth", i.e. the productivist believes
all growth is good, while the critic of productivism believes it can be more
like a disease, measurably growing but interfering with life processes, and
that it is up to the electorate, worker and purchaser to put values on their
free time and decide whether to use their time for production or their money
for consumption. A key academic critic of productivism is Amartya Sen, winner
of the 1999 Nobel Prize in Economics. His theory of "development as freedom" is
one of several human development theories, that states that the growth of
individual capital, that is, "talent", "creativity" and "personal ingenuity",
is more significant than the growth of many other measurable quantities, e.g.
production of products for commodity markets.
