Profit maximization In economics, profit maximization is the short run or long
run process by which a firm determines the price and output level that returns
the greatest profit. There are several approaches to this problem. The total
revenue–total cost perspective relies on the fact that profit equals revenue
minus cost and focuses on maximizing this difference, and the marginal
revenue–marginal cost perspective is based on the fact that total profit
reaches its maximum point where marginal revenue equals marginal cost. Basic
definitions. Any costs incurred by a firm may be classed into two groups: fixed
costs and variable costs. Fixed costs, which occur only in the short run, are
incurred by the business at any level of output, including zero output. These
may include equipment maintenance, rent, wages of employees whose numbers
cannot be increased or decreased in the short run, and general upkeep. Variable
costs change with the level of output, increasing as more product is generated.
Materials consumed during production often have the largest impact on this
category, which also includes the wages of employees who can be hired and laid
off in the span of time (long run or short run) under consideration. Fixed cost
and variable cost, combined, equal total cost. Revenue is the amount of money
that a company receives from its normal business activities, usually from the
sale of goods and services (as opposed to monies from security sales such as
equity shares or debt issuances). Marginal cost and revenue, depending on
whether the calculus approach is taken or not, are defined as either the change
in cost or revenue as each additional unit is produced, or the derivative of
cost or revenue with respect to the quantity of output. For instance, taking
the first definition, if it costs a firm 400 USD to produce 5 units and 480 USD
to produce 6, the marginal cost of the sixth unit is 80 dollars. Total revenue
- total cost perspective. To obtain the profit maximising output quantity, we
start by recognizing that profit is equal to total revenue (TR) minus total
cost (TC). Given a table of costs and revenues at each quantity, we can either
compute equations or plot the data directly on a graph. The profit-maximizing
output is the one at which this difference reaches its maximum. In the
accompanying diagram, the linear total revenue curve represents the case in
which the firm is a perfect competitor in the goods market, and thus cannot set
its own selling price. The profit-maximizing output level is represented as the
one at which total revenue is the height of C and total cost is the height of
B; the maximal profit is measured as CB. This output level is also the one at
which the total profit curve is at its maximum. If, contrary to what is assumed
in the graph, the firm is not a perfect competitor in the output market, the
price to sell the product at can be read off the demand curve at the firm's
optimal quantity of output.
