Progg Progg, a contraction of the Swedish word for "progressive music"
("progressiv musik") was a left-wing and anti-commercial musical movement in
Sweden that had its roots in the late 1960s, and its golden age in the 1970s.
It should not be confused with the English expression "progressive music" or
progressive rock. Progg is not a genre. There were progg bands playing
progressive rock, but the progg movement encompassed many other genres. The
progg movement was closely connected to similar movements in arts, theatre and
design, and to alternative life styles and left wing views. The people playing
and listening to this music came to be called "proggare" (Lit. "proggers") in
Swedish. The movement. Many musicians and people working with music in the end
of the 1960s were against the commercialism of pop music. Notably, the record
companies Silence and MNW were formed, and started to record and release this
new music. They created a new distribution company, "SAM-distribution", which
distributed the records of the alternative record companies, and so called
"music forums", places where concerts could be held without a commercial
middleman such as ordinary concert arrangers were created in many Swedish
cities. In the middle of the 1970s around 75 music forums existed. The word
that was generally used about the movement was "musikrörelsen", which means
the music movement. The music. Progg did not have a uniform sound and featured
a broad spectrum of musical styles. There were a wide range of artists as well,
including Bo Hansson, Kebnekajse, Södra bergens balalaikor, Blå Tåget, Hoola
Bandoola Band, Nationalteatern, Dag Vag, and Jan Hammarlund. Most lyrics were
in Swedish, while English was the common language for other pop and rock in
Sweden at the time. The two big progg record companies had a somewhat different
musical profile. History. Alternative bands began to form in the late 1960s,
but the movement emerged in full in the summer of 1970. A big alternative music
festival was held at the field Gärdet in Stockholm between June 12 and June
14. The festival was illegal, as a permission for it had not been obtained .
The new independent record company "Silence" released a compilation record with
music from the festival as their first record, and signed some of the bands
that played, including Träd, Gräs och Stenar and Gudibrallan. In 1971 MNW was
formed. During this decade the progg movement had a strong position in the
musical landscape of Sweden. At the end of the 1970s, however, the movement
started to decline, as many of the bands disintegrated and the "music forums"
were closed. The left wing ideals became less dominating among young people,
and the rock and folk music also became less popular than new genres such as
hard rock and electronic music. Opinions. The progg movement took a clear
stance against capitalism and commercialism, but it was by no means a
homogeneous movement. The political opinions ranged from everything from
anarchism and communism to less clearly pronounced general left-wing opinions.
The relations with the governing Social Democratic Party were not that good,
which can be exemplified by the song "Fy på dig sosse" (Shame on you, Social
Democrat) by "Gudibrallan". Few people in the movement were members of any
political party, though the communist parties the Swedish communist party and
Communist Party of Sweden (1967) started their own record companies which
joined the movement. The United FNL groups were a strong movement in support of
the National Front for the Liberation of Vietnam, and progg bands often played
at their demonstrations. Progg bands also played at other big demonstrations at
the time, such as the protest that managed to stop the cutting down of the elms
in the park Kungsträdgården in Stockholm, and the protests to stop the tennis
matches against tennis players from the Pinochet-ruled Chile in Båstad 1975.
In 1977 the record company Silence moved their studio to the small village
Koppom in the forests of the province of Värmland. Legacy. Some of the artists
from the progg movement have continued to play music and managed to remain
popular over the years, for example Björn Afzelius, Mikael Wiehe, Totta
Näslund and Peps Persson. There has been a stereotypical image of progg as
something out of date and spaced out from the 1970s. On the other hand, since
the end of the 1990s, many progg bands have experienced some renaissance, with
many old progg bands reuniting for concerts and new records, for example Träd,
Gräs och Stenar and Samla Mammas Manna. Some bands, like Nationalteatern,
still go on long tours in the 21st century performing their old songs for a new
generation. Silence has re-released much of their catalogue from the 1970s on
CD, and old LPs with progg music are sold at high prices. There are new
musicians who have references to the progg music, and are sometimes called
"nyprogg" (new progg), for example Lars Winnerbäck, Dungen, Hovet, Cirkus
Miramar and Doktor Kosmos. The film "Together" from 2000 is set in Sweden
during the progg era and features much progg music.
