Progressive Era The Progressive Era in the United States was a period of social
activism and political reform that flourished from the 1890s to the 1920s. One
main goal of the Progressive movement was purification of government, as
Progressives tried to eliminate corruption by exposing and undercutting
political machines and bosses. Many (but not all) Progressives supported
prohibition in order to destroy the political power of local bosses based in
saloons. At the same time, women's suffrage was promoted to bring a "purer"
female vote into the arena. A second theme was achieving efficiency in every
sector by identifying old ways that needed modernizing, and emphasizing
scientific, medical and engineering solutions. Many people led efforts to
reform local government, public education, medicine, finance, insurance,
industry, railroads, churches, and many other areas. Progressives transformed,
professionalized and made "scientific" the social sciences, especially history,
economics, and political science. In academic fields the day of the amateur
author gave way to the research professor who published in the new scholarly
journals and presses. The national political leaders included Theodore
Roosevelt, Robert M. La Follette, Sr., Charles Evans Hughes and Herbert Hoover
on the Republican side, and William Jennings Bryan, Woodrow Wilson and Al Smith
on the Democratic side. Initially the movement operated chiefly at local
levels; later it expanded to state and national levels. Progressives drew
support from the middle class, and supporters included many lawyers, teachers,
physicians, ministers and business people. The Progressives strongly supported
scientific methods as applied to economics, government, industry, finance,
medicine, schooling, theology, education, and even the family. They closely
followed advances underway at the time in Western Europe and adopted numerous
policies, such as the banking laws which became the Federal Reserve System in
1913. They felt that old-fashioned ways meant waste and inefficiency, and
eagerly sought out the "one best system". Political reform. Disturbed by the
waste, inefficiency, corruption and injustices of the Gilded Age, the
progressives were committed to changing and reforming every aspect of the
state, society and economy. Significant changes enacted at the national levels
included the imposition of an income tax with the Sixteenth Amendment, direct
election of Senators with the Seventeenth Amendment, Prohibition with the
Eighteenth Amendment, and women's suffrage through the Nineteenth Amendment to
the U.S. Constitution. Exposing corruption. Muckrakers were journalists who
exposed waste, corruption, and scandal in the highly influential new medium of
national magazines, such as McClure's Magazine. Ray Stannard Baker, George
Creel and Brand Whitlock were active at the state and local level, while
Lincoln Steffens exposed political corruption in many large cities; Ida Tarbell
went after Rockefeller's Standard Oil Company. Samuel Hopkins Adams in 1905
showed the fraud involved in many patent medicines, Upton Sinclair's "The
Jungle" (1906) was a novel that gave a horrid portrayal of how meat was packed,
and David Graham Phillips unleashed a blistering indictment of the U.S. Senate
in 1906. Roosevelt gave these journalists their nickname when he complained
they were not being helpful by raking up all the muck. Modernization. The
progressives were avid modernizers. They believed in science, technology,
expertise—and especially education—as the grand solution to society's
weaknesses. Characteristics of progressivism included a favorable attitude
toward urban-industrial society, belief in mankind's ability to improve the
environment and conditions of life, belief in obligation to intervene in
economic and social affairs, and a belief in the ability of experts and in
efficiency of government intervention. Democracy. Progressives sought to enable
the citizenry to rule more directly and circumvent political bosses. Thanks to
the efforts of Oregon Populist Party State Representative William S. U'Ren and
his Direct Legislation League, voters in Oregon overwhelmingly approved a
ballot measure in 1902 that created the initiative and referendum processes for
citizens to directly introduce or approve proposed laws or amendments to the
state constitution, making Oregon the first state to adopt such a system. U'Ren
also helped in the passage of an amendment in 1908 that gave voters power to
recall elected officials, and would go on to establish, at the state level,
popular election of U.S. Senators and the first presidential primary in the
United States. In 1911, California governor Hiram Johnson established the
Oregon System of "Initiative, Referendum, and Recall" in his state, viewing
them as good influences for citizen participation against the historic
influence of large corporations on state lawmakers. These Progressive reforms
were soon replicated in other states, including Idaho, Washington, and
Wisconsin, and today roughly half of U.S. states have initiative, referendum
and recall provisions in their state constitutions. About 16 states began using
primary elections to reduce the power of bosses and machines. The Seventeenth
Amendment was ratified in 1913, requiring that all senators be elected by the
people (instead of state legislatures). The main motivation was to reduce the
power of political bosses, who controlled the Senate seats by virtue of their
control of state legislatures. The result, according to political scientist
Henry Ford Jones, was that the United States Senate had become a "Diet of party
lords, wielding their power without scruple or restraint, in behalf of those
particular interests" that put them in office. Municipal reform. Many cities
set up municipal reference bureaus to study the budgets and administrative
structures of local governments. Progressive mayors were important in many
cities, such as Cleveland, Ohio (especially Mayor Tom Johnson); Toledo, Ohio;
Jersey City, New Jersey; Los Angeles; Memphis, Tennessee; Louisville, Kentucky;
and many other cities, especially in the western states. In Illinois, Governor
Frank Lowden undertook a major reorganization of state government. In
Wisconsin, the stronghold of Robert LaFollette, the Wisconsin Idea used the
state university as a major source of ideas and expertise. Family and food.
Progressives believed that the family was the foundation stone of American
society, and the government, especially municipal government, must work to
strengthen and enhance the family. Local public assistance programs were
reformed to try and keep families together. Inspired by crusading Judge Ben
Lindsey of Denver, cities established juvenile courts to deal with disruptive
teenagers without sending them to adult prisons. Special emphasis was put on
pure milk and water supplies. At the state and national levels new food and
drug laws strengthened local efforts to guarantee the safety of the food
system. The 1906 federal Pure Food and Drug Act, which was pushed by drug
companies and providers of medical services, removed from the market patent
medicines that had never been scientifically tested. In addition, with the
increase in technology use and creation of standard working hours, families had
more leisure time. Many spent this leisure time at movie theaters. Progressives
advocated for censorship of motion pictures as it was believed that patrons
(especially children) viewing movies in dark, unclean, potentially unsafe
theaters, might be negatively influenced in witnessing actors portraying
crimes, violence, and sexually suggestive situations. Progressives across the
country influenced municipal governments of large urban cities, to build
numerous parks where it was believed that leisure time for children and
families could be spent in a healthy, wholesome environment, thereby fostering
good morals and citizenship. The Sheppard–Towner Act of 1921 provided federal
funding for maternity and child care, especially federally-financed instruction
in maternal and infant health care. It provided 50–50 matching funds to
individual states to build women’s health care clinics. Eugenics. Some
progressives, especially among economists, sponsored eugenics as a collectivist
solution to excessively large or underperforming families, hoping that birth
control would enable parents to focus their resources on fewer, better
children. However, there were no major national, state or local programs that
practiced or endorsed eugenics. Progressive leaders like Herbert Croly and
Walter Lippmann indicated their classically liberal concern over the danger
posed to the individual by collectivism and statism. The Catholics, although
favoring collectivism, strongly opposed birth control proposals such as
eugenics . Constitutional change. The Progressives tried to permanently fix
their reforms into law by constitutional amendments, included Prohibition with
the 18th Amendment and women's suffrage by the 19th amendment, both in 1920 as
well as the federal income tax with the 16th amendment and direct election of
senators with the 17th amendment. After Progressivism collapsed, the 18th
amendment was repealed (in 1933). Prohibition. Prohibition was the outlawing of
the manufacture, sale and transport of alcohol. Drinking itself was never
prohibited. Throughout the Progressive Era, it remained one of the main causes
at the local, state and national level. It achieved national success with the
passage of the 18th Amendment by Congress in late 1917, and the ratification by
three-fourths of the states in 1919. Prohibition was essentially a religious
movement backed by the Methodists, Baptists, Congregationalists, Scandinavian
Lutherans and other evangelical churches. Activists were mobilized by the
highly effective Anti-Saloon League. Timberlake (1963) argues the dries sought
to break the liquor trust, weaken the saloon base of big-city machines, enhance
industrial efficiency, and reduce the level of wife beating, child abuse, and
poverty caused by alcoholism. Agitation for prohibition began during the Second
Great Awakening in the 1840s when Crusades against drinking originated from
evangelical Protestants. Evangelicals precipitated the second wave of
prohibition legislation during the 1880s, which had as its aim local and state
prohibition. During the 1880s, referendums were held at the state level to
enact prohibition amendments. Two important groups were formed during this
period. The Women’s Christian Temperance Union (WCTU) was formed in 1874. The
Anti-Saloon League was formed in 1893, uniting activists from different
religious groups. The third wave of prohibition legislation, of which national
prohibition was the grand climax, began in 1907, when Georgia passed a state-
wide prohibition law. By 1917, two thirds of the states had some form of
prohibition laws and roughly three quarters of the population lived in dry
areas. In 1913, the Anti-Saloon League first publicly appealed for a
prohibition amendment. They preferred a constitutional amendment over a federal
statute because although harder to achieve, they felt it would be harder to
change. In 1913, Congress passed the Webb-Kenyon Act forbade the transport of
liquor into dry states. As the United States entered World War I, the
Conscription Act banned the sale of liquor near military bases. In August 1917,
the Lever Food and Fuel Control Act banned production of distilled spirits for
the duration of the war. The War Prohibition Act, November, 1918, forbade the
manufacture and sale of intoxicating beverages (more than 2.75% alcohol
content) until the end of demobilization. The drys worked energetically to
secure two-third majority of both houses of Congress and the support of three
quarters of the states needed for an amendment to the federal constitution.
Thirty-six states were needed, and organizations were set up at all 48 states
to seek ratification. In late 1917, Congress passed the Eighteenth Amendment;
it was ratified in 1919 and took effect in January 1920. It prohibited the
manufacturing, sale or transport of intoxicating beverages within the United
States, as well as import and export. The Volstead Act, 1919, defined
intoxicating as having alcohol content greater than 0.5% and established the
procedures for enforcement of the Act. Consumer demand, however, led to a
variety of illegal sources for alcohol, especially illegal distilleries and
smuggling from Canada and other countries. It is difficult to determine the
level of compliance, and although the media at the time portrayed the law as
highly ineffective, even if it did not eradicate the use of alcohol, it
certainly decreased alcohol consumption during the period. The Eighteenth
Amendment was repealed in 1930, with the passage of the Twenty-First Amendment,
thanks to a well organized repeal campaign led by Catholics (who stressed
personal liberty) and businessmen (who stressed the lost tax revenue).
Education. The Progressives worked hard to reform and modernize the schools at
the local level. The era was notable for a dramatic expansion in the number of
schools and students served, especially in the fast-growing metropolitan
cities. After 1910 that smaller cities began building high schools. By 1940,
50% of young adults had earned a high school diploma. The result was the rapid
growth of the educated middle class, who typically were the grass roots
supporters of progressive measures. During the Progressive Era, many states
began passing compulsory schooling laws. An emphasis on hygiene and health was
made in education, with physical and health education becoming more important
and widespread. Medicine and law. The "Flexner Report" of 1910, sponsored by
the Carnegie Foundation, professionalized American medicine by discarding the
scores of local small medical schools and focusing national funds, resources,
and prestige on larger, professionalized medical schools associated with
universities. Prominent leaders included the Mayo Brothers whose Mayo Clinic in
Rochester, Minnesota, became world famous for innovative surgery. In the legal
profession, the American Bar Association set up in 1900 the Association of
American Law Schools (AALS). It established national standards for law schools,
which led to the replacement of the old system of young men studying law
privately with established lawyers by the new system of accredited law schools
associated with universities. Social sciences. Progressive scholars, based at
the emerging research universities such as Harvard, Columbia, Johns Hopkins,
Chicago, Michigan, Wisconsin and California, worked to modernize their
disciplines. The heyday of the amateur expert gave way to the research
professor who published in the new scholarly journals and presses. Their
explicit goal was to professionalize and make "scientific" the social sciences,
especially as history, economics, and political science. Professionalization
meant creating new career tracks in the universities, with hiring and promotion
dependent on meeting international models of scholarship. Economic policy. The
Progressive Era was one of general prosperity after the Panic of 1893—a
severe depression—ended in 1897. The Panic of 1907 was short and mostly
affected financiers. However, Campbell (2005) stresses the weak points of the
economy in 1907–1914, linking them to public demands for more Progressive
interventions. The Panic of 1907 was followed by a small decline in real wages
and increased unemployment, with both trends continuing until World War I.
Campbell emphasizes the resulting stress on public finance and the impact on
the Wilson administration's policies. The weakened economy and persistent
federal deficits led to changes in fiscal policy, including the imposition of
federal income taxes on businesses and individuals and the creation of the
Federal Reserve System. Government agencies were also transformed in an effort
to improve administrative efficiency. In the Gilded Age (late 19th century) the
parties were reluctant to involve the federal government too heavily in the
private sector, except in the area of railroads and tariffs. In general, they
accepted the concept of laissez-faire, a doctrine opposing government
interference in the economy except to maintain law and order. This attitude
started to change during the depression of the 1890s when small business, farm,
and labor movements began asking the government to intercede on their behalf.
By the start of the 20th century, a middle class had developed that was leery
of both the business elite and the radical political movements of farmers and
laborers in the Midwest and West. The progressives argued the need for
government regulation of business practices to ensure competition and free
enterprise. Congress enacted a law regulating railroads in 1887 (the Interstate
Commerce Act), and one preventing large firms from controlling a single
industry in 1890 (the Sherman Antitrust Act). These laws were not rigorously
enforced, however, until the years between 1900 and 1920, when Republican
President Theodore Roosevelt (1901–1909), Democratic President Woodrow Wilson
(1913–1921), and others sympathetic to the views of the Progressives came to
power. Many of today's U.S. regulatory agencies were created during these
years, including the Interstate Commerce Commission and the Federal Trade
Commission. Muckrakers were journalists who encouraged readers to demand more
regulation of business. Upton Sinclair's "The Jungle" (1906) was influential
and persuaded America about the supposed horrors of the Chicago Union Stock
Yards (though Sinclair himself never visited the site), a giant complex of meat
processing that developed in the 1870s. The federal government responded to
Sinclair's book and The Neill-Reynolds Report with the new regulatory Food and
Drug Administration. Ida M. Tarbell wrote a series of articles against Standard
Oil, which was perceived to be a monopoly. This affected both the government
and the public reformers. Attacks by Tarbell and others helped pave the way for
public acceptance of the breakup of the company by the Supreme Court in 1911.
When Democrat Woodrow Wilson was elected President with a Democratic Congress
in 1912 he implemented a series of progressive policies in economics. In 1913,
the Sixteenth Amendment was ratified, and a small income tax was imposed on
high incomes. The Democrats lowered tariffs with the Underwood Tariff in 1913,
though its effects were overwhelmed by the changes in trade cause by the World
War that broke out in 1914. Wilson proved especially effective in mobilizing
public opinion behind tariff changes by denouncing corporate lobbyists,
addressing Congress in person in highly dramatic fashion, and staging an
elaborate ceremony when he signed the bill into law. Wilson helped end the long
battles over the trusts with the Clayton Antitrust Act of 1914. He managed to
convince lawmakers on the issues of money and banking by the creation in 1913
of the Federal Reserve System, a complex business-government partnership that
to this day dominates the financial world. In 1913, Henry Ford, adopted the
moving assembly line, with each worker doing one simple task in the production
of automobiles. Taking his cue from developments during the progressive era ,
Ford offered a very generous wage—$5 a day—to his (male) workers, arguing
that a mass production enterprise could not survive if average workers could
not buy the goods. Labor unions. Labor unions, especially the American
Federation of Labor (AFL) grew rapidly in the early 20th century, and had a
progressive agenda as well. After experimenting in the early 20th century with
cooperation with business in the National Civic Federation, it turned after
1906 to a working political alliance with the Democratic party. The alliance
was especially important in the larger industrial cities. The unions wanted
restrictions on judges who intervened in labor disputes, usually on the side of
the employer. They finally achieve that goal with the Norris-LaGuardia Act of
1932. Immigration. The level of immigration grew steadily after 1896, with most
new arrivals unskilled workers from eastern and southern Europe, who found jobs
working in the steel mills, slaughterhouses and construction crews in the mill
towns and industrial cities. The start of World War I in 1914 suddenly stopped
most international movement, which only resumed after 1919. Starting in the
1880s, the labor unions aggressively promoted restrictions on immigration,
especially restrictions on Chinese and other Asians. The basic fear was that
large numbers of unskilled, low-paid workers would defeat the union's efforts
to raise wages through collective bargaining. Other groups, such as the
prohibitionists, opposed immigration because it was the base of strength of the
saloon power, and the West generally. Rural Protestants distrusted the urban
Catholics and Jews who comprised most of the immigrants after 1890. On the
other hand, the rapid growth of the industry called for large numbers of new
workers, so large corporations generally opposed immigration restriction. By
the early 1920s the consensus had been reached and that the total influx of
immigration had to be restricted, and a series of laws in the 1920s accomplish
that purpose. A handful of eugenics advocates were also involved in immigration
restriction. Immigration restriction continued to be a national policy until
after World War II. During World War I, the progressives strongly promoted
Americanization programs, designed to modernize the recent immigrants and turn
them into model American citizens, with diminishing loyalties to the old
country. These programs often operated through the public school system, which
expanded dramatically. Decline. In the 1940s typically historians saw the
Progressive Era as a prelude to the New Deal and dated it from 1901 (when
Roosevelt became president) to the start of World War I in 1914 or 1917.
Historians have moved back in time emphasizing the progressive reformers at the
municipal and state levels in the 1890s. End of the era? Much less settled is
the question of when the era ended. Historians on the left who emphasize civil
liberties decry their suppression during World War I and do not consider the
war progressive. Most historians, however, see the "war to end all wars" as a
globalized expression of the American movement, with Wilson's fight for the
League of Nations as the climax. The politics of the 1920s was unfriendly
toward the labor unions and liberal crusaders against business, so many if not
most historians who emphasize those themes write off the decade. Urban
cosmopolitan scholars recoiled at the moralism of prohibition and the
intolerance of the nativists of the KKK, and denounced the era. Richard
Hofstadter, for example, in 1955 wrote that prohibition, "was a pseudo-reform,
a pinched, parochial substitute for reform" that "was carried about America by
the rural-evangelical virus". However as Arthur S. Link emphasized, the
progressives did not simply roll over and play dead. Link's argument for
continuity through the twenties stimulated a historiography that found
Progressivism to be a potent force. Palmer, pointing to leaders like George
Norris, says, "It is worth noting that progressivism, whilst temporarily losing
the political initiative, remained popular in many western states and made its
presence felt in Washington during both the Harding and Coolidge presidencies."
Gerster and Cords argue that, "Since progressivism was a 'spirit' or an
'enthusiasm' rather than an easily definable force with common goals, it seems
more accurate to argue that it produced a climate for reform which lasted well
into the 1920s, if not beyond." Even the Klan has been seen in a new light, as
numerous social historians reported that Klansmen were "ordinary white
Protestants" primarily interested in purification of the system, which had long
been a core progressive goal. While some progressive leaders became
reactionaries, that usually happened in the 1930s, not in the 1920s, as shown
by William Randolph Hearst, Herbert Hoover, Al Smith and Henry Ford. Business
Progressivism in 1920s. What historians have identified as "business
progressivism", with its emphasis on efficiency and typified by Henry Ford and
Herbert Hoover reached an apogee in the 1920s. Wik, for example, argues that
Ford's "views on technology and the mechanization of rural America were
generally enlightened, progressive, and often far ahead of his times." Tindall
stresses the continuing importance of the Progressive movement in the South in
the 1920s involving increased democracy, efficient government, corporate
regulation, social justice, and governmental public service. William Link finds
political progressivism dominant in most of the South in the 1920s. Likewise it
was influential in Midwest. Historians of women and of youth emphasize the
strength of the progressive impulse in the 1920s. Women consolidated their
gains after the success of the suffrage movement, and moved into causes such as
world peace, good government, maternal care (the Sheppard–Towner Act of
1921), and local support for education and public health. The work was not
nearly as dramatic as the suffrage crusade, but women voted and operated
quietly and effectively. Paul Fass, speaking of youth, says "Progressivism as
an angle of vision, as an optimistic approach to social problems, was very much
alive." The international influences which had sparked a great many reform
ideas likewise continued into the 1920s, as American ideas of modernity began
to influence Europe. There is general agreement that that the era was over by
1932, especially since a majority of the remaining progressives opposed the New
Deal.
