Progress for America Progress for America (PFA) (a 501(c)(4)) and its affiliate
Progress for America Voter Fund (PFA-VF) (a 527 committee) are national tax-
exempt organizations in the United States. PFA was established in 2001 to
support George W. Bush's "agenda for America". The PFA Voter Fund, which was
set up in 2004, raised US$38 million in support of Bush's 2004 election bid.
History. PFA was registered as a 501(c)(4) group in February 2001 by Tony
Feather, a political director of the Bush-Cheney 2000 campaign and partner at
DCI Group as well as at the affiliated telemarketing and fundraising firm of
Feather Larson Synhorst-DCI (FLS-DCI). Feather set up PFA as a “grassroots
organization that mobilizes the public to contact their members of Congress
about pending legislation and to write local newspapers to publicize the White
House’s agenda,” the Center for Public Integrity wrote in 2002. During the
first part of the Bush Administration, it led campaigns to support tax cuts,
conservative judicial appointments and energy legislation. Feather told the
"Washington Post" in August 2002 that PFA was simply a vehicle for building
grassroots support for Bush Administration policies. However others said it was
intended to accept soft money donations which political parties were barred
from accepting starting in 2002. Feather left PFA in 2003 after receiving a
legal opinion that his involvement with it and the Bush-Cheney campaign could
violate regulations barring coordination between the entities. PFA spin-offs
and projects. Progress for America Voter Fund. On July 21, 2004, complaints
were filed with the Federal Election Commission (FEC) by Democracy 21, the
Campaign Legal Center, and the Center for Responsive Politics. The Complaints
charged that Progress for America Voter Fund (PFA-VF) was illegally raising and
spending soft money to influence the 2004 presidential elections. On February
28, 2007 the Federal Election Commission (FEC) reached a settlement with
Progress for America related to its activities in 2004. In the 2004 election
cycle, the Fund had raised US$45 million. Under the terms of the settlement,
PFA-VF did not admit to any wrongdoing, and agreed to pay US$750,000 and to
register as a political committee if it undertakes any activities similar to
those in 2004. The FEC stated: "Over US$41 million of those funds consisted of
excessive contributions from individuals, while over US$2 million came from
sources prohibited from making contributions . . . ." Ashley and friends. In
the last three weeks leading up to the November 2, 2004, election, Progress for
America Voter Fund (PFA-VF) outspent the next largest spending Democratic 527
group three-to-one on political ads. It bought US$16.8 million worth of
television and radio ad time. According to Federal Election Commission data,
Swift Boat Veterans for Truth came in second with US$6.3 million in ad
spending. In third place was Democrat Harold Ickes’ Media Fund, which spent
US$5 million. PFA produced two “harshly anti-Kerry ads that have become the
subjects of controversy and debate, especially in the battleground states of
Wisconsin and Iowa where they are running frequently,” the "Washington
Post"’s Thomas Edsall wrote. PFA-VF spent US$14.2 million on ad time for
"Ashley’s Story", which ran on cable stations and in nine key states.
According to USA Today, the ad was supported by ashleysstory.com, as well as
“e-mails, automated phone calls and 2.3 million brochures” mailed to
voters. "Ashley's Story" made "Advertising Age" columnist Bob Garfield's list
of top 10 "Ads I Loved" for 2004. Garfield writes, "We said, 'It might come
down to one commercial,' and it may well have. A retelling of candidate Bush's
encounter with an Ohio Teenager answered undecideds' doubts. The president
wasn't a dry-well-drilling gambler, moron and fool... he's a fearless leader
who will hug us." The push for privatized Social Security. After winning re-
election in 2004, Bush emphasized changes in Social Security as a major
domestic goal of his second term. He called for partial privatization of the
system. PFA "has estimated it will spend US$20 million promoting private
accounts. It has run a series of ads on cable television, including a spot that
invokes the legacy of Democratic President Franklin Roosevelt, who signed the
legislation creating the retirement system", the "Houston Chronicle" reported
in February 2005. The "Chronicle" raised the question whether investment firms,
"which are trying to keep a low profile in the current debate, will quietly
contribute to a number of groups promoting Social Security overhaul because
private accounts will increase their business". PFA's McCabe denies "his group
would serve as a front for investment firms". But PFA "will be soliciting from
donors who have helped the organization in the past". The head of the prominent
investment firm Charles Schwab contributed US$50,000 to the group's political
arm in 2004. Schwab also gave US$75,000 to the Club for Growth, which is also
lobbying for Social Security privatization. The advantage of arrangements
between corporate donors and groups like PFA, however, is acknowledge. Thomas
Edsall wrote in the "Washington Post", "For corporations wary of publicity over
their involvement in Social Security privatization, tort reform and other
controversial issues, the US Chamber of Commerce's Institute for Legal Reform,
the Club for Growth and Progress for America pointedly offer donors the promise
of anonymity." In late February 2005, the "Houston Chronicle" reported that
Texas A&M University economics professor Thomas R. Saving had joined up with
Progress for America as an advisor and spokesman. Saving, however, is serving
as one of seven trustees for the Social Security Administration, raising
questions about potential conflicts of interest between his advocacy work at
PFA and his role as a Social Security "trustee". Saving is also a fellow at the
National Center for Policy Analysis. According to the "Chronicle", former US
Treasurer Rosario Marin joined PFA as an advisor as well. "I'm interested in
the issues and I'm working on them and I'll continue to work on them", Saving
told the "Chronicle". "I already do an awful lot of speeches about Social
Security and Medicare." Federal judicial battles. In May 2005, PFA began
running ads targeted at pressuring Republicans Senators into supporting a ban
on Senate filibusters for judicial nominations. "Associated Press" reported
that PFA would spend US$350,000 on "radio ads on Christian stations" and US$1.5
million on television ads to be run in Alaska, Arkansas, Maine, North Dakota,
Nebraska and Rhode Island as well as nationally. In June 2005, "The Hill"
reported that PFA intended to "spend at least US$18 million on the expected
fight to replace William Rehnquist, chief justice of the US Supreme Court".
PFA's campaign would include "national cable-news and broadcast-television ads
in targeted states. The group will also coordinate grassroots organizers and
public-relations specialists in eighteen states, including states represented
by centrist Republican senators such as Arizona, Maine and Oregon" "The Hill"
wrote. The groups will also use phone-bank and direct-mail in its campaign.
"Before Senate confirmation of Owen and Brown, PFA claims to have helped
generate nearly 80,000 telephone calls supporting their nominations", "The
Hill" reported. PFA will work closely with the Judicial Confirmation Network
and the Committee for Justice on the campaign. On June 22, 2005, PFA issued a
press release announcing a US$700,000 campaign in anticipation of a Supreme
Court Justice vacancy during the Court's summer break. The campaign included
buys on big newspapers' internet websites, and a roll-out of a new website:
upordownvote.com. Iraq War advertising campaign. Starting in 2006, Progress for
America began an ad campaign in support of the Iraq War, with a US$1 million ad
campaign in Minnesota. Progress for America spokesman Stuart Roy said the group
purchased "a saturation buy" in Minnesota and said that bolstering support for
the war now "will be a major focus, if not the major focus of Progress for
America". These ads often feature war veterans speaking in support for the war
and for then President Bush. Contact. Progress for America http://
www.progressforamerica.org/pfa/
