Progressivism Progressivism is a general political philosophy advocating or
favoring social, political, and economic reform. Progressivism emerged as part
of a more general response to the vast social changes brought by
industrialization. History. The Progressive Movement began in the late 19th and
early 20th centuries in cities with settlement workers and reformers who were
interested in helping those facing harsh conditions at home and at work. The
reformers spoke out about the need for laws regulating tenement housing and
child labor. They also called for better working conditions for women.
Political parties such as the Progressive Party were organized at the start of
the 20th century, and progressivism was embraced in the administrations of
American presidents Theodore Roosevelt, Woodrow Wilson, Franklin Delano
Roosevelt and Lyndon Baines Johnson. Moreover, in Europe and Canada, the term
"progressive" has occasionally been used by groups not particularly left-wing.
The Progressive Democrats in the Republic of Ireland took the name
"progressivism" despite being considered centre-right or classical liberal. The
European Progressive Democrats was a mainly heterogeneous political group in
the European Union. In contemporary times, the term "progressivism" is used to
describe a wide range of views associated with left-wing political movements.
By country. Australia. In the past few years, the term "progressive" has been
used in Australia to refer to what used to be called "The Third Way." The term
is popular in Australia, and it is often used in place of "social liberal." The
term "liberalism" has become associated with free markets and small government;
in other words "classical liberalism." Progressivism is used to differentiate
between the two-party political system of the classical-economic liberal
Liberal Party and the protectionist-working class Labor Party. The Australian
Greens represent the third largest political party in the country, polling
around 12% with 9 senators and one newly elected member of the Australian House
of Representatives (elected in the 2010 Australian federal election). The party
espouses progressive ideologies, together with grassroots democracy and
participatory democracy. Canada. Western Canada began to receive an influx of
political ideas at the end of the 19th century. The Progressive Party of Canada
was founded in 1920 by Thomas Crerar, a former Minister of Agriculture in the
Unionist government of Robert Borden. Crerar quit the Borden cabinet in 1919
because Minister of Finance Thomas White introduced a budget that did not pay
sufficient attention to farmers' issues. Crerar became the first leader of the
Progressive Party, and he led it to win 65 seats in the 1921 general election,
placing second (ahead of the well-established Conservative Party). The
Progressives also had a close alignment with the provincial United Farmers
parties in several provinces. However, the Progressives were not able to hold
their caucus together well, and progressive-leaning MPs and voters soon
deserted the Progressives for the Liberals and the Co-operative Commonwealth
Federation (later the New Democratic Party). Dating back to 1854, Canada's
oldest political party was the Conservative Party. Following that party's
disastrous showing in the 1935 election during the depths of the Great
Depression, the party was leaderless and lacked new ideas. The party drafted
Manitoba Premier John Bracken, a long-time leader of that province's
progressive "United Farmers" party, who agreed to become leader of the
Conservatives on condition that the party add "Progressive" to its name. The
party adopted the name "Progressive Conservative", which it kept until its
dissolution in 2003. Despite the name change, most former Progressives
continued to support other parties. During the debate over the merger of the
Progressive Conservatives and the Alliance (2003), the meaning of the word
caused contention again. Since the Tories have stopped using the word
"progressive" in their name federally, it has been used as a synonym for
"centrist and centre left". This has been apparent in the debate on a possible
merger between the NDP and the Liberals, or in discussions of stragetic voting
amoug leftist voters. At the provincial level in Alberta, the "progressive"
element of the PCs was used in advertisements by Allison Redford's leadership
to attacked the allegedly "regressive" nature of the Wildrose Party in the 2012
election. Liberal leader Raj Sherman challenged the PC's right to use the
label. India. In India, there are a large number of state and national
political parties. The National Democratic Alliance (NDA) and the United
Progressive Alliance (UPA) are the two political alliances in India, previously
composed of leftist political parties that lean toward socialism and/or
communism, but since economic reforms took place in 1991 both national parties
have established themselves as right wing reformists which lean toward more
capitalism. Thus, the definition of "progressivism" may be interpreted
differently in India, as communism was not a branch of thought that played any
major role in the original western progressive movement. Furthermore, on a
social level, the leftist parties in India do not espouse policies that would
be considered progressive in the West, though policies in regards to the caste
system, worker's rights, and women's rights are far more progressive than the
non-progressive Indian parties. The Bharatiya Janata Party and the Indian
National Congress are currently the chief members of the NDA and UPA coalitions
respectively. New Zealand. The New Zealand Progressive Party, led by Jim
Anderton, states a particular focus on the creation of jobs, full employment,
the environment, free education, free healthcare and raising the legal age of
alcohol consumption to 20. The party was a junior member of the governing
coalition in New Zealand from 2005 to 2008 during the second and third term of
the fifth Labour Government of New Zealand. The coalition continues in
opposition after the 2008 election. The Progressive Green Party was formed in
1995 as an economically right-wing "blue-green" environmentalist party. After a
poor showing in the 1996 election, the Party did not contest any further
elections. It is now disbanded. Ukraine. The Progressive Socialist Party of
Ukraine ("Prohresivna Sotsjalistychna Partiya Ukrayiny/Progressivnaya
Sotsialističeskaja Partiya Ukrajiny", Прогресивна
соціалістична партія України) is a political party in
Ukraine, created by Nataliya Vitrenko, a flamboyant former member of the
Socialist Party of Ukraine in 1995. The Progressive Socialist Party of Ukraine
is a radical left-wing populist party that supports integration with Russia and
Belarus as an alternative to the European Union. PSPU traditionally campaigns
on an anti-NATO, anti-IMF and pro-Russian platform. During the 1998
parliamentary elections the party got 4% of the vote, and its candidate for the
1999 presidential elections, Nataliya Vitrenko, came in fourth. She received
10.97% of the vote in the first round. In the legislative 2002 parliamentary
election, the party established the Nataliya Vitrenko Bloc alliance, including
the "Partija Osvitjan Ukrajiny". It received 3.22% of the votes, below the 4%
threshold needed to enter the Verkhovna Rada. PSPU was a vocal opponent of
President Leonid Kuchma but supported Viktor Yanukovych, Ukrainian prime
minister since 2002, during the 2004 presidential elections. After the Orange
Revolution of 2004, the party joined the opposition to the new president Viktor
Yushchenko in a coalition with the "Derzhava" (State) party led by former
Ukrainian prosecutor Gennady Vasilyev. In the 2006 parliamentary elections, the
party again failed to gain seats in the parliament, participating as People's
Opposition Bloc of Natalia Vitrenko. At the 2007 parliamentary elections the
party failed once more to enter the parliament. United States. In the United
States there have been several periods where progressive political parties have
developed. The first of these was around the turn of the 19th to 20th century.
This period notably included the emergence of the Progressive Party, founded in
1912 by President Theodore Roosevelt. This progressive party was the most
successful third party in modern American history. The Progressive Party
founded in 1924 and the Progressive Party founded in 1948 were less successful
than the 1912 version. There are also two notable state progressive parties:
the Wisconsin Progressive Party and the Vermont Progressive Party. The latter
is still in operation and currently has several high-ranking positions in state
government. Today, members of the Green Party of the United States are most
likely to self-identify as liberal progressives. In the U.S. Congress, the
Congressional Progressive Caucus is the most liberal wing of the Democratic
Party, and it is often in opposition to the more centrist or conservative
Democrats who form the Blue Dogs caucus. It is also in near-continuous
opposition to the Republican Party. United Kingdom. In the UK there are several
parties who claim to be progressive, including the Labour Party, the Liberal
Democrats, the Scottish National Party, Plaid Cymru and the Green Party of
England and Wales. The current coalition between the Conservatives and the
Liberal Democrats also claims to be progressive. Scotland. The Progressive
Party was the name of a defunct municipal political organisation that operated
in Scottish local government in the 20th century based around the Unionist
Party, Scottish Liberals and Independents. The Scottish Progressives, a party
with the same registered name as the defunct party, was also established in
2007. National political parties were rarely active in local politics, but the
rise of the Labour Party led to a process of party politicisation of local
government. At first Labour were opposed by the Progressives before other
national political parties entered local government elections on a significant
scale. The Progressives formed as a loose alliance of unofficial Liberals,
Unionists and independents. Apart from a distinct focus on their urban
localities, the essence of the Progressive groupings was opposition to Labour
policies and control, plus a desire to avoid splitting the anti-Labour vote.
Progressive groupings formed in Edinburgh in 1928 and Glasgow in 1936 before
spreading to other cities and towns. Their members were mainly drawn from small
businessmen opposed to the introduction of what they saw as municipal socialism
and Labour control. They dominated Scottish local politics for almost 50 years
and as late as 1972 Edinburgh council was made up of 21 Progressives, 9
Conservatives, 33 Labour and 5 Liberals. Relation to other political
ideologies. Liberalism. The term "progressive" is today often used in place of
"liberal." Although the two are related in some ways, they are separate and
distinct political ideologies and should not be used interchangeably. In the US
in particular, the term progressive tends to have the same value as the
European term social democrat; which is scarcely used in American political
language. The reason for this confusion in the US might partly be rooted in the
political spectrum being two-dimensional; social liberalism is a tenet of
modern progressivism, whereas economic liberalism (and its associated
deregulation) is not. According to John Halpin, senior advisor on the staff of
the center-left Center for American Progress, "Progressivism is an orientation
towards politics. It's not a long-standing ideology like liberalism, but an
historically-grounded concept... that accepts the world as dynamic." Cultural
Liberalism is ultimately founded on the belief that the major purpose of the
government is to protect rights. Liberals are often called "left-wing", in
contrast to "right-wing" conservatives. The progressive school, as a unique
branch of contemporary political thought, tends to advocate certain center-left
or left-wing views that may conflict with mainstream liberal views, despite the
fact that modern liberalism and progressivism may still both support many of
the same policies (such as the concept of war as a general last resort).
American progressives tend to advocate progressive taxation and oppose the
growing influence of corporations. Progressives are in agreement on an
international scale with left-liberalism in that they support organized labor
and trade unions, they usually wish to introduce a living wage, and they often
support the creation of a universal health care system. In the United States,
liberals and progressives are often conflated, and in general are the primary
voters of the Democratic Party which has a "large tent" policy, combining
similar if not congruent ideologies into large voting blocs. Many progressives
also support the Green Party or local parties such as the Vermont Progressive
Party. In Canada, liberals usually support the national Liberal Party while
progressives usually support the New Democratic Party, which traditionally has
had provincial electorial success in Manitoba, Saskatchewan, British Columbia,
and since the recent federal election, in Quebec.
