Project Camelot Project Camelot was a social science research project of the
United States Army that started in 1964 and was cancelled after congressional
hearings in 1965. The goal of the project was to assess the causes of conflict
between national groups, to anticipate social breakdown and provide eventual
solutions. The proposal caused much controversy among social scientists, many
of whom voiced concerns that such a study was in conflict with their
professional ethics. Chile was to be the test case for the project, but Claudio
Bunster was alerted almost immediately to its possible military nature when
Johan Galtung showed him a letter from the Special Operations Research Office
(SORO) inviting him to a seminar to discuss the project in 1966 at the American
University in Washington DC. The seminar was actually held in the summer of
1965 but by then the initial exploratory mission to study the feasibility of
running such a project was being phased out and the project itself was
officially cancelled on July 8 1965.. History. The origin of the name "Camelot"
came from a book by T.H. White, The Once and Future King, for its premise of a
peaceful and harmonious society. Hugo Nutini, a Chilean-born professor of
Anthropology, was a consultant in the conceptual stages of Project Camelot and
he asked for permission from SORO to approach Chilean social scientists with
the idea of conducting a study in their country. He first approached Claudio
Bunster. Bunster expressed his doubts to colleagues who then confronted Nutini.
When Nutini was unable to deny that the project had US political and military
finance and motivation, a letter to the editor was sent to the Latin American
"Review of Sociology" and the whole affair was exposed in the media. The US
Defense Department came under mounting criticism, with critics claiming that
the project was a violation of professional ethics in the scientific world;
this bad press led to the project's cancellation in 1965. There were also
voices that social science research was an appropriate way to avoid cultural
conflict. The latter was not a unique idea, as the US had commissioned the
anthropologist Ruth Benedict to write a widely distributed book on Japanese
society and beliefs after the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor. Organization.
The concept of Project Camelot was first formulated by the Office of the Chief
of Research and Development and presented to the Office of the Director of
Defense Research and Engineering who thereafter passed it on to the Army
Research and Development Office who turned to the Special Operations and
Research Office(Soro) at the American University of Washington DC. There was no
organization as such as the project never got off the ground.
