Project Cybersyn Project Cybersyn was a Chilean attempt in the years
1971–1973 (during the government of President Salvador Allende) to construct
a top-down command and control decision support system to aid in the management
of the national economy. It was to consist of a network of telex machines
("Cybernet") in state-run enterprises and government offices that would
transmit information to a government-run mainframe computer in Santiago.
Information from the field would be fed into statistical modeling software
("Cyberstride") that would monitor production parameters (such as raw material
supplies or high rates of worker absenteeism) in real time, and alert
government managers if those parameters fell outside acceptable ranges. The
information would also be input into economic simulation software ("CHECO", for
CHilean ECOnomic simulator) that the government could use to forecast the
possible outcome of economic decisions. Finally, a sophisticated operations
room ("Opsroom") would provide a space where managers could see relevant
economic data, formulate responses to emergencies, and transmit advice and
directives to enterprises and factories using the telex network. The principal
architect of the system was British operations research scientist Stafford
Beer, and the system embodied his notions of cybernetics in industrial
management. Name. The project's name in English, Cybersyn, is a portmanteau of
the words "cybernetics" and "synergy". Since the name is not euphonic in
Spanish, in that language the project was called "Synco", both an initialism
for the Spanish "SYstema de iNformación y COntrol", "system of information and
control", and a pun on the Spanish "cinco", the number five, alluding to the
five levels of Beer's Viable System Model. History. In July 1971, Stafford Beer
was contacted by Fernando Flores, then a high-level employee of the Chilean
Production Development Corporation (CORFO), for advice on incorporating Beer's
theories of cybernetics into the management of the newly nationalized sector of
Chile's economy. Beer saw this as a unique opportunity to implement his ideas
of cybernetic management on a national scale, and also sympathized with the
stated ideals of Chilean socialism, which aimed to maintain Chile's democratic
system and the autonomy of workers instead of imposing a Soviet-style system of
top-down command and control. More than just offering advice, Beer stepped
aside from most of his other consulting business and devoted a great deal of
time to what became Project Cybersyn, traveling to Chile frequently to
collaborate with local implementors and using his personal contacts to secure
assistance from British technical experts. The implementation schedule was very
aggressive, and the system had reached an advanced prototype stage at the start
of 1973. The system was most useful in October 1972, when about 50,000 striking
truck drivers blocked the access streets that converged towards Santiago.
According to Gustavo Silva (executive secretary of energy in CORFO), using the
system's telex machines, the government was able to guarantee the transport of
food into the city with only about 200 trucks driven by strike-breakers,
recouping the shortages caused by 40,000 striking truck drivers. After the
military coup on September 11, 1973, Cybersyn was abandoned and the operations
room was destroyed. The system. There were 500 unused telex machines bought by
the previous government, each was put into one factory. In the control centre
in Santiago, each day data coming from each factory (several numbers, such as
raw material input, production output and number of absentees) were put into a
computer, which made short-term predictions and necessary adjustments. There
were four levels of control (firm, branch, sector, total), with algedonic
feedback (if lower level of control didn't remedy a problem in a certain
interval, the higher level was notified). The results were discussed in the
operations room and the top-level plan was made. The software for Cybersyn was
called "Cyberstride", and it used Bayesian filtering and Bayesian control. It
was written by Chilean engineers in consultation with a team of 12 British
programmers. The futuristic operations room was designed by a team led by the
interface designer Gui Bonsiepe. It was furnished with seven swivel chairs
(considered the best for creativity) with buttons, which were designed to
control several large screens that could project the data, and other panels
with status information, although these were never functional and could only
show pre-prepared graphs. The project is described in some detail in the second
edition of Beer's book "Brain of the Firm", as well as in "Platform for Change"
which includes proposals for such social innovations as bringing
representatives of diverse 'stakeholder' groups into the control centre. The
aesthetics. The Ops room used Tulip chairs similar to those used in the
American science fiction TV programme "Star Trek", though according to the
designers, the style was not influenced by sci-fi movies. References in popular
culture. Chilean science fiction author Jorge Baradit published a Spanish-
language science fiction novel "Synco" in 2008. It is an alternate history
dystopia set in a 1979 where Allende's government was not overthrown and Chile
became a technocratic totalitarian state in which the Cybersyn system was used
to control all aspects of Chilean life.
