Proletarian internationalism Proletarian internationalism, sometimes referred
to as international socialism, is a Marxist social class concept based on the
view that capitalism is now a global system, and therefore the working class
must act as a global class if it is to defeat it. Workers should struggle in
solidarity with their fellow workers in other countries on the basis of a
common class interest. Proletarian internationalism is closely linked to
Marxist goals of world revolution, to be achieved through successive or
simultaneous communist revolutions in all nations. Marxist theory is that world
revolution would lead to world communism, and later still, stateless communism.
Marxists regard proletarian internationalism as the antonym of bourgeois
nationalism but the term has been subjected to different interpretations by
various currents of Marxist thought. Marx and Engels. Proletarian
internationalism is summed up in the slogan coined by Marx and Engels, "Workers
of all countries, unite!", the last line of The Communist Manifesto, published
in 1848. However, Marx and Engels' approach to the national question was also
shaped by tactical considerations in their pursuit of a long-term revolutionary
strategy. In 1848, the proletariat was a small minority in all but a handful of
countries. Political and economic conditions needed to ripen in order to
advance the possibility of proletarian revolution. Thus, for example, Marx and
Engels supported the emergence of an independent and democratic Poland, which
at the time was divided between Germany, Russia and Austria-Hungary. Rosa
Luxemburg's biographer Peter Nettl writes, "In general, Marx and Engels'
conception of the national-geographical rearrangement of Europe was based on
four criteria: the development of progress, the creation of large-scale
economic units, the weighting of approval and disapproval in accordance with
revolutionary possibilities, and their specific enmity to Russia." Russia was
seen as the heartland of European reaction at the time. The First
International. The trade unionists who formed the International Workingmen's
Association (IWA), sometimes called the First International, recognised that
the working class was an international class which had to link its struggle on
an international scale. By joining together across national borders, the
workers would gain greater bargaining power and political influence. Founded in
1864, the IWA was the first mass movement with a specifically international
focus. At its peak, the IWA had 5 million members, according to police reports
from the various countries in which it had a significant presence. Repression
in Europe and internal divisions between the anarchist and Marxist currents led
eventually to its dissolution in 1876. Shortly thereafter, the Marxist and
revolutionary socialist tendencies continued the internationalist strategy of
the IWA through the successor organisation of the Second International, though
without the inclusion of the anarchist and anarcho-syndicalist movements. The
Second International. "Wars between capitalist states are, as a rule, the
outcome of their competition on the world market, for each state seeks not only
to secure its existing markets, but also to conquer new ones. In this, the
subjugation of foreign peoples and countries plays a prominent role. These wars
result furthermore from the incessant race for armaments by militarism, one of
the chief instruments of bourgeois class rule and of the economic and political
subjugation of the working class. "Wars are favored by the national prejudices
which are systematically cultivated among civilized peoples in the interest of
the ruling classes for the purpose of distracting the proletarian masses from
their own class tasks as well as from their duties of international solidarity.
"Wars, therefore, are part of the very nature of capitalism; they will cease
only when the capitalist system is abolished or when the enormous sacrifices in
men and money required by the advance in military technique and the indignation
called forth by armaments, drive the peoples to abolish this system." The
resolution concluded that: "If a war threatens to break out, it is the duty of
the working classes and their parliamentary representatives in the countries
involved, supported by the coordinating activity of the International Socialist
Bureau, to exert every effort in order to prevent the outbreak of war by the
means they consider most effective, which naturally vary according to the
sharpening of the class struggle and the sharpening of the general political
situation. International Socialist Congress at Stuttgart, August 18–24, 1907
Vorwärts Publishers, Berlin, 1907, pp. 64-66. In fact, Luxemburg and Lenin had
very different interpretations of the national question. Lenin and the
Bolsheviks opposed imperialism and chauvinism by advocating a policy of
national self-determination, including the right of oppressed nations to secede
from Russia. They believed this would help to create the conditions for unity
between the workers in both oppressing and oppressed nations. Specifically,
Lenin claimed “The bourgeois nationalism of any oppressed nation has a
general democratic content that is directed against oppression and it is this
content that we unconditionally support." By contrast, Luxemburg broke with the
mainstream Polish Socialist Party (PPS) in 1893 on the national question.
Luxemburg argued in that the nature of Russia had changed since Marx’s day.
Russia was now fast developing as a major capitalist nation, while the Polish
bourgeoisie now had its interests linked to Russian capitalism. This had opened
the possibility of a class alliance between the Polish and Russian working
class. In the event the leading party of the Second International, the SPD,
voted overwhelmingly in support of Germany's entry into the First World War by
approving war credits on 4 August 1914. Many other member parties of the Second
International followed suit by supporting national governments and the Second
International was dissolved in 1916. Proletarian internationalists
characterized the combination of social democracy and nationalism as social
chauvinism. First World War. The hopes of internationalists such as Lenin, Karl
Liebknecht and Rosa Luxemburg were dashed by the initial enthusiasm for war.
Lenin tried to re-establish socialist unity against the war at the Zimmerwald
conference but the majority of delegates took a pacifist rather than a
revolutionary position. In prison, Luxemburg deepened her analysis with the
Junius Pamphlet of 1915. In this document she specifically rejects the notion
of oppressor and oppressed states: "Imperialism is not the creation of one or
any group of states. It is the product of a particular stage of ripeness in the
world development of capital, an innately international condition, an
indivisible whole, that is recognisable only in all its relations, and from
which no nation can hold aloof at will." Proletarian internationalists now
argued that the alliances of the First World War had proved that socialism and
nationalism were incompatible in the imperialist era, that the concept of
national self-determination had become outdated, and in particular, that
nationalism would prove to be an obstacle to proletarian unity. Anarcho-
syndicalism was a further working class political current that characterised
the war as imperialist on all sides, finding organisational expression in the
Industrial Workers of the World. The internationalist perspective influenced
the revolutionary wave towards the end of the First World War, notably with
Russia's withdrawal from the conflict following the Bolshevik revolution and
the revolt in Germany beginning in the naval ports of Kiel and Wilhelmshaven
that brought the war to an end in November 1918. However, once this
revolutionary wave had receded in the early 1920s, proletarian internationalism
was no longer mainstream in working class politics. The Third International:
Leninism versus Left Communism. Following the First World War the international
socialist movement was irreconcilably split into two hostile factions: on the
one side, the social democrats, who broadly supported their national
governments during the conflict; and on the other side Leninists and their
allies who formed the new Communist Parties that were organised into the Third
International, which was established in March 1919. However, during the Russian
Civil War Lenin and Trotsky more firmly embraced the concept of national self-
determination for tactical reasons. In the Third International the national
question became a major bone of contention between mainstream Leninists and
"left communists". However the latter soon became an isolated minority, either
falling into line or leaving the International. By the time the Second World
War broke out in 1939 only a few prominent communists such as the Italian
Marxist Amadeo Bordiga and the Dutch council communist Anton Pannekoek remained
opponents of Russia's use of the tactics of national self-determination. But in
1943, following the collapse of the Mussolini regime in Italy, Bordigists
regrouped and founded the Internationalist Communist Party (PCInt). The first
edition of the party organ, Prometeo (Prometheus) proclaimed: "Workers! Against
the slogan of a national war which arms Italian workers against English and
German proletarians, oppose the slogan of the communist revolution, which
unites the workers of the world against their common enemy — capitalism." The
PCInt took the view that Luxemburg, not Lenin, had been right on the national
question. Socialist internationalism. Socialist internationalism allegedly
regulated relationship between socialist countries. In reality Soviet Union
controlled smaller countries using the Warsaw Pact and Comecon, invading
Hungary in 1956 and Czechoslovakia in 1968. The Sino-Soviet split in 1950s and
1960s produced two groups of socialist countries. Proletarian internationalism
today. Some political groupings such as the International Communist Party, the
International Communist Current and the International Bureau for the
Revolutionary Party (which includes the PCInt) follow the Luxemburgist and
Bordigist interpretations of proletarian internationalism, as do some
libertarian communists. Leftist opposition to proletarian internationalism. In
contrast, some socialists have pointed out that social realities such as local
loyalties and cultural barriers militate against proletarian internationalism.
For example, George Orwell believed that "in all countries the poor are more
national than the rich." To this, Marxists might counter that while the rich
may have historically had the awareness and education to recognize cross-
national interest of class, the poor of those same nations likely have not had
this advantage, making them more susceptible to what Marxists would describe as
the false ideology of patriotism. Marxists assert that patriotism and
nationalism serve precisely to obscure opposing class interests that would
otherwise pose a threat to the ruling class order. Marxists would also point
out that in times of intense revolutionary struggle (the most evident being the
revolutionary periods of 1848-9, 1917–1923 and 1968) internationalism within
the proletariat can overtake petty nationalisms as intense class struggles
break out in multiple nations at the same time and the workers of those nations
discover that they have more in common with other workers than with their own
bourgeoisie. On the question of imperialism and national determination,
proponents of third worldism argue that workers in "oppressor" nations (such as
the USA or Israel) must first support national liberation movements in
"oppressed" nations (such as Afghanistan or Palestine) before there can be any
basis for proletarian internationalism. For example, Tony Cliff, a leading
figure of the British Socialist Workers Party, denied the possibility of
solidarity between Palestinians and Israelis in the current Middle East
situation, writing "Israel is not a colony suppressed by imperialism, but a
settler’s citadel, a launching pad of imperialism. It is a tragedy that some
of the very people who had been persecuted and massacred in such bestial
fashion should themselves be driven into a chauvinistic, militaristic fervour,
and become the blind tool of imperialism in subjugating the Arab masses."
Trotskyists argue that there must be a permanent revolution in third world
countries, in which a bourgeoisie revolution will inevitably lead to a worker's
revolution with an international scope. We may see this in the Bolshevik
Revolution before the movement was stopped by Stalin, a proponent of Socialism
in One Country. Because of this threat, the bourgeoisie in third world
countries will willingly subjugate themselves to national and capitalist
interests in order to prevent a proletarian uprising. Internationalists would
respond that capitalism has proved itself incapable of resolving the competing
claims of different nationalisms, and that the working class (of all countries)
is oppressed by capitalism, not by other workers. Moreover, the global nature
of capitalism and international finance make "national liberation" an
impossibility. For internationalists, all national liberation movements,
whatever their "progressive" gloss, are therefore obstacles to the communist
goal of world revolution.
