Proletarian revolution A proletarian revolution is a social and/or political
revolution in which the working class attempts to overthrow the bourgeoisie.
Proletarian revolutions are generally advocated by socialists, communists, and
most anarchists. In Marxism, the need for a proletarian revolution is a
cornerstone and the first step towards dismantling the exploitations brought
about by capitalism. Marxists believe that the workers of the world must unite
and free themselves from capitalist oppression to create a world run by and for
the working class. In the Marxist view, proletarian revolutions will inevitably
happen in all capitalist countries; see world revolution. The Leninist branch
of Marxism argues that a proletarian revolution must be led by a vanguard of
'professional revolutionaries' - that is, men and women who are fully dedicated
to the communist cause and who form the nucleus of the communist revolutionary
movement. This vanguard is meant to provide leadership and organization to the
rest of the working class before and during the revolution, so as to prevent
the all-too-common situation in which the government defeats a revolution
thanks to the superior discipline and organization of its police and army.
Other Marxists such as Luxemburgists disagree with the Leninist idea of a
vanguard, and insist that the entire working class - or at least a large part
of it - must be deeply involved and equally committed to the socialist or
communist cause in order for a proletarian revolution to be successful. To this
end, they seek to build mass working class movements with a very large
membership. Finally, there are socialist anarchists and libertarian socialists,
who oppose Marxism but agree with Marxists on the point that a proletarian
revolution is necessary. Their view is that the revolution must be
decentralized, and must not have any central leadership whatsoever (though it
may have various local and temporary leaders), nor must it ultimately establish
a "dictatorship of the proletariat".
