Promoting adversaries Promoting adversaries refers to a self-organizing
tactical relationship between opposing organizations ("which can be countries,
terrorist organizations, businesses, religious institutions, etc. and mixes of
any of these, i.e. terrorist org. vs. country") in which both opposing sides
benefit ("gain/concentrate power or wealth") by attacking each other. The
relationship usually relies on either side never fully defeating the other,
because the whole time their 'conflict' helps both sides ("while each side also
simultaneously takes occasional 'acceptable' losses"). The tactic is mutually
beneficial, even though it occurs between opposing organizations. Promoting
adversaries in military, politics, and economics. Promoting adversaries works
within a tendency where those opposed are increasingly polarized. When the
tactic is used, it has the effect of making those involved in the relationship
even more extreme than they were to begin with. Fundamentalist groups become
more fanatical ... and nations, agencies, militaries & political parties become
more repressive and authoritarian -- as the time they oppose each other
increases in quantity. It is argued by some that the modern day military tactic
of suicide bombing emerged from conditions in which one or more "promoting
adversaries" relationships developed. In George Orwell's book "Nineteen Eighty-
Four", the three remaining super nations left in the world profit from
attacking each other and do so without end. Promoting adversaries in pop
culture and public relations. This tactic is dynamically similar to certain
publicity techniques, and so can be used by individuals and products seeking to
gain/concentrate power or wealth as well. As well as aspects of manufactured
conflict for ratings purposes on many "reality" shows on TV... "Promoting
Adversaries" has also been parodied most recently by Stephen Colbert on his
show, The Colbert Report in which Stephen's brand of Ben & Jerry's ice cream
("AmeriCone Dream") is pitted against Willie Nelson's brand of Ben & Jerry's
ice cream ("Country Peach Cobbler"). Of course, it is obvious to note, that
this public 'conflict' generates advertising for both products, which are owned
by the same company. "Promoting adversaries" is a similar concept to the term
frenemy.
