Prometheus Radio Project The Prometheus Radio Project is a non-profit advocacy
and community organizing group committed to building an inclusive and
representative media landscape in the United States and around the world. They
are working to create a network of low power community radio stations. The
communities organizing around these stations have grown into a powerful force
working toward a more democratic media future. Founded in 1998 by a small group
of radio activists in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, Prometheus has been active in
building the low power community radio movement and organizing against media
consolidation. Prometheus Radio Project v. FCC. In 2003 the Federal
Communications Commission, under Chairman Michael Powell, sought to
significantly relax media outlet ownership regulations. In Prometheus Radio
Project v. FCC, a number of broadcasters and citizens groups, including the
Consumer Federation of America, the National Council of Churches of Christ, and
Media Alliance, sued to prevent the FCC from following through on the decision.
Prometheus was represented by Andrew Jay Schwartzman and Cheryl Leanza of the
Media Access Project. On September 3, 2003, the U.S. Third Circuit Court of
Appeals issued a stay which prevented the new rules from being enforced pending
the outcome of the litigation. In 2004, the majority ruled 2-1 in favor of
Prometheus and mandated the FCC re-examine its media ownership rules. They
ruled that a "diversity index" used by the FCC to weigh cross-ownership (of
radio, television and newspapers) employed several "irrational assumptions and
inconsistencies." Dissent by Chief Judge Anthony Joseph Scirica noted that the
majority were simply employing their own assumptions. The Supreme Court later
turned down an appeal, so the decision stands. The FCC was ordered to
reconfigure how it justifies raising ownership limits. Barnraisings. In the
spirit of the Amish barn-raising tradition, where a community comes together
and erects an essential structure, Prometheus holds radio barnraisings. These
events bring together the local community with community radio advocates from
around the world to build a community radio station, while advancing the
movement for media democracy. Prometheus barnraisings gather Low Power FM radio
advocates, journalists, radio engineers, students, lawyers, musicians,
activists and other folks from across the country to build a studio, raise an
antenna mast, and put the station on air for the first time – all over the
course of three days. At a typical barnraising, the organization invites expert
facilitators to lead workshops on a wide variety of topics, like understanding
the workings of the FCC, introductions to various aspects of radio engineering,
updates on media and democracy campaigns, and how radio can promote social
change today. In the inclusive spirit of Prometheus's mission, the events are
open to all. Prometheus has also been active internationally, working with
groups in Guatemala, Nepal, Colombia, Jordan, Kenya, and Tanzania. Prometheus
Involvement with Local Community Radio Act. For many years, Prometheus has
strived to gain community members and nonprofit groups a fair share of the
radio spectrum. Most recently, Prometheus was involved in the passing of the
Local Radio Community Act. The act, proposed in 2009, opened up a portion of
the radio spectrum to low-power community radio stations (LPFMs). Before then,
community members could apply for licenses for full-power stations, which are
five to ten times as expensive as LPFMs. Those groups who did not have the
capital to build a full-power station were forced into piracy. The Prometheus
Radio Project did everything possible to ensure the passage of the Local
Community Radio Act. Members of the organization discovered that while the bill
circulated in Congress, secret holds were put on it to prevent its passage.
People who opposed the bill, like Senator Gordon Smith – the president of the
National Association of Broadcasters – were persuading other senators to vote
against it. The moment the Prometheus Radio Project found out about this,
members began contacting all the citizens they could. They encouraged their
contacts to call their senators to show they were aware of these holds. Their
efforts turned out to be worth it when the Local Community Radio Act was
finally passed in 2010. What signing this act means is that “the FCC a new
mandate to expand low power radio,” says Brandy Doyle, Policy Director for
the Prometheus Radio Project. However, the FCC will not begin to automatically
handout licenses. Doyle states that “we think the FCC will need to do a rule
making to clarify the intent of the new law and update the rules going
forward.” (Doyle) Because of this act more groups will soon start to apply
for licenses and they will need a lot of support in order to “navigate the
process” says Vanessa Maria Graber, Community Radio Director at the
Prometheus Radio Project. Now, however, “many low power stations are under a
significant and substantive threat of encroachment.” Low Power FM
Encroachment Report, 2/15/2005. Encroachment is something that Prometheus will
have to work on combating next. Prometheus saw the act's passage as an
opportunity to give a voice to local community radio and bring community radio
to urban areas. Prometheus' current Outreach Campaign involves the contacting
and support of groups wishing to attain their own low-power FM community radio
station.
