Pronunciamiento A pronunciamiento (, , "announcement" or "declaration") is a
form of military rebellion or "coup d'état" peculiar to Spain, Portugal and
Latin America, particularly in the 19th century. In a classic "coup d'état", a
rebel faction which controls some element of the armed forces seizes control of
the state by sudden movement, organized and executed in stealth. In a
"pronunciamiento", a group of military officers "publicly" declare their
opposition to the current government (that is, the present chief executive and
cabinet, who may be legally elected civilians, or the result of a previous
coup). The rebels then wait for the rest of the armed forces to declare for or
against the government. Generally, a "pronunciamento" is preceded by a period
of preparation, when the would-be rebels "sound out" as many other officers as
possible to determine if their views are widely shared. There is no fighting at
this point; if the rebellion has no support, the organizers lose. They may have
to flee the country, or retire from the armed forces, or may be arrested. If
the bulk of the armed forces declare in favor of the "pronunciamiento", the
government resigns. It is similar to a vote of no-confidence, except that
issued by the armed forces, not by the legislature. One example of a
"pronunciamiento" was the successful rebellion of September 1868 against Queen
Isabella II of Spain, by Generals Prim and Serrano. Another was the 1932
rebellion against the Second Spanish Republic by José Sanjurjo (known as the
"sanjurjada"), which failed. In Mexico, where such declarations were often
quite detailed, formal, and issued as written texts, they were given the name
of plans. It is interesting to note that the Spanish Civil War which commenced
in 1936 was not started by way of a pronunciamiento, but was rather in the
style of a coup d'état. Hugh Thomas writes in his authoritative text on the
Spanish Civil War that, "Mola's plans were made clear in a circular in April.
The planned rising was to be no pronunciamiento of the old style. Two branches
of the plot, one civil, one military, were to be set up in all the provinces of
Spain."
