Property Property is any physical or intangible entity that is owned by a
person or jointly by a group of people or a legal entity like a corporation.
Depending on the nature of the property, an owner of property has the right to
consume, sell, rent, mortgage, transfer, exchange or destroy it, or to exclude
others from doing these things. Important widely recognized types of property
include real property (the combination of land and any improvements to or on
the land), personal property (physical possessions belonging to a person),
private property (property owned by legal persons or business entities), public
property (state owned or publicly owned and available possessions) and
intellectual property (exclusive rights over artistic creations, inventions,
etc.), although the latter is not always as widely recognized or enforced. A
title, or a right of ownership, establishes the relation between the property
and other persons, assuring the owner the right to dispose of the property as
the owner sees fit. Overview. Property is usually thought of as being defined
and protected by the local sovereignty. Ownership, however, does not
necessarily equate with sovereignty. If ownership gave supreme authority, it
would be sovereignty, not ownership. Some philosophers assert that property
rights arise from social convention, while others find justifications for them
in morality or natural law. Various scholarly disciplines (such as law,
economics, anthropology or sociology) may treat the concept more
systematically, but definitions vary within and between fields. Scholars in the
social sciences frequently conceive of property as a bundle of rights. They
stress that property is not a relationship between people and things, but a
relationship between people "with regard to" things. "Public property" is any
property that is controlled by a state or by a whole community. "Private
property" is any property that is not public property. Private property may be
under the control of a single person or by a group of persons jointly. General
characteristics. Modern property rights are based on conceptions of owners and
possession as belonging to legal persons, even if the legal person is not a
natural person. In most countries, corporations, for example, have legal rights
similar to those of citizens. Therefore, the corporation is a juristic person
or artificial legal entity, under a concept that some refer to as "corporate
personhood". Property rights are protected in the current laws of most states,
usually in their constitution or in a bill of rights. Protection is also
prescribed in the United Nations' Universal Declaration of Human Rights,
Article 17, and in the European Convention on Human Rights (ECHR), Protocol 1.
Not every person or entity with an interest in a given piece of property may be
able to exercise all possible property rights. For example, as a lessee of a
particular piece of property, you may not sell the property, because a tenant
is only in possession and does not have title to transfer. Similarly, while you
are a lessee, the owner cannot use their right to exclude to keep you from the
property, or, if they do, you may be entitled to stop paying rent or sue for
access. Further, property may be held in a number of forms, such as through
joint ownership, community property, or lease. These different types of
ownership may complicate an owner's ability to exercise property rights
unilaterally. For example, if two people own a single piece of land as joint
tenants then, depending on the law in the jurisdiction, each may have limited
recourse for the actions of the other. For example, one of the owners might
sell their interest in the property to a stranger whom the other owner does not
particularly like. Be it as it may, property rights need to be fixed and need
to portray the relationships among other parties in order to be effective.
Legal systems have evolved to cover transactions and disputes that arise over
the possession, use, transfer, and disposal of property, most particularly
involving contracts. Positive law defines such rights, and the judiciary is
used to adjudicate and to enforce property rights. In his text "The Common
Law", Oliver Wendell Holmes describes property as having two fundamental
aspects. The first is possession, which can be defined as control over a
resource based on the practical inability of another to contradict the ends of
the possessor. The second is title, which is the expectation that others will
recognize rights to control resource, even when it is not in possession. He
elaborates the differences between these two concepts, and proposes a history
of how they came to be attached to persons, as opposed to families or entities
such as the church. Both communism and some kinds of socialism have also upheld
the notion that private ownership of capital is inherently illegitimate. This
argument centers mainly on the idea that private ownership of capital always
benefits one class over another, giving rise to domination through the use of
this privately owned capital. Communists are not opposed to personal property
that is "hard-won, self-acquired, self-earned" (Communist Manifesto) by members
of the proletariat. Both socialism and communism are careful to make the
distinction between private ownership of capital (land, factories, resources,
etc...) and private property (homes, material objects, and so forth). Types of
property. Most legal systems distinguish different types (immovable property,
estate in land, real estate, real property) of property, especially between
land and all other forms of property—goods and chattels, movable property or
personal property. They often distinguish tangible and intangible property. One
categorization scheme specifies three species of property: land, improvements
(immovable man-made things), and personal property (movable man-made things).
In common law, real property (immovable property) is the combination of
interests in land and improvements thereto, and personal property is interest
in movable property. Real property rights are rights relating to the land.
These rights include ownership and usage. Owners can grant rights to persons
and entities in the form of leases, licenses and easements. Later, with the
development of more complex theories of property, personal property was divided
into tangible property (such as cars and clothing) and intangible property
(such as financial instruments, including stocks and bonds, digital files, and
intellectual property, including patents, copyrights, and trademarks). Issues
in property theory. What can be property? The two major justifications given
for original property, or homesteading, are effort and scarcity. John Locke
emphasized effort, "mixing your labor" with an object, or clearing and
cultivating virgin land. Benjamin Tucker preferred to look at the telos of
property, i.e. What is the purpose of property? His answer: to solve the
scarcity problem. Only when items are relatively scarce with respect to
people's desires do they become property. For example, hunter-gatherers did not
consider land to be property, since there was no shortage of land. Agrarian
societies later made arable land property, as it was scarce. For something to
be economically scarce, it must necessarily have the "exclusivity property" -
that use by one person excludes others from using it. These two justifications
lead to different conclusions on what can be property. Intellectual property -
non-corporeal things like ideas, plans, orderings and arrangements (musical
compositions, novels, computer programs) - are generally considered valid
property to those who support an effort justification, but invalid to those who
support a scarcity justification, since they don't have the exclusivity
property (however they may still support other 'intellectual property'-laws
such as Copyright, as long as these are a subject of contract instead of
government arbitration). Thus even ardent propertarians may disagree about IP.
By either standard, one's body is one's property. From some anarchist points of
view, the validity of property depends on whether the "property right" requires
enforcement by the state. Different forms of "property" require different
amounts of enforcement: intellectual property requires a great deal of state
intervention to enforce, ownership of distant physical property requires quite
a lot, ownership of carried objects requires very little, while ownership of
one's own body requires absolutely no state intervention. Many things have
existed that did not have an owner, sometimes called the commons. The term
"commons," however, is also often used to mean something quite different:
"general collective ownership" - i.e. common ownership. Also, the same term is
sometimes used by statists to mean government-owned property that the general
public is allowed to access (public property). Law in all societies has tended
to develop towards reducing the number of things not having clear owners.
Supporters of property rights argue that this enables better protection of
scarce resources, due to the tragedy of the commons, while critics argue that
it leads to the 'exploitation' of those resources for personal gain and that it
hinders taking advantage of potential network effects. These arguments have
differing validity for different types of "property"—things that are not
scarce are, for instance, not subject to the tragedy of the commons. Some
apparent critics advocate general collective ownership rather than
ownerlessness. Things that do not have owners include: ideas (except for
intellectual property), seawater (which is, however, protected by anti-
pollution laws), parts of the seafloor (see the United Nations Convention on
the Law of the Sea for restrictions), gases in Earth's atmosphere, animals in
the wild (although in most nations, animals are tied to the land. In the United
States and Canada wildlife are generally defined in statute as property of the
state. This public ownership of wildlife is referred to as the North American
Model of Wildlife Conservation and is based on The Public Trust Doctrine.),
celestial bodies and outer space, and land in Antarctica. The nature of
children under the age of majority is another contested issue here. In ancient
societies children were generally considered the property of their parents.
Children in most modern societies theoretically own their own bodies but are
not considered competent to exercise their rights, and their parents or
guardians are given most of the actual rights of control over them. Questions
regarding the nature of ownership of the body also come up in the issue of
abortion, drugs and euthanasia. In many ancient legal systems (e.g. early Roman
law), religious sites (e.g. temples) were considered property of the God or
gods they were devoted to. However, religious pluralism makes it more
convenient to have religious sites owned by the religious body that runs them.
Intellectual property and air (airspace, no-fly zone, pollution laws, which can
include tradeable emissions rights) can be property in some senses of the word.
Ownership of land can be held separately from the ownership of rights over that
land, including sporting rights, mineral rights, development rights, air
rights, and such other rights as may be worth segregating from simple land
ownership. Who can be an owner? Ownership laws may vary widely among countries
depending on the nature of the property of interest (e.g. firearms, real
property, personal property, animals). Persons can own property directly. In
most societies legal entities, such as corporations, trusts and nations (or
governments) own property. In many countries women have limited access to
property following restrictive inheritance and family laws, under which only
men have actual or formal rights to own property. In the Inca empire, the dead
emperors, who were considered gods, still controlled property after death.
Whether and to what extent the state may interfere with property. Under United
States law the principal limitations on whether and the extent to which the
State may interfere with property rights are set by the Constitution. The
"Takings" clause requires that the government (whether state or federal—for
the 14th Amendment's due process clause imposes the 5th Amendment's takings
clause on state governments) may take private property only for a public
purpose, after exercising due process of law, and upon making "just
compensation." If an interest is not deemed a "property" right, or the conduct
is merely an intentional tort, these limitations do not apply and the doctrine
of sovereign immunity precludes relief. Moreover, if the interference does not
almost completely make the property valueless, the interference will not be
deemed a taking but instead a mere regulation of use. On the other hand, some
governmental regulations of property use have been deemed so severe that they
have been considered "regulatory takings." Moreover, conduct sometimes deemed
only a nuisance or other tort has been held a taking of property where the
conduct was sufficiently persistent and severe. Theories of property. There
exist many theories of property. One is the relatively rare first possession
theory of property, where ownership of something is seen as justified simply by
someone seizing something before someone else does. Perhaps one of the most
popular, is the natural rights definition of property rights as advanced by
John Locke. Locke advanced the theory that when one mixes one’s labor with
nature, one gains a relationship with that part of nature with which the labor
is mixed, subject to the limitation that there should be "enough, and as good,
left in common for others." From the RERUM NOVARUM, Pope Leo XIII wrote "It is
surely undeniable that, when a man engages in remunerative labor, the impelling
reason and motive of his work is to obtain property, and thereafter to hold it
as his very own." Anthropology studies the diverse systems of ownership, rights
of use and transfer, and possession under the term "theories of property."
Western legal theory is based, as mentioned, on the owner of property being a
legal person. However, not all property systems are founded on this basis.
Communal property systems describe ownership as belonging to the entire social
and political unit. Such arrangements can under certain conditions erode open
access resources. This development has been critiqued by the tragedy of the
commons. Corporate systems describe ownership as being attached to an
identifiable group with an identifiable responsible individual. The Roman
property law was based on such a corporate system. Different societies may have
different theories of property for differing types of ownership. Pauline Peters
argued that property systems are not isolable from the social fabric, and
notions of property may not be stated as such, but instead may be framed in
negative terms: for example the taboo system among Polynesian peoples. Property
in philosophy. In medieval and Renaissance Europe the term "property"
essentially referred to land. Much rethinking has come to be regarded as only a
special case of the property genus. This rethinking was inspired by at least
three broad features of early modern Europe: the surge of commerce, the
breakdown of efforts to prohibit interest (then called "usury"), and the
development of centralized national monarchies. Ancient philosophy. Urukagina,
the king of the Sumerian city-state Lagash, established the first laws that
forbade compelling the sale of property. The Ten Commandments shown in Exodus
20:2-17 and Deuteronomy 5:6-21 stated that the Israelites were not to steal, a
blanket early protection of private property. Aristotle, in "Politics,"
advocates "private property." He argues that self-interest leads to neglect of
the commons. "hat which is common to the greatest number has the least care
bestowed upon it. Every one thinks chiefly of his own, hardly at all of the
common interest; and only when he is himself concerned as an individual." In
addition he says that when property is common, there are natural problems that
arise due to differences in labor: "If they do not share equally enjoyments and
toils, those who labor much and get little will necessarily complain of those
who labor little and receive or consume much. But indeed there is always a
difficulty in men living together and having all human relations in common, but
especially in their having common property." ("Politics, 1261b34") Medieval
philosophy. Thomas Aquinas (13th century). Thomas Aquinas concludes that, given
certain detailed provisions, Modern philosophy. Thomas Hobbes (17th century).
The principal writings of Thomas Hobbes appeared between 1640 and 1651—during
and immediately following the war between forces loyal to King Charles I and
those loyal to Parliament. In his own words, Hobbes' reflection began with the
idea of "giving to every man his own," a phrase he drew from the writings of
Cicero. But he wondered: How can anybody call anything his own? He concluded:
My own can only truly be mine if there is one unambiguously strongest power in
the realm, and that power treats it as mine, protecting its status as such.
James Harrington (17th century). A contemporary of Hobbes, James Harrington,
reacted differently to the same tumult; he considered property natural but not
inevitable. The author of "Oceana", he may have been the first political
theorist to postulate that political power is a consequence, not the cause, of
the distribution of property. He said that the worst possible situation is one
in which the commoners have half a nation's property, with crown and nobility
holding the other half—a circumstance fraught with instability and violence.
A much better situation (a stable republic) will exist once the commoners own
most property, he suggested. In later years, the ranks of Harrington's admirers
included American revolutionary and founder John Adams. Robert Filmer (17th
century). Another member of the Hobbes/Harrington generation, Sir Robert
Filmer, reached conclusions much like Hobbes', but through Biblical exegesis.
Filmer said that the institution of kingship is analogous to that of
fatherhood, that subjects are but children, whether obedient or unruly, and
that property rights are akin to the household goods that a father may dole out
among his children—his to take back and dispose of according to his pleasure.
John Locke (17th century). In the following generation, John Locke sought to
answer Filmer, creating a rationale for a balanced constitution in which the
monarch had a part to play, but not an overwhelming part. Since Filmer's views
essentially require that the Stuart family be uniquely descended from the
patriarchs of the Bible, and since even in the late 17th century that was a
difficult view to uphold, Locke attacked Filmer's views in his First Treatise
on Government, freeing him to set out his own views in the Second Treatise on
Civil Government. Therein, Locke imagined a pre-social world, the unhappy
residents of which create a social contract. They would, he allowed, create a
monarchy, but its task would be to execute the will of an elected legislature.
"To this end" (to achieve the previously specified goal), he wrote, "it is that
men give up all their natural power to the society they enter into, and the
community put the legislative power into such hands as they think fit, with
this trust, that they shall be governed by declared laws, or else their peace,
quiet, and property will still be at the same uncertainty as it was in the
state of nature." Even when it keeps to proper legislative form, though, Locke
held that there are limits to what a government established by such a contract
might rightly do. "It cannot be supposed that hypothetical contractors they
should intend, had they a power so to do, to give any one or more an absolute
arbitrary power over their persons and estates, and put a force into the
magistrate's hand to execute his unlimited will arbitrarily upon them; this
were to put themselves into a worse condition than the state of nature, wherein
they had a liberty to defend their right against the injuries of others, and
were upon equal terms of force to maintain it, whether invaded by a single man
or many in combination. Whereas by supposing they have given up themselves to
the absolute arbitrary power and will of a legislator, they have disarmed
themselves, and armed him to make a prey of them when he pleases..." Note that
both "persons "and" estates" are to be protected from the arbitrary power of
any magistrate, inclusive of the "power and will of a legislator." In Lockean
terms, depredations against an estate are just as plausible a justification for
resistance and revolution as are those against persons. In neither case are
subjects required to allow themselves to become prey. To explain the ownership
of property Locke advanced a labor theory of property. William Blackstone (18th
century). In the 1760s, William Blackstone sought to codify the English common
law. In his famous "Commentaries on the Laws of England" he wrote that "every
wanton and causeless restraint of the will of the subject, whether produced by
a monarch, a nobility, or a popular assembly is a degree of tyranny." How
should such tyranny be prevented or resisted? Through property rights,
Blackstone thought, which is why he emphasized that indemnification must be
awarded a non-consenting owner whose property is taken by eminent domain, and
that a property owner is protected against physical invasion of his property by
the laws of trespass and nuisance. Indeed, he wrote that a landowner is free to
kill any stranger on his property between dusk and dawn, even an agent of the
King, since it isn't reasonable to expect him to recognize the King's agents in
the dark. David Hume (18th century). In contrast to the figures discussed in
this section thus far, David Hume lived a relatively quiet life that had
settled down to a relatively stable social and political structure. He lived
the life of a solitary writer until 1763 when, at 52 years of age, he went off
to Paris to work at the British embassy. In contrast, one might think, to his
polemical works on religion and his empiricism-driven skeptical epistemology,
Hume's views on law and property were quite conservative. He did not believe in
hypothetical contracts, or in the love of mankind in general, and sought to
ground politics upon actual human beings as one knows them. "In general," he
wrote, "it may be affirmed that there is no such passion in human mind, as the
love of mankind, merely as such, independent of personal qualities, or
services, or of relation to ourselves." Existing customs should not lightly be
disregarded, because they have come to be what they are as a result of human
nature. With this endorsement of custom comes an endorsement of existing
governments, because he conceived of the two as complementary: "A regard for
liberty, though a laudable passion, ought commonly to be subordinate to a
reverence for established government." These views led to a view on property
rights that might today be described as legal positivism. There are property
rights because of and to the extent that the existing law, supported by social
customs, secure them. He offered some practical home-spun advice on the general
subject, though, as when he referred to avarice as "the spur of industry," and
expressed concern about excessive levels of taxation, which "destroy industry,
by engendering despair." Smith and Ricardo. By the mid 19th century, the
industrial revolution had transformed England and had begun in France. The
established conception of what constitutes property expanded beyond land to
encompass scarce goods in general. In France, the revolution of the 1790s had
led to large-scale confiscation of land formerly owned by church and king. The
restoration of the monarchy led to claims by those dispossessed to have their
former lands returned. Furthermore, the labor theory of value popularized by
classical economists such as Adam Smith and David Ricardo were utilized by a
new ideology called socialism to critique the relations of property to other
economic issues, such as profit, rent, interest, and wage-labor. Thus, property
was no longer an esoteric philosophical question, but a political issue of
substantial concern. Charles Comte – legitimate origin of property. Charles
Comte, in "Traité de la propriété" (1834), attempted to justify the
legitimacy of private property in response to the Bourbon Restoration.
According to David Hart, Comte had three main points: "firstly, that
interference by the state over the centuries in property ownership has had dire
consequences for justice as well as for economic productivity; secondly, that
property is legitimate when it emerges in such a way as not to harm anyone; and
thirdly, that historically some, but by no means all, property which has
evolved has done so legitimately, with the implication that the present
distribution of property is a complex mixture of legitimately and
illegitimately held titles." ("The Radical Liberalism of Charles Comte and
Charles Dunoyer" Comte, as Proudhon later did, rejected Roman legal tradition
with its toleration of slavery. He posited a communal "national" property
consisting of non-scarce goods, such as land in ancient hunter-gatherer
societies. Since agriculture was so much more efficient than hunting and
gathering, private property appropriated by someone for farming left remaining
hunter-gatherers with more land per person, and hence did not harm them. Thus
this type of land appropriation did not violate the Lockean proviso – there
was "still enough, and as good left." Comte's analysis would be used by later
theorists in response to the socialist critique on property. Pierre Proudhon
– property is theft. In his 1849 treatise "What is Property?", Pierre
Proudhon answers with "Property is theft!" In natural resources, he sees two
types of property, "de jure" property (legal title) and "de facto" property
(physical possession), and argues that the former is illegitimate. Proudhon's
conclusion is that "property, to be just and possible, must necessarily have
equality for its condition." His analysis of the product of labor upon natural
resources as property (usufruct) is more nuanced. He asserts that land itself
cannot be property, yet it should be held by individual possessors as stewards
of mankind with the product of labor being the property of the producer.
Proudhon reasoned that any wealth gained without labor was stolen from those
who labored to create that wealth. Even a voluntary contract to surrender the
product of labor to an employer was theft, according to Proudhon, since the
controller of natural resources had no moral right to charge others for the use
of that which he did not labor to create and therefore did not own. Proudhon's
theory of property greatly influenced the budding socialist movement, inspiring
anarchist theorists such as Mikhail Bakunin who modified Proudhon's ideas, as
well as antagonizing theorists like Karl Marx. Frédéric Bastiat – property
is value. Frédéric Bastiat's main treatise on property can be found in
chapter 8 of his book "Economic Harmonies" (1850). In a radical departure from
traditional property theory, he defines property not as a physical object, but
rather as a relationship between people with respect to an object. Thus, saying
one owns a glass of water is merely verbal shorthand for "I may justly gift or
trade this water to another person". In essence, what one owns is not the
object but the value of the object. By "value," Bastiat apparently means
"market value"; he emphasizes that this is quite different from utility. ""In
our relations with one another, we are not owners of the utility of things, but
of their value, and value is the appraisal made of reciprocal services.""
Strongly disputing Proudhon's equality-based argument, Bastiat theorizes that,
as a result of technological progress and the division of labor, the stock of
communal wealth increases over time; that the hours of work an unskilled
laborer expends to buy e.g. 100 liters of wheat decreases over time, thus
amounting to "gratis" satisfaction. Thus, private property continually destroys
itself, becoming transformed into communal wealth. The increasing proportion of
communal wealth to private property results in a tendency toward equality of
mankind. ""Since the human race started from the point of greatest poverty,
that is, from the point where there were the most obstacles to be overcome, it
is clear that all that has been gained from one era to the next has been due to
the spirit of property."" This transformation of private property into the
communal domain, Bastiat points out, does not imply that private property will
ever totally disappear. This is because man, as he progresses, continually
invents new and more sophisticated needs and desires. Contemporary views. Among
contemporary political thinkers who believe that natural persons enjoy rights
to own property and to enter into contracts, there are two views about John
Locke. On the one hand there are ardent Locke admirers, such as W.H. Hutt
(1956), who praised Locke for laying down the "quintessence of individualism."
On the other hand, there are those such as Richard Pipes who think that Locke's
arguments are weak, and that undue reliance thereon has weakened the cause of
individualism in recent times. Pipes has written that Locke's work "marked a
regression because it rested on the concept of Natural Law" rather than upon
Harrington's sociological framework. All of the above enhance economic growth.
See also. Property giving (legal) Property taking (legal) Property taking
(illegal) Property of either digital or virtual form
