Protest vote A protest vote (also known as a blank vote or white vote) is a
vote cast in an election to demonstrate the caster's dissatisfaction with the
choice of candidates or refusal of the current political system. In this latter
case, protest vote may take the form of a valid vote, but instead of voting for
the mainstream candidates, it is a vote in favor of a minority or fringe
candidate, either from the far-left, far-right or self-presenting as a
candidate foreign to the political system. Along with abstention, which is
simply the act of not voting, it is often considered to be a clear sign of the
lack of popular legitimacy and roots of representative democracy, as depressed
voter turnout endangers the credibility of the whole voting system. If protest
vote takes the form of a blank vote, it may or may not be tallied into final
results depending on the rules. Thus, it may either result in a spoilt vote
(which is the case most of the times) or, if the electoral system accepts to
take it into account, as a "None of the Above" vote. Several possible protest
votes. Interpretations to each of the methods mentioned above vary. Sometimes,
a person may use even more uncommon, often illegal, methods to protest vote.
Examples include physical destruction of the ballot (for example, ripping the
ballot apart or eating it), asking other people to vote for them, or selling
their ballot (for example, putting their vote on auction sites). Protest vote
and abstention. Abstention may be considered as a form of protest vote, when it
is not assimilable to simple apathy or indifference towards politics in
general. Henceforth, the anarchist movement which has since its origins
rejected representative democracy in favor of a more direct form of government,
traditionally calls for abstention in an active and protest gesture. In states
where voting is compulsory, abstention may be seen as an act of civil
disobedience. Abstention in compulsory voting systems tends to be somewhat
ineffective, as the protest 'message' is likely to be confused with apathy.
Voters who do not care who is elected, but are simply voting because they must,
may choose to abstain, and the abstention protest votes will be confused with
the apathetic abstention votes. A second problem with abstention is it tends to
help maintain the status quo, which may be seen as antithetical to the purpose
of protesting in the first place. In a system where one candidate has a
majority of support, protesting by abstention will increase that majority in
the election results. To illustrate this, consider a group of 10 people voting
for two candidates, A and B. Six support candidate A and three support
candidate B, and one is wishing to protest, using their vote, against either
the system or both candidates. If the protestor votes for candidate A, the
results would be 70% to 30% (for A and B respectively); if the protestor
abstains, the results would be 67% and 33% (A and B respectively); if the
protestor votes for B, the results would be 60% and 40% (A and B respectively).
In a larger election, the differences are numerically smaller but act to
increase/decrease the proportional vote in the same ways. The abstain vote
actually "increases" the proportion of votes for the most popular candidate,
while voting against the popular candidate(s) (by voting for any other option
(s)) would close the electoral margin. In a wider context, closing the margin
may result in a hung parliament, or a smaller difference between the parties in
government, reducing the chance of a single party having control over the
system, which may be seen as beneficial for the sake of protesting against the
system or candidates. Voting for fringe candidates. "Protest vote" also refers,
in a more derogatory manner, to specific demographic categories, classifying
populations according to the frequency and nature of their vote. Thus, in the
US, middle-income families vote more often than the working class or
marginalised populations. After the 2002 French presidential election, in which
far-right leader Jean-Marie Le Pen arrived second behind conservative candidate
Jacques Chirac, many analysts put the blame of the surprising result on working
class, accused of engaging themselves in "protest vote", that is in support of
fringe candidates belonging to the far-left or the far-right, or even to people
who present themselves as alien to the political world (in France,
environmentalist René Dumont in 1974, comedian Coluche in 1981 — but he
withdrew his candidacy before the elections — environmentalist Pierre Rabhi
who unsuccessfully tried to present himself in 2002, as well as TV showman
Nicolas Hulot who almost stood for the election for 2007, before putting aside
his idea, thus leaving electoral space for José Bové, a figure of the
alterglobalization movement who recently decided to present himself as an
independent candidate). This kind of protest vote, where the vote is taken into
account but accused of being "useless", is often considered by political
analysts to be either a form of populism or, worst, of poujadism. For example,
French voters were encouraged by the establishment to make a "useful" vote in
the 2007 presidential election, i.e., by voting either for Nicolas Sarkozy,
candidate of the centre-right Union for a Popular Movement, or for Ségolène
Royal, candidate of the centre-left Socialist Party, and not for other
candidates considered unlikely to make the second turn of the elections.
Electing a political newcomer. Significant popular support for a person who had
never previously been involved in politics may be seen as a form of "protest
vote". Thus, when the 37 year-old Director of the Vanuatu National Cultural
Council, Ralph Regenvanu, stood for Parliament in 2008, he was a political
newcomer. He campaigned on the theme of bringing a fresh face and a fresh
approach to politics, and was elected in his constituency with a record high
number of votes. This prompted Transparency International Vanuatu to applaud
his election and his first days in office: "Port Vila MP Ralph Regenvanu was
elected by the “Protest Vote” – essentially by those people who were sick
and tired of the traditional politics, and it is encouraging to see him
exercising his mandate." Protest vote in various countries. In the United
States, cartoon and other fictitious characters are typically used as protest
votes; as Mickey Mouse is the most well-known and well-recognized character in
the United States, his name is frequently selected for this purpose. Other
popular selections include Donald Duck and Bugs Bunny. A similar phenomenon
occurs in the parliamentary elections in Finland and Sweden, although Finns and
Swedes usually write Donald Duck as a protest vote because in these countries
Donald is more famous than Mickey. Other characters, both real and fictional,
are used as protest votes too. One theory has it that the reason for boxer/
politician Tony Halme's popularity in one of the Finnish elections was because
he was being used as a protest vote. Somewhat ironically, this might mean that
protest votes actually got someone elected.
