Protest A protest is an expression of objection, by words or by actions, to
particular events, policies or situations. Protests can take many different
forms, from individual statements to mass demonstrations. Protesters may
organize a protest as a way of publicly making their opinions heard in an
attempt to influence public opinion or government policy, or they may undertake
direct action in an attempt to directly enact desired changes themselves. Where
protests are part of a systematic and peaceful campaign to achieve a particular
objective, and involve the use of pressure as well as persuasion, they go
beyond mere protest and may be better described as cases of civil resistance or
nonviolent resistance. Various forms of self-expression and protest are
sometimes restricted by governmental policy, economic circumstances, religious
orthodoxy, social structures, or media monopoly. When such restrictions occur,
protests may assume the form of open civil disobedience, more subtle forms of
resistance against the restrictions, or may spill over into other areas such as
culture and emigration. A protest can itself sometimes be the subject of a
counter-protest. In such a case, counter-protesters demonstrate their support
for the person, policy, action, etc. that is the subject of the original
protest. Forms of protest. Public demonstration or political rally. Some forms
of direct action listed in this article are also public demonstrations or
rallies. Written demonstration. Written evidence of political or economic
power, or democratic justification may also be a way of protesting. In sports.
During a sporting event, under certain circumstances, one side may choose to
play a game "under protest", usually when they feel the rules are not being
correctly applied. The event continues as normal, and the events causing the
protest are reviewed after the fact. If the protest is held to be valid, then
the results of the event are changed. Each sport has different rules for
protests. By Internet and social networking. Blogging and social networking
have become effective tools to register protest and grievances. Protests can
express views, news and use viral networking to reach out to thousands of
people. Economic effects of protests against companies. A study of 342 US
protests covered by the New York Times newspaper in the period 1962 and 1990
showed that such public activities usually had an impact on the company's
publicly-traded stock price. The most intriguing aspect of the study's findings
is that what mattered most was not the number of protest participants, but the
amount of media coverage the event received. Stock prices fell an average of
one-tenth of a percent for every paragraph printed about the event.
