Pseudo-secularism Pseudo-secularism is the state of implicit non-secular trends
in the face of pledged secularism. The term is used by groups who perceive a
double standard exhibited within the established secular governing policy
towards culturally different groups. The first recorded use of the term was in
the book "Philosophy and Action of the R. S. S. for the Hind Swaraj" , by
Anthony Elenjimittam. In his book, Elenjimittam accused leaders of the Indian
National Congress, of pretending to uphold secularism. He singles out then
Prime Minister Jawaharlal Nehru's refusal to serve on the Congress Working
Committee in 1951, which led to the resignation of the Congress Purushottam Das
Tandon. In India. Since an amendment in 1976, the constitution of India
describes the country as 'secular', and generally most mainstream political
forces describe themselves as 'secular'. It is important to note that in the
Indian context the term is mainly used as an opposite of 'communal', rather
than describing the role of state-religion relations. One of the most
comprehensive studies of Indian secularism has been done by Donald Eugene Smith
in his book India: As a Secular State. It succinctly sums the differences
between Gandhi and Nehru on the issue of secularism, and describes how this
divergence sometimes created problems for the government in the early years of
Independence. The Hindu nationalist movement claim that the Indian National
Congress and the associated Communist Party of India are pseudo-secularist.
Their claim is that leftists in India are not truly secular since they appease
minority communities (such as Muslims or Christians in India) at the expense of
the interests of the Hindu community, and often at odds with modern ideas of
secularism . A major issue raised by the Hindu nationalist movement is the
implementation of a uniform civil code of India and its opposition to separate
legal codes for religious communities, such as the Shariat bill, and the Indian
government's subsidy of the travel of Indian Muslims to Saudi Arabia to visit
Mecca (Hajj subsidy). In India, courts have ruled that Sharia, Muslim law,
holds precedence for Muslims over Indian civil law, which caused considerable
anguish among Nationalists and fueled allegations of pseudo-secularism against
the judiciary as well.
