Psychogeography Psychogeography, a subfield of geography, was defined in 1955
by Guy Debord as "the study of the precise laws and specific effects of the
geographical environment, consciously organized or not, on the emotions and
behavior of individuals." Another definition is "a whole toy box full of
playful, inventive strategies for exploring cities...just about anything that
takes pedestrians off their predictable paths and jolts them into a new
awareness of the urban landscape." Development. Psychogeography was originally
developed by the avant-garde movement Lettrist International in the journal
"Potlach". The originator of what became known as unitary urbanism,
psychogeography, and the dérive was Ivan Chtcheglov, in his highly influential
1953 essay "Formulaire pour un urbanisme nouveau" ("Formulary for a New
Urbanism"). The Lettrists' reimagining of the city has its precursors in
aspects of Dadism and Surrealism. The idea of urban wandering relates to the
older concept of the flâneur, theorized by Charles Baudelaire. Following
Chtcheglov's exclusion from the Lettrists in 1954, Guy Debord and others worked
to clarify the concept of unitary urbanism, in a bid to demand a revolutionary
approach to architecture. At a conference in Cosio di Arroscia, Italy in 1956,
the Lettrists joined the International Movement for an Imaginist Bauhaus to set
a proper definition for the idea announced by Gil J. Wolman "Unitary Urbanism -
the synthesis of art and technology that we call for — must be constructed
according to certain new values of life, values which now need to be
distinguished and disseminated." It demanded the rejection of functional,
Euclidean values in architecture, as well as the separation between art and its
surroundings. The implication of combining these two negations is that by
creating abstraction, one creates art, which, in turn, creates a point of
distinction that unitary urbanism insists must be nullified. This confusion is
also fundamental to the execution of unitary urbanism as it corrupts one's
ability to identify where "function" ends and "play" (the "ludic") begins,
resulting in what the Lettrist International and Situationist International
believed to be a utopia where one was constantly exploring, free of determining
factors. In "Formulary for a New Urbanism," Chtcheglov had written
"Architecture is the simplest means of articulating time and space, of
modulating reality, of engendering dreams". Similarly, the Situationists found
contemporary architecture both physically and ideologically restrictive,
combining with outside cultural influence, effectively creating an undertow,
and forcing oneself into a certain system of interaction with their
environment: "ities have a psychogeographical relief, with constant currents,
fixed points and vortexes which strongly discourage entry into or exit from
certain zones". The Situationists' response was to create designs of new
urbanized space, promising better opportunities for experimenting through
mundane expression. Their intentions remained completely as abstractions. Guy
Debord's truest intention was to unify two different factors of "ambiance"
that, he felt, determined the values of the urban landscape: the soft ambiance
– light, sound, time, the association of ideas – with the hard, the actual
physical constructions. Debord's vision was a combination of the two realms of
opposing ambiance, where the play of the soft ambiance was actively considered
in the rendering of the hard. The new space creates a possibility for activity
not formerly determined by one besides the individual. However, the
Situationist International may have been tongue-in-cheek about some parts of
psychogeography. "This apparently serious term 'psychogeography,'" writes
Debord biographer Vincent Kaufman, "comprises an art of conversation and
drunkenness, and everything leads us to believe that Debord excelled at both."
Eventually, Debord and Asger Jorn resigned themselves to the fate of "urban
relativity". Debord readily admits in his film "A Critique of Separation"
(1961), "The sectors of a city…are decipherable, but the personal meaning
they have for us is incommunicable, as is the secrecy of private life in
general, regarding which we possess nothing but pitiful documents". Despite the
ambiguity of the theory, Debord committed himself firmly to its practical basis
in reality, even as he later confesses, "none of this is very clear. It is a
completely typical drunken monologue…with its vain phrases that do not await
response and its overbearing explanations. And its silences." Gray,
Christopher, editor, "Leaving the 20th Century: the Incomplete Work of the
Situationist International", London: Rebel P, 1998. p26. Dérive, as a
previously conceptualized tactic in the French military, was "a calculated
action determined by the absence of a greater locus", and "a maneuver within
the enemy's field of vision". To the SI, whose interest was inhabiting space,
the dérive brought appeal in this sense of taking the "fight" to the streets
and truly indulging in a determined operation. The dérive was a course of
preparation, reconnaissance, a means of shaping situationist psychology among
urban explorers for the eventuality of the situationist city. Contemporary
psychogeography. Since the 1990s, as situationist theory became popular in
artistic and academic circles, avant-garde, neoist and revolutionary groups
emerged, developing psychogeographical praxis in various ways. Influenced
primarily through the re-emergence of the London Psychogeographical Association
and the foundation of The Workshop for Non-Linear Architecture, these groups
have assisted in the development of a contemporary psychogeography. Between
1992 and 1996 The Workshop for Non-Linear Architecture undertook an extensive
programme of practical research into classic (situationist) psychogeography in
both Glasgow and London. The discoveries made during this period, documented in
the group's journal "Viscosity", expanded the terrain of the psychogeographic
into that of urban design and architectural performance. The journal
"Transgressions: A Journal of Urban Exploration" (which appears to have ceased
publication sometime in 2000) collated and developed a number of post-avant-
garde revolutionary psychogeographical themes. The journal also contributed to
the use and development of psychogeographical maps which have, since 2000 been
used in political actions, drifts and projections, distributed as flyers. Since
2003 in the United States, separate events known as Provflux and Psy-Geo-
conflux have been dedicated to action-based participatory experiments, under
the academic umbrella of psychogeography. Psychogeography also become a device
used in performance art and literature. In Britain in particular,
psychogeography has become a recognised descriptive term used in discussion of
successful writers such as Iain Sinclair and Peter Ackroyd and the
documentaries of filmmaker Patrick Keiller. The popularity of Sinclair drew the
term into greater public use in the United Kingdom. Though Sinclair makes
infrequent use of the jargon associated with the Situationists, he has
certainly popularized the term by producing a large body of work based on
pedestrian exploration of the urban and suburban landscape. Sinclair and
similar thinkers draw on a longstanding British literary tradition of the
exploration of urban landscapes, predating the Situationists, found in the work
of writers like William Blake, Arthur Machen, and Thomas de Quincey. The nature
and history of London were a central focus of these writers, utilising
romantic, gothic, and occult ideas to describe and transform the city. Sinclair
drew on this tradition combined with his own explorations as a way of
criticising modern developments of urban space in such key texts as "Lights Out
for the Territory". Peter Ackroyd's bestselling "" was partially based on
similar sources. Merlin Coverley gives equal prominence to this literary
tradition alongside Situationism in his book "Psychogeography" (2006), not only
recognising that the situationist origins of psychogeography are sometimes
forgotten, but that via certain writers like Edgar Allan Poe, Daniel Defoe and
Charles Baudelaire they had a shared tradition. Psychogeography, as a term and
a concept, now reaches more British eyes than ever before, as novelist Will
Self had a column of that name which started out in the British Airways
Inflight magazine and then appeared weekly in the Saturday magazine of "The
Independent" newspaper until October 2008. The concepts and themes seen in
popular comics writers such as Alan Moore in works like "From Hell" are also
now seen as significant works of psychogeography. Other key figures in this
version of the idea are Walter Benjamin, J. G. Ballard, and Nicholas Hawksmoor.
Part of this development saw increasing use of ideas and terminology by some
psychogeographers from Fortean and occult areas like earth mysteries, ley
lines, and chaos magic, a course pioneered by Sinclair. A core element in
virtually all these developments remains a dissatisfaction with the nature and
design of the modern environment and a desire to make the everyday world more
interesting. After a few years of practicing, the psychogeography group that
gravitates around the Urban Squares Initiative and Aleksandar Janicijevic, Bill
Humber Director, Revitalization Institute, Toronto, Canada, a participant in a
few of our walks, described our intentions in his article about psychogeography
like this: "In discovering a small world we discover the whole world."
