Public choice theory Public choice theory is the use of modern economic tools
to study problems that traditionally are in the province of political science.
From the perspective of political science, it is the subset of positive
political theory that models voters, politicians, and bureaucrats as mainly
self-interested. In particular, it studies such agents and their interactions
in the social system either as such or under alternative constitutional rules.
These can be represented in a number of ways, including standard constrained
utility maximization, game theory, or decision theory. Public choice analysis
has roots in positive analysis ("what is") but is often used for normative
purposes ("what ought to be"), to identify a problem or suggest how a system
could be improved by changes in constitutional rules, the subject of
constitutional economics.¬ ¬  ‚Ä¢ James M. Buchanan, 1990. "The Domain of
Constitutional Economics," "Constitutional Political Economy", 1(1), pp. 1-
18.¬ ¬  ‚Ä¢ Dennis C. Mueller, 2008. "constitutions, economic approach to,"
"The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics", 2nd Edition. Abstract. Public
choice theory is closely related to social choice theory, a mathematical
approach to aggregation of individual interests, welfares, or votes. Much early
work had aspects of both, and both use the tools of economics and game theory.
Since voter behavior influences the behavior of public officials, public choice
theory often uses results from social choice theory. General treatments of
public choice are classified as a subarea of public economics. Background.
Prior to the emergence of public choice theory, many economists tended to
consider the state as an agent outside the scope of economic theory, whose
actions depend on different considerations than those driving economic agents.
(The many "other" economists who "did" place the state and its agents within
such theory include Vilfredo Pareto.) Public choice theory attempts to look at
governments from the perspective of the bureaucrats and politicians who compose
them, and makes the assumption that they act based on a budget-maximizing model
in a self-interested way for the purpose of growing their own power and
influence. The theory aims to apply economic analysis (usually decision theory
and game theory) to the political decision-making process in order to reveal
certain systematic trends towards inefficient government policies. There are
also Austrian variants of public choice theory (suggested by von Mises, Hayek,
Kirzner, Lopez, and Boettke) in which it is assumed that bureaucrats and
politicians may be benevolent but have access to limited information. The
assumption that such benevolent political agents possess limited information
for making decisions often results in conclusions similar to those generated
separately by means of the rational self-interest assumptions. Randall Holcombe
and Richard E. Wagner have also developed the notion of "Political
Entrepreneurship". Special interests. Public choice theory is often used to
explain how political decision-making results in outcomes that conflict with
the preferences of the general public. For example, many advocacy group and
pork barrel projects are not the desire of the overall democracy. However, it
makes sense for politicians to support these projects. It may make them feel
powerful and important. It can also benefit them financially by opening the
door to future wealth as lobbyists. The project may be of interest to the
politician's local constituency, increasing district votes or campaign
contributions. The politician pays little or no cost to gain these benefits, as
he is spending public money. Special-interest lobbyists are also behaving
rationally. They can gain government favors worth millions or billions for
relatively small investments. They face a risk of losing out to their
competitors if they don't seek these favors. The taxpayer is also behaving
rationally. The cost of defeating any one government give-away is very high,
while the benefits to the individual taxpayer are very small. Each citizen pays
only a few pennies or a few dollars for any given government favor, while the
costs of ending that favor would be many times higher. Everyone involved has
rational incentives to do exactly what they're doing, even though the desire of
the general constituency is opposite. Costs are diffused, while benefits are
concentrated. The voices of vocal minorities with much to gain are heard over
those of indifferent majorities with little to individually lose.¬ ¬  ‚Ä¢
Gordon Tullock, 2008. "public choice," "The New Palgrave Dictionary of
Economics". 2nd Edition. [http://www.dictionaryofeconomics.com/
article?id=pde2008_P000240&q=rational%20choice&topicid=&result_number=10
Abstract.¬ ¬  ‚Ä¢ Gary S. Becker, 1983. "A Theory of Competition Among Pressure
Groups for Political Influence," "Quarterly Journal of Economics", 98(3), pp.
371-400.¬ ¬  ‚Ä¢_____, 1985. "Public Policies, Pressure Groups, and Dead-weight
Costs," "Journal of Public Economics", 28(3), pp.¬ 329‚Äì347. Abstract and
reprinted in George J. Stigler, ed., 1988, "Chicago Studies in Political
Economy", pp. 85-105. Decision making processes and the state. One way to
organize the subject matter studied by public choice theorists is to begin with
the foundations of the state itself. According to this procedure, the most
fundamental subject is the origin of government. Although some work has been
done on anarchy, autocracy, revolution, and even war, the bulk of the study in
this area has concerned the fundamental problem of collectively choosing
constitutional rules. This work assumes a group of individuals who aim to form
a government, then it focuses on the problem of hiring the agents required to
carry out government functions agreed upon by the members. Bureaucracy. Another
major sub-field is the study of bureaucracy. The usual model depicts the top
bureaucrats as being chosen by the chief executive and legislature, depending
on whether the democratic system is presidential or parliamentary. The typical
image of a bureau chief is a person on a fixed salary who is concerned with
pleasing those who appointed him. The latter have the power to hire and fire
him more or less at will. The bulk of the bureaucrats, however, are civil
servants whose jobs and pay are protected by a civil service system against
major changes by their appointed bureau chiefs. This image is often compared
with that of a business owner whose profit varies with the success of
production and sales, who aims to maximize profit, and who can in an ideal
system hire and fire employees at will. Rent-seeking. A field that is closely
related to public choice is "rent-seeking". This field combines the study of a
market economy with that of government. Thus, one might regard it as a "new
political economy." Its basic thesis is that when both a market economy and
government are present, government agents provide numerous special market
privileges. Both the government agents and self-interested market participants
seek these privileges in order to partake in the resulting monopoly rent. When
such privileges are granted, they reduce the efficiency of the economic system.
In addition, the rent-seekers use resources that could otherwise be used to
produce goods that are valued by consumers. Rent-seeking is broader than Public
Choice in that it applies to autocracies as well as democracies and, therefore,
is not directly concerned with collective decision-making. However, the obvious
pressures it exerts on legislators, executives, bureaucrats, and even judges
are factors that public choice theory must account for in its analysis of
collective decision-making rules and institutions. Moreover, the members of a
collective who are planning a government would be wise to take prospective
rent-seeking into account. Theory. Democracy. One of the basic claims that
results from public choice theory is that good government policies in a
democracy are an underprovided public good, because of the rational ignorance
of the voters. Each voter is faced with a tiny probability that his vote will
change the result of the elections, while gathering the relevant information
necessary for a well-informed voting decision requires substantial time and
effort. Therefore, the rational decision for each voter is to be generally
ignorant of politics and perhaps even abstain from voting. Rational choice
theorists claim that this explains the gross ignorance of most citizens in
modern democracies as well as low voter turnout. Rational abstention creates
the so-called "Paradox of voting" in which a strict cost-benefit analysis
implies that no one should vote. Special interests. While good government tends
to be a pure public good for the mass of voters, there may be many advocacy
groups that have strong incentives for lobbying the government to implement
specific policies that would benefit them, potentially at the expense of the
general public. For example, lobbying by the sugar manufacturers might result
in an inefficient subsidy for the production of sugar, either direct or by
protectionist measures. The costs of such inefficient policies are dispersed
over all citizens, and therefore unnoticeable to each individual. On the other
hand, the benefits are shared by a small special-interest group with a strong
incentive to perpetuate the policy by further lobbying. Due to rational
ignorance, the vast majority of voters will be unaware of the effort; in fact,
although voters may be aware of special-interest lobbying efforts, this may
merely select for policies which are even harder to evaluate by the general
public, rather than improving their overall efficiency. Even if the public were
able to evaluate policy proposals effectively, they would find it infeasible to
engage in collective action in order to defend their diffuse interest.
Therefore, theorists expect that numerous special interests will be able to
successfully lobby for various inefficient policies. In public choice theory,
such scenarios of inefficient government policies are referred to as
"government failure" ‚Äî a term akin to "market failure" from earlier
theoretical welfare economics. "Expressive interests" and democratic
irrationality. Geoffrey Brennan and Loren Lomasky claim that democratic policy
is biased to favor "expressive interests" and neglect practical and utilitarian
considerations. Brennan and Lomasky differentiate between instrumental
interests (any kind of practical benefit, both monetary and non-monetary) and
expressive interests (forms of expression like applause). According to Brennan
and Lomasky, the voting paradox can be resolved by differentiating between
expressive and instrumental interests. While voters have virtually no
instrumental incentive to vote, they do have an expressive interest in voting.
Since voters vote for expressive reasons, politicians win by targeting the
median expressive preferences. Bias in favor of expressive interests means that
public policy often ignores important practical considerations. For example,
there are instrumental costs to restricting international trade. Yet many
people favor protectionism as an expression of nationalism, despite its
economic costs. This argument has led some public choice scholars to claim that
politics is plagued by irrationality. In articles published in the Econ Journal
Watch, economist Bryan Caplan contended that voter choices and government
economic decisions are inherently irrational. Caplan‚Äòs ideas are more fully
developed in his book "The Myth of the Rational Voter" (Princeton University
Press 2007). In opposition to the arguments put forward by economist Donald
Wittman in his The Myth of Democratic Failure, Caplan claims that politics is
biased in favor of irrational beliefs. According to Caplan, democracy
effectively subsidizes irrational beliefs. Anyone who derives utility from
potentially irrational policies (such as protectionism) can receive private
benefits while imposing the costs of such beliefs on the general public. Were
people to bear the full costs of their ‚Äúirrational beliefs‚Äù, they would
lobby for them optimally, taking into account both their instrumental
consequences and their expressive appeal. Instead, democracy oversupplies
policies based on irrational beliefs. Caplan defines rationality mainly in
terms of mainstream price theory, pointing out that mainstream economists tend
to oppose protectionism and government regulation more than the general
population, and that more educated people are closer to economists on this
score, even after controlling for confounding factors such as income, wealth or
political affiliation. One criticism is that many economists do not share
Caplan's views on the nature of public choice. However, Caplan does have some
data to support his position. Economists have, in fact, often been frustrated
by public opposition to economic reasoning. As Sam Peltzman puts it "Economists
know what steps would improve the efficiency of HSE safety, and environmental
regulation, and they have not been bashful advocates of them. These steps
include substituting markets in property rights, such as emission rights, for
command and control. . . . The real problem lies deeper than any lack of reform
proposals or failure to press them. It is our inability to understand their
lack of political appeal "George Stigler's Contribution to the Economic
Analysis of Regulation" 101 J. Pol. Econ. 818, 830 (October 1993). Rent-
seeking. Another major claim is that much of political activity is a form of
rent-seeking which wastes resources. Gordon Tullock, Jagdish Bhagwati, and Anne
Osborn Krueger have argued that rent-seeking has caused considerable waste. In
a parallel line of research Fred McChesney claims that rent extraction causes
considerable waste, especially in the developing world. As the term implies,
rent extraction happens when officials use threats to extort payments from
private parties. Political stance. From such results it is sometimes asserted
that public choice theory has an anti-state tilt. But there is ideological
diversity among public choice theorists. Mancur Olson for example was an
advocate of a strong state and instead opposed political interest group
lobbying. More generally, James Buchanan has suggested that public choice
theory be interpreted as "politics without romance," a critical approach to a
pervasive earlier notion of idealized politics set against market failure. As
such it is more a correction of the earlier scientific record, almost requiring
a certain pragmatism in comparing alternative politicized institutional
structures. Applications. Public choice's application to government regulation
was developed by George Stigler (1971) and Sam Peltzman (1976). William
Niskanen is generally considered the founder of Public Choice literature on the
bureaucracy. Development. The modern literature in Public Choice began with
Duncan Black, who in 1948 identified the underlying concepts of what would
become median voter theory. He also wrote "The Theory of Committees and
Elections" in 1958. Gordon Tullock refers to him as the "father of public
choice theory". James M. Buchanan and Gordon Tullock coauthored "" (1962),
considered one of the landmark works that founded the discipline of public
choice theory. In particular (1962, p. v), the book is about the "political
organization" of a free society. But its method, conceptual apparatus, and
analytics "are derived, essentially, from the discipline that has as its
subject the "economic" organization of such a society." The book focuses on
positive-economic analysis as to the development of constitutional democracy
but in an ethical context of consent. The consent takes the form of a
compensation principle like Pareto efficiency for making a policy change and
unanimity at least no opposition as a point of departure for social choice.
Kenneth Arrow's "Social Choice and Individual Values" (1951) influenced
formulation of the theory. Among other important works are Anthony Downs's "An
Economic Theory of Democracy" (1957) and Mancur Olson's "The Logic of
Collective Action" (1965). During the same decade, the probabilistic voting
theory started to replace the median voter theory, since it clearly showed how
it was able to find Nash Equilibria also in multidimensional space. The theory
was later completely formalized by Peter Coughlin. Recognition. Several notable
Public Choice scholars have been awarded the Nobel Prize in Economics,
including James M. Buchanan (1986), George Stigler (1982), and Gary Becker
(1992). In addition, Vernon Smith (2002) and Elinor Ostrom (2009) were former
Presidents of the Public Choice Society. Criticisms. It should be noted that
scenarios of this type contain an implicit assumption of zero probability of
the two strangers ever interacting again. With a positive probability of future
interactions and the propensity of humans to use tit-for-tat type strategies
(someone harms or helps you, you return the favor in kind), the optimal totally
self-interested decision may be to point to the train station. Furthermore, as
David D. Friedman observes, the benefit of cheating the stranger "on one
occasion" may not be worth the mental effort of conceiving a way to do so and
weighing the odds of suffering the consequences. Sen, in fact, has participated
in the development of public choice theory, in such works as "Collective Choice
and Social Welfare".
