Public sector The public sector, sometimes referred to as the state sector or
the government sector, is a part of the state that deals with either the
production, ownership, sale, provision, delivery and allocation of goods and
services by and for the government or its citizens, whether national, regional
or local/municipal. Examples of public sector activity range from delivering
social security, administering urban planning and organizing national defense.
A borderline form is as follows** In spite of their name, public companies are
not part of the public sector; they are a particular kind of private sector
company that can offer their shares for sale to the general public, i.e. to
anyone willing to buy them (as opposed to a privately owned company, shares of
which can be sold to someone only if the owner of the shares agrees to sell
them). The role and scope of the public sector and state sector are often the
biggest distinction regarding the economic positions of socialist, liberal and
libertarian political philosophy. In general, socialists favor a large state
sector consisting of state projects and enterprises, at least in the
"commanding heights" or fundamental sectors of the economy (although some
socialists favor a large cooperative sector instead). Social democrats tend to
favor a medium-sized public sector that is limited to the provision of
universal programs and public services. Economic libertarians and minarchists
favor a larger private sector and small public sector with the state being
relegated to protecting property rights, creating and enforcing laws and
settling disputes, a "night watchman state". - The Public Sector consists of
the Central government,regional administration and local authorities - The
Public sector is obliged to promote the economy, by providing an infra-
structure for businesses to use. - The Public sector have to finance large
capital projects that businesses in the private sector cannot afford by itself.
- The Main aim of the Public Sector is to provide a service to the public -
They take state finances and put it into businesses in the private sector, that
can make a profit
