Public administration Public administration houses the implementation of
government policy and an academic discipline that studies this implementation
and that prepares civil servants for this work. As a "field of inquiry with a
diverse scope" its "fundamental goal... is to advance management and policies
so that government can function." Some of the various definitions which have
been offered for the term are: "the management of public programs"; the
"translation of politics into the reality that citizens see every day"; and
"the study of government decision making, the analysis of the policies
themselves, the various inputs that have produced them, and the inputs
necessary to produce alternative policies." Public administration is "centrally
concerned with the organization of government policies and programmes as well
as the behavior of officials (usually non-elected) formally responsible for
their conduct" Many unelected public servants can be considered to be public
administrators, including heads of city, county, regional, state and federal
departments such as municipal budget directors, human resources (H.R.)
administrators, city managers, census managers, state health directors, and
cabinet secretaries. Public administrators are public servants working in
public departments and agencies, at all levels of government. In the US, civil
servants and academics such as Woodrow Wilson promoted American civil service
reform in the 1880s, moving public administration into academia. However,
"until the mid-20th century and the dissemination of the German sociologist Max
Weber's theory of bureaucracy" there was not "much interest in a theory of
public administration." The field is multidisciplinary in character; one of the
various proposals for public administration's sub-fields sets out six pillars,
including human resources, organizational theory, policy analysis and
statistics, budgeting, and ethics. Definitions. One scholar claims that "public
administration has no generally accepted definition", because the "scope of the
subject is so great and so debatable that it is easier to explain than define".
Public administration is a field of study (i.e., a discipline) and an
occupation. There is much disagreement about whether the study of public
administration can properly be called a discipline, largely because of the
debate over whether public administration is a subfield of political science or
a subfield of administrative science". Scholar Donald Kettl is among those who
view public administration "as a subfield within political science". The North
American Industry Classification System definition of the Public Administration
(NAICS 91) sector states that public administration "... comprises
establishments primarily engaged in activities of a governmental nature, that
is, the enactment and judicial interpretation of laws and their pursuant
regulations, and the administration of programs based on them". This includes
"Legislative activities, taxation, national defense, public order and safety,
immigration services, foreign affairs and international assistance, and the
administration of government programs are activities that are purely
governmental in nature". From the academic perspective, the National Center for
Education Statistics (NCES) in the United States defines the study of public
administration as "A program that prepares individuals to serve as managers in
the executive arm of local, state, and federal government and that focuses on
the systematic study of executive organization and management. Includes
instruction in the roles, development, and principles of public administration;
the management of public policy; executive-legislative relations; public
budgetary processes and financial management; administrative law; public
personnel management; professional ethics; and research methods." History.
Antiquity to the 19th century. Dating back to Antiquity, Pharaohs, kings and
emperors have required pages, treasurers, and tax collectors to administer the
practical business of government. Prior to the 19th century, staffing of most
public administrations was rife with nepotism, favoritism, and political
patronage, which was often referred to as a "spoils system". Public
administrators have been the "eyes and ears" of rulers until relatively
recently. In medieval times, the abilities to read and write, add and subtract
were as dominated by the educated elite as public employment. Consequently, the
need for expert civil servants whose ability to read and write formed the basis
for developing expertise in such necessary activities as legal record-keeping,
paying and feeding armies and levying taxes. As the European Imperialist age
progressed and the militarily powers extended their hold over other continents
and people, the need for a sophisticated public administration grew. The
eighteenth-century noble, King Frederick William I of Prussia, created
professorates in Cameralism in an effort to train a new class of public
administrators. The universities of Frankfurt an der Oder and University of
Halle were Prussian institutions emphasizing economic and social disciplines,
with the goal of societal reform. Johann Heinrich Gottlob Justi was the most
well-known professor of Cameralism. Thus, from a Western European perspective,
Classic, Medieval, and Enlightenment-era scholars formed the foundation of the
discipline that has come to be called public administration. Lorenz von Stein,
an 1855 German professor from Vienna, is considered the founder of the science
of public administration in many parts of the world. In the time of Von Stein,
public administration was considered a form of administrative law, but Von
Stein believed this concept too restrictive. Von Stein taught that public
administration relies on many prestablished disciplines such as sociology,
political science, administrative law and public finance. He called public
administration an integrating science, and stated that public administrators
should be concerned with both theory and practice. He argued that public
administration is a science because knowledge is generated and evaluated
according to the scientific method. Modern American public administration is an
extension of democratic governance, justified by classic and liberal
philosophers of the western world ranging from Aristotle to John Locke to
Thomas Jefferson The separation of politics and administration has been the
subject of lasting debate. The different perspectives regarding this dichotomy
contribute to differentiating characteristics of the suggested generations of
public administration. By the 1920s, scholars of public administration had
responded to Wilson's solicitation and thus textbooks in this field were
introduced. A few distinguished scholars of that period were, Luther Gulick,
Lyndall Urwick, Henri Fayol, Frederick Taylor, and others. Frederick Taylor
(1856-1915), another prominent scholar in the field of administration and
management also published a book entitled ‘The Principles of Scientific
Management’ (1911). He believed that scientific analysis would lead to the
discovery of the ‘one best way’ to do things and /or carrying out an
operation. This, according to him could help save cost and time. Taylor’s
technique was later introduced to private industrialists, and later into the
various government organizations (Jeong, 2007). Taylor's approach is often
referred to as Taylor's Principles, and/or Taylorism. Taylor's scientific
management consisted of main four principles (Frederick W. Taylor, 1911):
Taylor had very precise ideas about how to introduce his system (approach):
‘It is only through enforced standardization of methods, enforced adoption of
the best implements and working conditions, and enforced cooperation that this
faster work can be assured. And the duty of enforcing the adoption of standards
and enforcing this cooperation rests with management alone.’ The American
Society for Public Administration (ASPA) the leading professional group for
public administration was founded in 1939. ASPA sponsors the journal Public
Administration Review, which was founded in 1940. US in the 1940s. The
separation of politics and administration advocated by Wilson continues to play
a significant role in public administration today. However, the dominance of
this dichotomy was challenged by second generation scholars, beginning in the
1940s. Luther Gulick's fact-value dichotomy was a key contender for Wilson's
proposed politics-administration dichotomy. In place of Wilson's first
generation split, Gulick advocated a "seamless web of discretion and
interaction". Luther Gulick and Lyndall Urwick are two second-generation
scholars. Gulick, Urwick, and the new generation of administrators built on the
work of contemporary behavioral, administrative, and organizational scholars
including Henri Fayol, Fredrick Winslow Taylor, Paul Appleby, Frank Goodnow,
and Willam Willoughby. The new generation of organizational theories no longer
relied upon logical assumptions and generalizations about human nature like
classical and enlightened theorists. Gulick developed a comprehensive, generic
theory of organization that emphasized the scientific method, efficiency,
professionalism, structural reform, and executive control. Gulick summarized
the duties of administrators with an acronym; POSDCORB, which stands for
planning, organizing, staffing, directing, coordinating, reporting, and
budgeting. Fayol developed a systematic, 14-point, treatment of private
management. Second-generation theorists drew upon private management practices
for administrative sciences. A single, generic management theory bleeding the
borders between the private and the public sector was thought to be possible.
With the general theory, the administrative theory could be focused on
governmental organizations. Post–World War II to the 1970s. The mid-1940s
theorists challenged Wilson and Gulick. The politics-administration dichotomy
remained the center of criticism. In the 1960s and 1970s, government itself
came under fire as ineffective, inefficient, and largely a wasted effort. The
costly American intervention in Vietnam along with domestic scandals including
the bugging of Democratic party headquarters (the 1974 Watergate scandal) are
two examples of self-destructive government behavior that alienated citizens.
There was a call by citizens for efficient administration to replace
ineffective, wasteful bureaucracy. Public administration would have to distance
itself from politics to answer this call and remain effective. Elected
officials supported these reforms. The Hoover Commission, chaired by University
of Chicago professor Louis Brownlow, to examine reorganization of government.
Brownlow subsequently founded the Public Administration Service (PAS) at the
university, an organization which has provided consulting services to all
levels of government until the 1970s. Concurrently, after World War II, the
whole concept of public administration expanded to include policy-making and
analysis, thus the study of ‘administrative policy making and analysis’ was
introduced and enhanced into the government decision-making bodies. Later on,
the human factor became a predominant concern and emphasis in the study of
Public Administration. This period witnessed the development and inclusion of
other social sciences knowledge, predominantly, psychology, anthropology, and
sociology, into the study of public administration (Jeong, 2007). Henceforth,
the emergence of scholars such as, Fritz Morstein Marx with his book ‘The
Elements of Public Administration’ (1946), Paul H. Appleby ‘Policy and
Administration’ (1952), Frank Marini ‘Towards a New Public
Administration’ (1971), and others that have contributed positively in these
endeavors. By LAMIDI YUSSUFF OLATUNJI..(The executive president of POLITICAL
SCIENCE DEPARTMENT. EACOED) OYO. Public administration can be defined as a
department in the executive arm of government responsible for the formulating
and implementation of government policies and programmes. 1980s–1990s. In the
late 1980s, yet another generation of public administration theorists began to
displace the last. The new theory, which came to be called New Public
Management, was proposed by David Osborne and Ted Gaebler in their book
"Reinventing Government". The new model advocated the use of private sector-
style models, organizational ideas and values to improve the efficiency and
service-orientation of the public sector. During the Clinton Administration
(1993–2001), Vice President Al Gore adopted and reformed federal agencies
using NPM approaches. In the 1990s, new public management became prevalent
throughout the bureaucracies of the US, the UK and, to a lesser extent, in
Canada. Some modern authors define NPM as a combination of splitting large
bureaucracies into smaller, more fragmented agencies, encouraging competition
between different public agencies, and encouraging competition between public
agencies and private firms and using economic incentives lines (e.g.,
performance pay for senior executives or user-pay models). NPM treats
individuals as "customers" or "clients" (in the private sector sense), rather
than as citizens. Some critics argue that the New Public Management concept of
treating people as "customers" rather than "citizens" is an inappropriate
borrowing from the private sector model, because businesses see customers are a
means to an end (profit), rather than as the proprietors of government (the
owners), opposed to merely the customers of a business (the patrons). In New
Public Management, people are viewed as economic units not democratic
participants. Nevertheless, the model is still widely accepted at all levels of
government and in many OECD nations. Late 1990s–2000. In the late 1990s,
Janet and Robert Denhardt proposed a new public services model in response to
the dominance of NPM. A successor to NPM is digital era governance, focusing on
themes of reintegrating government responsibilities, needs-based holism
(executing duties in cursive ways), and digitalization (exploiting the
transformational capabilities of modern IT and digital storage).One example of
this is openforum.com.au, an Australian non-for-pronvites politicians, senior
public servants, academics, business people and other key stakeholders to
engage in high-level policy debate. Another new public service model is what
has been called New Public Governance, an approach which includes a
centralization of power; an increased number, role and influence of partisan-
political staff; personal-politicization of appointments to the senior public
service; and, the assumption that the public service is promiscuously partisan
for the government of the day. Decision-making models. Given the array of
duties public administrators find themselves performing, the professional
administrator might refer to a theoretical framework from which he or she might
work. Indeed, many public and private administrative scholars have devised and
modified decision-making models. Niskanen's budget-maximizing. In 1971,
Professor William Niskanen proposed a rational choice variation which he called
the "budget-maximizing model". He claimed that rational bureaucrats will
universally seek to increase the budgets of their units (to enhance their
stature), thereby contributing to state growth and increased public
expenditure. Niskanen served on President Reagan's Council of Economic
Advisors; his model underpinned what has been touted as curtailed public
spending and increased privatization. However, budgeted expenditures and the
growing deficit during the Reagan administration is evidence of a different
reality. A range of pluralist authors have critiqued Niskanen's universalist
approach. These scholars have argued that officials tend also to be motivated
by considerations of the public interest. Dunleavy's bureau-shaping. The
bureau-shaping model, a modification of Niskanen, holds that rational
bureaucrats only maximize the part of their budget that they spend on their own
agency's operations or give to contractors and interest groups. Groups that are
able to organize a "flowback" of benefits to senior officials would, according
to this theory, receive increased budgetary attention. For instance, rational
officials will get no benefit from paying out larger welfare checks to millions
of low-income citizens because this does not serve a bureaucrats' goals.
Accordingly, one might instead expect a jurisdiction to seek budget increases
for defense and security purposes in place programming. If we refer back to
Reagan once again, Dunleavy's bureau shaping model accounts for the alleged
decrease in the "size" of government while spending did not, in fact, decrease.
Domestic entitlement programming was financially de-emphasized for military
research and personnel. As an academic field. In the United States, the
academic field of public administration draws heavily on political science and
administrative law. Some MPA programs include economics courses to give
students a background in microeconomic issues (markets, rationing mechanisms,
etc.) and macroeconomic issues (e.g., national debt). Scholars such as John A.
Rohr write of a long history behind the constitutional legitimacy of government
bureaucracy. In Europe (notably in Britain and Germany), the divergence of the
field from other disciplines can be traced to the 1720s continental university
curriculum. Formally, official academic distinctions were made in the 1910s and
1890s, respectively. The goals of the field of public administration are
related to the democratic values of improving equality, justice, security,
efficiency, effectiveness of public services usually in a non-profit, non-
taxable venue; business administration, on the other hand, is primarily
concerned with taxable profit. For a field built on concepts (accountability,
governance, decentralization, clientele), these concepts are often ill-defined
and typologies often ignore certain aspects of these concepts (Dubois & Fattore
2009). One minor tradition that the more specific term "public management"
refers to ordinary, routine or typical management concerns, in the context of
achieving public good. Others argue that "public management" refers to a newer,
market-driven perspective on the operation of government. This latter view is
often called "new public management" by its advocates. New Public Management
represents a reform attempt, aimed at reemphasizing the professional nature of
the field. This will replace the academic, moral or disciplinary emphasis. Some
theorists advocate a bright line differentiation of the professional field from
related academic disciplines like political science and sociology; it remains
interdisciplinary in nature. One public administration scholar, Donald Kettl,
argues that "...public administration sits in a disciplinary backwater",
because "...or the last generation, scholars have sought to save or replace it
with fields of study like implementation, public management, and formal
bureaucratic theory". Kettl states that "public administration, as a subfield
within political science...is struggling to define its role within the
discipline". He notes two problems with public administration: it "has seemed
methodologically to lag behind" and "the field’s theoretical work too often
seems not to define it"-indeed, "some of the most interesting recent ideas in
public administration have come from outside the field". Public administration
theory is the domain in which discussions of the meaning and purpose of
government, the role of bureaucracy in supporting democratic governments,
budgets, governance, and public affairs takes place. In recent years, public
administration theory has periodically connoted a heavy orientation toward
critical theory and postmodern philosophical notions of government, governance,
and power. However, many public administration scholars support a classic
definition of the term emphasizing constitutionality, public service,
bureaucratic forms of organization, and hierarchical government. Comparative
public administration. Comparative public administration is defined as the
study of administrative systems in a comparative fashion or the study of public
administration in other countries. Another definition for "comparative public
administration" is the "quest for patterns and regularities in administrative
action and behavior". There have been several issues which have hampered the
development of comparative public administration, including: the major
differences between Western countries and developing countries; the lack of
curriculum on this subfield in public administration programs; and the lack of
success in developing theoretical models which can be scientifically tested.
Master's degrees. As a field, public administration can be compared to business
administration, and the master of public administration (MPA) viewed as similar
to a master of business administration (MBA) for those wishing to pursue
governmental or non-profit careers. An MPA often emphasizes substantially
different ethical and sociological criteria that are traditionally secondary to
that of profit for business administrators. The MPA is related to similar
graduate level government studies including MA programs in public affairs,
public policy, and political science. Differences often include program
emphases on policy analysis techniques or other topical focuses such as the
study of international affairs as opposed to focuses on constitutional issues
such as separation of powers, administrative law, problems of governance and
power, and participatory democracy. Doctoral degrees. There are two types of
doctoral degrees in public administration: the Doctor of Public Administration
and the Ph.D. in Public Administration. The Doctor of Public Administration
(DPA) is an applied-research doctoral degree in the field of public
administration, focusing on practice. The DPA requires a dissertation and
significant coursework beyond the Masters level. Upon successful completion of
the doctoral requirements, the title of "Doctor" is awarded and the post-
nominals of D.P.A. are often added. Some universities use the Ph.D. as their
doctoral degree in public administration (e.g., Carleton University in Ottawa,
Canada). Notable scholars. Notable scholars of public administration have come
from a range of fields. In the period before public administration existed as
its own independent discipline, scholars contributing to the field came from
economics, sociology, management, political science, administrative law, and,
other related fields. More recently, scholars from public administration and
public policy have contributed important studies and theories. For a longer
list of academics and theorists, see the List of notable public administration
scholars article. International public administration. There are several
organizations that are active. The Commonwealth Association of Public
Administration and Management CAPAM http://www.capam.org/ is perhaps the most
diverse, covering the 54 member states of the Commonwealth from India to Nauru.
Its biennial conference brings together ministers of public service, top
officials and leading scholars in the field. The oldest is the International
Institute of Administrative Sciences. Based in Brussels, Belgium, the IIAS is a
worldwide platform providing a space for exchanges that promote knowledge and
practices to improve the organization and operation of Public Administration
and to ensure that public agencies will be in a position to better respond to
the current and future expectations and needs of society. The IIAS has set-up
four entities: the International Association of Schools and Institutes of
Administration (IASIA), the European Group for Public Administration (EGPA),
The Latin American Group for Public Administration (LAGPA) and the Asian Group
for Public Administration (AGPA). IASIA is an association of organizations and
individuals whose activities and interests focus on public administration and
management. The activities of its members include education and training of
administrators and managers. It is the only worldwide scholarly association in
the field of public management. EGPA, LAGPA and AGPA are the regional sub-
entities of the IIAS. Also the International Committee of the US-based National
Association of School of Public Affairs and Administration (NASPAA) has
developed a number of relationships around the world. They include sub regional
and National forums like CLAD, INPAE and NISPAcee, APSA, ASPA. The Center for
Latin American Administration for Development (CLAD), based in Caracas,
Venezuela, this regional network of schools of public administration set up by
the governments in Latin America is the oldest in the region. The Institute is
a founding member and played a central role in organizing the Inter-American
Network of Public Administration Education (INPAE). Created in 2000, this
regional network of schools is unique in that it is the only organization to be
composed of institutions from North and Latin America and the Caribbean working
in public administration and policy analysis. It has more than 49 members from
top research schools in various countries throughout the hemisphere. NISPAcee
is a network of experts, scholars and practitioners who work in the field of
public administration in Central and Eastern Europe, including the Russian
Federation and the Caucasus and Central Asia. The US public administration and
political science associations like NASPA, American Political Science
Association (APSA) and American Society of Public Administration (ASPA). These
organizations have helped to create the fundamental establishment of modern
public administration.
