Public participation Public participation is a political principle or practice,
and may also be recognised as a right (right to public participation). The
terms public participation may be used interchangeably with the concept or
practice of stakeholder engagement and/or popular participation. Generally
public participation seeks and facilitates the involvement of those potentially
affected by or interested in a decision. The principle of public participation
holds that those who are affected by a decision have a right to be involved in
the decision-making process. Public participation implies that the public's
contribution will influence the decision. Public participation may be regarded
as a way of empowerment and as vital part of democratic governance. In the
context of knowledge management the establishment of ongoing participatory
processes is seen by some in the facilitator of collective intelligence and
inclusiveness, shaped by the desire for the participation of the whole
community or society. Public participation is part of “people centred” or
"human centric" principles, which have emerged in Western culture over the last
thirty years, and has had some bearings of education, business, public policy
and international relief and development programs. Public participation is
advanced by the humanist movements. Public participation may be advanced as
part of a “people first” paradigm shift. In this respect public
participation may challenge the concept that "big is better" and the logic of
centralized hierarchies, advancing alternative concepts of “more heads are
better than one” and arguing that public participation can sustain productive
and durable change. The role of public participation in economic and human
development was enshrined in the 1990 African Charter for Popular Participation
in Development and Transformation. Public policy. In some countries public
participation has become a central principle of public policy making. In the UK
it has been observed that all levels of government have started to build
citizen and stakeholder engagement into their policy-making processes. This may
involve large-scale consultations, focus group research, online discussion
forums, or deliberative citizens' juries. There are many different public
participation mechanisms, although these often share common features (for a
list over 100, and a typology of mechanisms, see Rowe and Frewer, 2005). Public
participation is viewed as a tool, intended to inform planning, organising or
funding of activities. Public participation may also be used to measure
attainable objectives, evaluate impact, and identify lessons for future
practice. In the USA public participation in administrative rulemaking refers
to the process by which proposed rules are subject to public comment for a
specified period of time. Public participation is typically mandatory for rules
promulgated by executive agencies of the US government. Statutes or agency
policies may mandate public hearings during this period. Participatory
budgeting. Participatory budgeting is a process of democratic deliberation and
decision-making, in which ordinary city residents decide how to allocate part
of a municipal or public budget. Participatory budgeting is usually
characterized by several basic design features: identification of spending
priorities by community members, election of budget delegates to represent
different communities, facilitation and technical assistance by public
employees, local and higher level assemblies to deliberate and vote on spending
priorities, and the implementation of local direct-impact community projects.
Participatory budgeting may be used by towns and cities around the world, and
has been widely publicised in Porto Alegre, Brazil, were the first full
participatory budgeting process was developed starting in 1989. Public trust.
In recent years loss of public trust in authorities and politicians has become
a widespread concern in many democratic societies. Public participation is a
regarded as one potential solution to the crisis in public trust and
governance, particularly in the UK, Europe, and other democracies. The idea is
that public should be involved more fully in the policy process in that
authorities seek public views and participation, instead of treating the public
as simply passive recipients of policy decisions. The underlying assumption by
political theorists, social commentators, and even politicians is that public
participation increase public trust in authorities, improving citizen political
efficacy, enhancing democratic ideals and even improving the quality of policy
decisions. However, the assumed benefits of public participation in restoring
public trust are yet to be confirmed. Accountability and transparency. Public
participation may also be viewed as accountability enhancing. The argument
being that public participation can be a means for the participating
communities to hold public authorities accountable for implementation.
Participatory development. In economic development theory the school of
participatory development. The desire to increase public participation in
humanitarian aid and development has led to the establishment of a numerous
context-specific, formal methodologies, matrices, pedagogies and ad hoc
approaches. These include conscientization and praxis; Participatory action
research (PPA), rapid rural appraisal (RRA) and participatory rural appraisal
(PRA); appreciation influence control analysis (AIC); “open space”
approaches; Objectives Oriented Project Planning (ZOPP); vulnerability analysis
and capacity analysis. Environment and sustainable development. In recent years
public participation has become to be seen as a vital part of addressing
environmental problems and bringing about sustainable development. In this
context the limits of solely relying on technocratic bureaucratic monopoly of
decision making, and it is argued that public participation allows governments
to adopt policies and enact laws that are relevant to communities and take into
account their needs. Public participation is recognised as an environmental
principle, see Environmental Principles and Policies, and has been enshrined in
the Rio Declaration. Public participation in environmental governance. With
growing complexities of the environmental issues, public participation has come
to the fore in academic analysis concerning the contemporary debates about
environmental governance. There have emerged a number of arguments in favour of
a more participatory approach, which stress that public participation is a
crucial element in environmental governance that contributes to better decision
making. It is recognised that environmental problems cannot be solved by
government alone. Participation in environmental decision-making effectively
links the public to environmental governance. By involving the public, who are
at the root of both causes and solutions of environmental problems, in
environmental discussions, transparency and accountability are more likely to
be achieved, thus secures the democratic legitimacy of decision-making that
good environmental governance depends on. Arguably, a strong public
participation in environmental governance could increase the commitment among
stockholders, which strengthens the compliance and enforcement of environmental
laws. In addition, some opponents argue that the right to participate in
environmental decision-making is a procedural right that “can be seen as part
of the fundamental right to environmental protection”. From this ethical
perspective, environmental governance is expected to operate within a framework
coinciding the "constitutional principle of fairness (inclusive of equality)",
which inevitably requires the fulfillment of "environmental rights" and
ultimately calls for the engagement of public. Further, in the context of
considerable scientific uncertainties surrounding environmental issues, public
participation helps to counter such uncertainties and bridges the gap between
scientifically-defined environmental problems and the experiences and values of
stakeholders. Through joint effort of the government and scientists in
collaboration with the public, better governance of environment is expected to
be achieved by making the most appropriate decision possible. Although broad
agreements exist, the notion of public participation in environmental decision-
making has been subject to a sustained critique concerning the real outcome of
participatory environmental governance. Critics argue that public participation
tends to focus on reaching a consensus between actors who share the same values
and seek the same outcomes. However, the uncertain nature of many of the
environmental issues would undermine the validity of public participation,
given that in many cases the actors come to the table of discussion hold very
different perceptions of the problem and solution which are unlikely to be
welded into a consensus due to the incommensurability of different positions.
This may run the risk of expert bias, which generates further exclusion as
those who are antagonistic to the consensus would be marginalised in the
environmental decision-making process, which violates the assumed advantage of
participatory approach to produce democratic environmental decisions. This
raises the further question of whether consensus should be the measure of a
successful outcome of participation. As Davies suggests, participative
democracy could not guarantee the substantive environmental benefits ‘if
there are competing views of what the environment should be like and what it is
valuable for’. Consequently, who should be involved at what points in the
process of environmental decision-making and what is the goal of this kind of
participation become central to the debates on public participation as a key
issue in environmental governance. Right to public participation. In some
jurisdictions the right to public participation is enshrined by law. The right
to public participation may also be conceived of as human right, or as
manifestation of the right to freedom of association and freedom of assembly.
As such the Netherlands, Germany, Denmark and Sweden, have public participation
and freedom of information provisions in their legal systems since before the
Middle Ages. Democracy and public participation are closely connected
democratic societies have incorporated public participation rights into their
laws for centuries. For example, in the US the right to petition has been part
of the first Amendment of the US constitution since 1791. More recently, since
the 1970s in New Zealand numerous laws (e.g.: health, local government,
environmental management) require government officials to "consult" those
affected by a matter and take their views into consideration when making
decisions. Effective public participation depends on the public having
accessing to accurate and comprehensive information. Hence laws regarding
public participation often deal with the issue of the right to know, access of
information and freedom of information. The right to participation may also be
advanced in the context of equality and group rights, meant to ensure equal and
full participation of a designated group in society. For example in the context
of disabled people. Rio Declaration on Environment and Development. The Rio
Declaration of 1992 enshrines public participation in its 27 principles.
Principle 10 states that "environmental issues are best handled with
participation of all concerned citizens, at the relevant level”. The Rio
Declaration continues, drawing a close link between access to information and
public participation:  Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities.
The 2006 Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities recognised that
"disability results from the interaction between persons with impairments and
attitudinal and environmental barriers that hinders their full and effective
participation in society on an equal basis with others" and that "persons with
disabilities continue to face barriers in their participation as equal members
of society." The Convention makes participation of disabled one of its
principles, stating "The principles of the present Convention shall be:...Full
and effective participation and inclusion in society;", subsequently enshrining
the right of disabled to participate fully and equally in the community,
education, all aspect of life (in the context of habilitation and
rehabilitation), political and public life, cultural life, leisure and sports.
