Public policy Public policy as government action is generally the principled
guide to action taken by the administrative or executive branches of the state
with regard to a class of issues in a manner consistent with law and
institutional customs. In general, the foundation is the pertinent national and
substantial constitutional law and implementing legislation such as the US
Federal code. Further substrates include both judicial interpretations and
regulations which are generally authorized by legislation. Other scholars
define it as a system of "courses of action, regulatory measures, laws, and
funding priorities concerning a given topic promulgated by a governmental
entity or its representatives." Public policy is commonly embodied "in
constitutions, legislative acts, and judicial decisions." In the United States,
this concept refers not only to the result of policies, but more broadly to the
decision-making and analysis of governmental decisions. As an academic
discipline, public policy is studied by professors and students at public
policy schools of major universities throughout the country. The U.S.
professional association of public policy practitioners, researchers, scholars,
and students is the Association for Public Policy Analysis and Management.
Government actions. Shaping public policy is a complex and multifaceted process
that involves the interplay of numerous individuals and interest groups
competing and collaborating to influence policymakers to act in a particular
way. These individuals and groups use a variety of tactics and tools to advance
their aims, including advocating their positions publicly, attempting to
educate supporters and opponents, and mobilizing allies on a particular issue.
As an academic discipline. As an academic discipline, public policy brings in
elements of many social science fields and concepts, including economics,
sociology, political economy, program evaluation, policy analysis, and public
management, all as applied to problems of governmental administration,
management, and operations. At the same time, the study of public policy is
distinct from political science or economics, in its focus on the application
of theory to practice. While the majority of public policy degrees are master's
and doctoral degrees, several universities also offer undergraduate education
in public policy. Policy schools tackle policy analysis differently. The Harris
School of Public Policy Studies at the University of Chicago has a more
quantitative and economics approach to policy, the Heinz College at Carnegie
Mellon uses computational and empirical methods, while the John F. Kennedy
School of Government at Harvard University has a more political science and
leadership based approach. The Indiana University School of Public and
Environmental Affairs provides traditional public policy training with
multidisciplinary concentrations available in the environmental sciences and
nonprofit management. The Jindal School of Government and Public Policy in
India offers an interdisciplinary training in public policy with a focus on the
policy making processes in developing and BRIC countries. In Europe, the School
of Government of LUISS Guido Carli offers a multidisciplinary approach to
public policy combining economics, political sciences, new public management
and policy analysis. Traditionally, the academic field of public policy focused
on domestic policy. However, the wave of economic globalization, which ensued
in the late 20th and early 21st centuries, created a need for a subset of
public policy that focuses on global governance, especially as it relates to
issues that transcend national borders such as climate change, terrorism,
nuclear proliferation, and economic development. Consequently, many traditional
public policy schools had to tweak their curricula to adjust to this new policy
landscape.
