Public good In economics, a public good is a good that is both non-excludable
and non-rivalrous in that individuals cannot be effectively excluded from use
and where use by one individual does not reduce availability to others.
Examples of public goods include fresh air, knowledge, lighthouses, national
defence, flood control systems and street lighting. Public goods that are
available everywhere are sometimes referred to as global public goods. Many
public goods may at times be subject to excessive use resulting in negative
externalities affecting all users; for example air pollution and traffic
congestion. Public goods problems are often closely related to the "free-rider"
problem or the tragedy of the commons, in which people not paying for the good
may continue to access it. Thus, the good may be under-produced, overused or
degraded. Public goods may also become subject to restrictions on access and
may then be considered to be club goods or private goods; exclusion mechanisms
include copyright, patents, congestion pricing, and pay television.
Uncoordinated markets driven by self-interested parties may be unable to
provide these goods. There is a good deal of debate and literature on how to
measure the significance of public goods problems in an economy, and to
identify the best remedies. Terminology, and types of goods. ..." which all
enjoy in common in the sense that each individual's consumption of such a good
leads to no subtractions from any other individual's consumption of that
good"... This is the property that has become known as "non-rivalry". In
addition a "pure public good" exhibits a second property called "non-
excludability": that is, it is impossible to exclude any individuals from
consuming the good. The opposite of a public good is a "private good", which
does not possess these properties. A loaf of bread, for example, is a private
good: its owner can exclude others from using it, and once it has been
consumed, it cannot be used again. A good which is rivalrous but "non-
excludable" is sometimes called a "common-pool resource". Such goods raise
similar issues to public goods: the mirror to the "public goods problem" for
this case is sometimes called the "tragedy of the commons". For example, it is
so difficult to enforce restrictions on deep sea fishing that the world's fish
stocks can be seen as a non-excludable resource, but one which is finite and
diminishing. The definition of non-excludability states that it is impossible
to exclude individuals from consumption. Technology now allows radio or TV
broadcasts to be encrypted such that persons without a special decoder are
excluded from the broadcast. Many forms of information goods have
characteristics of public goods. For example, a poem can be read by many people
without reducing the consumption of that good by others; in this sense, it is
non-rivalrous. Similarly, the information in most patents can be used by any
party without reducing consumption of that good by others. Creative works may
be excludable in some circumstances, however: the individual who wrote the poem
may decline to share it with others by not publishing it. Copyrights and
patents both encourage and inhibit the creation of such non-rival goods by
providing temporary monopolies, or, in the terminology of public goods,
providing a legal mechanism to enforce excludability for a limited period of
time. For public goods, the "lost revenue" of the producer of the good is not
part of the definition: a public good is a good whose consumption does not
reduce any other's consumption of that good.  The economic concept of public
goods should not be confused with the expression "the public good", which is
usually an application of a collective ethical notion of "the good" in
political decision-making. Another common confusion is that public goods are
goods provided by the public sector. Although it is often the case that
Government is involved in producing public goods, this is not necessarily the
case. Public goods may be "naturally" available. They may be produced by
private individuals and firms, by non-state collective action, or they may not
be produced at all. The theoretical concept of public goods does not
distinguish with regard to the geographical region in which a good may be
produced or consumed. However, some theorists (such as Inge Kaul) use the term
'global public good' for public goods which is non-rival and non-excludable
throughout the whole world, as opposed to a public good which exists in just
one national area. Knowledge has been held to be an example of a global public
good, but also as a commons, the Knowledge commons. Graphically, non-rivalry
means that if each of several individuals has a demand curve for a public good,
then the individual demand curves are summed vertically to get the aggregate
demand curve for the public good . This is in contrast to the procedure for
deriving the aggregate demand for a private good, where individual demands are
summed horizontally. Social goods. Social goods are defined as public goods
that could be delivered as private goods, but are usually delivered by the
government for various reasons, including social policy, and funded via public
funds like taxes. "Note: Some writers have used the term 'public good' to refer
only to non-excludable 'pure public goods' and refer to excludable public goods
'club goods'. Examples. Common examples of public goods include: defense,
public fireworks, lighthouses, clean air and other environmental goods, and
information goods, such as software development, authorship, and invention.
Some goods (such as orphan drugs) require special governmental incentives to be
produced, but can't be classified as public goods since they don't fulfill the
above requirements (Non-excludable and non-rivalrous.) Law enforcement,
streets, libraries, museums, and education are commonly misclassified as public
goods, but they are technically classified in economic terms as quasi-public
goods because excludability "is" possible, but they do still fit some of the
characteristics of public goods. The provision of a lighthouse has often been
used as the standard example of a public good, since it is difficult to exclude
ships from using its services. No ship's use detracts from that of others, but
since most of the benefit of a lighthouse accrues to ships using particular
ports, lighthouse maintenance fees can often profitably be bundled with port
fees (Ronald Coase, "The Lighthouse in Economics" 1974). This has been
sufficient to fund actual lighthouses. Technological progress can create new
public goods. The most simple examples are street lights, which are relatively
recent inventions (by historical standards). One person's enjoyment of them
does not detract from other persons' enjoyment, and it currently would be
prohibitively expensive to charge individuals separately for the amount of
light they presumably use. On the other hand, a public good's status may change
over time. Technological progress can significantly impact excludability of
traditional public goods: encryption allows broadcasters to sell individual
access to their programming. The costs for electronic road pricing have fallen
dramatically, paving the way for detailed billing based on actual use. There is
some question as to whether defense is a public good. Murray Rothbard argues,
"'national defense' is surely not an absolute good with only one unit of
supply. It consists of specific resources committed in certain definite and
concrete ways—and these resources are necessarily scarce. A ring of defense
bases around New York, for example, cuts down the amount possibly available
around San Francisco." Jeffrey Rogers Hummel and Don Lavoie note, "Americans in
Alaska and Hawaii could very easily be excluded from the U.S. government's
defense perimeter, and doing so might enhance the military value of at least
conventional U.S. forces to Americans in the other forty-eight states. But, in
general, an additional ICBM in the U.S. arsenal can simultaneously protect
everyone within the country without diminishing its services." The free rider
problem. Public goods provide a very important example of market failure, in
which market-like behavior of individual gain-seeking does not produce
efficient results. The production of public goods results in positive
externalities which are not remunerated. If private organizations don't reap
all the benefits of a public good which they have produced, their incentives to
produce it voluntarily might be insufficient. Consumers can take advantage of
public goods without contributing sufficiently to their creation. This is
called the free rider problem, or occasionally, the "easy rider problem"
(because consumers' contributions will be small but non-zero). If too many
consumers decide to 'free-ride', private costs exceed private benefits and the
incentive to provide the good or service through the market disappears. The
market thus fails to provide a good or service for which there is a need. The
free rider problem depends on a conception of the human being as "homo
economicus": purely rational and also purely selfish—extremely
individualistic, considering only those benefits and costs that directly affect
him or her. Public goods give such a person an incentive to be a free rider.
For example, consider national defense, a standard example of a pure public
good. Suppose "homo economicus" thinks about exerting some extra effort to
defend the nation. The benefits to the individual of this effort would be very
low, since the benefits would be distributed among all of the millions of other
people in the country. There is also a very high possibility that he or she
could get injured or killed during the course of his or her military service.
On the other hand, the free rider knows that he or she cannot be excluded from
the benefits of national defense, regardless of whether he or she contributes
to it. There is also no way that these benefits can be split up and distributed
as individual parcels to people. The free rider would not voluntarily exert any
extra effort, unless there is some inherent pleasure or material reward for
doing so (for example, money paid by the government, as with an all-volunteer
army or mercenaries). The free riding problem is even more complicated than it
was thought to be until recently. Any time non-excludability results in failure
to pay the true marginal value (often called the "demand revelation problem"),
it will also result in failure to generate proper income levels, since
households will not give up valuable leisure if they cannot individually
increment a good. This implies that, for public goods without strong special
interest support, under-provision is likely since benefit-cost analyses are
being conducted at the wrong income levels, and all of the ungenerated income
would have been spent on the public good, apart from general equilibrium
considerations. In the case of information goods, an inventor of a new product
may benefit all of society, but hardly anyone is willing to pay for the
invention if they can benefit from it for free. In the case of an information
good, however, because of its characteristics of non-excludability and also
because of almost zero reproduction costs, commoditization is difficult and not
always efficient even from a neoclassical economic point of view. Possible
solutions. Assurance contracts. An assurance contract is a contract in which
participants make a binding pledge to contribute to building a public good,
contingent on a quorum of a predetermined size being reached. Otherwise the
good is not provided and any monetary contributions are refunded. A dominant
assurance contract is a variation in which an entrepreneur creates the contract
and refunds the initial pledge plus an additional sum of money if the quorum is
not reached. (The entrepreneur profits by collecting a fee if the quorum is
reached and the good is provided.) In game-theoretic terms this makes pledging
to build the public good a dominant strategy: the best move is to pledge to the
contract regardless of the actions of others. Coasian solution. "The world of
zero transaction costs has often been described as a Coasian world. Nothing
could be further from the truth. It is the world of modern economic theory, one
which I was hoping to persuade economists to leave." In some ways, the
formation of governments and government-like communities, such as homeowners
associations, can be thought of as applied instances of practicing the coasian
solution by creating institutions to reduce the transaction costs. A similar
alternative for arranging funders of public goods production, which is
especially applicable to information goods, is to produce the good but refuse
to release it to the public until some form of payment to cover costs is met.
Author Stephen King, for instance, authored chapters of a new novel
downloadable for free on his website while stating that he would not release
subsequent chapters unless a certain amount of money was raised. Sometimes
dubbed "holding for ransom", this method of public goods production is a modern
application of the street performer protocol for public goods production.
Unlike assurance contracts, this relies on social norms to ensure (to some
extent) that the threshold is reached and partial contributions are not wasted.
Government provision. If voluntary provision of public goods will not work,
then the obvious solution is making their provision involuntary. This saves
each of us from our own tendency to be a free rider, while also assuring us
that no one else will be allowed to free ride. One frequently proposed solution
to the problem is for governments or states to impose taxation to fund the
production of public goods. This does not actually solve the theoretical
problem because "good government" is itself a public good. Thus it is difficult
to ensure the government has an incentive to provide the optimum amount even if
it were possible for the government to determine precisely what amount would be
optimum. These issues are studied by public choice theory and public finance.
Sometimes the government provides public goods using "unfunded mandates". An
example is the requirement that every car be fit with a catalytic converter.
This may be executed in the private sector, but the end result is predetermined
by the state: the individually involuntary provision of the public good clean
air. Unfunded mandates have also been imposed by the U.S. federal government on
the state and local governments, as with the Americans with Disabilities Act,
for example. Subsidies and joint products. A government may subsidize
production of a public good in the private sector. Unlike government provision,
subsidies may result in some form of a competitive market. The potential for
cronyism (for example, an alliance between political insiders and the
businesses receiving subsidies) can be limited with secret bidding for the
subsidies or application of the subsidies following clear general principles.
Depending on the nature of a public good and a related subsidy, principal agent
problems can arise between the citizens and the government or between the
government and the subsidized producers; this effect and counter-measures taken
to address it can diminish the benefits of the subsidy. Subsidies can also be
used in areas with a potential for non-individualism: For instance, a state may
subsidize devices to reduce air pollution and appeal to citizens to cover the
remaining costs. Similarly, a joint-product model analyzes the collaborative
effect of joining a private good to a public good. For example, a tax deduction
(private good) can be "tied" to a donation to a charity (public good). It can
be shown that the provision of the public good increases when tied to the
private good, as long as the private good is provided by a monopoly (otherwise
the private good would be provided by competitors without the link to the
public good). Privileged group. The study of collective action shows that
public goods are still produced when one individual benefits more from the
public good than it costs him to produce it; examples include benefits from
individual use, intrinsic motivation to produce, and business models based on
selling complement goods. A group that contains such individuals is called a
privileged group. A historical example could be a downtown entrepreneur who
erects a street light in front of his shop to attract customers; even though
there are positive external benefits to neighboring nonpaying businesses, the
added customers to the paying shop provide enough revenue to cover the costs of
the street light. The existence of privileged groups may not be a complete
solution to the free rider problem, however, as underproduction of the public
good may still result. The street light builder, for instance, would not
consider the added benefit to neighboring businesses when determining whether
to erect his street light, making it possible that the street light isn't built
when the cost of building is too high for the single entrepreneur even when the
total benefit to all the businesses combined exceeds the cost. An example of
the privileged group solution could be the Linux community, assuming that users
derive more benefit from contributing than it costs them to do it. For more
discussion on this topic see also Coase's Penguin. Another example is those
musicians and writers who create music and writings for their own personal
enjoyment, and publish because they enjoy having an audience. Financial
incentives are not necessary to ensure the creation of these public goods.
Whether this creates the correct production level of writings and music is an
open question. Merging free riders. Another method of overcoming the free rider
problem is to simply eliminate the profit incentive for free riding by buying
out all the potential free riders. A property developer that owned an entire
city street, for instance, would not need to worry about free riders when
erecting street lights since he owns every business that could benefit from the
street light without paying. Implicitly, then, the property developer would
erect street lights until the marginal social benefit met the marginal social
cost. In this case, they are equivalent to the private marginal benefits and
costs. While the purchase of all potential free riders may solve the problem of
underproduction due to free riders in smaller markets, it may simultaneously
introduce the problem of underproduction due to monopoly. Additionally, some
markets are simply too large to make a buyout of all beneficiaries feasible -
this is particularly visible with public goods that affect everyone in a
country. Introducing an exclusion mechanism (club goods). Another solution,
which has evolved for information goods, is to introduce exclusion mechanisms
which turn public goods into club goods. One well-known example is copyright
and patent laws. These laws, which in the 20th century came to be called
intellectual property laws, attempt to remove the natural non-excludability by
prohibiting reproduction of the good. Although they can address the free rider
problem, the downside of these laws is that they imply private monopoly power
and thus are not Pareto-optimal. For example, in the United States, the patent
rights given to pharmaceutical companies encourage them to charge high prices
(above marginal cost) and to advertise to convince patients to persuade their
doctors to prescribe the drugs . Likewise, copyright provides an incentive for
a publisher to act like The Dog in the Manger, taking older works out of print
so as not to cannibalize revenue from the publisher's own new works. The laws
also end up encouraging patent and copyright owners to sue even mild imitators
in court and to lobby for the extension of the term of the exclusive rights in
a form of rent seeking. These problems with the club-good mechanism arise
because the underlying marginal cost of giving the good to more people is low
or zero, but, because of the limits of price discrimination those who are
unwilling or unable to pay a profit-maximizing price do not gain access to the
good. If the costs of the exclusion mechanism are not higher than the gain from
the collaboration, club goods can emerge naturally. James M. Buchanan showed in
his seminal paper that clubs can be an efficient alternative to government
interventions. On the other hand, because of the inherent inefficiency of club
good provision, it is sometimes preferable to treat even naturally excludable
club goods as public goods, and produce them by some other mechanism. Examples
of such "natural" club goods include natural monopolies with very high fixed
costs, private golf courses, cinemas, cable television and social clubs. This
explains why many such goods are often provided or subsidized by governments,
co-operatives or volunteer associations, rather than being left to be supplied
by profit-minded entrepreneurs. These goods are often known as "social goods".
Joseph Schumpeter claimed that the "excess profits," or profits over normal
profit, generated by the copyright or patent monopoly will attract competitors
that will make technological innovations and thereby end the monopoly. This is
a continual process referred to as "Schumpeterian creative destruction", and
its applicability to different types of public goods is a source of some
controversy. The supporters of the theory point to the case of Microsoft, for
example, which has been increasing its prices (or lowering its products'
quality), predicting that these practices will make increased market shares for
Linux and Apple largely inevitable. A nation can be seen as a club whose
members are its citizens. Government would then be the manager of this club.
This is further studied in the Theory of the State. Social norms. If enough
people do not think like free-riders, the private and voluntary provision of
public goods may be successful. A free rider might litter in a public park, but
a more public-spirited individual would not do so, getting an inherent pleasure
from helping the community. In fact, one might voluntarily pick up some of the
existing litter. If enough people do so, the role of the state in using taxes
to hire professional maintenance crews is reduced. This might imply that even
someone typically inclined to free-riding would not litter, since their action
would have such a cost. Social norms can also be defined on the Internet.
According to Lawrence Lessig, social norms can regulate behavior in cyberspace.
Norms constrain through perceptions from the community surrounding an
individual. If a disabled person boards a crowded bus it is expected that
someone will volunteer their seat. The same social norm, although executed in a
different environment, can also be applied to the Internet. If a user enters a
discussion in a chat room and continues to use all capital letters when
addressing other users, this action may result in that user being blocked by
other participants. There are social norms in cyberspace that users must adapt
in order to maintain a domain of public good that can be enjoyed by the masses.
Public mindedness may be encouraged by non-market solutions to the economic
problem, such as tradition and social norms. For example, concepts such as
nationalism and patriotism have been part of most successful war efforts,
complementing the roles of taxation and conscription. To some extent, public
spiritedness of a more limited type is the basis for voluntary contributions
that support public radio and television. Contributions to online collaborative
media like Wikipedia and many other projects utilizing wiki technology can also
be seen to represent an example of such public spiritedness, since they provide
a public good (information) freely to all readers. Groups relying on such
social norms often have a federated structure, since collaboration emerges more
readily in smaller social groups than in large ones (e.g. see Dunbar's number).
This explains why labor unions or charities are often organized this way.
Efficient production levels of public goods. A public good is provided
efficiently at the level where the combined marginal rate of substitution of
all individuals is equal to the marginal rate of transformation. (The marginal
rate of substitution is the rate at which an individual is willing to exchange
a private good for a public good, the marginal rate of transformation is the
quantity of a private good which the society has to give up in order to produce
one unit of a public good). When should a public good be provided? To
illustrate the basic principle, consider a community composed of just two
consumers. The government is considering whether or not to provide a park.
Arthur is prepared to pay up to $200 for use of the park, while Julia is
willing to pay up to $100. The total value to the two individuals of having the
park is $300. If it can be produced for $225, there is a $75 gain on its
production since it provides services that the community values at $300 at a
cost of only $225. Regardless of the method of providing public goods, the
efficient level of such provision is still being subjected to economic
analysis. For instance, the Samuelson condition calculates the efficient level
of public goods production to be where the ratio of the marginal social cost of
public and private goods production equals the ratio of the marginal social
benefit of public and private goods production. "If the amount of a public good
can be varied continuously, the optimal quantity to produce is that quantity
for which the marginal cost of the last unit is just equal to the sum of the
prices that all consumers would be willing to pay for that unit." This
equilibrium guarantees that the last unit of the public good costs as much to
produce as the value that it gives to all of its consumers. References. For
example, Gravelle and Rees: "The defining characteristic of a public good is
that consumption of it by one individual does not actually or potentially
reduce the amount available to be consumed by another individual."
