Public law Public law is a theory of law governing the relationship between
individuals (citizens, companies) and the state. Under this theory,
constitutional law, administrative law and criminal law are sub-divisions of
public law. This theory is at odds with the concept of constitutional law,
which requires all laws to be specifically enabled, and thereby sub-divisions,
of a constitution. Generally speaking, private law is the area of law in a
society that affects the relationships between individuals or groups without
the intervention of the state or government. In many cases the public/private
law distinction is confounded by laws that regulate private relations while
having been passed by legislative enactment. In some cases these public
statutes are known as laws of public order, as private individuals do not have
the right to break them and any attempt to circumvent such laws is void as
against public policy. By country. Canada. In the "English" provinces of
Canada, the term private law is also known as "English Common Law," or just
"common law." These are judge-made laws. Public Law is that law which is passed
by either the provincial legislatures or by the federal Parliament. In Quebec,
private law is basically the civil code of Quebec, considered to be the primary
source of private law. These laws are interpreted by judges, but this within
the ambit of the codal provisions that have been enunciated by the legislators.
United States. All U.S. states except Louisiana share a heritage with English
law, so the private law of most U.S. states is called the common law; indeed,
the U.S. Constitution makes specific reference to the common law of England as
the fundamental law of the federal United States. Some states, such as New York
(owing to its Dutch heritage), have strong civil-law influences, and have
enacted laws relating to obligations; e.g., the "General Obligations Law" and
the "General Business Law". The distinction between what is public and what is
private in the law is often a hazy one. Many consumer protection laws are of a
public law nature, which limits the ability of companies to engage in
transactions that fail to respect the rights of consumers. Most laws that
impose criminal penalties are considered public law, as these laws are intended
to protect all members of society, and this not just in the areas of
interaction covered by contract and tort laws. The legal system of Louisiana
follows the French legal tradition, especially the Code Napoleon, except where
those traditions are effectively overridden by contrary English-based legal
principles in the U.S. Constitution. Alternate usage. Acts of Congress are
designated as either "Public Laws", relating to the general public, or "Private
Laws", relating to specific individuals. Since 1957 all Acts of Congress have
been designated as "Public Law X-Y" or "Private Law X-Y", where X is the number
of the Congress and Y is a number sequentially assigned to each act. German-
speaking countries. Under the latter theory, both a contract of situation such
as the government buying office supplies are subject to private law. There are
areas of law which are mixed under that definition, such as employment law,
parts of which are public law (e.g. the activities of an employment
inspectorate when investigating workplace safety etc.) and parts of which are
private law (e.g. the employment contract). The differentiation is primarily an
academic debate, important mainly for the delineation between the competences
of the court system and administrative authorities. A statute will normally
include a section stating who is in charge of enforcement. However, under the
Austrian constitution the distinction is of some importance, as private law is
among the exclusive compentences of federal legislation, whereas public law is
partly a matter of state legislation. As a practical result, the distinction is
thus a matter of how the constitution is to be interpreted most accurately.
