Public-benefit corporation A public-benefit corporation is a public corporation
chartered by a state designed to perform some public benefit. A public
authority is a type of public-benefit corporation that takes on a more
bureaucratic role, such as the maintenance of public infrastructure, that often
has broad powers to regulate or maintain public property. Authorities borrow
from both municipal corporation law (that is, the laws responsible for the
creation of cities, towns, and other forms of local government) and private
corporations law. Other public-benefit corporations resemble private non-profit
organizations, and take on roles that private corporations might otherwise
perform. These corporations often operate in heavily regulated industries, such
as broadcasting and transportation. Corporations such as these are often found
in common law jurisdictions such as the Commonwealth countries and the United
States. Origins. Although people generally associate corporations, sometimes
negatively, with private business, corporations in theory began as means to
serve public purposes. Corporate theory has its roots in primarily government
and religious institutions, where the institution itself is identifiable
independently of its membership's mortality. For example, if the Pope dies, the
Catholic Church continues to exist, just as it continues to exist as
generations pass on and get replaced by new members. Public-benefit
corporations likely have their direct roots in mercantile capitalism. In the
early days of European exploration and colonization, a government or monarch
would sometimes grant a charter to an entity allowing it to incorporate and
make potentially risky investments. While certainly not public-benefit
corporations by today's standards, entities such as the Massachusetts Bay
Company, Hudson's Bay Company, and the Dutch East India Company arguably are
early prototypes of publicly-chartered (in this case, crown-chartered)
corporations successfully making risky investments. History. The first public
authority on record is the Port of London Authority, established 1908.
According to the Port of London Acts The Authority is a public trust
established to "administer, preserve and improve the Port of London." The goal
was to create an entity that would be run self-sufficiently like a private
company yet remain under the control of the government. The name "Authority" is
derived from the founding act of Parliament which repeatedly stated that
""Authority is hereby given..."" The special status of this entity and the fact
that it remained subject to administrative law was established by the UK courts
in "" 1 KB 176. Incorporation and powers. Public-benefit corporations are
generally governed by boards of directors, which are appointed, rather than
elected, and, internally, reflect bureaucratic forms. The corporation is
government-owned and performs a specific, narrow function for the public good.
Public-benefit corporations are most often created by statute. In many
Commonwealth countries, public-benefit corporations continue to receive
charters from the British monarchy. In the United States, they receive their
charters usually from states, but possibly from the federal government. Public
authorities are usually created with a specific mandate, such as the
construction of bridges, mass transit, etc. Unlike departments or ministries of
the state, these corporations usually are enabled by statute to raise revenues
through bond issues. For more information, read below about individual
jurisdictions. Public-benefit corporations by location. United Kingdom. The
first reference to public-benefit corporations in United Kingdom law is in the
Health and Social Care (Community Health and Standards) Act 2003, which
established NHS Foundation Trusts as public-benefit corporations. Schedule 1 of
the Act sets out the requirements for a public-benefit corporation which
include a membership made up of individuals living in a specific area,
employees of the corporation and service users, and a board of governors some
of whom are elected by the members based on "constituencies" such as staff,
users or public. Public-benefit corporations are distinguishable from public
authorities in that the latter do not have a membership. Examples of other
bodies which have a similar role to, whilst not being formally called, public-
benefit corporations include the BBC, which is incorporated by royal charter.
Many universities have charters going back centuries, and so are also chartered
corporations. Canada. Via Rail in Canada is an independent crown corporation
offering intercity passenger rail services in Canada. The Canadian Broadcasting
Corporation is another example. Russia. In Russia the law “On Noncommercial
Organizations” describes the status state corporations. It is a special form
of noncommercial partnership founded by the state to fulfill socially
significant tasks. The activities of each corporation are described in a
special federal law. Assets transferred to a state corporation are not state
property from the legal point of view. Under the law “On Noncommercial
Organizations”, property transferred to as the investment in a partnership is
the property of the partnership. The partnership itself is no one's property.
It manages its assets as described in its charter. The rights of the founder
are considerable in the partnership, but they are still not ownership rights.
There is only one founder in a state corporation, and it is the Russian
Federation. That is why the state corporation is independent. It is a set of
assets that are managed for purposes established in its charter by managers
appointed by the founder. State corporations, as a rule, are subordinate not to
the government, but to the Russian president, and act to accomplish some
important goal. The state corporations can manage those assets as demanded by
the sketchily described goals and tasks of the charters and as allowed by the
supervisory council, on which there is no one the president does not trust.
United States. Since the U.S. Constitution does not explicitly or implicitly
empower the Government of the United States to create corporations outside of
the confines of the federal government, the power to define and create
corporations (other than as agencies of the U.S. government) is mostly reserved
to the individual states. (However, certain corporations chartered by acts of
Congress do exist, mostly non-profit organizations serving the public interest,
such as the Boy Scouts of America, as well as various charitable, fraternal,
and veterans' organizations. In addition, certain parastatals, which are for-
profit, but may exercise unique powers, such as Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac,
have federal charters.) Private corporations were not so common in the early
United States as they are today; corporations were often founded to create a
public purpose, such as the maintenance of a toll bridge. Today, public-benefit
corporations are popular in some states in the United States, perhaps
especially New York State. Many interstate compacts in the United States are
public-benefit corporations. Examples of federal public-benefit corporations
created, owned and operated by the U.S. government include Amtrak, the United
States Postal Service and the Corporation for Public Broadcasting. Many public
authorities in the United States are interstate compacts or local and regional
entities covering multiple municipalities on the county or state level.
Illinois. The Bi-State Development Agency is a bi-state agency managing public
transportation between southern Illinois and Missouri. It serves the St. Louis
metropolitan area. The Regional Transportation Authority (RTA) oversees funding
and operation of public transit in the Illinois portion of the Chicago
metropolitan area. The Illinois State Toll Highway Authority Missouri. See "Bi-
State Development Agency". New Jersey. The New Jersey Turnpike Authority (NJTA)
is a public-benefit corporation in New Jersey, created by the New Jersey
Turnpike Authority Act of 1948. The Delaware River and Bay Authority controls
the Delaware Memorial Bridge between Delaware and New Jersey, and is a bi-state
agency. The Delaware River Port Authority is a bi-state agency of New Jersey
and Pennsylvania. The Port Authority of New York and New Jersey is a bi-state
agency shared with New York. NJ Transit, formed in 1979 operates bus, light
rail and passenger rail service in New Jersey and in neighboring states as well
as funding and planning of bus and rail services and programs. Although "Public
Benefit Corporation" is not a statutorily defined term under State laws (New
Jersey Statutes or the New Jersey Administrative Code), such corporations are
among those included within the statutorily defined term "State Agency". New
York. The widespread use of public authorities in the United States was
pioneered in New York state by Robert Moses. The approval of the New York State
Public Authorities Control Board is required in some cases when creating an
authority. An authority may at times levy taxes and tolls; this means that they
are not part of the usual state budgetary process, and gives them a certain
independence. Their most admired ability by the New York State and local
government, is to circumvent strict public debt limits in the New York State
Constitution. Furthermore, they may make contracts; because of public
authorities' corporate status, there is, generally, no remedy against the
chartering State for the breach of such contracts. "John Grace & Co. v. State
University Constr. Fund", 44 N.Y.2d 84, 375 N.E.2d 377; 404 N.Y.S.2d 316
(1978). On the other hand, as agents of the state, public authorities are not
subject to many laws governing private corporations, and are not subject to
municipal regulation. Employees of public authorities usually "are not" state
employees, but are employees of the authority. "Ciulla v. State", 191 Misc.
528; 77 N.Y.S.2d 545; (NY Court of Claims, 1948). Public authorities can also
often condemn property. "See Generally" 87 NY Jur PUBLIC AUTHORITIES Section 1
"et seq". Among the major public-benefit corporations in New York state, the
Port Authority of New York and New Jersey, an interstate compact, and the
Metropolitan Transportation Authority, which manages most of the public
transportation to, in, and around New York City, might be the most famous. New
York has hundreds of lesser-known public-benefit corporations. The Urban
Development Corporation, founded to provide public housing, now has other
priorities, and it boasts no less than 107 subsidiaries with devolved powers.
One of these, the Lower Manhattan Development Corporation has been receiving a
lot of press, in the wake of the September 11, 2001, terrorist attacks. New
York likely has the most extensive number of public-benefit corporations in the
United States. Pennsylvania. In this state, a municipal authority can have many
similarities to a public-benefit corporation. The Southeastern Pennsylvania
Transportation Authority (SEPTA) provides public transportation in and around
Philadelphia. The Delaware River Port Authority is a bi-state agency of
Pennsylvania and New Jersey. Tennessee. Tennessee is arguably the banner state
for the Tennessee Valley Authority's (TVA's) operations, which span a region
extending into seven states (most of Tennessee and parts of six others), but
the TVA is actually a federally-owned public authority. The TVA has been key in
aiding the region's economic development, most notably in the 1930s during the
Great Depression. Vermont. Like Maine, the state of Vermont defines public-
benefit corporations broadly. They include public-benefit corporations founded
by the state and by private entities. The Vermont Economic Development
Authority[http://www.veda.org/] is an example of a state-owned public-benefit
corporation. Other meanings. More broadly, a public-benefit corporation could
be any corporation that exists for a charitable purpose, though these are
generally called non-profit corporations if they are not founded by a
government. Some jurisdictions (the U.S. State of Maine, for instance) might
define a public-benefit corporation broadly. In California, public-benefit
corporations are one of several types of non-profit corporations.
