Punk ideologies Punk ideologies are a group of varied social and political
beliefs associated with the punk subculture. In its original incarnation, the
punk subculture was primarily concerned with concepts such as rebellion, anti-
authoritarianism, individualism, free thought and discontent. Punk ideologies
are usually expressed through punk rock music, punk literature, spoken word
recordings, punk fashion, or punk visual art. Some punks have participated in
direct action, such as protests, boycotts, squatting, vandalism, or property
destruction. Punk fashion was originally an expression of nonconformity, as
well as opposition to both mainstream culture and the hippie counterculture.
Punk fashion often displays aggression, rebellion, and individualism. Some
punks wear clothing or have tattoos that express sociopolitical messages. Punk
visual art also often includes those types of messages. Many punks wear second
hand clothing, partly as an anti-consumerist statement. An attitude common in
the punk subculture is the opposition to selling out, which refers to
abandoning of one's values and/or a change in musical style toward pop or more
radio-friendly rock in exchange for wealth, status, or power. Selling out also
has the meaning of adopting a more mainstream lifestyle and ideology. Because
anti-establishment and anti-capitalist attitudes are such an important part of
the punk subculture, a network of independent record labels, venues and
distributors has developed. Some punk bands have chosen to break from this
independent system and work within the established system of major labels. The
do it yourself (DIY) ideal is common in the punk scene, especially in terms of
music recording and distribution, concert promotion, magazines, posters and
flyers. On religious issues, punk is mostly atheist or agnostic, but some punk
bands have promoted religions such as Christianity, Islam, the Rastafari
movement or Krishna. Specific ideologies and philosophies. The following
include some of the most common ideologies and philosophies within the punk
subculture (in alphabetical order). Anarchism. There is a complex and worldwide
underground of punks committed to libertarian socialism or anarchism as a
serious political ideology, sometimes termed "peace punks" or "anarcho-punks."
Whereas some well-known punk bands such as the Sex Pistols and The Exploited
sang about general anarchy, they did not embrace anarchism as a disciplined
ideology. As such, they are not considered part of anarcho-punk. Notable
anarchist punk artists include: Aus-Rotten, Dave Insurgent, Crass, Dick Lucas,
Colin Jerwood, and Dave Dictor. Apolitical. Some punks claim to be non-
political, such as the band Charged GBH and the singer G.G. Allin, although
some socio-political ideas have appeared in their lyrics. Some Charged GBH
songs have discussed social issues, and a few have expressed anti-war views.
G.G. Allin expressed a vague desire to kill the United States president and
destroy the political system in his song "Violence Now". Punk subgenres that
are generally apolitical include: glam punk, psychobilly, horror punk, punk
pathetique, deathrock and pop punk. Many of the bands credited with starting
the punk movement were decidedly apolitical, including The Dictators, Ramones
(which featured staunch conservative Johnny Ramone alongside left-wing activist
Joey Ramone), New York Dolls, Television, Johnny Thunders & The Heartbreakers,
and Richard Hell & The Voidoids. Christianity. Christian punk is a small sub-
genre of punk rock with some degree of Christian lyrical content. Some
Christian punk bands are associated with the Christian music industry, but
others reject that association. Examples of notable Christian punk bands
include The Crucified, MxPx and Flatfoot 56. Conservatism and right-
libertarianism. A small number of punks are conservative or right-libertarian,
rejecting anarchism, liberalism, communism and socialism in favor of free
market capitalism, a minimal government and individualist ownership of
property. Notable conservative punks include: Michale Graves, Johnny Ramone,
Lee Ving, Joe Escalante, Bobby Steele, Dave Smalley and Barry Donegan. Krishna.
In the 1990s, some notable members of the New York hardcore scene, including
Ray Cappo (Youth of Today, Shelter and other bands), John Joseph (Cro-Mags) and
Harley Flanagan (Cro-Mags) converted to Hare Krishna. This led to trend within
the hardcore scene that became known as Krishna-core. Neo-Nazism. Nazi punks
have a far right, white nationalist ideology that is closely related to that of
white power skinheads. Ian Stuart Donaldson and his band Skrewdriver are
credited with popularizing white power rock and hatecore (for its hateful
lyrical themes), or Rock Against Communism. Nazi punks are different from early
punks such as Sid Vicious and Siouxsie Sioux, who are believed to have
incorporated Nazi imagery such as Swastikas for shock or comedy value.
Nihilism. Centering around a belief in the abject lack of meaning and value to
life, nihilism was a fixture in some protopunk and early punk rock. Notable
nihilist punks include: Iggy Pop, Sid Vicious and Richard Hell. Liberalism.
Liberal punks were in the punk subculture from the beginning, and are mostly on
the liberal left. Notable liberal punks include: Joey Ramone, Fat Mike, Ted
Leo, Billie Joe Armstrong, Crashdog, Hoxton Tom McCourt, Justin Sane, Tim
Armstrong and Tim McIlrath. Some punks participated in the Rock Against Bush
movement in the mid-2000s, in support of the Democratic Party candidate John
Kerry. Straight edge. Straight edge, which originated in the American hardcore
punk scene, involves abstaining from alcohol, tobacco, and recreational drug
use. Some who claim the title straight edge also abstain from caffeine, casual
sex and meat. Those more strict individuals may be considered part of the
hardline subculture. Unlike the shunning of meat and caffeine, refraining from
casual sex was without question a practice in the original straight edge
lifestyle, but it has been overlooked in many of the later reincarnations of
straight edge. For some, straight edge is a simple lifestyle preference, but
for others it's a political stance. In many cases, it is a rejection of the
perceived self-destructive qualities of punk and hardcore culture. Notable
straight edgers: Ian MacKaye, Tim McIlrath, Justin Sane, and Davey Havok.
Socialism. The Clash were the first blatantly political punk rock band,
introducing socialism to the punk scene. Some of the original Oi! bands
expressed a rough form of socialist working class populism — often mixed with
patriotism. Many Oi! bands sang about unemployment, economic inequality,
working class power and police harassment. In the 1980s, several notable
British socialist punk musicians were involved with Red Wedge. Notable
socialist punks include: Attila the Stockbroker, Billy Bragg, Bruce La Bruce,
Garry Bushell (until the late 1980s), Chris Dean, Gary Floyd, Jack Grisham,
Stewart Home, Dennis Lyxzén, Thomas Mensforth, Fermin Muguruza, Alberto Pla,
Tom Robinson, Seething Wells, Paul Simmonds, Rob Tyner, Joe Strummer, Ian
Svenonius, Mark Steel and Paul Weller. The Situationist International (SI) was
allegedly an early influence on the punk subculture in the United Kingdom.
Started in continental Europe in the 1950s, the SI was an avant-garde political
movement that sought to recapture the ideals of surrealist art and use them to
construct new and radical social situations. Malcolm McLaren introduced
situationist ideas to punk through his management of the band Sex Pistols.
Vivienne Westwood, McLaren’s partner and the band’s designer/stylist,
expressed situationist ideals through fashion that was intended to provoke a
specific social response. Jamie Reid's distinctive album cover artwork was
openly situationist. Islam. Taqwacore is a punk subgenre centred around Islam,
its culture and its interpretation. The Taqwacore scene is composed mainly of
young Muslim artists living in the United States and other western countries,
many of whom openly reject traditionalist interpretations of Islam. There is no
definitive Taqwacore sound, and some bands incorporate styles including hip-
hop, techno, and/or musical traditions from the Muslim world. Examples of
Muslim punk bands include Alien Kulture. The Kominas and Secret Trial Five.
Criticism of punk ideologies. Punk ideologies have been criticized from outside
and within. The Clash occasionally accused other contemporary punk acts of
selling out, such as in their songs "(White Man) In Hammersmith Palais" and
"Death or Glory". Crass's song "White Punks on Hope" criticized the late-1970s
British punk scene in general and, among other things, accused Joe Strummer of
selling out and betraying his earlier socialist principles. Their song "Punk is
Dead" attacked corporate co-option of the punk subculture. Dead Kennedys
frontman Jello Biafra wrote many songs criticizing aspects of the punk
subculture, and he once accused the punk magazine "Maximum RocknRoll" of "punk
fundamentalism" when they refused to advertise Alternative Tentacles records
because they said the records "weren't punk". The Misfits' Michale Graves, a
right-libertarian who cofounded the Conservative Punk website, argued that
punks have become "hippies with mohawks". Author Jim Goad has been very
critical of punk ideologies in many of his writings. In his essay "The
Underground is A Lie!", Goad argued that many punks are hypocrites, and he
claimed that many punks act poor while hiding the fact they come from middle to
upper class backgrounds. In "Farts from Underground", Goad claimed that the DIY
ethic never produces anything original, and it allows poor quality work to be
championed. In their book "The Rebel Sell", Joseph Heath and Andrew Potter
argued that counterculture politics have failed, and that the punk
understanding of society is flawed. They also argued that alternative and
mainstream lifestyles ultimately have the same values.
