Purple Rain Protest The Purple Rain Protest, Purple Rain Revolt or Purple Rain
Riot was an anti-apartheid protest held in Cape Town on 2 September 1989, four
days before South Africa's racially segregated parliament held its elections. A
police water cannon with purple dye was turned on thousands of Mass Democratic
Movement supporters who poured into the city in an attempt to march on South
Africa's Parliament. White office blocks adjacent to Greenmarket Square were
sprayed purple four stories high as a protester leapt onto the roof of the
water cannon vehicle, seized the nozzle and attempted to turn the jet away from
the crowds. One of the dyed buildings was the Cape Headquarters of the National
Party. The historic Town House, a national monument, was sprayed purple and the
force of the jet smashed windows in the Central Methodist Church. Tear gas was
fired and the crowd that had knelt defiantly in the purple jet fled. Adderley
Street was closed to traffic as scores of shops and businesses closed their
doors and hundreds of people were arrested, including Dr Allan Boesak, UCT
academic Dr Charles Villa-Vincencia, Western Cape Council of Churches official
Rev. Pierre van den Heever and lawyer Essa Moosa. Climax. The police were using
a new water cannon with purple dye whose purpose was to stain protestors for
later identification and arrest. Protesters were warned to disperse, but
instead knelt in the street. When the cannon was turned on them, some
protestors remained kneeling while others fled; some had their feet knocked out
from under them by the force of the jet. In Adderley Street, shoppers ran for
cover, their eyes streaming, and a young couple with a baby in a pram were
hurriedly ushered into a shop which then locked its doors. A lone protestor
redirected the water cannon toward the local headquarters of the ruling
National Party. The headquarters, along with the historic, white-painted Old
Town House, overlooking Greenmarket Square, were doused with purple dye. A
group of about 50 protesters streaming with purple dye, ran from Burg Street,
down to the parade. They were followed by another group of clergymen and others
who were stopped in Plein Street. Some were then arrested. On the Parade, a
large contingent of policemen arrested everyone they could find who had purple
dye on them. When they were booed by the crowd, police dispersed them. About
250 people marching under a banner stating "The People Shall Govern" dispersed
at the intersection of Darling Street and Sir Lowry Road after being stopped by
police. Graffiti. Another piece of anti-apartheid graffiti, "The purple shall
govern", appeared on the old Townhouse in Greenmarket Square. The statement is
play on words of the Freedom Charter's declaration that "The people shall
govern". The slogan was used as the title of a book, "The Purple shall govern:
a South African A to Z of nonviolent action". Comments. "What about the purple
people?" a reader asked the Cape Times' Teleletters. "Not only has the
government messed up with the tricameral system, now their police have created
another problem. They, the government, have made 'provision' for the so-called
coloureds and Indians -- how are they going to accommodate the 'purple people?
Perhaps the next time they use their water cannon, they would like to consult
with their voters as to which colour is fashionable." "Who's going to pay for
the city's day of purple spray?" asked Don Holliday of the Cape Argus. "As the
controversy continues over who is to pay for the clean-up of buildings,
streets, cars and clothing sprayed purple by police during Saturday's Mass
Democratic Movement's attempted march to parliament, police announced that they
would release details of the effects of the dye." "A spokesperson for the
police directorate of public relations said they had approached their forensic
science division to prepare a report on the effects of the dye -- including
whether it would eventually wash off and possible solutions for washing." A
later statement reported that the dye was a "harmless substance" which was
mixed with water and could be washed off clothing with soap and water. Walls
sprayed with the dye could be cleaned using a mixture of one part hydrochloric
acid to 100 parts water and then rinsed. The Rev. Herbert Brand of the Dutch
Reformed Church was inspired by the "purple drama" as well as the 50th
anniversary of the start of WW2 to deliver a passionate sermon on "fascism in
the city".
