Quantitative easing Quantitative easing (QE) is an unconventional monetary
policy used by central banks to stimulate the national economy when
conventional monetary policy has become ineffective. A central bank implements
quantitative easing by buying financial assets from commercial banks and other
private institutions with newly created money in order to inject a pre-
determined "quantity" of money into the economy. This is distinguished from the
more usual policy of buying or selling government bonds to keep market interest
rates at a specified target value. Quantitative easing increases the excess
reserves of the banks, and raises the prices of the financial assets bought,
which lowers their yield. Expansionary monetary policy typically involves the
central bank buying short-term government bonds in order to lower short-term
market interest rates. However, when short-term interest rates are either at,
or close to, zero, normal monetary policy can no longer lower interest rates.
Quantitative easing may then be used by the monetary authorities to further
stimulate the economy by purchasing assets of longer maturity than only short-
term government bonds, and thereby lowering longer-term interest rates further
out on the yield curve. Quantitative easing can be used to help ensure
inflation does not fall below target. Risks include the policy being more
effective than intended in acting against deflation – leading to higher
inflation, or of not being effective enough if banks do not lend out the
additional reserves. Process. Ordinarily, a central bank conducts monetary
policy by raising or lowering its interest rate target for the inter-bank
interest rate. A central bank generally achieves its interest rate target
mainly through open market operations, where the central bank buys or sells
short-term government bonds from banks and other financial institutions. When
the central bank disburses or collects payment for these bonds, it alters the
amount of money in the economy, while simultaneously affecting the price (and
thereby the yield) for short-term government bonds. This in turn affects the
interbank interest rates. If the nominal interest rate is at or very near zero,
the central bank cannot lower it further. Such a situation, called a liquidity
trap, can occur, for example, during deflation or when inflation is very low.
In such a situation, the central bank may perform quantitative easing by
purchasing a pre-determined amount of bonds or other assets from financial
institutions without reference to the interest rate. The goal of this policy is
to increase the money supply rather than to decrease the interest rate, which
cannot be decreased further. This is often considered a "last resort" to
stimulate the economy. Quantitative easing, and monetary policy in general, can
only be carried out if the central bank controls the currency used. The central
banks of countries in the Eurozone, for example, cannot unilaterally expand
their money supply, and thus cannot employ quantitative easing. They must
instead rely on the European Central Bank (ECB) to set monetary policy.
History. In Japan. The original Japanese expression for "quantitative easing"
(量的金融緩和, "ryōteki kin'yū kanwa"), was used for the first time by
a Central Bank in the Bank of Japan's publications. The Bank of Japan has
claimed that the central bank adopted a policy with this name on 19 March 2001.
However, the Bank of Japan's official monetary policy announcement of this date
does not make any use of this expression (or any phrase using "quantitative")
in either the Japanese original statement or its English translation. Indeed,
the Bank of Japan had for years, including as late as February 2001, claimed
that "quantitative easing … is not effective" and rejected its use for
monetary policy. Speeches by the Bank of Japan leadership in 2001 gradually,
and "ex post", hardened the subsequent official Bank of Japan stance that the
policy adopted by the Bank of Japan on 19 March 2001 was in fact quantitative
easing. This became the established official view, especially after Toshihiko
Fukui was appointed governor in February 2003. The use by the Bank of Japan is
not the origin of the term "quantitative easing" or its Japanese original
(ryoteki kinyu kanwa). This expression had been used since the mid-1990s by
critics of the Bank of Japan and its monetary policy. Quantitative easing was
used unsuccessfully by the Bank of Japan (BOJ) to fight domestic deflation in
the early 2000s. The Bank of Japan has maintained short-term interest rates at
close to zero since 1999. With quantitative easing, it flooded commercial banks
with excess liquidity to promote private lending, leaving them with large
stocks of excess reserves, and therefore little risk of a liquidity shortage.
The BOJ accomplished this by buying more government bonds than would be
required to set the interest rate to zero. It also bought asset-backed
securities and equities, and extended the terms of its commercial paper
purchasing operation. After 2007. More recently, similar policies have been
used by the United States, the United Kingdom and the Eurozone during the
Financial crisis of 2007–2012. Quantitative easing was used by these
countries as their "risk-free short-term nominal interest rates" are either at,
or close to, zero. In US, this interest rate is the federal funds rate. In UK,
it is the official bank rate. During the peak of the financial crisis in 2008,
in the United States the Federal Reserve expanded its balance sheet
dramatically by adding new assets and new liabilities without "sterilizing"
these by corresponding subtractions. In the same period the United Kingdom also
used quantitative easing as an additional arm of its monetary policy in order
to alleviate its financial crisis. The European Central Bank has used 12-month
and 36-month long term refinancing operations (LTRO) (forms of quantitative
easing without referring to them as such) through a process of expanding the
assets that banks can use as collateral that can be posted to the ECB in return
for euros. This process has led to bonds being "structured for the ECB". By
comparison the other central banks were very restrictive in terms of the
collateral they accept: the US Federal Reserve used to accept primarily
treasuries (in the first half of 2009 it bought almost any relatively safe
dollar-denominated securities); the Bank of England applied a large haircut.
During its QE programme, the Bank of England bought gilts from financial
institutions, along with a smaller amount of relatively high-quality debt
issued by private companies. The banks, insurance companies and pension funds
can then use the money they have received for lending or even to buy back more
bonds from the bank. The central bank can also lend the new money to private
banks or buy assets from banks in exchange for currency. These have the effect
of depressing interest yields on government bonds and similar investments,
making it cheaper for business to raise capital. Another side effect is that
investors will switch to other investments, such as shares, boosting their
price and thus encouraging consumption. QE can reduce interbank overnight
interest rates, and thereby encourage banks to loan money to higher interest-
paying and financially weaker bodies. Nevin argued that QE failed to stimulate
recovery in the UK and instead prolonged the recession between 2009 and 2012 as
it caused a collapse in the velocity of circulation, or rate at which money
circulates around the economy. This happened because QE drove down gilt yields
and annuity rates and forced pensioners, savers and companies to hoard cash to
counter the negative impact of QE on their investment income. In 2012 the Bank
of England itself reckoned that quantitative easing had benefited households
differently, according to the assets they hold; richer households have more
assets.. Amounts. The US Federal Reserve held between $700 billion and $800
billion of Treasury notes on its balance sheet before the recession. In late
November 2008, the Fed started buying $600 billion in Mortgage-backed
securities (MBS). By March 2009, it held $1.75 trillion of bank debt, MBS, and
Treasury notes, and reached a peak of $2.1 trillion in June 2010. Further
purchases were halted as the economy had started to improve, but resumed in
August 2010 when the Fed decided the economy was not growing robustly. After
the halt in June holdings started falling naturally as debt matured and were
projected to fall to $1.7 trillion by 2012. The Fed's revised goal became to
keep holdings at the $2.054 trillion level. To maintain that level, the Fed
bought $30 billion in 2–10-year Treasury notes a month. In November 2010, the
Fed announced a second round of quantitative easing, or "QE2", buying $600
billion of Treasury securities by the end of the second quarter of 2011. A
third round of quantitative easing, or "QE3," was announced by the Federal
Reserve in September 2012. The third round includes a plan to purchase US$40
billion of mortgage-backed securities (MBS) per month. Additionally, the
Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) announced that it would likely maintain
the federal funds rate near zero "at least through 2015." The Bank of England
had purchased around £165 billion of assets by September 2009 and around £175
billion of assets by end of October 2010. At its meeting in November 2010, the
Monetary Policy Committee (MPC) voted to increase total asset purchases to
£200 billion. Most of the assets purchased have been UK government securities
(gilts), the Bank has also been purchasing smaller quantities of high-quality
private sector assets. In December 2010 MPC member Adam Posen called for a £50
billion expansion of the Bank's quantitative easing programme, whilst his
colleague Andrew Sentance has called for an increase in interest rates due to
inflation being above the target rate of 2%. In October 2011, the Bank of
England announced it would undertake another round of QE, creating an
additional £75 billion, in February 2012 it announced an additional £50
billion, in July 2012 it announce another £50 billion bringing the total
amount to £375 billion. The Bank of England has said that it will not buy more
than 70% of any issue of government debt. This means that at least 30% of each
issue of government debt will have to be bought by other institutions. The
European Central Bank (ECB) said it would focus efforts on buying covered
bonds, a form of corporate debt. It signalled initial purchases would be worth
about €60 billion in May 2009. The Bank of Japan (BOJ) increased the
commercial bank current account balance from ¥5 trillion yen to ¥35 trillion
(approximately US$300 billion) over a 4-year period starting in March 2001. As
well, the BOJ tripled the quantity of long-term Japan government bonds it could
purchase on a monthly basis. In early October 2010, the BOJ announced that it
would examine the purchase of ¥5 trillion (US$60 billion) in assets. This was
an attempt to push the value of the yen versus the US dollar down to stimulate
the local economy by making their exports cheaper; it did not work. On 4 August
2011 the bank announced a unilateral move to increase the amount from ¥40
trillion (US$504 billion) to a total of ¥50 trillion (US$630 billion). In
October 2011 the Bank of Japan expanded its asset purchase program by ¥5
trillion ($66bn) to a total of ¥55 trillion. QE1, QE2, and QE3. The expression
"QE2" became a " nickname" in 2010, when used to refer to a second round of
quantitative easing by central banks in the United States. Retrospectively, the
round of quantitative easing preceding QE2 may be called "QE1". Similarly,
"QE3" refers to the third round of quantitative easing following QE2. QE3 was
announced on 13 September 2012. In an 11-to-1 vote, the Federal Reserve decided
to launch a new $40 billion a month, open-ended, bond purchasing program of
agency mortgage-backed securities and also to continue extremely low rates
policy until at least mid-2015. According to NASDAQ.com, this is effectively a
stimulus program which allows the Federal Reserve to relieve $40 billion
dollars per month of commercial housing market debt risk with no maximum amount
or time limit. Ratings firm Egan-Jones said it believes the Fed’s decision
“will hurt the U.S. economy and, by extension, credit quality.” As a result
the firm once again slashed the U.S. bond rating bringing it down to AA-.
Federal Reserve chairman Ben Bernanke acknowledged concerns about inflation.
Effectiveness. According to the IMF, the quantitative easing policies
undertaken by the central banks of the major developed countries since the
beginning of the late-2000s financial crisis have contributed to the reduction
in systemic risks following the bankruptcy of Lehman Brothers. The IMF states
that the policies also contributed to the improvements in market confidence and
the bottoming out of the recession in the G-7 economies in the second half of
2009. Economist Martin Feldstein argues that QE2 led to a rise in the stock-
market in the second half of 2010, which in turn contributed to increasing
consumption and the strong performance of the US economy in late-2010. Former
Federal Reserve Chairman Alan Greenspan calculated that as of July 2012 there
was "very little impact on the economy" and noted "I'm very surprised at the
data." Risks. Adverse impact on savings and pensions. In November 2010, a group
of conservative Republican economists and political activists released an open
letter to Federal Reserve Chairman Ben Bernanke questioning the efficacy of the
Fed's QE program. The Fed responded that their actions reflected the economic
environment of high unemployment and low inflation. Lowering interest rates can
actually "hurt" the economy if people who depend on interest income spend less
in response to their reduced income. In general, however, the Federal Reserve
has assumed that the advantages of the low interest rates outweigh this effect,
though they often admit that seniors may be hit as collateral damage. In the
European Union, World Pensions Council (WPC) financial economists have also
argued that QE-induced artificially low interest rates will have an adverse
impact on the underfunding condition of pension funds as “without returns
that outstrip inflation, pension investors face the real value of their savings
declining rather than ratcheting up over the next few years” Inflation from
purchasing liquid assets. Quantitative easing may cause higher inflation than
desired if the amount of easing required is overestimated, and too much money
is created by the purchase of liquid assets. On the other hand, it can fail if
banks remain reluctant to lend money to small business and households in order
to spur demand. Quantitative easing can effectively ease the process of
deleveraging as it lowers yields. It should be noted that mortagage-backed
securities such as are being purchased as part of the QE3 program are not based
on liquid assets, and their purchase does not entail inflation risks. If the
easing resulted in an expansion of the money supply, it would be expected to
cause an inflationary effect (as indicated by an increase in the annual rate of
inflation). Since there is a time lag between money growth and inflation,
inflationary pressures associated with money growth from QE could build before
the central bank acts to counter them. Inflationary risks are mitigated if the
system's economy outgrows the pace of the increase of the money supply from the
easing. If production in an economy increases because of the increased money
supply, the value of a unit of currency may also increase, even though there is
more currency available. For example, if a nation's economy were to spur a
significant increase in output at a rate at least as high as the amount of debt
monetized, the inflationary pressures would be equalized. This can only happen
if member banks actually lend the excess money out instead of hoarding the
extra cash. During times of high economic output, the central bank always has
the option of restoring the reserves back to higher levels through raising of
interest rates or other means, effectively reversing the easing steps taken.
Increasing the money supply tends to depreciate a country's exchange rates
versus other currencies. This feature of QE directly benefits exporters
residing in the country performing QE and also debtors whose debts are
denominated in that currency, for as the currency devalues so does the debt.
However, it directly harms creditors and holders of the currency as the real
value of their holdings decrease. Devaluation of a currency also directly harms
importers as the cost of imported goods is inflated by the devaluation of the
currency. Capital flight. The new money could be used by the banks to invest in
emerging markets, commodity-based economies, commodities themselves and non-
local opportunities rather than to lend to local businesses that are having
difficulty getting loans. Comparison with other instruments. Credit easing.
Credit easing involves increasing the money supply by the purchase not of
government bonds, but of private sector assets such as corporate bonds and
residential mortgage-backed securities. When undertaking credit easing, the
Federal Reserve increases the money supply not by buying government debt, but
instead by buying private sector assets including residential mortgage-backed
securities. In 2010, the Federal Reserve purchased $1.25 trillion of mortgage-
backed securities (MBS) in order to support the sagging mortgage market. These
purchases increased the monetary base in a way similar to a purchase of
government securities. Printing money. Quantitative easing has been nicknamed
"printing money" by some members of the media, central bankers, and financial
analysts. However, central banks state that the use of the newly created money
is different in QE. With QE, the newly created money is used for buying
government bonds or other financial assets, whereas the term "printing money"
usually implies that the newly minted money is used to directly finance
government deficits or pay off government debt (also known as "monetizing the
government debt"). Central banks in most developed nations (e.g., UK, US,
Japan, and EU) are forbidden by law to buy government debt directly from the
government and must instead buy it from the secondary market. This two-step
process, where the government sells bonds to private entities which the central
bank then buys, has been called "monetizing the debt" by many analysts. The
distinguishing characteristic between QE and monetizing debt is that with QE,
the central bank is creating money to stimulate the economy, not to finance
government spending. Also, the central bank has the stated intention of
reversing the QE when the economy has recovered (by selling the government
bonds and other financial assets back into the market). The only effective way
to determine whether a central bank has monetized debt is to compare its
performance relative to its stated objectives. Many central banks have adopted
an inflation target. It is likely that a central bank is monetizing the debt if
it continues to buy government debt when inflation is above target, and the
government has problems with debt-financing. Ben Bernanke remarked in 2002 that
the US Government had a technology called the printing press, or today its
electronic equivalent, so that if rates reached zero and deflation was
threatened the government could always act to ensure deflation was prevented.
He said, however, that the Government would not print money and distribute it
"willy nilly" but would rather focus its efforts in certain areas (for example,
buying federal agency debt securities and mortgage-backed securities).
According to economist Robert McTeer, former president of the Federal Reserve
Bank of Dallas, there is nothing wrong with printing money during a recession,
and quantitative easing is different from traditional monetary policy "only in
its magnitude and pre-announcement of amount and timing". Richard W. Fisher,
president of the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas, warned that a potential risk
of QE is, "the risk of being perceived as embarking on the slippery slope of
debt monetization. We know that once a central bank is perceived as targeting
government debt yields at a time of persistent budget deficits, concern about
debt monetization quickly arises." and later in the same speech states that the
Fed is monetizing the government debt, "The math of this new exercise is
readily transparent: The Federal Reserve will buy $110 billion a month in
Treasuries, an amount that, annualized, represents the projected deficit of the
federal government for next year. For the next eight months, the nation’s
central bank will be monetizing the federal debt." Altering debt maturity
structure. Based on research reassessing the effectiveness of the US Federal
Open Market Committee action in 1961 known as Operation Twist, "The Economist",
based on research by economist Eric Swanson, has posited that a similar
restructuring of the supply of different types of debt would have an effect
equal to that of QE. Such action would allow finance ministries (e.g., the US
Department of the Treasury) a role in the process now reserved for central
banks.
