Quantity theory of money In monetary economics, the quantity theory of money is
the theory that money supply has a direct, proportional relationship with the
price level. For example, if the currency in circulation increased, there would
be a proportional increase in the price of goods. The theory was challenged by
Keynesian economics, but updated and reinvigorated by the monetarist school of
economics. While mainstream economists agree that the quantity theory holds
true in the long run, there is still disagreement about its applicability in
the short run. Critics of the theory argue that money velocity is not stable
and, in the short-run, prices are sticky, so the direct relationship between
money supply and price level does not hold. Alternative theories include the
real bills doctrine and the more recent fiscal theory of the price level.
Origins and development of the quantity theory. The quantity theory descends
from Copernicus, followers of the School of Salamanca, Jean Bodin, and various
others who noted the increase in prices following the import of gold and
silver, used in the coinage of money, from the New World. The “equation of
exchange” relating the supply of money to the value of money transactions was
stated by John Stuart Mill who expanded on the ideas of David Hume. The
quantity theory was developed by Simon Newcomb, Alfred de Foville, Irving
Fisher, and Ludwig von Mises in the latter 19th and early 20th century, while
it had been argued against by Karl Marx. The theory was influentially restated
by Milton Friedman in response to Keynesianism. Academic discussion remains
over the degree to which different figures developed the theory. For instance,
Bieda argues that Copernicus's observation amounts to a statement of the
theory, while other economic historians date the discovery later, to figures
such as Jean Bodin, David Hume, and John Stuart Mill. Historically, the main
rival of the quantity theory was the real bills doctrine, which says that the
issue of money does not raise prices, as long as the new money is issued in
exchange for assets of sufficient value. Equation of exchange. In its modern
form, the quantity theory builds upon the following definitional relationship.
where where The previous equation presents the difficulty that the associated
data are not available for all transactions. With the development of national
income and product accounts, emphasis shifted to national-income or final-
product transactions, rather than gross transactions. Economists may therefore
work with the form where As an example, formula_16 might represent currency
plus deposits in checking and savings accounts held by the public, formula_15
real output (which equals real expenditure in macroeconomic equilibrium) with
formula_18 the corresponding price level, and formula_19 the nominal (money)
value of output. In one empirical formulation, velocity was taken to be “the
ratio of net national product in current prices to the money stock”. Thus
far, the theory is not particularly controversial, as the equation of exchange
is an identity. A theory requires that assumptions be made about the causal
relationships among the four variables in this one equation. There are debates
about the extent to which each of these variables is dependent upon the others.
Without further restrictions, the equation does not require that a change in
the money supply would change the value of any or all of formula_18,
formula_15, or formula_19. For example, a 10% increase in formula_16 could be
accompanied by a 10% decrease in formula_14, leaving formula_19 unchanged. The
quantity theory postulates that the primary causal effect is an effect of "M"
on "P". A rudimentary version of the quantity theory. The equation of exchange
can be used to form a rudimentary version of the quantity theory of the effect
of monetary growth on inflation. and thus where That is to say that, if
formula_14 and formula_15 were constant, then the inflation rate (the rate of
growth formula_34 of the price level) would exactly equal the growth rate
formula_35 of the money supply. In short, the inflation rate is a function of
the monetary growth rate. Less restrictively, with time-varying "V" and "Q", we
have the identity which says that the inflation rate equals the monetary growth
rate plus the growth rate of the velocity of money minus the growth rate of
real expenditure. If one makes the quantity theory assumptions that, at least
in the long run, (i) the monetary growth rate is controlled by the central
bank, (ii) the growth rate of velocity is purely determined by the evolution of
payments mechanisms, and (iii) the growth rate of real expenditure is
determined by the rate of technological progress plus the rate of labor force
growth, then while the inflation rate need not "equal" the monetary growth
rate, an "x" percentage point rise in the monetary growth rate will result in
an "x" percentage point rise in the inflation rate. Cambridge approach. The
Cambridge version of the quantity theory led to both Keynes's attack on the
quantity theory and the Monetarist revival of the theory. Quantity theory and
evidence. The plus signs indicate that a change in the money supply is
hypothesized to change nominal expenditures and the price level in the same
direction (for other variables held constant). Friedman described the empirical
regularity of substantial changes in the quantity of money and in the level of
prices as perhaps the most-evidenced economic phenomenon on record. Empirical
studies have found relations consistent with the models above and with
causation running from money to prices. The short-run relation of a change in
the money supply in the past has been relatively more associated with a change
in real output formula_15 than the price level formula_18 in (1) but with much
variation in the precision, timing, and size of the relation. For the "long"-
run, there has been stronger support for (1) and (2) and no systematic
association of formula_15 and formula_16. Decline of money-supply targeting. An
application of the quantity-theory approach aimed at removing monetary policy
as a source of macroeconomic instability was to target a constant, low growth
rate of the money supply. Still, practical identification of the relevant money
supply, including measurement, was always somewhat controversial and difficult.
As financial intermediation grew in complexity and sophistication in the 1980s
and 1990s, it became more so. As a result, some central banks, including the
U.S. Federal Reserve, which had targeted the money supply, reverted to
targeting interest rates. But monetary aggregates remain a leading economic
indicator. Criticisms. John Maynard Keynes criticized the quantity theory of
money in "The General Theory of Employment, Interest and Money". Keynes had
originally been a proponent of the theory, but he presented an alternative in
the "General Theory". Keynes argued that price level was not strictly
determined by money supply. Changes in the money supply could have effects on
real variables like output. Ludwig von Mises agreed that there was a core of
truth in the Quantity Theory, but criticized its focus on the supply of money
without adequately explaining the demand for money. He said the theory "fails
to explain the mechanism of variations in the value of money".
