Quasi-market A quasi-market is a public sector institutional structure that is
designed to reap the supposed efficiency gains of free markets without losing
the equity benefits of traditional systems of public administration and
financing. A notable example would be the NHS Internal Market (introduced in
1990): under this system, the purchase and provision of healthcare in the UK
was split up, with government-funded GP fundholders "purchasing" healthcare
from NHS Trusts and District Health Authorities, who competed against one
another for the GPs' custom. This led to increased efficiency, as hospitals now
needed to offer procedures at lower costs in order to win patients and funding,
but without losing the main equity benefits of the NHS (healthcare remained
free at the point of service and financed through taxation). However, much of
the gain from the Internal Market was countered by the increased cost of
running the administration-intensive system, and the lack of competition
between providers in many areas (due to the presence of only one general
hospital) also reduced the scope for increased efficiency. On the whole though,
the system was regarded as a success: the 1997 Labour government did not
abolish it on taking office, though it combined groups of GP fundholders to
form larger Primary Care Trusts as purchasers of healthcare. Critics of quasi-
markets argue that they can lead to problems of cream skimming. For example,
the introduction of open enrolment in UK secondary schools after 1988 (whereby
parents could choose which secondary school to send their child to, rather than
being limited to the nearest) led to popular schools being oversubscribed. This
allowed these schools to select which pupils they would accept, leading some to
discriminate against children from low-income backgrounds or non-traditional
family structures (e.g. inviting "both" of a child's parents to an informal
meeting with the headteacher so as to determine by stealth whether the child
comes from an "appropriate" family). Open enrolment also led popular schools to
expand their intake, leading to the growth of very large schools with resulting
discipline problems, at the expense of smaller schools and rural schools.
