Radicalization Radicalization (or radicalisation) is a process by which an
individual or group comes to adopt increasingly extreme political, social, or
religious ideals and aspirations that (1) reject or undermine the status quo.
Radicalization can be both violent and nonviolent, although most academic
literature focuses on radicalization into violent extremism (RVE). There are
multiple pathways that constitute the process of radicalization, which can be
independent but are usually mutually reinforcing. or (2) reject and/or
undermine contemporary ideas and expressions of freedom of choice. For example,
radicalism can originate from a broad social consensus against progressive
changes in society. Radicalization that occurs across multiple reinforcing
pathways greatly increases a group’s resilience and lethality. Furthermore,
by compromising its ability to blend in with non-radical society and
participate in a modern, globalized economy, serves as a kind of sociological
trap that gives individuals no other place to go to satisfy their material and
spiritual needs. Western Counterterrorism and Law Enforcement Agencies'
Definitions of Radicalization. United States. NCTC: According to the U.S.
National Counterterrorism Center (NCTC), The grievances that fuel
radicalization are diverse and vary across locations and groups. Radicalization
frequently is driven by personal concerns at the local level in addition
to frustration with international events. NYPD: In 2007 The New York Police
Department Intelligence Division released a document that focused on the
Islamist radicalization process entitled, Radicalization in the West: The
Homegrown Threat. The report was co-authored by Mitchell D. Sibler and Arvin
Bhatt, who are both Senior Intelligence Analysts for the NYPD. The report
researched and analyzed several famous case studies from abroad as well as from
the United States to collect the needed data to create their step by step
explanation of radicalization. The cases examined included: the London, England
7/7 attack, 2004 Madrid train bombings, the Toronto 18 case, Herald Square Bomb
Plot, the Lackawana Six plot, and the Al Muhajiroun Two plot. United Kingdom.
The UK Home Office, MI5’s parent agency, bluntly defines radicalization as
“The process by which people come to support terrorism and violent extremism
and, in some cases, then join terrorist groups.” The MI5 report closes by
saying that no single measure will reduce radicalization in the UK and that the
only way to combat it is by targeting the at risk vulnerable groups and trying
to assimilate them into society. This may include helping young people find
jobs, better integrating immigrant populations into the local culture, and
effectively reintegrating ex-prisoners into society. Canada. The Royal Canadian
Mounted Police defines radicalization as “the process by which individuals
— usually young people — are introduced to an overtly ideological message
and belief system that encourages movement from moderate, mainstream beliefs
towards extreme views. While radical thinking is by no means problematic in
itself, it becomes a threat to national security when Canadian citizens or
residents espouse or engage in violence or direct action as a means of
promoting political, ideological or religious extremism. Sometimes referred to
as “homegrown terrorism,” this process of radicalization is more correctly
referred to as domestic radicalization leading to terrorist violence.”
Holland. The Dutch AIVD defines radicalization as “Growing readiness to
pursue and/or support - if necessary by undemocratic means - far reaching
changes in society that conflict with, or pose a threat to, the democratic
order.” Denmark. The Danish Security and Intelligence Service (PET) defines
radicalization as “A process by which a person to an increasing extent
accepts the use of undemocratic or violent means, including terrorism, in an
attempt to reach a specific political/ideological objective.” The
Radicalization Process. Despite being composed of multifarious pathways that
lead to different outcomes and sometimes diametrically opposed ideological
purposes, radicalization can be traced to a common set of pathways that
translate real or perceived grievances into increasingly extreme ideas and
readiness to participate in political action beyond the status quo. To quote
Shira Fishman, a researcher at the National Consortium for the Study of
Terrorism and Responses to Terrorism, "Radicalization is a dynamic process that
varies for each individual, but shares some underlying commonalities that can
be explored."" Though there are many end products of the process of
radicalization, to include all manner of extremist groups both violent and
nonviolent, a common series of dynamics have been consistently demonstrated in
the course of academic inquiry. Radicalization and Mutual Aid. Eli Berman's
2009 book Radical, Religious, and Violent: the New Economics of Terrorism
applies a rational choice model to the process of radicalization, demonstrating
that the presence of mutual aid networks increase the resilience of radical
groups. When those groups decide to use violence, they also enjoy a heightened
level of lethality and are protected from defection and other forms of
intervention by states and outside groups. All organizations insofar as they
include the possibility of free riders by extension experience defection
constraints. Within the context of a violent extremist organization, defection
means either defection to a counterintelligence or security apparatus, or
defection to a non-radical criminal apparatus. Both of these outcomes spoil
specific plans to exercise violence in the name of the group at large. The
“defection constraint” is similar to a threshold price-point in that it
denotes what rewards would justify the defection of any one individual within
the context of an organization. Berman uses the example of a Taliban protection
racket for convoys of consumer goods moving through Afghanistan: checkpoints
are set up at several points along a trade route, and each checkpoint’s team
is given a small percentage of the convoy’s total value if it arrives safely
at its destination. The incentive for any one checkpoint’s team deciding to
simply hijack a convoy as it passes through, sell the goods off, and escape,
increases as the value of the convoy increases. The same dynamic applies to
attacks; while an individual in a terrorist group may not feel drawn by the
reward of alerting the police to an impending low level crime, the reward for
alerting the police to an impending high profile attack, such as a mass
bombing, becomes more attractive. While non-radicalized and criminal
organizations can only rely on organizational cohesion through a calculus of
greed, fear, and perhaps familial loyalty, Berman argues that religious
radicalization greatly increases the defection constraints of radical terrorist
organizations by requiring outsized demonstrations of commitment to the cause
prior to recruiting operatives. Mutual aid is the voluntary and reciprocal
exchange of goods within an organization. Examples in various religious
antecedents include Judaic Tzedakah, Islamic Zakat, and various Christian
institutions of charity, as described in the Acts of the Apostles. Berman
argues that religious organizations experience economic risks by extending
mutual aid to all alleged believers - theological assent is cheap, action can
be costly. By imposing a series of outwardly visible social rules, such as
restrictions (or prescriptions) on dress, diet, language, and social
interactions, groups impose a cost on entering into a mutual aid partnership,
diminishing the occurrence of free riding. These restrictions have a dual
effect in radical groups. Not only do they ensure that an individual is
committed to the cause, but they also diminish individual’s access to
consumption opportunities and social interaction that might persuade them to
distance themselves from the cause. As individuals become more involved with
radical activities, their social circles become more constrained, which
diminishes contact with non-radicalized persons and further entrenches
radicalized thinking. For example, when a young man spend several years in a
Yeshiva in order to establish himself within a Haredi community, he foregoes
future earnings that would be accessible should he choose a secular education.
To quote Berman “As consumption opportunities are limited, work for pay
becomes less appealing, freeing up even more time for community activities.”
This sunk cost figures into future calculations, and raises the defection
constraint in a way that non-radicalized group dynamics cannot. Going back to
the Taliban convoy example, not only have the two footsoldiers in question have
been vetted by demonstrating commitment to the cause, they also have had their
exterior options limited such that it would be difficult to blend into a new
environment for lack of skills and cultural understanding. As such, the
threshold price point to defect, as represented by the value of the convoy,
increases to include both the price of losing their existing support network
and non-quantifiable factors such as friends, family, safety, and other goods
over the course of their lives. Individual Pathways. Individual-Level Factors.
Radicalization Due to Personal Grievance: This pathway emphasizes revenge for
real or perceived harm inflicted upon oneself by an outside party. This initial
offense triggers other psychodynamic mechanisms, such as thinking in more stark
in-group and out-group terms, lowered inhibitions to violence, and lessened
incentives to avoid violence. Chechen “Shahidka” also known as Black
Widows, women who have lost husbands, children, or other close family members
in conflict Russian forces are a good example. Radicalization due to group
grievance: “Group grievance” radicalization dynamics are similar to those
that are primed by personal grievances; the difference is that the subject
perceives harm inflicted on a group that she belongs to or has sympathy for.
This pathway accounts for the larger portion of political and ethnic radical
violence, in which action is taken on behalf of the group at large rather than
as an act of personal revenge. Radicalization out of sympathy for an outgroup
is rarer, but can be observed in the Weather Underground's attempted alignment
with the Black Panthers and Viet Cong. The tie between radicalization into
violent extremism through group grievance and suicide bombing has also been
quantifiably demonstrated: perceived threats to proximal identity such as the
presence of foreign troops or invasion accounts for the majority of suicide
bombings. Slippery Slope: The “Slippery Slope” represents gradual
radicalization through activities that incrementally narrow the individual’s
social circle, narrow their mindset, and in some cases desensitize them to
violence. This has also been called the “True Believer” syndrome, as a
product of which one becomes increasingly serious about their political,
social, and religious beliefs as a product of “taking the next step”. One
can begin by participating in nonviolent activities such as mutual aid, wherein
the best way to raise one’s in-group social status is to demonstrate
seriousness about the cause and increase the level of commitment in terms of
beliefs and activities. As an individual commits act after act, sunk costs are
developed. Even if activity is initially only ideological or only criminal, the
process of radicalization conflates the two such that criminal acts are
justified for intellectually radical purposes, and radical purposes are invoked
to justify what are ultimately criminal acts. Love: Romantic and familial
entanglement is often an overlooked factor in radicalization. Several violent
extremist organizations, especially at their origin, owe their structure to a
tight-knit group of friends who share religious, economic, social, and sexual
bonds. While this example is evident in more extreme cases, such as those of
Charles Manson's "Family" and other radical cults, it also applies
radicalization in secular and orthodox religious environments. Love can serve
as a connection between influential figures, connecting their networks of
followers through a combination of attraction and loyalty. This particular
force was especially notable in New Left radical groups, such as the American
Weather Underground and the German Red Army Faction. The connections between
Bill Ayers and Bernardine Dohrn, or between Gudrun Ensslin and Andreas Baader
served as the organizational and intellectual nucleus of these groups. Risk and
Status: Within a radical group, high-risk behavior, if successful, offers a
pathway to status insofar as it becomes re-construed as bravery and commitment
to the cause. As such, violence or other radical activity provides a pathway to
success, social acceptance, and physical rewards that might otherwise be out of
reach. Unfreezing: Loss of social connection can open an individual to new
ideas and a new identity that may include political radicalization. Isolated
from friends, family, or other basic needs, individuals may begin to associate
with unlike parties, to include political, religious, or cultural radicals.
This is especially noted in "prison radicalization", where individuals bind
together over racial, religious, and gang identity to a greater degree than in
the outside world and often bring their newfound radical identity beyond prison
to connect with radical organizations in the populace at large. Group-Level
Factors. Insofar as a group is a dynamic system with a common goal or set of
values it is possible that the group’s mindset as a whole can affect
individuals such that those individuals become more radical. Group
Polarization: Discussion, interaction, and experience within a radical group
can result in an aggregate increase in commitment to the cause, and in some
cases can contribute to the formation of divergent conceptions of the group’s
purpose and preferred tactics. Within a radical group, internal dynamics can
contribute to the formation of different factions as a result of internal
disillusionment (or, conversely, ambitions) with the group’s activities as a
whole, especially when it comes to a choice between violent terrorism and
nonviolent activism. The Weather Underground’s split with Students for a
Democratic Society is one of many examples. The dynamics of group polarization
imply that members of this larger group must either commit to one faction and
demonstrate their loyalty through further radicalization, or leave the group
entire. Group Isolation: Isolation reinforces the influence of radical thinking
by allowing serious and or persuasive members of the group to
disproportionately define the body’s agenda. When an individual only has
access to one in-group social environment, that group gains a totalizing
influence over the individual - disapproval would be tantamount to social
death, personal isolation, and often a lack of access to the basic services
that mutual aid communities fulfill. As an isolated minority, Islamic groups in
the West are especially vulnerable to this form of radicalization. Being cut
off from society at large through language barriers, cultural difference, and
occasionally discriminatory treatment, Muslim communities become more
vulnerable to additional pathways of radicalization Group Competition: Groups
can become radicalized vis-a-vis other groups as they compete for legitimacy
and prestige with the general populace. This pathway emphasizes increased
radicalization in an effort to outdo other groups, whether that increase is in
violence, time spent in religious ritual, economic and physical hardship
endured, or all four. Religious movements and the terrorist elements that form
in their name display this characteristic. While in some cases there may be
doctrinal or ethnic differences that motivate this kind of competition, its
greatest outward sign is an increased demand by the group for commitment to
radical actions. Mass Radicalization. Jujitsu Politics Also called “the logic
of political violence”, Jiujitsu politics is a form of asymmetrical political
warfare in which radical groups act to provoke governments to crack down on the
populace at large and produce domestic blowback that legitimates further
violent action. The primary purpose of a radical group using this tactic is not
to destroy the enemy outright, but to make the enemy strike at political and
ideological moderates, such that the existing political order loses its claim
on legitimacy while the radical group gains legitimacy. By destroying
moderates, radical groups encourage a bifurcated society and use state's
reactions to violence as a justification for further violence. Al-Qaeda's
strategy of luring the West, specifically the United States, into ground wars
in Islamic states that polarize the Ummah against the West while avoiding
engagements that would allow the American military to draw on its technical
superiority is an example of jiujitsu politics. David Kilcullen,
Counterinsurgency advisor to David Petraeus during the Iraq Surge, has called
this the "Accidental Guerilla" syndrome. This tactic is also pillar of Maoist
insurgency and serves both the purposes of tactical and ideological advantage.
Hatred: In protracted conflicts the enemy is increasingly seen as less human,
such that their common humanity does not readily trigger natural inhibitions
against violence. This involves "essentializing" both the self and enemies as
respectively good and evil entities. The Islamist use of Takfirism, or
(apostasy), to justify the murder of non-radical muslims and nonbelievers
(Kafir - "pagans") is an example of this. Hannah Arendt, in The Origins of
Totalitarianism outlines a similar dynamic that contributed to the ideologies
of pan-slavism, Nazism, and antisemitism, where an in-group constructs an
exalted self identity for political purposes and mobilizes against out-groups
in order to solidify that identity. This dynamic of hatred is not unique to
rightist groups. The Weathermen and Red Army Faction often characterized police
officers and government officials as “pigs” worthy of death and subhuman
treatment. Martyrdom: Martyrdom implies that the person in question died for a
cause or is willing to die for a cause. The symbolic impact of martyrdom varies
across cultures, but within the field of radicalization the act or pursuit of
martyrdom denotes the absolute value of a radical’s way of life. Myths.
Poverty: The association between radicalization and poverty is a myth. Many
terrorists come from middle-class backgrounds and have university-level
educations, particularly in the technical sciences and engineering. There is no
statistical association between poverty and militant radicalization. As
outlined above, poverty and disadvantage may incentivize joining a mutual aid
organization with radical tendencies, but this does not mean that poverty
proper is responsible for radicalization. Mental Illness: though personal
psychology does play a significant part in radicalization, mental illness is
not a root cause of terrorism specifically or ideological radicalization
broadly. Even in the case of suicide terrorism, psychological pathologies, such
as sociopathy and schizophrenia are largely absent.
