Radium Girls The Radium Girls were female factory workers who contracted
radiation poisoning from painting watch dials with glow-in-the-dark paint at
the United States Radium factory in Orange, New Jersey around 1917. The women,
who had been told the paint was harmless, ingested deadly amounts of radium by
licking their paintbrushes to sharpen them; some also painted their fingernails
and teeth with the glowing substance. Five of the women challenged their
employer in a case that established the right of individual workers who
contract occupational diseases to sue their employers. United States Radium
Corporation. From 1917 to 1926, U.S. Radium Corporation, originally called the
Radium Luminous Material Corporation was engaged in the extraction and
purification of radium from carnotite or to produce luminous paints, which were
marketed under the brand name 'Undark'. As a defense contractor, U.S. Radium
was a major supplier of radioluminescent watches to the military. Their plant
in New Jersey employed more than a hundred workers, mainly women, to paint
radium-lit watch faces and instruments, believing it to be safe. Radiation
exposure. The U.S. Radium Corporation hired some 70 women to perform various
tasks including the handling of radium, while the owners and the scientists
familiar with the effects of radium carefully avoided any exposure to it
themselves; chemists at the plant used lead screens, masks and tongs. US Radium
had even distributed literature to the medical community describing the
“injurious effects” of radium. An estimated 4,000 workers were hired by
corporations in the U.S. and Canada to paint watch faces with radium. They
mixed glue, water and radium powder, and then used camel hair brushes to apply
the glowing paint onto dials. The then-current rate of pay, for painting 250
dials a day, was about a penny and a half per dial ($ per dial in today's
terms). The brushes would lose shape after a few strokes, so the U.S. Radium
supervisors encouraged their workers to point the brushes with their lips, or
use their tongues to keep them sharp. For fun, the Radium Girls painted their
nails, teeth and faces with the deadly paint produced at the factory. Many of
the workers became sick. It is unknown how many died from exposure to
radiation. The American factory sites became Superfund cleanup sites. Radiation
sickness. Many of the women later began to suffer from anemia, bone fractures
and necrosis of the jaw, a condition now known as radium jaw. It is thought
that the X-ray machines used by the medical investigators may have contributed
to some of the sickened workers' ill-health by subjecting them to additional
radiation. It turned out at least one of the examinations was a ruse, part of a
campaign of disinformation started by the defense contractor. U.S. Radium and
other watch-dial companies rejected claims that the afflicted workers were
suffering from exposure to radium. For some time, doctors, dentists, and
researchers complied with requests from the companies not to release their
data. At the urging of the companies, worker deaths were attributed by medical
professionals to other causes; syphilis, a notorious sexually transmitted
disease at the time, was often cited in attempts to smear the reputations of
the women. Significance. Litigation. The story of the abuse perpetrated against
the workers is distinguished from most such cases by the fact that the ensuing
litigation was covered widely by the media. Plant worker Grace Fryer decided to
sue, but it took two years for her to find a lawyer willing to take on U.S.
Radium. A total of five factory workers, dubbed the Radium Girls, joined the
suit. The litigation and media sensation surrounding the case established legal
precedents and triggered the enactment of regulations governing labor safety
standards, including a baseline of 'provable suffering'. Historical impact. The
Radium Girls saga holds an important place in the history of both the field of
health physics and the labor rights movement. The right of individual workers
to sue for damages from corporations due to labor abuse was established as a
result of the Radium Girls case. In the wake of the case, industrial safety
standards were demonstrably enhanced for many decades. The case was settled in
the fall of 1928, before the trial was deliberated by the jury, and the
settlement for each of the Radium Girls was $10,000 ($ in today's terms) and a
$600 per year annuity ($ per year in today's terms) while they lived, and all
medical and legal expenses incurred would also be paid by the company. The
lawsuit and resulting publicity was a factor in the establishment of
occupational disease labor law. Radium dial painters were instructed in proper
safety precautions and provided with protective gear; in particular, they no
longer shaped paint brushes by lip, and avoided ingesting or breathing the
paint. Radium paint was still used in dials as late as the 1960s. Scientific
impact. Robley D. Evans made the first measurements of exhaled radon and radium
excretion from a former dial painter in 1933. At MIT he gathered dependable
body content measurements from 27 dial painters. This information was used in
1941 by the National Bureau of Standards to establish the tolerance level for
radium of 0.1 μCi (3.7 kBq). The Center for Human Radiobiology was established
at Argonne National Laboratory in 1968. The primary purpose of the Center was
providing medical examinations for living dial painters. The project also
focused on collection of information, and, in some cases, tissue samples from
the radium dial painters. When the project ended in 1993, detailed information
of 2,403 cases had been collected. No symptoms were observed in those dial
painter cases with less than 1,000 times the natural 226Ra levels found in
unexposed individuals, suggesting a threshold for radium-induced malignancies.
