Radical cheerleading Radical cheerleading is a form of cheerleading performed
at demonstrations that combines elements of non-violent direct action and
street theater. It originated in 1996 in Miami, Florida, and there are now many
radical cheerleading squads in the United States as well as Canada and Europe.
Radical cheerleaders reappropriate the aesthetics of cheerleading, sometimes in
an ironic fashion, and use cheers that promote feminism and left-wing causes.
Radical cheerleaders subvert gender norms through costuming and may be male,
transgender or non-gender identified. Feminist magazine director Lisa Jervis
places radical cheerleading within a tradition of playful feminist comment on
popular culture. Radical cheerleaders often perform at demonstrations and will
lead protest chants. They also often perform at feminist and other radical
festivals and events. Radical cheerleading is used at demonstrations to promote
a radical message in a media-friendly, people-friendly way. It is also used to
support the actions of other activists who put themselves at physical risk and
to denounce infiltrators and opponents. Radical cheerleaders may also perform
on stage at music venues, to bring political issues (as well as entertainment)
to an unsuspecting crowd. Chicago's Lickity Split cheerleaders frequently used
this tactic. One of the most notable radical cheerleading appearances was at
the March for Women's Lives in Washington, DC on April 25, 2004. The
cheerleaders had their own feeder march and bloc within the larger march with
over 2,000 participants. The group's purpose was to raise awareness about the
lack of access low-income women have to abortion clinics. Radical cheerleaders
are often anti-authoritarian and anti-capitalist. Their cheers are usually
written from scratch or by rewriting the words of popular and historic songs.
Radical cheerleaders dress in diverse ways but often wear a combination of red
or pink and black. Some radical cheerleaders make pom-poms using garbage bags
by folding them in half, tying off one side with a rubber band and then cutting
strips from the other end.
