Rainbow/PUSH Rainbow/PUSH is a non-profit organization formed as a merger of
two non-profit organizations — Operation PUSH (People United to Save
Humanity) and the National Rainbow Coalition — founded by Jesse Jackson. The
organizations pursue social justice, civil rights and political activism. In
December 1971, Jackson resigned from Operation Breadbasket after clashing with
Rev. Ralph Abernathy and founded Operation PUSH. Jackson founded the National
Rainbow Coalition in 1984 which merged with PUSH in 1996. The combined
organization keeps its national headquarters on the South Side of Chicago and
has branches in Washington, D.C., New York City, Los Angeles, Detroit, Houston,
Atlanta, the Silicon Valley, and New Orleans. Operation PUSH was successful at
raising public awareness to initiate corporate action and government
sponsorship. The National Rainbow coalition became a prominent political
organization that raised public awareness on numerous political issues and
consolidated a large voting bloc. The merged entity has undertaken numerous
social initiatives. PUSH. Operation PUSH, an acronym for People United to Save
(later Serve) Humanity, was an organization which advocated black self-help and
achieved a broad audience for its liberal stances on issues of social justice
and civil rights. The origins of Operation PUSH can be traced to a factional
split in Operation Breadbasket, an affiliate of the Southern Christian
Leadership Conference. In 1966, Martin Luther King Jr., the head of the SCLC,
appointed Jackson to head the Chicago chapter of Operation Breadbasket, which
became a coalition of black ministers and entrepreneurs. After 1968, however,
Jackson increasingly clashed with King's successor at SCLC, Rev. Ralph
Abernathy. The break became complete in December 1971 when Abernathy suspended
Jackson for “administrative improprieties and repeated acts of violation of
organizational policy.” Jackson resigned from Operation Breadbasket, called
together his allies, and Operation PUSH was born. From its inception, Jackson
referred to its membership as a "Rainbow Coalition." Although money was a
problem at first, initial backing came from Manhattan Borough President Percy
Sutton, Gary, Indiana Mayor Richard Hatcher, Aretha Franklin, Jim Brown, and
Ossie Davis. The organizational meeting of PUSH was in the Chicago home of Dr.
T.R.M. Howard, a prominent black doctor and community leader on the South Side.
Before he moved to Chicago in 1956, Howard had developed a national reputation
as a Mississippi civil rights leader, surgeon, and entrepreneur. Howard served
on PUSH's board of directors and chaired the finance committee. Through PUSH
Jackson was able to continue pursuit of the same economic objectives that
Operation Breadbasket had pursued. In addition, his new organization was able
to expand into areas of social and political development for blacks in Chicago
and across the nation. The 1970s saw various tactics to pursue the
organization's objectives including direct action campaigns, weekly radio
broadcasts, and awards through which Jackson protected black homeowners,
workers, and businesses, and honored prominent blacks in the U.S. and abroad.
The organization was concerned with minority youth reading, and it championed
education through PUSH-Excel, a spin-off program that emphasized keeping inner-
city youths in school while assisting them with job placement. The program,
which persuaded inner city youth to pledge in writing to study two hours per
night and which involves parental monitoring, impressed Jimmy Carter whose
administration became a large sponsor after Secretary of Health, Education, and
Welfare Joseph Califano and Secretary of Labor Ray Marshall courted Jackson.
The organization was very successful at committing major corporations with
large presences in the black community to adopt affirmative action programs in
which they hired more black executives and supervisors and to buy from black
suppliers, wholesalers, and distributors. The organization employed prayer
vigils as a technique to call attention to issues. The organization opposed
Ronald Reagan's workfare initiative to compel that welfare recipients work for
part of their benefits. The organization staged several boycotts including
early 1980s boycotts of Anheuser Busch and Coca Cola as well as a 1986 boycott
of CBS television affiliates. The boycotts became so well known that at one
point David Duke supporters referred to a boycott of Nike, Inc. as if whites
were being oppressed by blacks. Nike spokesperson, Michael Jordan, disavowed
the Nike boycott. The boycotts of Budweiser, and Coke as well as one against
Kentucky Fried Chicken were touted for having won minority job concessions from
white businesses. National Rainbow Coalition. The National Rainbow Coalition
(Rainbow Coalition for short) was a political organization that grew out of
Jesse Jackson's 1984 presidential campaign. During the campaign Jackson began
speaking to a "Rainbow Coalition", an idea created by Fred Hampton, of the
disadvantaged and welcomed voters from a broad spectrum of races and creeds.
The goals of the campaign were to demand social programs, voting rights, and
affirmative action for all groups that had been neglected by Reaganomics.
Jackson's campaign blamed President Ronald Reagan's policies for reduction of
government domestic spending, causing new unemployment and encouraging economic
investment outside of the inner cities, while they discouraged the rebuilding
of urban industry. The industrial layoffs caused by these policies hit the
black and other minority populations particularly hard. At the 1984 Democratic
National Convention on July 18, 1984 in San Francisco, California, Jackson
delivered the Keynote address, entitled "The Rainbow Coalition". The speech
called for Arab Americans, Native Americans, Asian Americans, youth, disabled
veterans, small farmers, lesbians and gays to join with African Americans and
Jewish Americans for political purpose. Whereas the purpose of PUSH had been to
fight for economic and educational opportunities, the Rainbow Coalition was
created to address political empowerment and public policy issues. After his
unsuccessful bid for the Democratic nomination in 1984, Jackson attempted to
build a broad base of support among groups that "were hurt by Reagan
administration policies" - racial minorities, the poor, small farmers, working
mothers, the unemployed, some labor union members, gays, and lesbians. Merger.
Jackson moved from Chicago to Washington, D.C. to serve as shadow senator from
1991 to 1996. When he returned to Chicago in 1996 he merged his organizations.
The merged entity advocates for African Americans, Hispanics, Native Americans,
other minorities, and women. Its main economic goal is to have more minorities
on the payrolls, in the boardrooms, and on the supplier lists of major
corporations. The industries it most aggressively pursues are the financial
sector on Wall Street, the telecommunications field and high-tech firms in
Silicon Valley. The Wall Street activities are organized under sub-organization
"The Wall Street Project". The organization has been active in pursuit of
increase minority representation in other industries, most notably the
broadcast media, the entertainment industry, and the automobile industry. It
has also sought increased representation by minority administrators in college
and professional sports under the leadership of Jesse Jackson, Jr. For Hispanic
issues the merged entity works closely with the League of United Latin American
Citizens and the National Council of La Raza. In 1998 the organization
admonished Freddie Mac for its lending and employment practices, which led to
its pledge to earmark $1 billion in mortgage loans specifically for minorities,
to donate more than $1 million directly to Rainbow/PUSH and to became a sponsor
of Jackson's annual Wall Street Project. In 2000, the organization investigated
the case of Raynard Johnson, who was found hanged by a belt from a tree in
front of his home in Kokomo, Mississippi. Jackson labelled it a "lynching",
although two autopsies both concluded that the death was a suicide. In the
early 2000s (decade), Rainbow/PUSH worked with NASCAR to increase the number of
minorities involved in auto racing, through direct financial support and
projects to find talented African-American racing drivers. This initiative was
ended in 2003, after the racing sanctioning body was criticized by conservative
groups for the partnership. Among the smaller campaigns it has undertaken are
the HIV/AIDS Initiative for funding for AIDS programs; the National Field
Department support of "constructive agitation to bring about societal change";
and the Prison Outpost project, whose ultimate goal is "to eliminate the need
for prisons." Former congressman Mel Reynolds, who served a sentence in prison
for sexual assault and bank fraud, was hired by Rainbow/PUSH as its resident
scholar on prison reform after his release in 2001. The organization is a
member of several anti-war coalitions including Win Without War, United for
Peace and Justice, and After Downing Street.
