Rational choice theory Rational choice theory, also known as choice theory or
rational action theory is a framework for understanding and often formally
modeling social and economic behavior. It is the main theoretical paradigm in
the currently-dominant school of microeconomics. Rationality (here equated with
"wanting more rather than less of a good") is widely used as an assumption of
the behavior of individuals in microeconomic models and analysis and appears in
almost all economics textbook treatments of human decision-making. It is also
central to some of modern political science and is used by some scholars in
other disciplines such as sociology and philosophy. It attaches "wanting more"
to instrumental rationality, which involves seeking the most cost-effective
means to achieve a specific goal without reflecting on the worthiness of that
goal. Gary Becker was an early proponent of applying rational actor models more
widely. He won the 1992 Nobel Memorial Prize in Economic Sciences for his
studies of discrimination, crime, and human capital. The "rationality"
described by rational choice theory is different from the colloquial and most
philosophical use of the word. For most people, "rationality" means "sane," "in
a thoughtful clear-headed manner," or knowing and doing what's healthy in the
long term. Rational choice theory uses a specific and narrower definition of
"rationality" simply to mean that an individual acts "as if" balancing costs
against benefits to arrive at action that maximizes personal advantage. For
example, this may involve kissing someone, cheating on a test, buying a new
dress, or committing murder. In rational choice theory, all decisions, crazy or
sane, are postulated as mimicking such a "rational" process. Thus rationality
is seen as a property of patterns of choices, rather than of individual
choices: there is nothing irrational in preferring fish to meat the first time,
but there is something irrational in preferring fish to meat "and" preferring
meat to fish, regularly. The practitioners of strict rational choice theory
never investigate the origins, nature, or validity of human motivations (why we
want what we want) but instead restrict themselves to examining the expression
of "given" and inexplicable wants in specific social or economic environments.
That is, they do not examine the biological, psychological, and sociological
roots that make people see the "benefits" encouraging them to kiss another,
cheat on a test, use cocaine, or murder someone. Instead, all that is relevant
are the costs of doing so—which for crimes, reflects the chance of being
caught. In rational choice theory, these costs are only "extrinsic" or external
to the individual rather than being "intrinsic" or internal. That is, strict
rational choice theory would not see a criminal's self-punishment by inner
feelings of remorse, guilt, or shame as relevant to determining the costs of
committing a crime. In general, rational choice theory does not address the
role of an individual's sense of morals or ethics in decision-making. Thus,
economics Nobelist Amartya Sen sees the model of people who follow rational
choice model as "rational fools." Because rational choice theory lacks
understanding of consumer motivation, some economists restrict its use to
understanding business behavior where goals are usually very clear. As Armen
Alchian points out, competition in the market encourages businesses to maximize
profits (in order to survive). Because that goal is significantly less vacuous
than "maximizing utility" and the like, rational choice theory is apt. Although
models used in rational choice theory are diverse, all assume individuals
choose the best action according to unchanging and stable preference functions
and constraints facing them. Most models have additional assumptions. Those
proponents of rational choice models associated with the Chicago school of
economics do not claim that a model's assumptions are a full description of
reality, only that good models can aid reasoning and provide help in
formulating falsifiable hypothesis, whether intuitive or not. In this view, the
only way to judge the success of hypothesis is empirical tests. To use an
example from Milton Friedman, if a theory that says that the behavior of the
leaves of a tree is explained by their rationality passes the empirical test,
it is seen as successful. However, it may not be possible to empirically test
or falsify the rationality assumption, so that the theory leans heavily toward
being a tautology (true by definition) since there is no effort to explain
individual goals. Nonetheless, empirical tests can be conducted on some of the
results derived from the models. In recent years the theoretical vision of
rational choice theory has been subject to more and more doubt by the
experimental results of behavioral economics. This criticism has encouraged
many social scientists to utilize concepts of bounded rationality to replace
the "absolute" rationality of rational choice theory: this points to the
difficulties of data-processing and decision-making associated with many
choices in economics, political science, and sociology. More economists these
days are learning from other fields, such as psychology, in order to get a more
accurate view of human decision-making than offered by rational choice theory.
For example, the behavioral economist and experimental psychologist Daniel
Kahneman won the Nobel Memorial Prize in Economic Sciences in 2002 for his work
in this field. Because of the relative success of economics at understanding
markets, rational choice theory has also become increasingly employed in social
sciences other than economics, such as sociology and political science in
recent decades. It has had far-reaching impacts on the study of political
science, especially in fields like the study of interest groups, elections,
behaviour in legislatures, coalitions, and bureaucracy. Models that rely on
rational choice theory often adopt methodological individualism, the assumption
that social situations or collective behaviors are the result of individual
actions alone, with no role for larger institutions. The poor fit between this
and sociological conception of social situations partially explains the
theory's limited use in sociology. Among other things, sociology's emphasis on
the determination of individual tastes and perspectives by social institutions
conflicts with rational choice theory's assumption that our tastes and
perspectives are given and inexplicable. Actions, assumptions, and individual
preferences. The basic idea of rational choice theory is that patterns of
behavior in societies reflect the choices made by individuals as they try to
maximize their benefits and minimize their costs. In other words, people make
decisions about how they should act by comparing the costs and benefits of
different courses of action. As a result, patterns of behavior will develop
within the society that result from those choices. The idea of rational choice,
where people compare the costs and benefits of certain actions, is easy to see
in economic theory. Since people want to get the most useful products at the
lowest price, they will judge the benefits of a certain object (for example,
how useful is it or how attractive is it) compared to similar objects. Then
they will compare prices (or costs). In general, people will choose the object
that provides the greatest reward at the lowest cost. Individuals can also have
similar sets of possible outcomes. Together these assumptions form the result
that given a set of exhaustive and exclusive actions to choose from, an
individual can rank them in terms of his preferences, and that his preferences
are consistent. In more complex models, other assumptions are often
incorporated, such as the assumption of independence axiom. Also, with dynamic
models that include decision-making over time, time inconsistency may affect an
individual's preferences. Other assumptions. Even more realistic theories of
human action include such components as Amos Tversky and Daniel Kahneman's
prospect theory, which reflects the empirical finding as that, contrary to
rational choice theory, individuals attach extra value to items that they
already own compared to similar items owned by others. To rational choice
theory, the amount that an individual is willing to pay for an item (such as a
drinking mug) should equal the amount he or she is willing to be paid in order
to part with it. In experiments, the latter price is typically significantly
higher than the former. Behavioral economics has added a large number of other
amendments to our picture of human behavior that go against pure economic
rationality. Criticism. Both the assumptions and the behavioral predictions of
rational choice theory have sparked criticism from various camps. As mentioned
above, some economists have developed models of bounded rationality, which hope
to be more psychologically plausible without completely abandoning the idea
that reason underlies decision-making processes. Other economists have
developed more theories of human decision-making that allow for the roles of
uncertainty, institutions, and determination of individual tastes by their
socioeconomic environment (cf. Fernandez-Huerga, 2008). Martin Hollis and
Edward J. Nell's 1975 book offers both a philosophical critique of neo-
Classical economics and an innovation in the field of economic methodology.
Further they outlined an alternative vision to neo-Classicism based on a
rationalist theory of knowledge. DON C. LAVOIE (1977, p. 325) argued that To
the devastating critiques of positivism by such philosophers as Brand
Blanshard, W. V. Quine, S. Toulmin, A. R. Lousch and Karl Popper, can now be
added that of Professors Hollis and Nell. The reason for the impotence of
modern economics, these authors show, lies in its method. The rejuvenation of
economics necessitates developing a different methodology, one which pays
attention to the aspects of social sciences which distinguish them from natural
sciences. We need a method which recognizes that people are not atoms and that
society is not a laboratory. Hollis and Nell (1975) dissect the textbook
combination of neo-Classicism and Positivism, so crucial to the defence of
orthodox economics against now-familiar objections. Within Neo-classicism, the
authors addressed consumer behaviour (in the form of indifference curves and
simple versions of revealed preference theory) and marginalist producer
behaviour in both product and factor markets. Both are based on rational
optimizing behaviour. They consider imperfect as well as perfect markets since
neo-classical thinking embraces many market varieties and disposes of a whole
system for their classification. However, the authors believe that the issues
arising from basic maximizing models have extensive implications for
econometric methodology (Hollis and Nell, 1975, p. 2). In particular it is this
class of models – rational behavior as maximizing behaviour – which provide
support for specification and identification. And this, they argue, is where
the flaw is to be found. Hollis and Nell (1975) argued that Positivism (broadly
conceived) has provided neo-Classicism with important support, which they then
show to be unfounded. But we shall argue that they base their critique of neo-
Classicism not only on their critique of Positivism but also on the alternative
they propose, Rationalism. Indeed, they argue that rationality is central to
neo-Classical economics – as rational choice – and that this conception of
rationality is misused. Demands are made of it that it cannot fulfil. In their
1994 work, "Pathologies of Rational Choice Theory", Green and Shapiro argue
that the empirical outputs of rational choice theory have been limited. They
contend that much of the applicable literature, at least in political science,
was done with weak statistical methods and that when corrected many of the
empirical outcomes no longer hold. When taken in this perspective, rational
choice theory has provided very little to the overall understanding of
political interaction - and is an amount certainly disproportionately weak
relative to its appearance in the literature. Yet, they concede that cutting
edge research, by scholars well-versed in the general scholarship of their
fields (such as work on the U.S. Congress by Keith Krehbiel, Gary Cox, and Mat
McCubbins) has generated valuable scientific progress. Duncan Foley (2003, p.
1) has also provided an important critic of the concept of "Rationality" and
its role in Economics. He argued that “Rationality” has played a central
role in shaping and establishing the hegemony of contemporary mainstream
economics. As the specific claims of robust neoclassicism fade into the history
of economic thought, an orientation toward situating explanations of economic
phenomena in relation to rationality has increasingly become the touchstone by
which mainstream economists identify themselves and recognize each other. This
is not so much a question of adherence to any particular conception of
rationality, but of taking rationality of individual behavior as the
unquestioned starting point of economic analysis. Foley (2003, p. 9) went on to
argue thatThe concept of rationality, to use Hegelian language, represents the
relations of modern capitalist society one-sidedly. The burden of rational-
actor theory is the assertion that “naturally” constituted individuals
facing existential conflicts over scarce resources would rationally impose on
themselves the institutional structures of modern capitalist society, or
something approximating them. But this way of looking at matters systematically
neglects the ways in which modern capitalist society and its social relations
in fact constitute the “rational”, calculating individual. The well-known
limitations of rational-actor theory, its static quality, its logical
antinomies, its vulnerability to arguments of infinite regress, its failure to
develop a progressive concrete research program, can all be traced to this
starting-point. Schram and Caterino (2006) contains a fundamental
methodological criticism of rational choice theory for promoting the view that
the natural science model is the only appropriate methodology in social science
and that political science should follow this model, with its emphasis on
quantification and mathematization. Schram and Caterino argue instead for
methodological pluralism. The same argument is made by William E. Connolly, who
in his work Neuropolitics shows that advances in neuroscience further
illuminate some of the problematic practices of rational choice theory. More
recently Edward J. Nell and Karim Errouaki (2011, Ch. 1) argued that:The DNA of
neo-Classical economics is defective. Neither the Inductive Problem, nor the
problems of Methodological Individualism can be solved within the framework of
neoclassical assumptions. The neo-Classical approach is to call on Rational
Economic Man to solve both. Economic relationships that reflect Rational choice
should be ‘projectible’. But that attributes a deductive power to
‘rational’ that it cannot have consistently with Positivist (or even
Pragmatist) assumptions (which require deductions to be simply analytic). To
make rational calculations projectible, the agents may be assumed to have
idealized abilities, especially foresight; but then the Inductive Problem is
out of reach because the agents of the world do not resemble those of the
model. The agents of the model can be abstract, but they cannot be endowed with
powers actual agents could not have. This also undermines Methodological
Individualism; if behaviour cannot be reliably predicted on the basis of the
‘rational choices of agents’ a social order cannot reliably follow from the
choices of agents. Furthermore, Pierre Bourdieu fiercely opposed rational
choice theory as grounded in a misunderstanding of how social agents operate.
Bourdieu argued that social agents do not continuously calculate according to
explicit rational and economic criteria. According to Bourdieu, social agents
operate according to an implicit practical logic—a practical sense—and
bodily dispositions. Social agents act according to their "feel for the game"
(the "feel" being, roughly, habitus, and the "game" being the field). An
evolutionary psychology perspective is that many of the seeming contradictions
and biases regarding rational choice can be explained as being rational in the
context of maximizing biological fitness in the ancestral environment but not
necessarily in the current one. Thus, when living at subsistence level where a
reduction of resources may have meant death it may have been rational to place
a greater value on losses than on gains. It may also explain differences
between groups such as males being less risk-averse than females since males
have more variable reproductive success than females. While unsuccessful risk-
seeking may limit reproductive success for both sexes, males may potentially
increase their reproductive success much more than females from successful
risk-seeking. Benefits. Describing the decisions made by individuals as
rational and utility maximizing may seem to be a tautological explanation of
their behavior that provides very little new information. While there may be
many reasons for a rational choice theory approach, two are important for the
social sciences. First, assuming humans make decisions in a rational, rather
than a stochastic manner implies that their behavior can be modeled and thus
predictions can be made about future actions. Second, the mathematical
formality of rational choice theory models allows social scientists to derive
results from their models that may have otherwise not been seen, and submit
these theoretical results for empirical verification. Despite these benefits,
there is nothing about rational choice theory that tells scholars that they
should reject other methods of investigating questions about the economy and
society, such as the sociological determination of individual tastes.
