Rational pricing Rational pricing is the assumption in financial economics that
asset prices (and hence asset pricing models) will reflect the arbitrage-free
price of the asset as any deviation from this price will be "arbitraged away".
This assumption is useful in pricing fixed income securities, particularly
bonds, and is fundamental to the pricing of derivative instruments. Arbitrage
mechanics. Arbitrage is the practice of taking advantage of a state of
imbalance between two (or possibly more) markets. Where this mismatch can be
exploited (i.e. after transaction costs, storage costs, transport costs,
dividends etc.) the arbitrageur "locks in" a risk free profit without investing
any of his own money. In general, arbitrage ensures that "the law of one price"
will hold; arbitrage also equalises the prices of assets with identical cash
flows, and sets the price of assets with known future cash flows. The law of
one price. The same asset must trade at the same price on all markets ("the law
of one price"). Assets with identical cash flows. Two assets with identical
cash flows must trade at the same price. An asset with a known future-price. An
asset with a known price in the future, must today trade at that price
discounted at the risk free rate. Note that this condition can be viewed as an
application of the above, where the two assets in question are the asset to be
delivered and the risk free asset. It will be noted that (b) is only possible
for those holding the asset but not needing it until the future date. There may
be few such parties if short-term demand exceeds supply, leading to
backwardation. Fixed income securities. Rational pricing is one approach used
in pricing fixed rate bonds. Here, each cash flow can be matched by trading in
(a) some multiple of a zero-coupon bond corresponding to the coupon date, and
of equivalent credit worthiness (if possible, from the same issuer as the bond
being valued) with the corresponding maturity, or (b) in a corresponding strip
and ZCB. Given that the cash flows can be replicated, the price of the bond
must today equal the sum of each of its cash flows discounted at the same rate
as each ZCB, as above. Were this not the case, arbitrage would be possible and
would bring the price back into line with the price based on ZCBs; see Bond
valuation: Arbitrage-free pricing approach Often, the formula is expressed as
formula_4, using prices instead of rates, as prices are more readily available.
"See also Fixed income arbitrage; Bond credit rating." Pricing derivatives. A
derivative is an instrument that allows for buying and selling of the same
asset on two markets¬ ‚Äì the spot market and the derivatives market.
Mathematical finance assumes that any imbalance between the two markets will be
arbitraged away. Thus, in a correctly priced derivative contract, the
derivative price, the strike price (or reference rate), and the spot price will
be related such that arbitrage is not possible. Futures. In a futures contract,
for no arbitrage to be possible, the price paid on delivery (the forward price)
must be the same as the cost (including interest) of buying and storing the
asset. In other words, the rational forward price represents the expected
future value of the underlying discounted at the risk free rate (the "asset
with a known future-price", as above). Thus, for a simple, non-dividend paying
asset, the value of the future/forward, formula_5, will be found by
accumulating the present value formula_6 at time formula_7 to maturity
formula_8 by the rate of risk-free return formula_9. This relationship may be
modified for storage costs, dividends, dividend yields, and convenience yields;
see futures contract pricing. Any deviation from this equality allows for
arbitrage as follows. Options. As above, where the value of an asset in the
future is known (or expected), this value can be used to determine the asset's
rational price today. In an option contract, however, exercise is dependent on
the price of the underlying, and hence payment is uncertain. Option pricing
models therefore include logic that either "locks in" or "infers" this future
value; both approaches deliver identical results. Methods that lock-in future
cash flows assume "arbitrage free pricing", and those that infer expected value
assume "risk neutral valuation". To do this, (in their simplest, though widely
used form) both approaches assume a ‚ÄúBinomial model‚Äù for the behavior of
the underlying instrument, which allows for only two states¬ ‚Äì up or down. If
S is the current price, then in the next period the price will either be "S up"
or "S down". Here, the value of the share in the up-state is S √ó u, and in the
down-state is S √ó d (where u and d are multipliers with d < 1 < u and assuming
d < 1+r < u; see the binomial options model). Then, given these two states, the
"arbitrage free" approach creates a position that has an identical value in
either state¬ ‚Äì the cash flow in one period is therefore known, and arbitrage
pricing is applicable. The risk neutral approach infers expected option value
from the intrinsic values at the later two nodes. Although this logic appears
far removed from the Black‚ÄìScholes formula and the lattice approach in the
Binomial options model, it in fact underlies both models; see The
Black‚ÄìScholes PDE. The assumption of binomial behaviour in the underlying
price is defensible as the number of time steps between today (valuation) and
exercise increases, and the period per time-step is correspondingly short. The
Binomial options model allows for a high number of very short time-steps (if
coded correctly), while Black‚ÄìScholes, in fact, models a continuous process.
The examples below have shares as the underlying, but may be generalised to
other instruments. The value of a put option can be derived as below, or may be
found from the value of the call using put-call parity. Arbitrage free pricing.
Here, the future payoff is "locked in" using either "delta hedging" or the
"replicating portfolio" approach. As above, this payoff is then discounted, and
the result is used in the valuation of the option today. Delta hedging. It is
possible to create a position consisting of Œî shares and 1 call sold, such
that the position‚Äôs value will be identical in the "S up" and "S down"
states, and hence known with certainty (see Delta hedging). This certain value
corresponds to the forward price above ("An asset with a known future price"),
and as above, for no arbitrage to be possible, the present value of the
position must be its expected future value discounted at the risk free rate, r.
The value of a call is then found by equating the two. The replicating
portfolio. It is possible to create a position consisting of Œî shares and $B
borrowed at the risk free rate, which will produce identical cash flows to one
option on the underlying share. The position created is known as a "replicating
portfolio" since its cash flows replicate those of the option. As shown above
("Assets with identical cash flows"), in the absence of arbitrage
opportunities, since the cash flows produced are identical, the price of the
option today must be the same as the value of the position today. Note that
there is no discounting¬ ‚Äì the interest rate appears only as part of the
construction. This approach is therefore used in preference to others where it
is not clear whether the risk free rate may be applied as the discount rate at
each decision point, or whether, instead, a premium over risk free would be
required. The best example of this would be under Real options analysis where
managements' actions actually change the risk characteristics of the project in
question, and hence the Required rate of return could differ in the up- and
down-states. Here, in the above formulae, we then have: "Œî √ó "S up" - B √ó (1
+ r up)..." and "Œî √ó "S down" - B √ó (1 + r down)..." . Risk neutral
valuation. Here the value of the option is calculated using the risk neutrality
assumption. Under this assumption, the ‚Äúexpected value‚Äù (as opposed to
"locked in" value) is discounted. The expected value is calculated using the
intrinsic values from the later two nodes: ‚ÄúOption up‚Äù and ‚ÄúOption
down‚Äù, with u and d as price multipliers as above. These are then weighted by
their respective probabilities: ‚Äúprobability‚Äù p of an up move in the
underlying, and ‚Äúprobability‚Äù (1-p) of a down move. The expected value is
then discounted at r, the risk free rate. The risk neutrality assumption. Note
that above, the risk neutral formula does not refer to the volatility of the
underlying¬ ‚Äì p as solved, relates to the risk-neutral measure as opposed to
the actual probability distribution of prices. Nevertheless, both arbitrage
free pricing and risk neutral valuation deliver identical results. In fact, it
can be shown that ‚ÄúDelta hedging‚Äù and ‚ÄúRisk neutral valuation‚Äù use
identical formulae expressed differently. Given this equivalence, it is valid
to assume ‚Äúrisk neutrality‚Äù when pricing derivatives. See Fundamental
theorem of arbitrage-free pricing. Swaps. Rational pricing underpins the logic
of swap valuation. Here, two counterparties "swap" obligations, effectively
exchanging cash flow streams calculated against a notional principal amount,
and the value of the swap is the present value (PV) of both sets of future cash
flows "netted off" against each other. Subsequent valuation. Once traded, swaps
can also be priced using rational pricing. For example, the Floating leg of an
interest rate swap can be "decomposed" into a series of forward rate
agreements. Here, since the swap has identical payments to the FRA, arbitrage
free pricing must apply as above¬ ‚Äì i.e. the value of this leg is equal to
the value of the corresponding FRAs. Similarly, the "receive-fixed" leg of a
swap, can be valued by comparison to a bond with the same schedule of payments.
(Relatedly, given that their underlyings have the same cash flows, bond options
and swaptions are equatable.) Pricing shares. Note that under "true arbitrage",
the investor locks-in a "guaranteed" payoff, whereas under APT arbitrage, the
investor locks-in a positive "expected" payoff. The APT thus assumes "arbitrage
in expectations"¬ ‚Äî i.e. that arbitrage by investors will bring asset prices
back into line with the returns expected by the model. The capital asset
pricing model (CAPM) is an earlier, (more) influential theory on asset pricing.
Although based on different assumptions, the CAPM can, in some ways, be
considered a "special case" of the APT; specifically, the CAPM's securities
market line represents a single-factor model of the asset price, where beta is
exposure to changes in value of the market. External links. Arbitrage free
pricing Risk neutrality and arbitrage free pricing Application to derivatives
