Rational expectations Rational expectations is a hypothesis in economics which
states that agents' predictions of the future value of economically relevant
variables are not systematically wrong in that all errors are random.
Equivalently, this is to say that agents' expectations equal true statistical
expected values. An alternative formulation is that rational expectations are
model-consistent expectations, in that the agents inside the model assume the
model's predictions are valid. The rational expectations assumption is used in
many contemporary macroeconomic models, game theory and other applications of
rational choice theory. Since most macroeconomic models today study decisions
over many periods, the expectations of workers, consumers and firms about
future economic conditions are an essential part of the model. How to model
these expectations has long been controversial, and it is well known that the
macroeconomic predictions of the model may differ depending on the assumptions
made about expectations (see Cobweb model). To assume rational expectations is
to assume that agents' expectations may be individually wrong, but are correct
"on average". In other words, although the future is not fully predictable,
agents' expectations are assumed not to be systematically biased and use all
relevant information in forming expectations of economic variables. This way of
modeling expectations was originally proposed by John F. Muth (1961) and later
became influential when it was used by Robert E. Lucas Jr and others. Modeling
expectations is crucial in all models which study how a large number of
individuals, firms and organizations make choices under uncertainty. For
example, negotiations between workers and firms will be influenced by the
expected level of inflation, and the value of a share of stock is dependent on
the expected future income from that stock. Theory. Rational expectations
theory defines this kind of expectations as being identical to the "best guess
of the future" (the optimal forecast) that uses all available information.
Thus, it is assumed that outcomes that are being forecast do not differ
systematically from the market equilibrium results. As a result, rational
expectations do not differ systematically or predictably from equilibrium
results. That is, it assumes that people do not make systematic errors when
predicting the future, and deviations from "perfect foresight" are only random.
In an economic model, this is typically modelled by assuming that the expected
value of a variable is equal to the expected value predicted by the model.
where formula_3 is the rational expectation and formula_4 is the random error
term, which has an expected value of zero, and is independent of formula_3.
Rational expectations theories were developed in response to perceived flaws in
theories based on adaptive expectations. Under adaptive expectations,
expectations of the future value of an economic variable are based on past
values. For example, people would be assumed to predict inflation by looking at
inflation last year and in previous years. Under adaptive expectations, if the
economy suffers from constantly rising inflation rates (perhaps due to
government policies), people would be assumed to always underestimate
inflation. This may be regarded as unrealistic - surely rational individuals
would sooner or later realize the trend and take it into account in forming
their expectations? The hypothesis of rational expectations addresses this
criticism by assuming that individuals take all available information into
account in forming expectations. Though expectations may turn out incorrect,
they will not deviate systematically from the expected values. The rational
expectations hypothesis has been used to support some radical conclusions about
economic policymaking. An example is the Policy Ineffectiveness Proposition
developed by Thomas Sargent and Neil Wallace. If the Federal Reserve attempts
to lower unemployment through expansionary monetary policy economic agents will
anticipate the effects of the change of policy and raise their expectations of
future inflation accordingly. This in turn will counteract the expansionary
effect of the increased money supply. All that the government can do is raise
the inflation rate, not employment. This is a distinctly New Classical outcome.
During the 1970s rational expectations appeared to have made previous
macroeconomic theory largely obsolete, which culminated with the Lucas
critique. However, rational expectations theory has been widely adopted
throughout modern macroeconomics as a modelling assumption thanks to the work
of New Keynesians such as Stanley Fischer. Rational expectations theory is the
basis for the efficient market hypothesis (efficient market theory). If a
security's price does not reflect all the information about it, then there
exist "unexploited profit opportunities": someone can buy (or sell) the
security to make a profit, thus driving the price toward equilibrium. In the
strongest versions of these theories, where all profit opportunities "have
been" exploited, all prices in financial markets are correct and reflect market
fundamentals (such as future streams of profits and dividends). Each financial
investment is as good as any other, while a security's price reflects all
information about its intrinsic value. Criticisms. The models of Muth and Lucas
(and the strongest version of the efficient-market hypothesis) assume that at
any specific time, a market or the economy has "only one" equilibrium (which
was determined ahead of time), so that people form their expectations around
this unique equilibrium. Muth's math (sketched above) assumed that "P*" was
unique. Lucas assumed that equilibrium corresponded to a unique "full
employment" level (potential output) -- corresponding to a unique NAIRU or
natural rate of unemployment. If there is more than one possible equilibrium at
any time then the more interesting implications of the theory of rational
expectations do not apply. In fact, expectations would determine the nature of
the equilibrium attained, reversing the line of causation posited by rational
expectations theorists. A further problem relates to the application of the
rational expectations hypothesis to aggregate behavior. It is well known that
assumptions about individual behavior do not carry over to aggregate behavior
(Sonnenschein-Mantel-Debreu theorem). The same holds true for rationality
assumptions: Even if all individuals have rational expectations, the
representative household describing these behaviors may exhibit behavior that
does not satisfy rationality assumptions (Janssen 1993). Hence the rational
expectations hypothesis, as applied to the representative household, is
unrelated to the presence or absence of rational expectations on the micro
level and lacks, in this sense, a microeconomic foundation. It can be argued
that it is difficult to apply the standard efficient market hypothesis
(efficient market theory) to understand the stock market bubble that ended in
2000 and collapsed thereafter; however, advocates of rational expectations say
that the problem of ascertaining all the pertinent effects of the stock-market
crash is a great challenge. Furthermore, social scientists in general criticize
the movement of this theory into other fields such as political science. In his
book "Essence of Decision," political scientist Graham T. Allison specifically
attacked the rational expectations theory. Some economists now use the adaptive
expectations model, but then complement it with ideas based on the rational
expectations theory. For example, an anti-inflation campaign by the central
bank is more effective if it is seen as "credible," "i.e.," if it convinces
people that it will "stick to its guns." The bank can convince people to lower
their inflationary expectations, which implies less of a feedback into the
actual inflation rate. (An advocate of Rational Expectations would say, rather,
that the pronouncements of central banks are facts that must be incorporated
into one's forecast because central banks can act independently). Those
studying financial markets similarly apply the efficient-markets hypothesis but
keep the existence of exceptions in mind.
