Reactionary A reactionary is an individual that holds political viewpoints
which cause them to seek to return to a previous state (the status quo ante) in
a society. Reactionaries are considered to be one end of a political spectrum
whose opposite pole is perceived radicalism, though reactionary ideologies may
be themselves radical. While it has not been generally considered positive to
be regarded as a reactionary it has been adopted as a self-description by some
such as H. L. Mencken, Gerald Warner of Craigenmaddie and John Lukacs. Usage
and history. The French Revolution gave the English language three politically
descriptive words denoting anti-progressive politics: "reactionary",
"conservative" and "right". "Reactionary" derives from the French word
"réactionnaire" (an early nineteenth-century coinage), and "conservative" from
"conservateur", identifying monarchist parliamentarians opposed to the
revolution. In this French usage, "reactionary" denotes "a movement towards the
reversal of an existing tendency or state" and a "return to a previous
condition of affairs." The "Oxford English Dictionary" cites the first English-
language usage in 1799 in a translation of Lazare Carnot's letter on the Coup
of 18 Fructidor. During the French Revolution, conservative forces (especially
the Roman Catholic Church) organized opposition to the progressive socio-
political and economic changes brought by the revolution, and to fight to
restore the temporal authority of the Church and Crown. In nineteenth-century
European politics, the "reactionary class" included the Roman Catholic Church's
hierarchy—the clergy, the aristocracy, royal families, and
royalists—believing that national government is the sole domain of the Church
and the state. In France, supporters of traditional rule by direct heirs of the
House of Bourbon dynasty were labeled the "legitimist reaction". In the Third
Republic, the monarchists were the "reactionary faction", later renamed
"conservative". In Protestant Christian societies, "reactionary" described
those supporting tradition against modernity. In the nineteenth century,
"reactionary" denoted people who idealised feudalism and the pre-modern
era—before the Industrial Revolution and the French Revolution—when
economies were mostly agrarian, a landed aristocracy dominated society, a
hereditary king ruled and the Roman Catholic Church was society's moral center.
Those labeled as "reactionary" favored the aristocracy instead of the middle
class and the working class. Reactionaries opposed democracy and
parliamentarism. Thermidorian Reaction. The Thermidorian Reaction was a
movement within the revolution against perceived excesses of the Jacobins. On
July 27, 1794 (9 Thermidor year II in the French Republican Calendar),
Maximilien Robespierre's Reign of Terror was brought to an end. The overthrow
of Robespierre signalled the reassertion of the French National Convention over
the Committee of Public Safety. The Jacobins were suppressed, the prisons were
emptied and the Committee was shorn of its powers. After the execution of some
104 Robespierre supporters, the Thermidorian Reaction stopped the use of the
guillotine against alleged counterrevolutionaries, set a middle course between
the monarchists and the radicals and ushered in a time of relative exuberance
and its accompanying corruption. The Restored French Monarchy. With the
Congress of Vienna, the monarchs of Russia, Prussia, and Austria formed the
"Holy Alliance", a form of collective security against revolution and
Bonapartism inspired by Tsar Alexander I of Russia. This instance of reaction
was surpassed by a movement that developed in France when, after the second
fall of Napoleon, the "Restoration," or re-instatement of the Bourbon dynasty,
ensued. This time it was to be a constitutional monarchy, with an elected lower
house of parliament, the Chamber of Deputies. The Franchise was restricted to
men over the age of forty, which indicated that for the first fifteen years of
their lives they had lived under the "ancien régime". Nevertheless, King Louis
XVIII was worried that he would still suffer an intractable parliament. He was
delighted with the ultra-royalists, or Ultras, whom the election returned,
declaring that he had found a "chambre introuvable", literally, an "unfindable
house". But he later realized that they were too ultra for a royal. It was the
Declaration of Saint-Ouen which had prepared the way for the Restoration.
Before the French Revolution, which radically and bloodily overthrew most
aspects of French society's organization, the only way that constitutional
change could be instituted was by referring it to old legal documents that
could be interpreted as agreeing with the proposal. Everything new had to be
expressed as a righteous revival of something old that had lapsed and had been
forgotten. This was also the means used for diminished aristocrats to get
themselves a bigger piece of the pie. In the eighteenth century, those gentry
whose fortunes had so diminished that they lived at the level of peasants went
skulking for every ancient feudal law that would give them a little something.
The "ban," for example, meant that all their peasants had to grind their grain
in the lord's mill. So they came to the French States-General of 1789 fully
prepared to press for the expansion of such practices in all provinces, to the
legal limit. They were horrified when the French Revolution permitted common
citizens to go hunting, one of the few advantages that they had always
maintained everywhere. Thus with the restoration of the Bourbons, the Chambre
Introuvable set about reverting every law to return things not merely to the
age of the absolute monarchy, but before that to the age in which the
aristocracy really was a socially powerful class. It is this which clearly
distinguishes a "reactionary" from a "conservative." The conservative would
have accepted many improvements brought about by the revolution, and simply
refused a program of wholesale "reversion". Hence one should be wary of the use
of the word "reactionary" in later days as a political slur, since there is
nothing to compare with the Chambre Introuvable in other countries. For
example, Russia certainly had no such aristocrats after 1989. Later French
kings similarly had trouble with their parliaments. The clerical philosophers.
In the Revolution's aftermath, France was continually wracked with the quarrels
between the right-wing legitimists and left-wing Revolutionaries. Herein arose
the clerical philosophers—Joseph de Maistre, Louis de Bonald, François-René
de Chateaubriand—whose answer was restoring the House of Bourbon and
reinstalling the Roman Catholic Church as the established church. Since then,
France's political spectrum has featured similar divisions. (see "Action
Française"). The ideas of the clerical philosophers were buttressed by the
teachings of the nineteenth century popes. Metternich and containment. During
the period of 1815-1848, Prince Metternich, the foreign minister of the
Austrian Empire, stepped in to organize containment of revolutionary forces
through international alliances meant to prevent the spread of revolutionary
fervour. At the Congress of Vienna, he was very influential in establishing the
new order, the Concert of Europe, after the overthrow of Napoleon. After the
Congress, Prince Metternich worked hard bolstering and stabilizing the
conservative regime of the Restoration period. He worked furiously to prevent
Russia's Tsar Alexander I (who aided the liberal forces in Germany, Italy and
France) from gaining influence in Europe. The Church was his principal ally,
promoting it as a conservative principle of order while opposing nationalistic
and liberal tendencies within the Church. His basic philosophy was based on
Edmund Burke, who championed the need for old roots and an orderly development
of society. He opposed democratic and parliamentary institutions but favoured
modernizing existing structures by gradual reform. Despite Metternich's efforts
a series of revolutions rocked Europe in 1848. 20th century. In the twentieth
century, "reactionary" denoted opponents of socialism and communism, such as
the White Armies, who fought in the Russian Civil War against the Bolsheviks
after the October Revolution. In Marxist terminology, "reactionary" is a
pejorative adjective denoting people whose ideas might appear to be socialist,
but, in essence, contain elements of feudalism, capitalism, nationalism,
fascism or other characteristics of the ruling class. "Reactionary" also
denotes supporters of authoritarian, anti-communist, and régimes such as Vichy
France, Spain under Francisco Franco, and Portugal under Antonio Salazar. One
example of this took place after Boris Pasternak was awarded the Nobel Prize
for Literature. On October 26, 1958, the day following the Nobel Committee's
announcement, Moscow's "Literary Gazette" ran a polemical article by David
Zaslavski entitled, "Reactionary Propaganda Uproar over a Literary Weed".
Reactionary feelings were often coupled with a hostility to modern, industrial
means of production and a nostalgia for a more rural society. The Vichy regime
in France, Francisco Franco's regime, the Salazar regime in Portugal, and
Maurras's "Action Française" political movements are examples of such
traditional reactionary feelings, in favour of authoritarian regimes with
strong unelected leaders and with Catholicism as a state religion. The motto of
Vichy France was "travail, famille, patrie"("work, family, homeland"), and its
leader, Marshal Philippe Pétain, declared that "la terre, elle ne ment pas"
("the earth, it does not lie") in an indication of his belief that the truest
life is rural and agrarian. Fascism is generally considered to be reactionary,
due to its glorification of ancient national history and some of the social
arrangements prior to the Industrial Revolution of the 19th century. The
Italian fascists showed a desire to bring about a new social order based on the
ancient feudal principle of delegation (though without serfdom) in their
enthusiasm for the corporate state. Benito Mussolini said that "fascism is
reaction" and that "fascism, which did not fear to call itself reactionary...
has not today any impediment against declaring itself illiberal and anti-
liberal." However, Gentile and Mussolini also attacked certain reactionary
policies, particularly monarchism and—more veiled—some aspects of Italian
conservative Catholicism. They wrote, "History doesn't travel backwards. The
fascist doctrine has not taken De Maistre as its prophet. Monarchical
absolutism is of the past, and so is ecclesiolatry." They further elaborated in
the political doctrine that fascism "is not reactionary the old way but
revolutionary." Conversely, they also explained that fascism was of the right,
not of the left. Fascism was certainly not simply a return to tradition: it
carried the centralised state beyond even what had been seen in absolute
monarchies. Fascist single-party states were as centralised as most communist
states, and fascism's intense nationalism was not found in the period prior to
the French Revolution. The National Socialists did not consider themselves
reactionary and considered the forces of reaction (Prussian monarchists,
nobility, Roman Catholic) among their enemies right next to their Red Front
enemies in the Nazi Party march "Die Fahne hoch". The fact that the Nazis
called their 1933 rise to power the "National Revolution", shows that they
supported some form of revolution. Nevertheless, they idealized tradition,
folklore, classical thought, leadership (as exemplified by Frederick the
Great), rejected the liberalism of the Weimar Republic, and called the German
state the Third Reich (which traces back to the medieval First Reich and the
pre-Weimar Second Reich). (See also Reactionary modernism.) Clericalist
movements sometimes labeled as clerical fascist by their critics, can be
considered reactionaries in terms of the 19th century, since they share some
elements of fascism, while at the same time promote a return to the pre-
revolutionary model of social relations, with a strong role for the Church.
Their utmost philosopher was Nicolás Gómez Dávila. Modern American
Conservatism is also considered to be a reactionary ideology. The emphasis on
restoring moral traditionalism to the social and political order as well as a
nascent nationalism inherent to the ideology both clearly place conservatism in
the category of reactionary ideologies. Conservatism, more broadly than the
Modern American variant, is generally opposed to change in the status quo and
manifests as a reaction to change.
