Realism (international relations) Realism is the view that world politics is
driven by competitive self-interest. Common assumptions. Realism is a tradition
of international theory centered upon four propositions. 1. The international
system is anarchic 2. States are the most important actors. 3. All states
within the system are unitary, rational actors 4. The primary concern of all
states is survival. In summary, realists believe that humankind is not
inherently benevolent but rather self-centered and competitive. This
perspective, which is shared by theorists such as Thomas Hobbes, views human
nature as egocentric (not necessarily selfish) and conflictual unless there
exist conditions under which humans may coexist. This view contrasts with the
approach of liberalism to international relations. Realists believe that
Sovereign states are the principal actors in the international system, and
special attention is afforded to large powers as they have the most influence
on the international stage. International institutions, non-governmental
organizations, multinational corporations, individuals and other sub-state or
trans-state actors are viewed as having little independent influence. States
are inherently aggressive (offensive realism) and/or obsessed with security
(defensive realism), and that territorial expansion is only constrained by
opposing power(s). This aggressive build-up, however, leads to a security
dilemma whereby increasing one's security may bring along even greater
instability as an opposing power builds up its own arms in response (an arms
race). Thus, security becomes a zero-sum game where only "relative gains" can
be made. Realists believe that there are no universal principles with which all
states may guide their actions. Instead, a state must always be aware of the
actions of the states around it and must use a pragmatic approach to resolve
problems as they arise. History and branches. Classical realism. Classical
realism states that it is fundamentally the nature of man that pushes states
and individuals to act in a way that places interests over ideologies.
Classical realism is defined as the view that the "drive for power and the will
to dominate are held to be fundamental aspects of human nature". Modern realism
began as a serious field of research in the United States during and after
World War II. This evolution was partly fueled by European war migrants like
Hans Morgenthau. Liberal realism or the English school or rationalism. The
English School holds that the international system, while anarchical in
structure, forms a "society of states" where common norms and interests allow
for more order and stability than what might be expected in a strict realist
view. Prominent English School writer Hedley Bull's 1977 classic entitled The
Anarchical Society is a key statement of this position. Neorealism or
structural realism. Neorealism derives from classical realism except that
instead of human nature, its focus is predominantly on the anarchic structure
of the "international system". States are primary actors because there is no
political monopoly on force existing above any sovereign. While states remain
the principal actors, greater attention is given to the forces above and below
the states through levels of analysis or structure-agency debate. The
international system is seen as a "structure" acting on the state with
individuals below the level of the state acting as "agency" on the state as a
whole. While neorealism shares a focus on the "international system" with the
English School, neorealism differs in the emphasis it places on the permanence
of conflict. To ensure state security, states must be on constant preparation
for conflict through economic and military build-up. Neoclassical realism.
Gideon Rose is responsible for coining the term in a book review he wrote.
While neoclassical realism has only been used for theories of foreign policy so
far, Randall Schweller notes that it could be useful to explain certain types
of political outcomes as well. Neoclassical realism is particularly appealing
from a research standpoint because it still retains a lot of the theoretical
rigor that Waltz has brought to realism, but at the same time can easily
incorporate a content-rich analysis, since its main method for testing theories
is the process-tracing of case studies. Realism in statecraft. The ideas behind
George F. Kennan's work as a diplomat and diplomatic historian remain relevant
to the debate over American foreign policy, which since the 19th century has
been characterized by a shift from the Founding Fathers' realist school to the
idealistic or Wilsonian school of international relations. In the realist
tradition, security is based on the principle of a balance of power and the
reliance on morality as the sole determining factor in statecraft is considered
impractical. According to the Wilsonian approach, on the other hand, the spread
of democracy abroad as a foreign policy is key and morals are universally
valid. During the Presidency of Bill Clinton, American diplomacy reflected the
Wilsonian school to such a degree that those in favor of the realist approach
likened Clinton's policies to social work. According to Kennan, whose concept
of American diplomacy was based on the realist approach, such moralism without
regard to the realities of power and the national interest is self-defeating
and will lead to the erosion of power, to America's detriment. Symbiotic
realism. Nayef Al-Rodhan’s Symbiotic Realism theory of international
relations is based on four interlocking dimensions of the global system: 1)
interdependence; 2) instant connectivity; 3) global anarchy; and 4) the
neurobiological substrates of human nature. He defines the neurobiological
substrates of human nature that motivate behavior as basic needs, , and fear.
When basic survival needs met, Nayef Al-Rodhan argues that humans can aspire to
higher things such as morality. Thus, in order for society to prosper, the
state of nature among individuals must be mitigated. This has historically been
done through the establishment of states and of domestic governments.
Internationally, however, the relations between states have historically and
continue to be dominated by anarchy. With no overarching authority to regulate
state behavior and ensure the safety and prosperity of all, international life
could be considered somewhat precarious. Nayef Al-Rodhan argues that increased
integration brought about by globalization helps to mitigate the consequences
of global anarchy. However, globalization is also undermining the capacities of
states to act as viable sites for collective action and credible commitments.
This is because the states are becoming more intertwined in webs of power that
are linked to shifts in the material distribution of power and authoritative
resources. In other words, the state’s domestic role is being transformed by
the increasingly important interests of transnational capital. Because of these
new emerging dynamics of the international system, Nayef Al-Rodhan maintains
that in order for societies to prosper materially and morally, humanity needs
some form of governance that can ensure that the basic survival needs of human
beings and states are satisfied in the context of increased interdependence and
instant connectivity. This conception of international relations allows for
absolute rather than just relative gains, and stresses that all states can
benefit from cooperation and non-conflictual competition. Symbiotic realism
goes beyond the state-centrism of realism, integrating a number of actors that
have often been underemphasized or ignored by the realist paradigm, such as
large collective identities, multi-national corporations, international
organizations, the biosphere, and women. This is vital, since these, too, are
all important actors (both active and reactive) that help to(re)produce the
global order and, as such, have a bearing on its relations and dynamics.
Criticisms. Democratic peace. Democratic peace theory advocates also that
Realism is not applicable to democratic states' relations with each another, as
their studies claim that such states do not go to war with one another.
However, Realists and proponents of other schools have critiqued both this
claim and the studies which appear to support it, claiming that its definitions
of 'war' and 'democracy' must be tweaked in order to achieve the desired
result. Federalism. The term refers to the theory or advocacy of federal
political orders, where final authority is divided between sub-units and a
centre. Unlike a unitary state, sovereignty is constitutionally split between
at least two territorial levels so that units at each level have final
authority and can act independently of the others in some area. Citizens thus
have political obligations to two authorities. The allocation of authority
between the sub-unit and centre may vary. Typically the centre has powers
regarding defence and foreign policy, but sub-units may also have international
roles. The sub-units may also participate in central decision-making bodies.
The basic idea behind federalism is that a unifying relationship between states
should be established under a common system of law. Conflict and disagreement
should be resolved through peaceful means rather than through coercion or war.
Its most important aspect is in recognizing that different types of
institutions are needed to deal with different types of political issues. Post-
realism. Post-realism suggests that Realism is a form of social scientific and
political rhetoric. It opens rather than closes a debate about what is real and
what is realistic in international relations. Further reading. "Politics Among
Nations: The Struggle for Power and Peace" (1948) New York NY: Alfred A. Knopf.
"In Defense of the National Interest" (1951) New York, NY: Alfred A. Knopf.
"The Purpose of American Politics" (1960) New York, NY: Alfred A. Knopf.
