Realigning election Realigning election (often called a critical election or
political realignment) are terms from political science and political history
describing a dramatic change in the political system. Scholars frequently apply
the term to American elections and occasionally to other countries. Usually it
means the coming to power for several decades of a new coalition, replacing an
old dominant coalition of the other party as in 1896 when the GOP (Republicans)
became dominant, or 1932 when the Democrats became dominant. More specifically,
it refers to American national elections in which there are sharp changes in
issues, party leaders, the regional and demographic bases of power of the two
parties, and structure or rules of the political system (such as voter
eligibility or financing), resulting in a new political power structure that
lasts for decades. Realigning elections typically separate Party Systems--with
1828, for example, separating the First Party System and the Second Party
System in the U.S. Political realignments can be sudden (1–4 years) or can
take place more gradually (5–20 years). Most often, however, particularly in
Key's (1955) original hypothesis, it is a single "critical election" that marks
a realignment. By contrast a gradual process is called a "secular realignment."
An American example was the change in the voting patterns among white
Southerners, who from the 1870s to 1962 had overwhelmingly voted at the
national and state levels for Democratic (what was called the "Solid South"). A
critical election came in 1964 with a shift at the presidential level to the
Republican (GOP) presidential candidates. However there was a gradual shift
toward the GOP at the state and local levels, as Aldrich (2000) and others have
found. Democratic voting remained strong into the 1970s and only slowly shifted
towards the GOP as state Republican organizations systematically broadened
their base in the 1980s and 1990s. Political scientists and historians often
disagree about which elections are realignments and what defines a realignment,
and even whether realignments occur. The terms themselves are somewhat
arbitrary, however, and usage among political scientists and historians does
vary. In the U.S. Walter Dean Burnham argued for a 30–36 year "cycle" of
realignments. Many of the elections often included in the Burnham 36-year cycle
are considered "realigning" for different reasons. Some political scientists,
such as Mayhew (2004), are skeptical of the realignment theory altogether,
saying there are no long-term patterns: "Electoral politics," he writes, "is to
an important degree just one thing after another... Elections and their
underlying causes are not usefully sortable into generation-long spans... It is
a Rip Van Winkle view of democracy that voters come awake only once in a
generation... It is too slippery, too binary, too apocalyptic, and it has come
to be too much of a dead end." Realignment theory. The central holding of
realignment theory, first developed in the political scientist V. O. Key, Jr.'s
1955 article, "A Theory of Critical Elections," is that American elections,
parties and policymaking routinely shift in swift, dramatic sweeps. V.O. Key
Jr., E.E. Schattschneider, James L. Sundquist, Walter Dean Burnham and Paul
Kleppner are generally credited with developing and refining the theory of
realignment. Though they differed on some of the details, scholars have
generally concluded that systematic patterns are identifiable in American
national elections such that cycles occur on a regular schedule: once every 36-
years or so. This period of roughly 30 years fits with the notion that these
cycles are closely linked to generational change. For social scientists, this
point is important, since it helps to provide an objective sociological basis
for the theory. Some, such as Schafer and Reichley, argue that the patterns are
longer, closer to 50 to 60 years in duration, noting the Democratic dominance
from 1800 to 1860, and Republican rule from 1860 to 1932. The alignment of
1860, with Republicans winning a series of close presidential elections,
yielded abruptly in 1896 to an era of more decisive GOP control, in which most
presidential elections were blowouts, and Democratic Congresses were infrequent
and brief. Thirty-six years later, that system was displaced by a cycle of
Democratic dominance, lasting throughout the Great Depression and beyond. Voter
realignment. A central component of realignment is the change in behavior of
voting groups. Realignment means the switching of voter preference from one
party to another, in contrast to "dealignment" (where a voter group abandons a
party to become independent or nonvoting). In the U.S. and Australia, as the
ideologies of the parties define many of the aspects of voters' lives and the
decisions that they make, a realignment by a voter tends to have a longer-
lasting effect. In Britain and Canada, on the other hand, voters have a
tendency to switch parties on a whim, perhaps only for one election, as there
is far less loyalty towards a particular party. Canada. The history of the
critical realigning elections in Canada, both nationally and in the provinces,
is covered by Argyle (2011). Behiels (2010) suggests that experts in Canadian
politics are now reporting that a watershed political realignment is underway,
the kind of shift that occurs but once a century. In light of the 2004, 2006,
and 2008 minority government elections and the success of Stephen Harper, many
journalists, political advisors, and politicians argue that a new political
paradigm is emerging, and it is based on Harper's drive for a right-wing
political party capable of reconfiguring the role of the state – federal and
provincial – in twenty-first-century. Bloomfield and Nossal (2007) suggest
that the new political alignment has reshaped Canadian foreign policy,
especially in improving relations with the U.S., taking a harder line on the
Middle East conflicts, and backing away from the Kyoto Protocol on global
warming. Party systems model. According to recent scholarship there have been
four party systems in Canada at the federal level since Confederation, each
with its own distinctive pattern of social support, patronage relationships,
leadership styles, and electoral strategies. Steve Patten identifies four party
systems in Canada's political history Clarkson (2005) shows how the Liberal
Party has dominated all the party systems, using different approaches. It began
with a "clientelistic approach" under Laurier, which evolved into a "brokerage"
system of the 1920s, 1930s and 1940s under Mackenzie King. The 1950s saw the
emergence of a "pan-Canadian system", which lasted until the 1990s. The 1993
election — categorized by Clarkson as an electoral "earthquake" which
"fragmented" the party system, saw the emergence of regional politics within a
four party-system, whereby various groups championed regional issues and
concerns. Clarkson concludes that the inherent bias built into the first-past-
the-post system, has chiefly benefited the Liberals. 1896. 1896 saw as Liberal
victory; Sir Wilfrid Laurier Prime Minister. From the 1867 election until 1896,
the Conservative Party of Sir John A. Macdonald had governed Canada, excepting
a single term from 1873 to 1878. The Liberals had struggled to retake office,
under Laurier and his predecessor, Edward Blake. 1896 was the first election
held after the death of Macdonald in 1891, and the Conservatives had been in
complete disarray in the ensuing years, with no less than four different
leaders. The Liberals would remain in office until 1911. Beyond that, political
scientists often consider this election that made the Liberal Party the
dominant force in Canadian politics, holding office for more than two thirds of
the time between 1896 and 2006. 1984. 1984 saw the victory of Progressive
Conservative under Brian Mulroney. The election of 1984 not only saw Brian
Mulroney's Progressive Conservatives win the largest number of seats in
Canadian History (211 of 282), and the second largest majority (behind John
Diefenbaker's 208 of 265 in 1958), it ended over twenty years of Liberal rule,
not counting the brief 1979–1980 tenure of Joe Clark. The Liberal Party under
prime minister John Turner saw their second worst result ever, winning a mere
40 seats. Turner had just succeeded Pierre Trudeau as prime minister when he
decided to call the election, and the Liberals were losing popularity due to
the downfall of the economy and Trudeau's last minute patronage appointments.
The PCs' victory was aided in large part by a massive breakthrough in Quebec,
winning 58 seats as compared to the one Quebec seat they won in 1980; Mulroney
successfully campaigned in Quebec on a message that Pierre Trudeau's Liberals
had "sold out" the province during the process of patriating the Canadian
constitution in 1982, due to the fact that Quebec never formally signed on to
the new constitution. The Liberals were cut down to only 17 seats, all but four
of them in Montreal. Although Quebec had been a Liberal stronghold since 1896
(with the exception of 1958), from 1984 onwards the Liberals never managed to
win the largest number of seats in that province (they came close in 2000 and
took the majority by winning several by-elections), making this province the
most long-lasting realignment in this election. Although Mulroney is often
grouped with contemporary conservative leaders Margaret Thatcher and Ronald
Reagan, and the 1984 election is seen as Canada's version of the 1979 United
Kingdom and 1980 United States elections, Mulroney proved in practice to be a
relatively centrist leader. 1993. 1993 saw not only the sweeping success of the
Liberals under Jean Chrétien, but also the fracturing the Progressive
Conservatives' support base to regional parties in Quebec and the western
provinces; resulting in a five party political system with the Liberals as the
dominant party. Throughout Canadian history two parties had taken turns in
government and opposition: the Liberals and the Progressive Conservatives
(sometimes known as Liberal-Conservatives, Conservatives, Union and National
Government). The Conservative majority election victories in 1984 and 1988 were
based on a "Grand Coalition" between socially conservative populists from the
West, Quebec nationalists, and fiscal conservatives from Ontario and the
Maritimes, making it difficult for the Mulroney government to balance these
diverse interests. During his second term, Mulroney's policies were unpopular,
while the failure of the Meech Lake and Charlottetown Accords frustrated Quebec
and stirred up Western alienation. New regional parties which formed in protest
to Mulroney's government, the Bloc Québécois in Quebec and the Reform Party
in the west won many seats formerly held by the PCs despite a lack of national
support. The New Democratic Party, the longtime third party in parliament, fell
from 43 seats to nine. The unpopularity of the provincial NDP governments in
Ontario and BC reflected badly on the federal NDP, also their endorsement of
the Charlottetown Accord and Quebec nationalism cost them support among
organized labour and rural voters in the West, which switched their support to
Reform. Meanwhile, the Progressive Conservatives were nearly wiped out, falling
from 151 seats to only two--the worst defeat of a sitting government at the
federal level. The Liberals under Chrétien would win a further two consecutive
majorities in 1997 and 2000, while never being seriously challenged as the
largest party. The Progressive Conservatives never recovered, winning 20 (of
301) seats in 1997) and 12 in 2000 before merging with the Reform Party's
successor, the Canadian Alliance, to form the new Conservative Party of Canada
in late 2003. Due to competition with the Liberals for left-leaning voters, the
New Democrats had mixed successes in the next several elections, winning 21 in
1997 but dropping back to 13 in 2000, unable to approach their high water mark
showing until 2006. 2004. While Paul Martin's Liberals retains enough seats to
continue as the government, it saw the re-emergence of the Conservatives and
the resurgence of Bloc Québécois; resulting in a four party system with the
ruling party as a minority government. This was the first of three elections
where no party managed a majority of seats. Martin succeeded a retiring Jean
Chrétien in 2003 and initially polls predicted that the Liberals could expand
their control of Parliament in the next election, as Martin sought inroads in
Quebec and Western Canada, while the newly created Conservative Party was
besought by controversy over its merger. However, the revelation of the
sponsorship scandal, along with party infighting between Chrétien and Martin
weakened the Liberals, while the reunited Conservatives became a viable
governing alternative, and the rejuvenated Bloc Québécois. At mid-campaign,
polls predicted a Conservative lead, but the Liberals regained enough support
to win a plurality of seats to remain the governing party. Several trends would
also begin in 2004 which signaled the Liberal party's decline; notably a high
turnover of permanent party leaders (in contrast to their predecessors who
usually served over two or more elections), and its inability to raise campaign
funds competitively once Chrétien banned corporate donations, and it would
gradually lose support to the Conservatives, and later to the NDP. 2011. The
election resulted in a Conservative majority victory under the leadership of
Prime Minister Stephen Harper, after forming two consecutive minority
governments. The Liberals dropped to third party status in Parliament for the
first time, having previously always been either the governing party or the
official opposition, and also no longer had a significant number of seats in
Quebec (their bastion of support from 1892 to 1984) or Ontario (a stronghold
since 1993, especially the Greater Toronto Area). Some suggested that Rob
Ford's mayoral victory in November 2010 had paved the way for the federal
Conservatives' successes in Toronto, with right-of-centre politicians garnering
significant support from immigrants that traditionally supported the Liberals.
The New Democratic Party, led by Jack Layton, won 103 seats to become the
official opposition for the first time in party history, as a late-campaign
surge of support in Quebec took them from one to 59 seats at the expense of the
other parties, particularly the Bloc Québécois which saw their 47 seats in
that province reduced to a rump of four seats. The Bloc had previously won the
majority of Quebec's seats from 1993 to 2008. The party leaders of the Liberals
and the Bloc, Michael Ignatieff and Gilles Duceppe, respectively, were
personally defeated in their own constituencies. This marked a return to the
three party system in parliament which was last seen in the 1988 election.
Commentators after the major shakeup in 2011 stressed the theme of a major
realignment. The "Economist" said, "the election represents the biggest
realignment of Canadian politics since 1993." Lawrence Martin, commentator for
the "Globe and Mail" said, "Harper has completed a remarkable reconstruction of
a Canadian political landscape that endured for more than a century. The
realignment sees both old parties of the moderate middle, the Progressive
Conservatives and the Liberals, either eliminated or marginalized." "Maclean's"
said, the election marked "an unprecedented realignment of Canadian politics"
as "the Conservatives are now in a position to replace the Liberals as the
natural governing party in Canada." Andrew Coyne proclaimed "The West is in and
Ontario has joined it", noting that the Conservatives accomplished the rare
feat of putting together a majority by winning in "both" Ontario and the
western provinces (difficult due to traditionally conflicting interests), while
having little representation in Quebec. Quebec. A considerable number of Quebec
general elections have been known characterized by high seat turnovers, with
certain ones being considered realigning elections, notably: The Quebec Liberal
Party (unaffiliated with the federal Liberals since 1955) survived since
Confederation but they have faced different opposition parties, several of
which had formed the government, often alternating with the Liberals.
