Real business cycle theory Real business cycle theory (RBC theory) are a class
of macroeconomic models in which business cycle fluctuations to a large extent
can be accounted for by real (in contrast to nominal) shocks. Unlike other
leading theories of the business cycle, RBC theory sees recessions and periods
of economic growth as the efficient response to exogenous changes in the real
economic environment. That is, the level of national output necessarily
maximizes "expected" utility, and government should therefore concentrate on
long-run structural policy changes and not intervene through discretionary
fiscal or monetary policy designed to actively smooth out economic short-term
fluctuations. According to RBC theory, business cycles are therefore "real" in
that they do not represent a failure of markets to clear but rather reflect the
most efficient possible operation of the economy, given the structure of the
economy. RBC theory differs in this way from other theories of the business
cycle such as Keynesian economics and Monetarism that see recessions as the
failure of some market to clear. RBC theory is associated with freshwater
economics (the Chicago school of economics in the neoclassical tradition).
Business cycles. If we were to take snapshots of an economy at different points
in time, no two photos would look alike. This occurs for two reasons: A common
way to observe such behavior is by looking at a time series of an economy’s
output, more specifically gross national product (GNP). This is just the value
of the goods and services produced by a country’s businesses and workers.
Figure 1 shows the time series of real GNP for the United States from 1954-
2005. While we see continuous growth of output, it is not a steady increase.
There are times of faster growth and times of slower growth. Figure 2
transforms these levels into growth rates of real GNP and extracts a smoother
growth trend. A common method to obtain this trend is the Hodrick-Prescott
filter. The basic idea is to find a balance between the extent to which general
growth trend follows the cyclical movement (since long term growth rate is not
likely to be perfectly constant) and how smooth it is. The HP filter identifies
the longer term fluctuations as part of the growth trend while classifying the
more jumpy fluctuations as part of the cyclical component. Observe the
difference between this growth component and the jerkier data. Economists refer
to these cyclical movements about the trend as business cycles. Figure 3
explicitly captures such deviations. Note the horizontal axis at 0. A point on
this line indicates at that year, there is no deviation from the trend. All
other points above and below the line imply deviations. By using log real GNP
the distance between any point and the 0 line roughly equals the percentage
deviation from the long run growth trend. We call large positive deviations
(those above the 0 axis) peaks. We call relatively large negative deviations
(those below the 0 axis) troughs. A series of positive deviations leading to
peaks are booms and a series of negative deviations leading to troughs are
recessions. At a glance, the deviations just look like a string of waves
bunched together—nothing about it appears consistent. To explain causes of
such fluctuations may appear rather difficult given these irregularities.
However, if we consider other macroeconomic variables, we will observe patterns
in these irregularities. For example, consider Figure 4 which depicts
fluctuations in output and consumption spending, i.e. what people buy and use
at any given period. Observe how the peaks and troughs align at almost the same
places and how the upturns and downturns coincide. We might predict that other
similar data may exhibit similar qualities. For example, (a) labor, hours
worked (b) productivity, how effective firms use such capital or labor, (c)
investment, amount of capital saved to help future endeavors, and (d) capital
stock, value of machines, buildings and other equipment that help firms produce
their goods. While Figure 5 shows a similar story for investment, the
relationship with capital in Figure 6 departs from the story. We need a way to
pin down a better story; one way is to look at some statistics. Stylized facts.
By eyeballing the data, we can infer several regularities, sometimes called
stylized facts. One is persistence. For example, if we take any point in the
series above the trend (the x-axis in figure 3), the probability the next
period is still above the trend is very high. However, this persistence wears
out over time. That is, economic activity in the short run is quite predictable
but due to the irregular long-term nature of fluctuations, forecasting in the
long run is much more difficult if not impossible. Another regularity is
cyclical variability. Column A of Table 1 lists a measure of this with standard
deviations. The magnitude of fluctuations in output and hours worked are nearly
equal. Consumption and productivity are similarly much smoother than output
while investment fluctuates much more than output. Capital stock is the least
volatile of the indicators. Yet another regularity is the co-movement between
output and the other macroeconomic variables. Figures 4 - 6 illustrated such
relationship. We can measure this in more detail using correlations as listed
in column B of Table 1. Procyclical variables have positive correlations since
it usually increases during booms and decreases during recessions. Vice versa,
a countercyclical variable associates with negative correlations. Acyclical,
correlations close to zero, implies no systematic relationship to the business
cycle. We find that productivity is slightly procyclical. This implies workers
and capital are more productive when the economy is experiencing a boom. They
aren’t quite as productive when the economy is experiencing a slowdown.
Similar explanations follow for consumption and investment, which are strongly
procyclical. Labor is also procyclical while capital stock appears acyclical.
Observing these similarities yet seemingly non-deterministic fluctuations about
trend, we come to the burning question of why any of this occurs. It’s common
sense that people prefer economic booms over recessions. It follows that if all
people in the economy make optimal decisions, these fluctuations are caused by
something outside the decision-making process. So the key question really is:
"what main factor influences and subsequently changes the decisions of all
factors in an economy?" Real business cycle theory. Economists have come up
with many ideas to answer the above question. The one which currently dominates
the academic literature on real business cycle theory was introduced by Finn E.
Kydland and Edward C. Prescott in their seminal 1982 work "Time to Build And
Aggregate Fluctuations". They envisioned this factor to be technological shocks
i.e., random fluctuations in the productivity level that shifted the constant
growth trend up or down. Examples of such shocks include innovations, bad
weather, imported oil price increase, stricter environmental and safety
regulations, etc. The general gist is that something occurs that directly
changes the effectiveness of capital and/or labour. This in turn affects the
decisions of workers and firms, who in turn change what they buy and produce
and thus eventually affect output. RBC models predict time sequences of
allocation for consumption, investment, etc. given these shocks. But exactly
how do these productivity shocks cause ups and downs in economic activity?
Let’s consider a positive but temporary shock to productivity. This
momentarily increases the effectiveness of workers and capital, allowing a
given level of capital and labor to produce more output. Individuals face two
types of tradeoffs. One is the consumption-investment decision. Since
productivity is higher, people have more output to consume. An individual might
choose to consume all of it today. But if he values future consumption, all
that extra output might not be worth consuming in its entirety today. Instead,
he may consume some but invest the rest in capital to enhance production in
subsequent periods and thus increase future consumption. This explains why
investment spending is more volatile than consumption. The life cycle
hypothesis argues that households base their consumption decisions on expected
lifetime income and so they prefer to “smooth” consumption over time. They
will thus save (and invest) in periods of high income and defer consumption of
this to periods of low income. The other decision is the labor-leisure
tradeoff. Higher productivity encourages substitution of current work for
future work since workers will earn more per hour today compared to tomorrow.
More labor and less leisure results in higher output today. greater consumption
and investment today. On the other hand, there is an opposing effect: since
workers are earning more, they may not want to work as much today and in future
periods. However, given the pro-cyclical nature of labor, it seems that the
above “substitution effect” dominates this “income effect”. Overall,
the basic RBC model predicts that given a temporary shock, output, consumption,
investment and labor all rise above their long-term trends and hence formulate
into a positive deviation. Furthermore, since more investment means more
capital is available for the future, a short-lived shock may have an impact in
the future. That is, above-trend behavior may persist for some time even after
the shock disappears. This capital accumulation is often referred to as an
internal “propagation mechanism”, since it may increase the persistence of
shocks to output. It is easy to see that a string of such productivity shocks
will likely result in a boom. Similarly, recessions follow a string of bad
shocks to the economy. If there were no shocks, the economy would just continue
following the growth trend with no business cycles. Essentially this is how the
basic RBC model qualitatively explains key business cycle regularities. Yet any
good model should also generate business cycles that quantitatively match the
stylized facts in Table 1, our empirical benchmark. Kydland and Prescott
introduced calibration techniques to do just this. The reason why this theory
is so celebrated today is that using this methodology, the model closely mimics
many business cycle properties. Yet current RBC models have not fully explained
all behavior and neoclassical economists are still searching for better
variations. It is important to note the main assumption in RBC theory is that
individuals and firms respond optimally all the time. In other words, if the
government came along and forced people to work more or less than they would
have otherwise, it would most likely make people unhappy. It follows that
business cycles exhibited in an economy are chosen in preference to no business
cycles at all. This is not to say that people like to be in a recession. Slumps
are preceded by an undesirable productivity shock which constrains the
situation. But given these new constraints, people will still achieve the best
outcomes possible and markets will react efficiently. So when there is a slump,
people are choosing to be in that slump because given the situation, it is the
best solution. This suggests laissez-faire (non-intervention) is the best
policy of government towards the economy but given the abstract nature of the
model, this has been debated. A pre-cursor to RBC theory was developed by
monetary economists Milton Friedman and Robert Lucas in the early 1970s. They
envisioned the factor that influenced people’s decisions to be misperception
of wages—that booms/recessions occurred when workers perceived wages higher/
lower than they really were. This meant they worked and consumed more/less than
otherwise. In a world of perfect information, there would be no booms or
recessions. Calibration. Unlike estimation, which is usually used for the
construction of economic models, calibration only returns to the drawing board
to change the model in the face of overwhelming evidence against the model
being correct; this inverts the burden of proof away from the builder of the
model. In fact, simply stated, it is the process of changing the model to fit
the data. Since RBC models explain data ex post, it is very difficult to
falsify any one model that could be hypothesised to explain the data. RBC
models are highly sample specific, leading some to believe that they have
little or no predictive power. Structural variables. Crucial to RBC models,
"plausible values" for structural variables such as the discount rate, and the
rate of capital depreciation are used in the creation of simulated variable
paths. These tend to be estimated from econometric studies, with 95% confidence
intervals. If the full range of possible values for these variables is used,
correlation coefficients between actual and simulated paths of economic
variables can shift wildly, leading some to question how successful a model
which only achieves a coefficient of 80% really is. Criticisms. It is a common
misconception that RBC theories are purely based on shocks to supply, as
opposed to Keynesian theories, which are based on shocks to demand, and this
leads to the common criticism of RBC theories as ignoring the demand side of
the economy. However, technology-based theories of real business cycles also
imply that consumers will change their intertemporal consumption and savings
decisions based on the real interest rate available to them, which is a shift
in demand. Other RBC theories based on preferences implicate the demand side to
an even greater extent (Plosser, 1989). Intuitively, as a market-clearing
model, RBC theories do not fall clearly into either a demand-side theory or a
supply-side theory as Say's law will hold in these theories and supply and
demand will automatically move together.
