Real versus nominal value (economics) In economics, nominal value refers to an
economic value expressed in fixed nominal money terms (that is, in units of a
currency) in a given year or series of years. By contrast, real value adjusts
nominal value to remove effects of general price level price changes over time.
For example, changes in the nominal value of some commodity bundle over time
can happen because of a change in the quantities in the bundle "or" their
associated prices, whereas changes in real values reflect "only" changes in
quantities. Real values over time are a measure purchasing power net of any
price changes over time. They are often used for restating nominal income to
real income, thus adjusting that part of income changes that merely offset
inflation (a general increase in prices). Similarly, for aggregate measures of
output, such as gross domestic product (GDP), the nominal amount reflects
production quantities "and prices" in that year, whereas real amounts in
different years reflect "only" changes in quantities. A series of real values
over time, such as for real GDP, measures relative quantities over time
expressed in prices of one year, called the "base year" (or more generally the
"base period"). In a related fashion, the real value of a commodity bundle in a
given year may be derived from its nominal value by replacing then-current
prices of commodities in the bundle with prices that prevailed in the base
year. Real values in different years then express values of the bundles as if
prices had been constant for all the years, with any differences due to
differences in underlying quantities. note: the base year can be any year but
government economists usually uses the same base year for 5 consecutive years.
In Canada, a base year was 2002 then 2007 and Canadians will continue using
2007 as a base year up until 2013. The nominal/real value distinction can apply
not only to time-series data, as above, but to cross-section data varying by
region, for example a cost-of-living index. Illustration, notation, and
generalization. The price "deflates" (divides) the nominal value to derive a
real value, the quantity itself. The generalization to a commodity bundle from
the single-good illustration above is to a bundle of quantities of "different"
commodities and different years. This has practical use, because price indexes
and the National Income and Product Accounts are constructed from such bundles
of commodities and their respective prices. So, every nominal value can be
dichotomized into a price-level part and a real part. The real part Qt is an
index of the quantities in the bundle. An illustration of a "nominal-value" sum
is . An illustration of a "real-value" sum (or quotient) is real GDP. Uses and
examples. Nominal values—such as nominal wages or (nominal) gross domestic
product—refer to amounts that are paid or earned in money terms. In the
illustration of the previous section, for a single good with a nominal value,
the nominal value of the good was divided by its unit price to calculate its
real value, namely the quantity of the good. The same general method applies
for calculation of other real values, except that a price index is used instead
of the price of a single commodity. Real values (such as real wages or real
gross domestic product) can be derived by dividing the relevant nominal value
(money wages or nominal GDP) by the appropriate price index. For consumers, a
relevant bundle of goods is that used to compute the Consumer Price Index. So,
for wage earners as consumers a relevant real wage is the nominal wage (after-
tax) divided by the CPI. A relevant divisor of nominal GDP is the GDP price
index. Real values represent the purchasing power of nominal values in a given
period, including wages, interest, or total production. In particular, price
indexes are typically calculated relative to some base year. If for example the
base year is 1992, real values are expressed in constant 1992 dollars,
referenced as 1992=100, since the published index is usually normalized to
equal 100 in the base year. To use the price index as a divisor for converting
a nominal value into a real value, as in the previous section, the published
index is first divided by the base-year price-index value of 100. In the U.S.
National Income and Product Accounts, nominal GDP is called "GDP in current
dollars" (that is, in prices current for each designated year), and real GDP is
called "GDP in [base-year] dollars" (that is, in dollars that can purchase the
same quantity of commodities as in the base year). In effect the price index of
100 for the base year is a numéraire for price-index values in other years.
The terminology of classical economics used by Adam Smith used a unit of labour
as the purchasing power unit, so monetary quantities were deflated by wages to
indicate the number of hours of labour required to produce or purchase a given
quantity.
