Recall election A recall election (also called a recall referendum or
representative recall) is a procedure by which voters can remove an elected
official from office through a direct vote before his or her term has ended.
Recalls, which are initiated when sufficient voters sign a petition, have a
history dating back to the ancient Athenian democracy and are a feature of
several contemporary constitutions. Canada. The Province of British Columbia
enacted representative recall in 1995. In that province, voters in a provincial
riding can petition to have a sitting representative removed from office, even
a Premier presently leading a government. If enough registered voters sign the
petition, the Speaker of the legislature announces before the House that the
member has been recalled and a by-election follows as soon as possible, giving
voters the opportunity to replace the politician in question. By January 2003,
22 recall efforts had been launched. No one has been recalled so far, but one
representative, Paul Reitsma, resigned in 1998 when it looked as if the
petition to recall him would have enough signatures to spur a recall election.
Reitsma resigned during the secondary verification stage, and the recall count
ended. Switzerland. The possibility of recall referenda (together with the
popular election of executives, the initiative and the legislative referendum)
was introduced into several cantonal constitutions after the 1860s in the
course of a broad movement for democratic reform. The instrument has never been
of any practical importance – the few attempts at recall so far have failed,
usually because the required number of signatures was not collected – and it
was abolished in the course of constitutional revisions in Aargau (1980),
Baselland (1984) and Lucerne (2007). But the possibility of recalling municipal
executives was newly introduced in Ticino in 2011, with 59% of voters in favor,
as a reaction to the perceived problem of squabbling and dysfunctional
municipal governments. United States. Recall first appeared in Colonial America
in the laws of the General Court of the Massachusetts Bay Colony in 1631. This
version of the recall involved one elected body removing another official.
During the American Revolution the Articles of Confederation stipulated that
state legislatures might recall delegates from the continental congress.
According to New York Delegate John Lansing, the power was never exercised by
any state. The Virginia Plan, issued at the outset of the Philadelphia
Convention of 1787, proposed to pair recall with rotation in office and to
apply these dual principles to the lower house of the national legislature. The
recall was rejected by the Constitutional Convention. However, the anti-
Federalists used the lack of recall provision as a weapon in the ratification
debates. Several states proposed adopting a recall for US senators in the years
immediately following the adoption of the Constitution. However, it did not
pass. Only two governors have ever been successfully recalled. In 1921, Lynn
Frazier, Governor of North Dakota, was recalled during a dispute about state-
owned industries. In 2003, Governor Gray Davis of California was recalled over
the state budget. In 2012, Wisconsin's governor, Scott Walker became the first
US governor to survive a recall election. Additionally, in 1988, a recall was
approved against Arizona Governor Evan Mecham, but he was impeached and
convicted before it got on the ballot. In Alaska, Georgia, Kansas, Minnesota,
Montana, Rhode Island, and Washington, specific grounds are required for a
recall. Some form of malfeasance or misconduct while in office must be
identified by the petitioners. The target may choose to dispute the validity of
the grounds in court, and a court then judges whether the allegations in the
petition rise to a level where a recall is necessary. In the November 2010
general election, Illinois passed a referendum to amend the state constitution
to allow a recall in light of ex-Governor Rod Blagojevich's corruption scandal.
In the other eleven states that permit state-wide recall, no grounds are
required and recall petitions may be circulated for any reason. However, the
target is permitted to submit responses to the stated reasons for recall. The
minimum number of signatures and the time limit to qualify a recall vary among
the states. In addition, the handling of recalls once they qualify differs. In
some states, a recall triggers a simultaneous special election, where the vote
on the recall, as well as the vote on the replacement if the recall succeeds,
are on the same ballot. In the 2003 California recall election, over 100
candidates appeared on the replacement portion of the ballot. In other states,
a separate special election is held after the target is recalled, or a
replacement is appointed by the Governor or some other state authority. 2011
recalls. In 2011, there were at least 150 recall elections in the United
States. Of these, 75 officials were recalled, and nine officials resigned under
threat of recall. Recalls were held in 17 states in 73 different jurisdictions.
Michigan had the most recalls (at least 30). The year set a record for number
of state legislator recall elections (11 elections) beating with previous one-
year high (three elections). Three jurisdictions adopted the recall in 2011. Of
recall elections, 52 were for city council, 30 were for mayor, 17 were for
school board, 11 were for state legislators, one was for prosecuting attorney
(York County, Nebraska). The largest municipality to hold a recall was Miami-
Dade County, Florida, for mayor. The busiest day was November 8 (Election Day)
with 26 recalls. In 34 jurisdictions, recalls were held over multiple days. See
also. General
